Lucas Papademos: Monetary policy communication and effectiveness 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Annual Meeting of the Allied Social Science Associations, New Orleans, 5 January 2008. 
 Introduction  
I. 
It is a great pleasure for me to join this distinguished panel and address a topic which is both 
important and challenging for monetary policy. Views and practices concerning transparency 
and communication have evolved dramatically in recent years. It is not an exaggeration to 
say  that  transparency  and  communication  have  not  traditionally  been  considered  a  top 
priority  for  monetary  policy-makers.  Only  until  a  couple  of  decades  ago,  the  conventional 
wisdom  in  central  banking  circles  was  that  monetary  policy-makers  should  say  as  little  as 
possible and say it rather cryptically.  
Nowadays, it is widely recognised that increased transparency and enhanced communication 
are  essential  and  beneficial  ingredients  of  an  effective  monetary  policy.  There  are  several 
reasons  for  this.  These  are  related  to  the  democratic  legitimacy  of  independent  central 
banks, the efficient functioning of the economy and the effectiveness with which  monetary 
policy  can  attain  its  objectives.  As  a  result,  the  majority  of  central  banks  have  steadily 
increased their degree of transparency and have placed greater emphasis on communicating 
their objectives, assessments, actions and intentions. 
Despite  the  growing  recognition  of  the  importance  of  transparency  in  monetary  policy-
making, no consensus has emerged – either among academics or among central banks – on 
what  the  appropriate  degree  of  transparency  is  and  what  constitutes  an  “optimal” 
communication strategy, in the sense that these two factors can contribute to the effective 
attainment of policy objectives and the efficient functioning of markets. Differences in views 
and practices need not be surprising, as the “best practice” in central bank communication is 
likely  to  depend,  among  other  things,  upon  (i)  the  size,  structure  and  complexity  of  the 
economy, (ii) the objectives and strategy of monetary policy, (iii) the political environment and 
institutional characteristics of the central bank, including its decision-making committee, and 
(iv)  different  assessments  of  the  extent  and  nature  of  uncertainty  faced  by  policy-makers. 
Central banks may therefore pursue, successfully, different communication strategies, which 
can  be  appropriate  and  be  considered  optimal  given  the  aforementioned  factors  and 
assessments. Consequently, when comparing and evaluating the features and effectiveness 
of  the  different  communication  strategies  pursued  by  central  banks,  we  should  take  into 
account  the  various  economic,  political  and  institutional  factors  as  well  as  the  elements  of 
uncertainty a central bank faces. 
In the remainder of my presentation, I will focus on four issues: 
• 
first, I will review the role of central bank communication in the conduct of monetary 
policy and assess both its benefits and limitations; 
second,  I  will  discuss  the  appropriate  content  and  means  of  monetary  policy 
communication,  with  reference  to  the  practice  and  experience  of  the  European 
Central Bank; 
third, I will address an issue which has received much attention recently, but which 
continues  to  be  controversial,  namely  the  potential  usefulness  of  announcing  the 
likely future path of future policy interest rates; and 
fourth, I will assess the available empirical evidence about the effectiveness of the 
ECB’s  communication  policy  and  conclude  by  highlighting  two  issues  concerning 
central bank communication and policy effectiveness. 
   BIS Review 5/2008 
 1
Role and importance of monetary policy transparency and communication  
II.  
It is generally agreed that a high degree of transparency and an effective communication of 
policy  are  necessary  for  the  successful  performance  of  central  bank  tasks.  Several 
arguments  and  a  wealth  of  empirical  evidence  support  this  proposition.  At  a  fundamental 
level, increased transparency is a key element of the greater accountability that accompanies 
central  bank  independence.  In  other  words,  a  high  degree  of  transparency  is  essential  for 
safeguarding  the  democratic  legitimacy  of  independent  central  banks.  At  policy  level, 
increased transparency and good communication about the objectives, the policy strategy, 
assessments  and  decisions  of  a  central  bank  can  contribute  to  policy  effectiveness  and 
market  efficiency.  This  is  the  reason  why  most  central  banks  have  steadily  exceeded  the 
accountability standards required by law and have become  more open  and improved their 
communication. 
Good communication can enhance policy effectiveness by influencing expectations and by 
reducing uncertainty. Expectations of future developments and policies influence the actions 
of economic agents and, consequently, help determine current economic conditions as well 
as  aggregate  output  and  price  dynamics.  Inflation  expectations,  in  particular,  are  a  key 
determinant  of  wage  and  price-setting  and  of  the  concomitant  dynamic  adjustment  of 
employment and output. Moreover, expectations of inflation and of the future path of short-
term (real) interest rates determine, given risks and liquidity premia, the longer-term interest 
rates that influence investment and consumption decisions and, ultimately, medium and long-
term price developments. By communicating clearly its policy objectives and its strategy for 
achieving  them  and  by  explaining  convincingly  the  rationale  for  its  decisions  –  and  their 
consistency with its objectives and strategy – a central bank can help anchor medium and 
long-term inflation expectations to price stability. The anchoring of expectations facilitates the 
preservation of price stability and improves the effectiveness with which monetary policy can 
secure this goal in the presence of shocks and in view of potential inflation risks. In this way, 
price stability can be maintained more efficiently and output volatility reduced.  
Although  clear  communication  of  the  objectives,  the  policy  strategy  and  of  the  decisions 
taken is necessary to anchor inflation expectations, it is not sufficient. A central bank must 
demonstrate  its  commitment  and  ability  to  achieve  its  objectives  by  the  systematic 
implementation  of  its  policies.  Markets  and  the  general  public  need  to  be  convinced  by 
central bank communication and policy action that are both consistent and effective. This will 
ensure  the  predictability  and  credibility  of  monetary  policy,  which  are  vital  for  the  effective 
management  of  expectations.  Moreover,  a  predictable  and  credible  monetary  policy, 
underpinned  by  high  transparency  and  clear  communication,  will  reduce  uncertainty,  thus 
facilitating decision-making and the efficient pricing of assets in a manner that contributes to 
the attainment of policy objectives. 
There  is  a  growing  body  of  empirical  evidence  that  supports  the  validity  of  the  previous 
arguments  concerning  the  value  of  high  transparency  and  good  communication  for  policy 
effectiveness  and  market  efficiency.1  I  will  elaborate  on  this  with  regard  to  the  ECB’s 
communication strategy. But before doing this, I would like to make one additional general 
remark  about  the  extent  of  central  bank  transparency  and  the  desirable  features  of  policy 
communication. 
Monetary policy transparency and communication are beneficial when they help the central 
bank to achieve its objectives by enhancing the understanding of the markets and the public 
of the policy aims, strategy and decisions, thereby offering clear guidance for the formation of 
expectations  as  well  as  reducing  uncertainty.  Transparency  means  more  than  simply 
releasing information. The provision of more information does not necessarily lead to a better 
                                                 
1   See,  for  example,  Levin,  Natalucci  and  Piger  (2004);  Castelnuovo,  Nicoletti-Altimari,  and  Rodriguez 
Palenzuela (2003); Gürkaynak, Levin and Swanson (2006); and Lange, Sack and Whitesell (2003). 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2008
understanding  of  monetary  policy.  What  is  needed  is  the  provision  of  comprehensive  and 
relevant information in a clear and timely manner. The challenge is to strike the right balance 
between the quantity and quality of information and to communicate the relevant messages 
with clarity so as to contribute to the understanding, predictability and credibility of monetary 
policy, and thus to its effectiveness.  
III.  
The ECB’s concept and practice of transparency and communication 
 Communicating the monetary policy objective and strategy 
III.1 
Let me now turn to the ECB’s concept and practice of transparency and communication. The 
EU Treaty and the ECB Statute clearly state that the primary objective of monetary policy is 
to maintain price stability. But they do not define a strategy to achieve that goal. The ECB 
announced its monetary policy strategy in October 1998, well before the launch of the euro 
on 1 January 1999. The strategy includes a quantitative definition of price stability and a two-
pillar,  medium-term  oriented,  analytical  framework,  employing  economic  and  monetary 
analyses, to assess risks to price stability. By defining and communicating its policy strategy, 
the ECB adopted a framework for internal analysis and decision-making which also provides 
the  basis  for  explaining  policy  decisions  to  the  public.  The  quantitative  definition  of  price 
stability serves as a yardstick by which the ECB can be held accountable and as a guide to 
the public in respect of expected future price developments.  
The clarification of aspects of the strategy in May 2003 contributed to better communication 
in  two  respects:  first,  it  clarified  the  ECB’s  aim  in  terms  of  price  stability  –  namely,  an 
increase in consumer prices of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term – thus giving 
more precise guidance to private sector inflation expectations, which have remained solidly 
anchored 
the  market’s 
understanding  of  the  use  of  monetary  analysis  to  cross-check  the  assessment  of  risks  to 
price stability over the medium and longer term. 
More generally, communication of the ECB’s strategy emphasises the bank’s commitment to 
conduct  its  policy  in  a  systematic  manner  following  a  well-defined  approach  (analytical 
framework)  and  to  be  open  and  transparent  about  its  analysis  and  decision-making.  In 
addition,  communicating  the  strategy  helps  markets  to  better  understand  how  monetary 
policy  is  likely  to  respond  to  adverse  shocks  and  potential  risks  to  price  stability,  thus 
establishing a basis for assessing the predictability and credibility of monetary policy. For all 
these  reasons,  the  announcement  of,  and  consistent  commitment  to,  our  monetary  policy 
strategy constitute a milestone in our communication activities.  
that  quantitative  definition;  second, 
it  helped  enhance 
to 
III. 2   Communicating the monetary policy stance 
Nevertheless, in a world of uncertainty, with incomplete information about the state of and 
prospects  for  the  economy,  knowledge  of  our  strategy  is  a  necessary,  albeit  insufficient, 
condition for the general public – and in particular market participants – to understand the 
decisions  taken  and  to  form  expectations  about  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy.  We 
therefore  aim  to  explain  clearly  and  systematically  the  economic  rationale  underlying  each 
monetary policy decision by providing detailed and comprehensive analyses of the current 
economic  and  monetary  conditions  and  of  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of  the 
medium and longer-term risks to price stability  on the basis of our strategy. Several forms 
and channels of communication are employed. 
The President's introductory statement at the monthly press conference is the main channel 
of the ECB’s communication in this respect. It explains in depth the monetary policy decision 
taken  jointly  by  the  Governing  Council  on  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  real  time.  By 
organising a press conference, we also reach out to a much wider audience than by issuing 
a press release.  
BIS Review 5/2008 
 3
The introductory statement is followed by questions posed by representatives of the media. 
These provide an opportunity for explanations and clarifications as well as for further insights 
into our outlook assessments and the policy decision taken. I would like to emphasise that 
the  Q&A  session  is  a  valuable  vehicle  for  communication  and  a  good  example  of  our 
transparency policy in action. A wide variety of issues are raised which are addressed in a 
direct, open, unfiltered and timely manner.  
The ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, which is published one week after the press conference, offers 
more comprehensive and detailed information and analysis pertaining to the monetary policy 
decisions.  Four  times  a  year,  it  also  includes  the  ECB/Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area. These projections, which incorporate the uncertainty and risk 
assessment of the ECB/Eurosystem staff, are an important input into our economic analysis, 
but not the only one.  
The  speeches  and  interviews  given  by  the  Governing  Council  members  to  many  different 
audiences  in  the  inter-meeting  period  are  another  important  channel  of  communication. 
These  provide  additional  opportunities  to  explain  our  monetary  policy  decisions  and  to 
comment  on  other  topics  within  the  ECB’s  sphere  of  competence.  The  speeches  are  an 
especially useful means of communicating, across the euro area, the single monetary policy 
formulated by the ECB, which is a supra-national institution. They allow Governing Council 
members  to  convey  the  collegial  view  of  the  Council  in  their  own  languages,  thereby 
overcoming  potential  cultural,  linguistic  and  other  national  barriers  of  communication. 
However,  this  kind  of  communication  is  guided  by  the  “single  voice”  principle,  that  is,  the 
views expressed on monetary policy reflect the position of the Governing Council as a whole. 
This approach has worked well. It reflects our collective responsibility and it has efficiently 
reduced  the  potential  “noise”  in  our  communication.  This  principle  is  becoming  more 
important as the euro area expands. As you know, on 1 January 2008 two more countries – 
Cyprus and Malta – adopted the euro and their central banks joined the Eurosystem. 
Communication in periods of uncertainty 
III.3  
Apart from these communication tools that we regularly use to convey our economic outlook 
and risk assessment, and to explain the current monetary policy stance, the ECB, like other 
central  banks,  at  times  has  to  adapt  its  communication  and  actions  to  exceptional  or 
unanticipated developments. Effective central bank communication is especially important in 
periods  of  heightened  uncertainty  –  like  the  geopolitical  tensions  that  followed  the  tragic 
events of September 11, or the recent turmoil in global financial markets, or occasionally in 
response  to  the  uncertainties  and  misperceptions  surrounding  the  outlook  for  future 
monetary policy. While such situations may pose unprecedented communication challenges 
to central banks and may require different policy responses, central bank communication in 
these  circumstances  should  aim  to  restore  trust  and  preserve  confidence  among  financial 
market participants, and to indicate, if necessary, that the monetary authorities are alert and 
ready to act promptly and effectively, in line with the statutory objectives and assigned tasks, 
to preserve price stability and safeguard financial stability.  
Let  me  provide  two  examples.  The  first  goes  back  to  November  2005  and  May  2006.  On 
both  occasions,  market  expectations  about  the  need  for,  or  the  size  of,  future  policy 
adjustments were out of line with those of the ECB. So, on both occasions, we made market 
participants  aware  of  these  misperceptions,  through  appropriate  communication,  and  thus 
avoided surprises and market volatility. The second example is provided by the recent period 
of financial market tensions. Two messages had to be clearly conveyed. One was that the 
ECB  stood  ready  to  take  the  necessary  measures  to  ensure  the  orderly  functioning  of  the 
interbank  money  market.  The  other  message  was  to  make  it  perfectly  clear  that  special 
market operations to reduce the volatility of very short-term rates around the key policy rate 
and to contain elevated pressures in the term money market would not undermine the price 
stability  objective  and  would  not  involve  any  risk  of  tolerating  or  encouraging  imprudent 
behaviour by market participants. It is therefore essential, at least in the ECB’s experience, 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2008
that a clear distinction be made in central bank communication between actions that belong 
to  the  monetary  policy  implementation  sphere  and  those  that  aim  to  ensure  the  orderly 
functioning of the money market and the safeguarding of financial stability. Such messages 
about  the  objective  and  nature  of  the  ECB’s  recent  money  market  operations  helped  to 
stabilise  longer-term  inflation  expectations  at  levels  consistent  with  our  price  stability 
objective and to restore orderly conditions in the money market. 
III.4   Minutes and voting records  
With these and other forms of communication in place, the ECB has achieved a high level of 
transparency over time. Nevertheless, the ECB does not subscribe to the view that unlimited 
transparency is always beneficial. Our position has at times triggered criticism of one aspect 
of our communication policy by some observers, mainly academics, which concerns the non-
disclosure  of  the  minutes  and  voting  records  of  the  Governing  Council  meetings.  Let  me 
briefly comment on this issue.  
The introductory statement made by the President at the monthly press conference contains 
the key information about our outlook and risk assessment, as well as the rationale for the 
respective  policy  decision,  in  real  time.  The  information  conveyed  in  the  introductory 
statement  is,  in  essence,  similar  to  that  published  by  other  central  banks  in  “summary 
minutes” and this is further elaborated by the more comprehensive economic and monetary 
analysis contained in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, which is published in the week following the 
first  Governing  Council  meeting  of  the  month.  Moreover,  the  introductory  statement  is 
provided in a timely manner: the press conference takes place 45 minutes after the decision 
on the key interest rates for the euro area has been announced in a press release, while the 
minutes of the decision-making committees of other major central banks take, on average, 
two to six weeks to be published. And as I mentioned before, the press conference gives the 
media  a  chance  to  ask  probing  questions  and  we  can  reach  a  wider  audience  than  by 
publishing minutes.  
With  regard  to  publishing  the  votes,  two  points  should  be  made.  First,  decisions  on  the 
appropriate  monetary  stance  are  taken  by  forging  a  consensus,  which  means  that  those 
members of the Governing Council that may hold a minority view agree to adopt the position 
of the majority. Second, if votes were published, this would entail a particular risk for the ECB 
–  one  that  is  often  ignored  or  underestimated.  This  risk  is  fundamentally  related  to  the 
institutional  and  political  environment  of  the  multi-country  euro  area  economy  within  which 
the  ECB  –  as  a  supranational  institution  –  operates.  The  voting  behaviour  of  Governing 
Council  members,  and  in  particular  the  Governors  of  the  national  central  banks,  could  be 
judged in the light of national economic conditions and considerations which might seem to 
support  a  different  monetary  policy  decision.  As  a  result,  the  Governors  could  become 
vulnerable  to  criticism  for  their  voting  behaviour  from  the  national  media  as  well  as 
politicians. Such a public discourse on the single monetary policy of the euro area could have 
undesirable effects on the Governing Council’s deliberations. 
Communication of the likely future path of policy interest rates 
IV.  
I  will  now  consider  another  issue  that  is  currently  debated  among  academics  and  central 
bankers  alike:  whether,  to  what  extent  and  how  the  central  bank  should  signal  its  future 
policy  intentions.  At  a  theoretical  level,  as  a  number  of  prominent  academics  have 
emphasised  in  recent  years,  it  may  be  argued,  and  may  seem  appealing,  that  the  central 
bank should provide market participants with fairly precise quantitative indications about the 
likely future path of policy interest rates, as these will align market expectations more closely 
BIS Review 5/2008 
 5
with  those  of  the  central  bank.2  However,  at  a  practical  level,  there  are  serious  concerns 
about  the  feasibility  and  desirability  of  announcing  a  specific  likely  future  path  of  policy 
rates.3  In  a  world  of  uncertainty  –  and  the  current  period  of  heightened  uncertainty  and 
financial  market  volatility  offers  a  characteristic  example  –  providing  markets  with  a  likely 
future path of policy rates, particularly beyond the short term, may entail a number of risks 
that  may  ultimately  undermine  the  initial  intention  to  further  reduce  financial  market  and 
aggregate output volatility. 
Let me highlight some factors and risks that raise doubts about the feasibility and desirability 
of announcing, as a general rule, the likely future path of policy rates: 
• 
The  first  factor  is  the  uncertainty  faced  by  policy-makers  which  makes  it  very 
difficult,  in  general  and  particularly  in  certain  circumstances,  to  define  in  a 
reasonably precise and reliable manner the likely future path of policy rates, or to 
put it differently, the extent and timing of future adjustments of the monetary policy 
stance. The uncertainty faced is not limited to that surrounding the future evolution 
of a large number of exogenous variables that will affect the economic outlook and 
the  risks  to  the  attainment  of  the  policy  objectives.  This  type  of  uncertainty  is 
considerable  and  increases  with  the  length  of  the  forecast  horizon.  More 
significantly,  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  economy’s  structure  and  functioning 
which may be changing over time in ways that are difficult to predict. This model or 
parameter uncertainty makes it hard to define and announce conditional intentions 
about  the  likely  future  path  of  policy  rates,  especially  over  a  relatively  long-time 
horizon. In extreme cases, it may be impossible to announce a path if, in fact, no 
explicit path can be determined in a reasonably precise and reliable manner.4 The 
current  economic  situation  provides  a  relevant  example  both  with  regard  to  the 
uncertainty  surrounding  the  lending  policies  of  banks  and  with  regard  to  the 
functioning of the wage-and-price setting mechanism in some countries.5  
A  second  factor  is  the  difficulty  to  reach  agreement  about  the  appropriate  path  of 
future  policy  rates  in  the  decision-making  committee,  especially  in  periods  of 
heightened uncertainty and perceived structural change. This difficulty is potentially 
greater  the  larger  the  size  of  the  decision-making  body  is,  and  particularly  if  the 
committee endeavours to forge a consensus on the economic outlook, the balance 
of risks to the policy objectives and the appropriate course of monetary policy in the 
future. 
A  third  issue  relates  to  the  risk  that  the  markets  and  the  public  will  not  fully 
understand  the  conditionality  of  the  announced  future  policy  path  on  forecasts  or 
assumptions about the future evolution of exogenous variables that will influence the 
choice  of  the  policy  path.  The  potential  problem  is  likely  to  be  greater  given  the 
implicit or explicit assumption about the time invariance of the underlying structural 
relations.  Communication  of  the  likely  future  path  of  policy  rates  may  be 
                                                   
2   See Woodford (2005). 
3   See, for example, Mishkin (2004); Morris and Shin (2002), and Kahn (2007). 
4   There may be periods of greater certainty and perceived stability of the underlying structural model when it is 
relatively easy to formulate a future policy path. There may also be exceptional situations, such as when the 
economy  faces  deflation  risks  and  the  policy  rate  approaches  the  lower  zero  bound,  when  it  may  be 
appropriate to provide a clear signal of future policy intentions. But such situations, by their very nature, do not 
justify the adoption, as a general rule, of a pre-announcement of the future monetary policy stance. 
5   For instance, the recent financial market turmoil may result in a reassessment of banks’ business models – at 
least by some banks – and may affect their lending practices and the stability of the relationships between 
policy rates, bank lending rates and credit availability. 
6 
 BIS Review 5/2008
 misinterpreted  as  a  quasi-promise  or  commitment  and  could  lead  to  a  disorderly 
adjustment of interest-rate expectations. 
Fourth, another problem is the potential effect on the central bank’s credibility if its 
communication of future policy rates often deviates from the subsequent actual path 
of interest rates. In this respect, policy-makers may also be concerned that frequent 
revisions of a previously announced policy path may weaken the public’s confidence 
in  their  forecasting  ability  or  in  their  commitment  to  follow  through.  In  particular, 
policy-makers  may  hesitate  to  reverse  the  direction  of  such  a  path,  e.g.  from  an 
accommodative to a restrictive stance and this could lead to the implementation of a 
policy  path  that  does  not  take  fully  into  account  new,  incoming  information  and  is 
therefore sub-optimal.  
There are some factors and risks that call for great caution to be exercised in respect of any 
pre-announcement  of  future  policy  intentions.  Ultimately,  the  benefits  and  drawbacks  of 
communicating  the  likely  future  policy  rates  will  depend  on  the  economy’s  structure  and 
complexity,  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  uncertainty  faced  by  policy-makers  and  the 
institutional framework of the central bank. While it might prove to be a useful communication 
tool  for  some  central  banks,  others,  including  the  ECB,  have  concluded  that  the  potential 
problems outweigh the potential benefits. The ECB has therefore adopted a rather pragmatic 
and flexible approach when providing forward guidance to financial markets about its future 
policy intentions. In the light of our risk assessment and by taking into account the specific 
environment in which monetary policy has been conducted, we have given implicit guidance 
at  times  to  the  markets  about  the  likely  direction  of  policy  rates  in  the  short  term,  without 
however pre-committing or compromising our flexibility with regard to future policy decisions.  
The effectiveness of the ECB’s communication strategy 
V.  
Has  the  ECB’s  approach  to  transparency  and  communication  been  successful  since  its 
establishment  in  1999?  The  conceptual  considerations  underlying  our  approach,  which  I 
outlined earlier on, point to a number of potential gains that can arise from transparent and 
effective communication. And there is indeed a wealth of empirical evidence indicating that 
the  ECB’s  communication  strategy  has  helped  increase  the  predictability,  credibility  and 
effectiveness of its monetary policy. Let me briefly present some of the empirical findings: 
First, by defining the overriding price stability objective in quantitative terms and adopting and 
announcing  a  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  ECB  has  provided  clear  guidance  for  market 
participants  to  form  expectations  about  inflation  and  a  basis  for  understanding  and 
anticipating the likely response of monetary policy to shocks or to new incoming information. 
As  a  consequence,  both  survey-based  and  market-based  medium  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  in  the  euro  area  have  remained  well  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  the 
ECB’s  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  even  at  times  when  inflation  outcomes  were 
volatile as a result of adverse shocks that affected aggregate demand or supply. 
A  second  finding  concerns  the  extent  to  which  longer-term  inflation  expectations  react  to 
fluctuations  in  actual  inflation,  and  this  provides  further  insight  into  how  well  the  central 
bank’s objective is incorporated into the expectations of market participants and the public. 
Recent  studies  have  shown  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  are 
decoupled from developments in actual inflation and do not respond at all to macroeconomic 
news, further pointing to the solid anchoring of expectations in the euro area.6  
Moreover, 
the  short-term 
predictability  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  –  namely  the  ability  of  financial  market 
is  considerable  empirical  evidence 
indicating 
there 
that 
                                                 
6  See Deutsche Bundesbank (2006) and Ehrmann et al. (2007). 
BIS Review 5/2008 
 7
participants  to  correctly  anticipate  the  next  monetary  policy  decision  –  has  increased  over 
time.  For  example,  it  has  been  found  that,  out  of  a  total  of  142  days  on  which  Governing 
Council meetings were held from 1999 to December 2007, financial markets were surprised 
– according to a common definition of the surprise element in this literature – on only eight 
occasions. Furthermore, the biggest surprises occurred in the first three years of Economic 
and Monetary Union, indicating that the short-term predictability of the ECB has increased 
over time. This evidence may reflect the fact that financial markets have gradually learned 
about the ECB’s monetary policy framework and communication. 
Similar  results  on  the  degree  of  short-term  predictability  were  found  by  a  recent  survey 
conducted by Barclays Capital among financial market analysts and central bank observers 
worldwide.7  A  sizeable  majority  (60%)  of  survey  respondents  felt  either  “very  confident” 
(15%) or “confident” (45%) in the way the ECB reacts to changing economic circumstances. 
Lastly, empirical evidence has also confirmed the benefits that stem from the “single voice” 
principle  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council.  More  divergent  communication  by  decision-
makers reduces the ability of financial markets to anticipate future monetary policy decisions 
and raises the degree of market uncertainty.8 The high level of short-term predictability of our 
policy decisions is therefore also a result of our “single voice” communication policy.  
Conclusion 
VI.  
Let me conclude by emphasising two points: 
First, notwithstanding the successes I have mentioned, it should be stressed that effective 
central  bank  communication  is  an  ongoing  challenge.  The  ECB,  like  other  central  banks, 
continuously reviews and refines its communication policy, and adapts it if necessary. In any 
event,  effective  central  bank  communication  will  always  be  characterised  by  a  degree  of 
flexibility  and  adaptability  in  order  to  respond  to  a  rapidly  changing  economic  environment 
and  exceptional  circumstances.  One  communication  challenge  for  the  ECB  concerns  the 
apparent divergence between actual inflation and that perceived by the public in a number of 
euro  area  countries.  Although  this  divergence  has  declined  over  time,  it  is  important  to 
deepen  our  understanding  and  to  address  the  causes  of  the  apparent  misperceptions  in 
order  to  maintain  and  strengthen  the  confidence  of  the  euro  area  public  in  the  single 
European currency. 
Second, although a high degree of transparency and effective communication are essential 
ingredients  for  a  successful  monetary  policy  –  in  order  to  anchor  inflation  expectations, 
reduce uncertainty and thus enhance policy effectiveness – they are not sufficient. A central 
bank  must  continuously  demonstrate  its  commitment  to,  and  ability  to  achieve,  its  price 
stability objective by the systematic implementation of its policies. This requires consistency 
between  words  and  deeds,  and  a  track  record  of  policy  decisions  that  will  ensure  the 
predictability, credibility and effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Amato, Jeffrey, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2003) “Communication and Monetary 
Policy,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1405. 
Barclays Capital (2007), “Barclays Capital Investor Survey of Central Bank Communication”. 
                                                 
7   See Barclays Capital (2007). 
8   Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005 and 2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 5/2008
(2005), 
“How  Should  Central  Banks 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007), “Federal Reserve Communications” speech at the Cato Institute 
25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., November 14.  
Blinder, Alan (2004), The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press. 
Blinder,  Alan,  Charles  Goodhart,  Phillip  Hildebrand  and  David  Lipton  (2001),  “How  Do 
Central Banks Talk?”, Geneva Report on the World Economy 3. 
Blinder,  Alan  and  Charles  Wyplosz  (2004),  “Central  Bank  Talk:  Committee  Structure  and 
Communication Policy”, Prepared for ASSA meetings, Philadelphia, January 9, 2005. 
Castelnuovo,  Efrem,  Sergio  Nicoletti-Altimari,  and  Diego  Rodriguez  Palenzuela  (2003), 
“Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Inflation Targets: The Anchoring of Long-Term 
Inflation Expectations”, ECB Working Paper No 273  
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2006).  How  informative  survey  data  on  private  sector  inflation 
expectations are for monetary policymakers. Monthly Bulletin, October, 15-27. 
European Central Bank (2006), “The Predictability of the ECB’s Monetary Policy”, European 
Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin January 2006. 
Ehrmann,  Michael  and  Marcel  Fratzscher 
Communicate?”, ECB Working Paper, No 557. 
Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher (2007), “Communication and decision-making by 
central  bank  committees  –  different  strategies,  same  effectiveness?”,  Journal  of  Money, 
Credit, and Banking. 39(2-3): 509-541. 
Ehrmann,  Michael,  Marcel  Fratzscher,  Refet  Gürkaynak  and  Eric  Swanson  (2007), 
“Convergence and anchoring of yield curves in the euro area”, ECB Working Paper.  
Gürkaynak, Refet, Andrew Levin, and Eric Swanson (2006), “Does inflation targeting anchor 
long-run  inflation  expectations?  Evidence  from  long-term  bond  yields  in  the  US,  UK  and 
Sweden”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No 2006-09. 
Issing, Otmar (2005), “Communication, Transparency, Accountability: Monetary Policy in the 
Twenty-First Century,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87 (2, pt. 1), pp. 65-83. 
Jansson,  Per,  and  Anders,  Vredin  (2003),  “Forecast-Based  Monetary  Policy:  The  Case  of 
Sweden,” International Finance 6: 349-380. 
J.P. Morgan (2000) Guide to Central Bank Watching. 
Kahn,  George  A.  (2007),  “Communicating  a  policy  path:  The  next  frontier  in  central  bank 
transparency”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, First Quarter 2007.  
King,  Mervyn  (2004)  “The  Institutions  of  Monetary  Policy,”  American  Economic  Review 
Papers and Proceedings 94, pp. 1-13. 
Kohn, Donald (2005), “Central Bank Communication,” remarks at the annual meeting of the 
American Economics Association, Philadelphia, January 9. 
Lange, Joe, Brian Sack, and William Whitesell (2003), “Anticipations of Monetary Policy in 
Financial Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35 (December, part 1), pp. 889-
910.  
Levin,  Andrew  T.,  Fabio  M.  Natalucci  and  Jeremy  M.  Piger  (2004),  “Explicit  inflation 
objectives and macroeconomic outcomes”, ECB Working Paper No 383. 
Mishkin, Frederic (2004), “Can central bank transparency go too far?”, NBER Working Paper, 
No. 10829. 
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002), “Social Value of Public Information”, American 
Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 5., pp. 1521-1534. 
BIS Review 5/2008 
 9
Norges Bank (2005), Inflation Report, June. 
Woodford,  Michael  (2005),  “Central  bank  communication  and  policy  effectiveness”,  NBER 
Working Paper No 11898. 
10 
 BIS Review 5/2008
