Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards gaining global growth potential of Islamic 
finance 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Seminar on 
Islamic Finance "Towards Gaining Global Growth Potential of Islamic Finance", Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 15 January 2008. 
 It is my honour and great pleasure to be in Hong Kong today to speak at this seminar on 
Islamic  Finance  jointly  organised  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board.  Islamic  finance  is  now  at  the  threshold  of  a  new  dimension  in 
which,  it  has  now  an  increased  potential  to  strengthen  international  financial  linkages 
between nations. And in so doing, it would contribute towards a more optimum allocation of 
financial resources across borders. Hong Kong, with its sophisticated financial infrastructure 
and  high  level  of  expertise  in  the  financial  sector,  has  strong  potential  to  be  an  important 
linkage and an engaging partner in the international Islamic financial activity.  
It is exactly six years ago that we were here in Hong Kong as our first destination, to promote 
the world's first sovereign sukuk issuance. The overwhelming response we received in Hong 
Kong  provided  the  momentum  effect  that  resulted  in  the  successful  issuance  of  the 
pioneering  USD600  million  Malaysian  sovereign  sukuk.  It  was  more  than  two  times  over 
subscribed  with  one-third  of  the  investors  from  this  region.  Six  years  hence,  the  Islamic 
financial  landscape  has  been  dramatically  transformed  into  a  vibrant,  dynamic  and 
competitive  global  intermediation  mechanism  that  is  supported  by  more  than  300  Islamic 
financial institutions in more than 75 countries. It also has become among the fastest growing 
segments in the financial services industry. 
In  the  early  phase  of  its  development,  Islamic  finance  was  essentially  domestic  centric, 
focussing on retail financing, trade financing and the financing of other commercial business 
activities.  Two  recent  developments  have  however,  influenced  the  subsequent  direction  of 
the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  Firstly,  the  drive  to  diversify  the  domestic  financial 
infrastructure so as to avoid the over dependence on the banking sector and secondly, the 
trend towards greater liberalisation of the financial system. These two trends have spurred 
the  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  markets  and  its  greater  integration  into  the 
international financial system, thereby raising the international dimension of Islamic finance.  
This more dynamic environment, has fostered the generation of a wide spectrum of Islamic 
financial instruments that has ranged from instruments to manage liquidity to structures for 
the financing of that for financing mega investments. These developments have led to the 
emergence of a new asset class. It has also drawn a higher level of foreign participation in 
the  Islamic  financial  markets  which  has  resulted  in  increased  cross-border  flows.  This  has 
not  only  contributed  to  enhancing  international  financial  inter-linkages  between  economies 
but it has also contributed towards the more efficient allocation of financial resources across 
borders.  
Islamic finance in 2008 and beyond remains positive despite the current challenging global 
financial  environment.  The  viability  and  competitiveness  of  Islamic  finance  is  derived  from 
several factors. It is from its ability to meet the changing demands of the economy, from its 
cost  competitiveness  and  from  being  supported  by  a  well  developed  legal,  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework. But more importantly, are the fundamental Shariah requirements of 
Islamic finance that support its viability and stability.  
Shariah  is  the  key  pillar  of  Islamic  finance  from  which  Islamic  finance  derives  its  unique 
characteristics.  The  Shariah  injunctions  require  that  Islamic  financial  transactions  be 
accompanied by an underlying productive activity. In Islamic finance, there is always a close 
link  between  financial  and  productive  flows.  Moreover,  under  the  risk  sharing  principle 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 1
for 
Islamic 
financial 
tenet  underlying  all 
instruments  also  allow 
transparency  represents  a  basic 
required,  Islamic  financial  institutions  will  share  the  profit  or  the  loss  incurred  by  the 
entrepreneur.  There  is  an  explicit  sharing  of  risk  by  the  financier  and  the  borrower.  This 
arrangement  will  thus  entail  the  appropriate  due  diligence  and  the  integrating  of  the  risks 
associated with the real investment activity into the financial transaction. In this arrangement, 
the real activity is expected to generate sufficient wealth to compensate for the risks.  
In  contrast,  conventional  instruments  generally  separate  such  risks  from  the  underlying 
assets. As a result, risk management and wealth creation may, at times, move in different or 
even  opposite  directions.  Conventional 
the 
commoditisation of risks. This has led to its proliferation through multiple layers of leveraging 
and  disproportionate  distribution,  in  turn,  which  could  result  in  higher  systemic  risks,  thus, 
increasing the potential for instability in the financial system.  
financial 
In  addition, 
transactions. There is an inherent obligation on Islamic financial services providers to meet 
the  appropriate  standards  of  transparency.  It  is  from  the  profit-sharing  feature  of  Islamic 
financial  transactions  that  imposes  a  high  level  of  disclosure  in  the  financial  contract.  The 
accountabilities of the respective parties involved in the transaction are clearly defined in the 
contract. This transparency also provides a strong incentive for Islamic financial institutions 
to appropriately manage risks. This disclosure allows the market to assign the appropriate 
risk premiums to the respective companies and thus the potential for the enhanced role of 
market  discipline  to  take  effect.  These  inherent  features  as  required  by  the  Shariah 
injunctions provides inbuilt checks and balances which serves to ensure financial stability in 
the Islamic financial system.  
These features are also reinforced by the development of a comprehensive regulatory and 
supervisory regime which has been strengthened considerably with the establishment of the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  in  2002.  It's  establishment  has  also  contributed  to  the 
harmonisation  in  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  across  different  jurisdictions.  Finally, 
education institutions have been established to develop the supply of professional talent and 
expertise in Islamic finance to support the growth and development of Islamic finance going 
forward.  
The evolution of sophisticated Islamic financial products that have been structured based on 
multiple Islamic concepts have resulted in a new wave of innovation. These products have 
become competitive and efficient both in terms of product structure and pricing. The more 
recent innovations include the introduction of Islamic hedge funds and the creation of Islamic 
benchmark indices. There has also been increased listing of Islamic financial instruments in 
international exchanges. This has enhanced the depth of the Islamic financial markets has 
increased  its  attractiveness  of  an  asset  class  for  investment.  This  has  contributed  to 
increased  sophistication  of  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  products  evidenced  by  the  recent 
surge of structured products and investment-linked products.  
The  sukuk  market  is  fast  emerging  as  the  most  significant  form  of  Islamic  financing  and 
continues to receive strong interest as an avenue for fund raising and investment. The sukuk 
market  has  been  gaining  growth  momentum,  increasing  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  40 
percent.  Significantly,  90  percent  of  the  sukuk  issuance  are  corporate  issuances.  In 
Malaysia, the issuance of sukuk has surpassed the issuance of conventional bonds for three 
consecutive  years,  with  the  annual  turnover  in  sukuk  trading  in  the  secondary  market  at 
about RM135 billion. Strong demand for sukuks have also been spurred by the high levels of 
surplus savings and reserves in Asia and the Middle East. 
The sukuk is also an attractive instrument to assist Islamic financial institutions in managing 
their  liquidity  requirements.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  also  an  effective  instrument  used  by 
corporations, institutions and sovereigns in tapping funds at competitive rates to finance long 
term funding needs. At this juncture, the demand for sukuk is tremendous. The high demand 
for the sukuk instrument is evidenced by the over subscription which has ranged from two to 
thirteen times. This has pushed down the cost of issuance by at least 10 to 20 basis points. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2008
This demand has originated from several different parts of the world, both from conventional 
as  well  as  Islamic  financial  investors.  Due  to  the  scarcity  of  sukuk  issuance,  the  investors 
have tended to hold the sukuk for investment thereby reducing the secondary activity in the 
market.  Thus,  has  resulted  in  a  higher  pricing  in  the  sukuk  secondary  market  thereby 
generating  good  investment  returns  for  investors.  The  sukuk  thus  offers  a  positive  value 
proposition for both issuers and investors.  
Let me turn to Malaysia's experience in Islamic finance. Malaysia has had three decades of 
experience  in  which  we  have  developed  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  that 
operates in parallel to the conventional system. The supporting legal framework includes a 
dedicated legislation that takes into account the unique principles of Islamic contracts. The 
legal  infrastructure  also  includes  the  court  system  and  arbitration  mechanism  to  resolve 
disputes  to  ensure  that  contracts  relating  to  Islamic  financial  transactions  are  effectively 
enforced.  The  Islamic  financial  system  is  also  well  supported  by  a  significant  number  of 
diverse players in the banking, takaful and capital market.  
Finally, for a dual financial system, the tax reforms have been undertaken to accord neutrality 
in  treatment  between  conventional  and  Islamic  financial  products.  The  establishment  of  a 
national  central  Shariah  Council  has  been  important  to  ensure  harmonisation  of  Shariah 
decisions in the Islamic financial services industry.  
The Islamic financial industry in Malaysia has experienced rapid transformation in recent five 
years.  The  product  range  has  now  expanded  into  broad  array  of  innovative  instruments. 
Several new Islamic financial products were introduced which included residential mortgage 
backed  securities,  commodity  based  financing,  as  well  as  investment  and  equity  linked 
product based on musyarakah, mudarabah and ijarah.  
The  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  has  evolved  as  a  competitive  component  of  the 
overall  financial  system,  complementing  the  conventional  financial  system  as  a  driver  of 
economic growth and development. Malaysia continues to foster the expansion of the dual 
banking  system  where  both,  the  Islamic  and  conventional  systems  operate  in  parallel  to 
deliver  innovative  and  competitive  financial  products  and  services.  More  recently,  the 
increased  pace  of  liberalisation  in  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  has  increased 
foreign  presence  and  participation  in  our  domestic  Islamic  financial  system.  This  has 
increase the diversity of players in our system. The Malaysian bond market has also been 
liberalised  to  enable  foreign  entities  to  raise  ringgit  and  foreign  denominated  funds  in  our 
domestic  market.  Following  these  developments  we  are  now  entering  a  new  phase  in  the 
development  of  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  with  the  new  initiatives  to  promote 
Malaysia  as  an  International  Islamic  Financial  Centre.  This  aims  at  strengthening  our 
economic  and  financial  inter-linkages  and  thus  promoting  greater  trade  and  investment 
across borders. We are therefore entering a new phase of development for Islamic finance in 
Malaysia as it becomes more integrated with the international financial system.  
Given the surge in demand for Islamic financial products and services, several countries and 
financial centres are increasingly participating in the industry. The global front-runners will be 
those with combined strengths of having the capabilities and resources, as well as the ability 
to  secure  the  confidence  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  community.  It  is  against  this 
backdrop  of  rising  competitive  environment  that  the  potential  of  cumulative  bilateral  and 
multilateral  strengths  will  become  important  in  managing  the  complexities  and  constraints 
found in the Islamic financial services industry. 
This increasing interest by several financial centres together with their international linkages 
will contribute towards creating a more integrated international Islamic financial system. Such 
centres,  such  as  Hong  Kong,  have  the  potential  infrastructure  and  the  ability  to  facilitate 
product  offerings  that  will  bridge  the  regional  and  international  financial  linkages.  Strategic 
alliances  among  Islamic  finance  players  would  be  a  catalyst  unleashing  the  regional  and 
global potential of Islamic finance.  
BIS Review 6/2008 
 3
In South East Asia alone there is an immense potential market to be tapped. This market not 
only comprises the 217 million Muslim population but extends to the non-Muslim community 
and  the  foreign  national  community  that  operates  in  the  region.  The  region  is  increasingly 
becoming an investment destination, including from the Middle Eastern investors. In 2006, 
Asia Pacific region has surpassed Europe as second largest region for investment from GCC 
with USD460 billion investment.  
The recent specific initiative to enhance the securitisation market by Cagamas Berhad, the 
Malaysian  Mortgage  Corporation  and  Hong  Kong  Mortgage  Corporation  by  establishing  a 
joint  venture  company  to  provide  a  mortgage  guarantee  programme  for  both  Islamic  and 
conventional  mortgages  in  Malaysia  is  an  example  of  a  collaboration.  This  could  be  a 
catalyst for more similar initiatives in the future.  
Conventional  financial  institutions  may  also  enter  into  alliances  with  Islamic  financial 
institutions to be co-arrangers, to structure sukuk or other Islamic products based on Shariah 
compliant assets in this region. The wide ranging availability of such assets and the massive 
financing  needs  of  the  new  growth  areas  in  the  region  such  as  in  China,  Indonesia  and 
Vietnam will be attracting funds from surplus economies such as from the Gulf economies. 
Efforts  can  also  focus  on  facilitating  cross  listing  of  sukuk  in  multiple  jurisdictions. 
Additionally, the viability of setting up of Asian Sukuk Fund as an extension of Asian Bond 
Fund can also be explored.  
Potential issuers may leverage on Malaysia's sukuk platform and the strengths as the world's 
largest sukuk issuance centre with over US$56b or 62% of world's sukuk issues. Malaysia 
has  one  of  the  most  active  primary  sukuk  market  with  an  average  annual  growth  of  17% 
during the period 2001-2006. It also has one of the most active secondary market with the 
turnover  of  the  sukuk  trading  registered  more  than  USD40  billion  annually.  International 
issuers  with  good  rating  will  benefit  from  the  simplified  issuance  procedures.  This  is  in 
addition to the ability to issue multi-currency sukuk and the flexibility to swap RM funding into 
other currencies to enable foreign issuers to capitalize on the price premium of issuing RM 
denominated sukuks.  
A  further  area  of  collaboration  is  outsourcing,  in-sourcing  or  white  labelling.  These 
mechanisms will not only serve as a means to drive down cost of doing business, achieving 
economies of scale and the avoidance of duplication of resources, but also gives optimum 
focus  by  players  to  develop  the  newly  ventured  Islamic  finance  business.  Malaysia's 
experience  in  Islamic  financial  operations  and  product  design  can  be  leveraged  upon  to 
systematically structure a complete solution to be offered to other players.  
Going  forward,  Islamic  finance  as  a  new  industry  requires  more  initiatives  to  expand  the 
horizon  of  business  parameters  and  innovative  products  offerings.  There  is  a  need  to 
conduct  further  in-depth  research  on  Shariah  issues  relating  to  risk  mitigation,  liquidity 
management  and  hedging.  The  combined  market  knowledge  and  insights  from  education 
and  training  institutions  such  as  INCEIF,  the  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic 
Finance in Malaysia can make meaningful contributions to the global Islamic finance industry 
that  addressed  both  market  needs  and  Shariah  compliance.  In  addition,  INCEIF's  flagship 
programme,  the  Chartered  Islamic  Finance  Professional  (CIFP)  offers  the  world's  first 
professional certification programme in Islamic finance aims to nurture skilled talent pool for 
Islamic finance. 
Let me conclude my remarks. The global Islamic finance industry has evolved from a faith-
based  to  a  business  driven  industry  for  all  communities.  With  total  global  Islamic  financial 
assets  amounting  to  only  40%  of  the  largest  conventional  bank  and  with  only  300  players 
compared to 23,000 conventional players globally, competitive pressure moving forward are 
likely  to  be  intense.  But  with  the  underlying  strength  inherent  in  Islamic  finance  and  its 
potential role in bringing together different parts of the world with surplus funds in search of 
investment  opportunities 
tremendous 
opportunities  to  be  drawn  from  Islamic  finance.  The  combined  efforts  and  collaborative 
financing  requirements  accords 
those  with 
to 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2008
alliances will pave the way for mutually reinforcing developments that will contribute to the 
overall international finance system and global economic prosperity. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 5
