Jürgen Stark: Does the euro area need an economic government? 
Statement  by  Mr  Jürgen  Stark,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the HEC European Executive Campus, Brussels, 22 January 2008. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  participate  in  this  session  on  economic  policies  and 
governance. The topic of our panel discussion is very well chosen: “Does the euro area need 
an economic government?” This is indeed an important and highly topical issue. 
The advocates of an economic government for the euro area argue that such an institution is 
needed in order to  
1. 
2. 
improve the coordination of national economic policies in the euro area; and 
establish a dialogue with the ECB in order to discuss the monetary strategy for the 
euro area. 
I will give  you my conclusions straight away: I  do not agree with these claims. We do not 
need  an  economic  government  for  the  euro  area  to  improve  the  coordination  of  national 
economic  policies.  Effective  and  efficient  coordination  can  be  achieved  within  the  current 
institutional  framework  if  all  policy  makers  respect  its  provisions  and  use  the  existing 
procedures  and  instruments  more  responsibly.  Indeed,  the  idea  of  establishing  a  political 
entity in order to institutionalise a dialogue with the ECB with a view to influencing monetary 
policy in the euro area represents a fundamental attack on the euro area’s monetary policy 
framework, which has proved very successful over the last nine years.  
The institutional framework of EMU is based on clearly specified objectives, a clear allocation 
of  responsibilities  to  different  policy  areas  and  a  sound  framework  for  the  coordination  of 
national economic policies.  
The  economic  objectives  of  the  Community,  which  are  listed  as  “tasks”  in  Article  2  of  the 
Treaty establishing the European Community include “harmonious, balanced and sustainable 
development of economic activities, a high level of employment […], sustainable and non-
inflationary  growth,  a  high  degree  of  competitiveness  and  convergence  of  economic 
performance”. The Treaty of Lisbon transformed these tasks into “objectives” and reworded 
them  but  made  no  substantive  changes.  One  noteworthy,  welcome,  amendment  is  the 
addition  of  price  stability  to  the  list  of  objectives,  which  further  strengthens  the  focus  on 
stability of the EU’s policy framework. 
In order to achieve these objectives, the Maastricht Treaty established a clear allocation of 
responsibilities,  reflecting  the  fact  that  assigning  policy  instruments  primarily  to  one  single 
policy  objective  and  making  individual  policy-makers  responsible  for  one  single  policy 
instrument ensures a high level of effectiveness and accountability.  
The single monetary policy was given the task of maintaining price stability in the euro area 
and was assigned to the ECB as an independent, supranational institution. Economic policy 
deals with the other economic objectives. Responsibility for the various areas of economic 
policy has largely remained with the Member States, since these policies are best carried out 
at  the  national  level  in  order  to  ensure  that  they  are  appropriately  tailored  to  the  specific 
characteristics and needs of the individual countries. 
More specifically: 
• 
structural policies in the Member States are supposed to seek to create flexible and 
efficient structures in product and labour markets with a view to fostering the growth 
potential  of  euro  area  economies  and  improving  the  adjustment  mechanisms  in 
EMU; 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 1
  fiscal policies are supposed to seek to ensure the sustainability of public finances, 
effectively limiting government deficits and indebtedness, thereby also ensuring that 
automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  work  effectively  as  an  adjustment  mechanism  in  the 
currency union; and 
wage policies should be compatible with trend developments in productivity in order 
to  foster  employment  and  should  take  into  account  the  overriding  importance  of 
wage flexibility as an equilibrating adjustment mechanism in EMU.  
While responsibility for economic policies lies with the Member States, the Treaty requires 
that  such  policies  be  conducted  with  a  view  to  contributing  to  the  achievement  of  the 
aforementioned  objectives  and  in  compliance  with  the  principles  of  “stable  prices,  sound 
public finances” and “an open market with free competition”. Furthermore, Article 99 of the 
Treaty explicitly requires that Member States “regard their economic policies as a matter of 
common  concern”  and  “coordinate  them  within  the  Council”,  reflecting  the  need  for  close 
coordination given the ever closer economic links between the Member States as a result of 
EMU.  
The Treaty’s general requirement that economic policies be coordinated is substantiated by a 
number of specific coordination provisions, such as:  
• 
a framework for avoiding excessive government deficits in the form of the Stability 
and Growth Pact; and 
a framework for fostering sound structural policies in labour, product and services 
markets  in  the  form  of  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines,  the  Employment 
Guidelines and the Lisbon Strategy. 
 In this context, the Eurogroup, an informal body bringing together the finance ministers of the 
euro  area  countries,  the  Commissioner  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  and  the  ECB 
President, plays an important role by establishing an informal forum for open discussions on 
all issues relevant to the euro area. The Lisbon Treaty recognises the informal role of the 
Eurogroup with a view to fostering “ever-closer coordination of economic policies within the 
euro area” in a new protocol.  
Thus, there is a comprehensive governance framework for the euro area establishing a clear 
allocation of responsibilities, as well as a framework for effective policy coordination. And yet, 
the  advocates  of  an  economic  government  argue  that  there  are  deficiencies  in  this 
framework, resulting in inferior economic outcomes, and that these could be remedied by an 
economic government. 
There is no doubt, however, that an immediate consequence of the creation of an economic 
government seeking close coordination with the ECB would be the blurring of responsibilities. 
An  institution  or  policy  area  can  be  responsible  only  for  a  task  for  which  it  has  the  right 
instrument available. A blurring of responsibilities would lead to every institution being made 
responsible for everything, which in the end would mean that, amid confusion, no institution 
was responsible for anything.  
The performance of the euro area’s policy framework has, in fact, been mixed. On the one 
hand, the first nine years of EMU have been characterised by low and stable inflation and 
firmly anchored inflation expectations, vindicating the monetary policy framework laid down in 
the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  bearing  witness  to  the  successful  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB 
within this framework. 
On  the  other  hand,  economic  policies  over  the  last  nine  years  have  not  delivered  the 
expected  results.  With  regard  to  structural  policies,  the  recent  cyclical  upswing  should  not 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2008
distract us from the fact that unemployment in the euro area is still unacceptably high1 and 
trend  productivity  growth  has  slowed  to  a  very  low  level2.  Some  countries  have  made 
progress  with  structural reforms  over  the  past  few  years,  but  overall  the  achievements  fall 
short  of  expectations.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  mid-term  review  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy. 
The European Council re-launched the Lisbon process in 2005, refocusing it on growth and 
employment. However, this does not, thus far, appear to have given significant fresh impetus 
to  reform  efforts  in  the  Member  States.  On  the  contrary,  reform  efforts  in  many  countries 
have  stalled  and  we  are  even  seeing  increases  in  economic  patriotism  and  protectionist 
tendencies, which are preventing the goals of the Lisbon Strategy from being achieved, and 
may potentially threaten the common internal market.  
With regard to fiscal policies, in the wake of the cyclical downturn observed between 2001 
and 2004, some Member States experienced significant deterioration in their fiscal positions 
and were, accordingly, subject to the excessive deficit procedure laid down in the Treaty and 
set out in greater detail in the Stability and Growth Pact. However, rather than complying with 
the  excessive  deficit  procedure  and  adjusting  their  budgetary  policies  accordingly,  policy-
makers started heavily criticising the Pact, arguing that it was inflexible and set the wrong 
incentives. In the end, it was the rules – and not the policies – that were adjusted. In March 
2005 the Council agreed on a reform of the Pact. Changes to its corrective arm, which seeks 
to deter countries from running excessive deficits and ensure their prompt correction, have 
considerably weakened the EU’s fiscal framework by placing greater emphasis on flexibility 
and discretion. The improvement seen in Member States’ fiscal positions since the new Pact 
was  adopted  is  attributable  largely  to  the  recent  cyclical  upswing,  while  progress  with 
structural  consolidation  in  countries  with  budgetary  imbalances  has  generally  been 
disappointing. This lack of ambition as regards fiscal consolidation, which is not consistent 
with  the  provisions  of  the  revised  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  falls  short  of  the  political 
commitments made, could potentially undermine the credibility of the new Pact. The real test 
of the new Pact’s credibility is still to come, but the indications, particularly from some large 
Member States, are not very encouraging in this regard. 
In addition, also wage policies have often not taken sufficient account of the requirements of 
the new environment – the fact of having a single currency. In some countries, wage growth 
has  considerably  outpaced  productivity  growth,  leading  to  considerable  increases  in  unit 
labour  costs.  Such  developments  have,  in  turn,  led  to  significant  deteriorations  in  the  cost 
and price competitiveness in these countries, which will require some sort of re-equilibrating 
wage adjustments in the future.  
A quick glance at the facts thus reveals that there is a need for better coordination of national 
economic polices in the euro area. But it would be a mistake to infer from this that there is a 
need  for  some  kind  of  economic  government  for  the  euro  area.  The  economic  policy 
provisions  of  the  Treaty  and  the  EU’s  framework  for  economic  policy  coordination  do,  in 
principle,  ensure  the  sound  conduct  and  coordination  of  economic  policies,  promoting 
economic  prosperity  in  the  countries  of  the  euro  area.  The  reasons  for  the  lacklustre 
performance of many euro area countries’ economic policies are rooted not in deficiencies in 
the  current  institutional  framework,  but  rather  in  some  national  governments’  lack  of 
willingness to adhere to the rules of that framework. As national governments obviously lack 
the political will to coordinate their economic policies and adhere to the rules of EMU, could 
an economic government make a difference? This would potentially involve the transfer to a 
European  institution  of  national  sovereignty  regarding  economic  policy  issues  and  would 
                                                 
1  
In  November  2007  the  euro  area  unemployment  rate  as  a  percentage  of  the  labour  force  was  7.2% 
(seasonally adjusted). 
2   According  to  Eurostat  figures,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of  labour  productivity  (real  GDP  per  person 
employed) was a mere 0.8% since the start of EMU. In the third quarter 2007 this growth rate stood at 0.75% 
(seasonally adjusted). 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 3
require a willingness to subordinate perceived national economic interests to the economic 
interests of the euro area as a whole. But would those politicians who so eloquently call for 
an economic government be willing to accept real decisions by such an institution that ran 
counter  to  the  perceived  national  interests  of  their  country  in  order  to  ensure  the  smooth 
functioning of EMU? I very much doubt it. In fact, there seems, instead, to be a risk of an 
economic  government  at  the  euro  area  level  potentially  being  used  as  a  scapegoat  for 
unsuccessful policies at the national level, which would thus even undermine incentives for 
sound policy and effective policy coordination. 
In the light of these considerations, it would seem that the main reason for the recent calls for 
an economic government is probably something else, namely a desire to establish political 
influence on monetary policy in the euro area and thereby to undermine the independence of 
the  ECB.  Let  me  make  it  clear  that  this  suspicion  is  unfortunately  not  a  product  of  the 
imagination of an overly cautious central banker. It is an immediate consequence of the idea 
of  an  economic  government  establishing  a  dialogue  with  the  ECB  in  order  to  influence 
monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  Article  108  of  the  Treaty  explicitly  states  that  “[t]he 
Community  institutions  and  bodies  and  the  governments  of  the  Member  States  undertake 
[…] not to seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the ECB or of the 
national central banks in the performance of their tasks”. 
The  ECB  certainly  does  communicate  with  political  authorities  on  a  regular  basis.  In 
particular, there is regular interaction between the ECB and the national finance ministers. 
The President of the ECB attends the monthly Eurogroup meetings, and the President of the 
Eurogroup is invited to attend the meetings of the ECB’s Governing Council. This interaction 
is, however, aimed solely at ensuring a regular exchange of information and views, and does 
not, therefore, conflict with the independence of the ECB.  
The institutional independence of the ECB is a key element of the euro area’s governance 
framework,  as  it  ensures  that  price  stability  is  effectively  achieved  and  maintained.  A 
necessary  condition  for  the  achievement  and  maintenance  of  price  stability  is  a  credible 
commitment to ultimately pursuing a price stability-oriented monetary policy. It is universally 
accepted,  on  the  basis  of  a  vast  amount  of  theoretical  and  empirical  literature,  as  well  as 
historical experience, that the best means of having monetary policy credibly committed to 
the pursuit of price stability is to have an independent central bank. It is therefore crucial that 
the different dimensions of the ECB’s independence are fully respected, namely institutional, 
personal, financial, functional and goal independence. 
In this context, it is important to stress the benefits of price stability for economic prosperity 
and  to  emphasise  the  fallacious  nature  of  the  view,  heard  occasionally,  that  an  overriding 
focus on price stability means that the needs of the real economy are neglected.  
The  relationship  between  inflation  and  economic  performance  in  the  long  run  has  been 
studied extensively. As I have recently argued, one could say that the long-run Phillips curve, 
describing  the  long-run  relationship  between  inflation  and  economic  activity,  has  virtually 
been rotating in the minds of macroeconomists and policy-makers over the last few decades. 
Around  35  years  ago  it  was  positively  sloped,  suggesting  that  a  little  more  inflation  would 
have the permanent effect of giving rise to a little more real income. The experience of the 
stagflation of the 1970s and the rational expectations revolution in macroeconomic theory led 
to attention being focused once again on a long forgotten principle, namely the concept of 
the long-run neutrality of money, the insight that monetary policy measures will, in the long 
run, influence only the level of prices, leaving growth and employment levels unchanged. Any 
attempt  by  central  banks  to  systematically  stimulate  output  and  employment  is  ultimately 
doomed to failure, the only certain outcome being inflation. The perceived trade-off between 
inflation  and  growth  will,  sooner  or  later,  reveal  its  true  nature.  Although  it  is  tempting  to 
believe that such a trade-off exists, it is in fact a mirage. 
New  empirical  evidence  and  new  insights  in  monetary  theory  have  shown  that  even 
moderate  levels  of  inflation  have  considerable  negative  repercussions  for  long-term 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2008
economic performance, and maintaining price stability is therefore the best contribution that 
monetary  policy  can  make  to  economic  welfare,  growth  and  employment.  By  maintaining 
price stability, monetary policy fosters economic prosperity by eliminating distortions arising 
from high and volatile inflation. In particular, contrary to the view, heard occasionally, that a 
monetary  policy  that  seeks  to  safeguard  price  stability  will  result  in  excessively  high  real 
interest rates, a price stability-oriented monetary policy will actually lead to lower real interest 
rates by reducing inflation risk premia, thereby promoting growth and employment.  
By  credibly  pursuing  price  stability,  monetary  policy  also  directly  contributes  to  the 
stabilisation of short-term fluctuations in output and employment. In a monetary policy regime 
with  a  clear  focus  on  price  stability,  inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored  such  that 
increases in inflation are not expected to be long-lasting. As a result, adverse supply shocks, 
such as an increase in oil prices, have less effect on inflation and unemployment and, at the 
same time, monetary policy has more leeway to accommodate such shocks. 
In this context, it is important to note that the ECB pursues its price stability mandate on the 
basis  of  a  monetary  policy  strategy  with  a  strong  forward-looking  element.  The  ECB’s 
strategy comprises a definition of price stability as an annual increase in the HICP of below 
but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term  and  a  broad-based  analysis  of  the  risks  to  price 
stability in the context of our two-pillar framework. Our definition of price stability implies that 
we do not attempt to fine-tune the inflation rate at very short horizons, but aim at keeping 
inflation below but close to 2% over the medium term. This medium-term orientation of our 
strategy  has  given  us  the  flexibility  to  respond  firmly,  and  yet  with  a  forward-looking 
approach, to the series of adverse economic disturbances that have hit the euro area over 
the  last  nine  years.  The  firm  focus  on  price  stability  has  ensured  that  expectations  have 
remained stable even in the face of protracted inflationary shocks, while the forward-looking 
approach has made it possible to achieve this objective without unnecessary fluctuations in 
real activity.  
And  yet,  despite  the  fact  that  our  monetary  policy  strategy  evidently  works  very  well, 
revisions  to  our  strategy  are  advocated  from  time  to  time.  For  example,  it  is  sometimes 
proposed that we should abandon our two-pillar framework for the analysis of risks to price 
stability  and  instead  adopt  a  full  inflation  targeting  approach.  Another  proposal  that  is 
sometimes made is that we should have our inflation goal or a new inflation target endorsed 
by the Eurogroup. I disapprove of these proposals. First, having our inflation goal endorsed 
by  the  Eurogroup  would  require  the  ECB  and  the  Eurogroup  to  reach  a  consensus  in  this 
regard, which would not be compatible with our independence in the pursuit of our mandate 
to  maintain  price  stability.  Second,  the  proposal  to  switch  to  a  full  inflation  targeting 
framework  disregards  what  are  by  now  the  well-known  short-comings  of  this  approach. 
Inflation targeting is a policy framework that aims at keeping inflation at a clearly specified 
target  level  over  a  clearly  specified  time  frame,  usually  up  to  two  years.  Thus,  inflation 
targeting  represents  a  narrow  framework  focusing  on  the  risks  to  price  stability  only  at 
relatively short horizons, but largely ignoring potential longer-term risks to price stability. Our 
two-pillar framework, with the important role played by monetary analysis, helps us to take 
account  also  of  these  longer-term  risks  emanating  from  the  well-documented  close  link 
between monetary developments and trend inflation. In particular, the close link discovered 
more recently between monetary developments and evolving imbalances in asset and credit 
markets  means  that  our  broad-based  monetary  analysis  enables  us  to  detect  these 
imbalances at an early stage and to respond to the implied risks to financial, economic and 
price stability in a timely, forward-looking, manner.  
A monetary policy geared to the maintenance of price stability is also conducive to external 
stability, helping to reduce exchange rate volatility and preserve confidence in the currency. 
And yet, growing concerns about the cost and price competitiveness of national economies 
in the wake of the recent appreciation of the euro have, in some euro area countries, led to 
the  virtual  rediscovery  of  the  exchange  rate  as  a  policy  instrument.  Not  surprisingly, 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 5
therefore, exchange rate policy is also one of the key aspects of the current debate about the 
pros and cons of an economic government.  
The governance framework of the euro area as regards exchange rate policy is specified in 
Article 111 of the Treaty. The Treaty authorises the Council to conclude formal agreements 
on an exchange rate system for the euro and to formulate general orientations for exchange 
rate policy – after consulting the ECB in order to ensure that any decision is consistent with 
monetary policy’s overriding objective of price stability.  
Thus far, and with good reason, neither of these procedures has been implemented. During 
the preparations for EMU it was decided that the euro would be a freely floating currency and 
I do not see any convincing arguments in support of a departure from this principle.  
However, my scepticism with regard to the implementation of an active exchange rate policy 
in  the  euro  area  does  not  mean  that  developments  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  are 
neglected in the ECB’s deliberations on monetary policy. On the contrary, we at the ECB are 
well aware of the role played by the exchange rate as a source of external shocks in the euro 
area and as an important link in the monetary transmission mechanism. Movements in the 
euro’s exchange rate are duly taken into account in the ECB’s economic analysis of the short 
to medium-term risks to price stability. There is therefore no reason to be concerned that the 
ECB  is  neglecting  the  implications  of  exchange  rate  developments  for  the  euro  area 
economy.  
In this context, there are, however, a couple of issues that need to be borne in mind. It is 
important  to  note  that,  with  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  the  importance  of  the 
exchange rate for the cost and price competitiveness of an individual euro area country has 
declined significantly. Nowadays, more than 50% of the euro area countries’ external trade is 
with  other  euro  area  trading  partners  and  is  therefore  not  affected  by  exchange  rate 
developments. Changes in the euro’s exchange rate therefore have a much smaller effect on 
a  country’s  competitiveness  than  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  of  that  country’s  former 
national currency prior to the adoption of the single currency.  
Furthermore, people often overlook the fact that a strong currency also has beneficial effects. 
It reduces the price of imported consumer goods, thereby boosting the purchasing power of 
consumers. A strong euro also lowers the price of imported production inputs, such as crude 
oil, which are denominated in US dollars in the world market and may, therefore, even have 
a favourable impact on the price competitiveness of the euro area economies.  
Does  the  euro  area  need  an  economic  government?  I  have  argued  that  it  does  not.  The 
institutional  framework  established  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  provides  for  effective  and 
efficient monetary and economic governance for the euro area. If all decision-makers act in 
accordance with their mandates, this will implicitly give rise to a policy mix that is beneficial to 
growth, employment and prosperity. 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2008
