T T Mboweni: Origins and causes of recent financial market turbulence 
and its implications for the CMA 
Speech  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  public 
lecture, Windhoek, Namibia, 4 April 2008.  
 Introduction  
Thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation  to  speak  to  you  about  the  recent  financial  market 
turbulence and its implications for the Common Monetary Area of Lesotho, Namibia, South 
Africa  and  Swaziland,  or  CMA.  As  you  may  know,  this  morning  the  Governors  of  the  four 
CMA  central  banks  had  a  meeting  which  was  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Namibia  to  discuss 
matters  of  mutual  interest  and  exchange  observations  on  economic  developments  in  the 
region. It is always a delight to visit Namibia, renowned for its friendliness, and this lecture 
gave me an excuse to extend my visit to your beautiful and super-tidy capital. 
Unfortunately, one should add a footnote to the reference in the topic of my lecture to the 
“recent financial market turbulence”: As we are all aware, the turbulence is still ongoing. 
I will first touch upon the build-up to the turbulence in the international financial markets, and 
use  a  number  of  indicators  to  illustrate  the  turmoil.  This  will  be  followed  by  some 
observations  regarding  international  policy  reactions  to  the  disturbances.  Thereafter  I  will 
pinpoint a number of key implications for the CMA, before concluding. 
The development of the turbulence in the international financial markets 
Significant  developments  in  the  global  economy  seldom  start  in  isolation.  Rather,  most 
episodes are extensions of or reactions to previous episodes. With any analysis, one has to 
start somewhere – but be mindful that important dimensions may be lost by doing so.  
We  can  largely  trace  the  origins  of  the  current  turmoil  to  the  United  States  (US)  housing 
market.  I  would  like  to  go  back  to  the  mid-1990s,  when  property  prices  in  the  US  started 
rising  alongside  increasing  income  levels  and  positive  demographic  influences  on  the 
demand for housing. This upward momentum continued, despite the sharp fall in prices in 
major share markets early in 2000.  
Partly in order to stem the negative impact of the share price decline on economic activity, 
monetary  policy  became  accommodative  in  the  US.  This  attempt  at  moderating  the 
slowdown in economic activity seemed to be successful. At the same time, the low interest 
rates and rising levels of income bolstered the real-estate market, with house prices in the 
United States going from strength to strength.  
 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 1
 A  long  period  of  rising  prices  creates  an  expectation  that  the  trend  will  persist.  Economic 
agents – and not only unsophisticated ones – may be drawn into this belief, and may adjust 
their behaviour accordingly. By doing so, they may well reinforce and extend the duration of 
the  trend.  Translated  to  the  US  housing  market,  there  was  a  fairly  widespread  belief  that 
acquiring fixed property was a sure way to make a profit, because rising house prices would 
cover  any  cost  of  borrowing  or  the  opportunity  cost  of  owners’  equity,  and  still  leave  a 
handsome  return.  This  drew  numerous  borrowers  into  that  market,  and  caused  lenders  to 
happily extend mortgage loans to such borrowers. Many of these borrowers were borrowers 
in  good standing,  and  their  business  continues  to  be  good  to  this  day  as  they  continue  to 
repay their mortgage instalments and as the market values of their fixed property continue to 
exceed their mortgage debt. 
But there were also home loans extended to very risky borrowers, with little or no income and 
few,  if  any,  assets.  A  significant  number  of  these  were  extended  to  so-called  subprime 
borrowers – meaning the borrowers were of below-prime quality. (It does not mean that they 
got  an  interest  rate  below  the  prime  rate!  Given  their  riskiness  they  were  usually  charged 
 2 
 BIS Review 41/2008
higher-than-average  interest  rates.)  The  “security”  in  this  instance  was primarily  a  belief in 
the continuation of the uptrend in property prices and the ability of homeowners to rent out 
these  dwellings.  One  of  the  catchwords  of  the  time  says  it  all:  NINJA  loans,  or  loans  to 
borrowers with “No Income, No Job or Assets”. According to the Chairman of the Board of 
Governors of the US Federal Reserve – the US central bank – advances in technology, the 
development of credit scoring techniques and the emergence of a large secondary market 
significantly  increased  the  access  to  mortgage  finance  in  the  US  (Bernanke,  2008:1). 
Consequently,  from  1994  to  2006,  subprime  lending  increased  from  an  estimated  US$35 
billion or 4,5 per cent of originations to US$600 billion or 20 per cent of originations. Although 
responsible  subprime  lending  was  helpful  in  fostering  sustainable  homeownership,  far  too 
much of the lending was based on abusive, unfair or deceptive lending practices. 
As mortgage loans were extended, the lender initially extending the loans in many instances 
securitised the loan. For example, a group or pool of, say, five thousand mortgage advances 
with  an  average  value  of  US$100  000  each  would  be  created  and  sold  to  a  cash-flush 
investor  such  as  a  pension  fund  for  US$500  million.  This  is  nothing  new  –  mortgage 
advances have been securitised on a substantial scale for many decades. Incidentally, the 
borrower would usually not even know that his or her mortgage loan had been securitised – 
the  borrowers  continue  to  send  their  instalments  to  the  institution  or  “mortgage  originator” 
which  initially  extended  the  loan.  But  the  mortgage  originator  now  simply  passes  on  the 
instalments received to a company  created to handle the pool of securitised mortgages, a 
“special  purpose  vehicle”,  from  where  it  is  redistributed  to  the  ultimate  owner  of  the 
securitised mortgages – the pension fund in this example. 
Numerous “structured financial products” were developed around the securitised mortgages. 
For  instance,  a  batch  of  risky  or  sub-prime  mortgage  advances  could  be  lumped  together 
and sold off as a separate “tranche” which would pay a higher rate of interest than a batch of 
standard  mortgages.  Furthermore,  some 
institutions  provided  guarantees  or  partial 
guarantees  to  enhance  the  risk-return  characteristics  of  some  of  these  products.  And  all 
remained well as long as the property boom continued. Loans could be extended quickly and 
repackaged  and  securitised  speedily.  The  US  housing  market  eventually  ran  out  of  steam 
around 2006 as supply started to outstrip demand, reinforced by tighter interest rates. This 
set in motion a chain of events in which subprime borrowers increasingly fell behind on their 
commitments and certain types of securitised assets and structured products started to show 
their true colour. As these assets stopped performing (or, at best, paid significantly less than 
previously  projected)  investor  appetite  for  structured  products  and  securitised  assets 
diminished  rapidly.  This  interrupted  the  process  in  which  original  lenders  (mortgage 
originators) could so comfortably extend a loan and sell it off to somebody else to carry the 
credit risk. Liquidity in that market evaporated rather quickly, its previously smooth-running 
machinery grinding to a halt.  
More  fundamentally,  investors  and  borrowers  as  well  as  all  those  institutions  in  between 
discovered that the risk premia which they had priced into a range of financial assets were 
grossly  inadequate.  This  inadequacy  extended  beyond  sub-prime  mortgages,  and  beyond 
the USA only: numerous types of securities and derivatives were involved. During the credit 
boom, investors had struggled to understand complex new securities, so they relied on the 
credit-rating agencies. The credit-rating agencies labelled the new securities with the same 
ratings  already  applied  to  corporate  bonds  and  this  gave  investors  a  handy  frame  of 
reference.  The  ratings  methodology  for  corporate  credit  risk  is,  however,  fundamentally 
different from that used for structured credit and yet the ratings that resulted were placed on 
the  same  scale,  implying  similar  potential  losses.  Ratings  agencies  in  their  methodologies 
also assumed adequate liquidity in the trading of structured credit securities – an assumption 
that did not hold when this market unravelled. 
Unfortunately,  investors  placed  excessive  trust  in  rating  agencies'  approach  to  structured 
credit as the new securities had little in common with corporate bonds. When the agencies 
pointed  out  that  they  relied  on  facts  presented  by  issuers,  and  that  due  diligence  was  not 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 3
in 
the  ongoing  dislocations 
conducted on any of the individual mortgages within a pool, investors’ perceptions of ratings 
on  most  innovative  financial  instruments  changed.  Accordingly,  prices  of  such  assets  fell 
considerably as investors became less willing to assume risk. Furthermore, because financial 
assets are traded in global financial markets, the repricing of assets and drying up of liquidity 
in trading such assets spread across borders. Consequently, the financial market strains that 
originated in the U.S. subprime sector began intensifying in the second half of 2007 and led 
to a sell-off in global equity markets.  
In  a  recent  speech,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  emphasised  three  underlying 
causes  of 
financial  markets  (Carney,  2008:2).  Firstly, 
overconfidence  among  market  participants  that  ample  liquidity  would  continue  to  prevail, 
providing  an  outlet  for  new  products  and  facilitating  the  rapid  growth  of  the  “originate-to-
distribute”  credit  model  –  loans  are  extended  but  then  repackaged,  tiered,  securitised  and 
distributed to end investors. Secondly, a lack of transparency and inadequate disclosure in 
respect  of  many  highly  structured  financial  products,  complicating  their  valuation  and 
reducing secondary market liquidity under conditions of stress. Thirdly, a series of misaligned 
incentives,  which  led  to  the  watering  down  of  credit  quality  standards  and  encouraged 
excessive risk-taking.  
Following  the  sharp  increase  in  delinquencies,  the  subprime-related  securities  were 
downgraded  by  rating  agencies,  causing  this  market  to  be  impaired  significantly.  Funding 
pressures  subsequently  forced  mortgage  lenders  to  scale  back  or  close  down,  and  banks 
became reluctant to provide liquidity to each other. Uncertainty about who owed how much to 
whom resulted in overnight interbank lending rates increasing significantly and central banks 
had  to  provide  additional  liquidity  to  facilitate  the  orderly  functioning  of  financial  markets. 
Current  estimates  regarding  the  scale  of  losses  suffered  by  mortgage  owners  in  the  US 
range  between  US$400  billion  and  US$500  billion,  although  in  a  recent  article  Krugman 
(2008) states that “ I think there’ll be $1 trillion of losses on mortgage-backed securities...” 
The  turbulence  came  to  the  fore  in  many  ways.  Probably  the  most  pervasive  immediate 
consequence was the repricing of risk. Global markets generally experienced considerable 
volatility  and  illiquidity  and  borrowers  were  confronting  tighter  terms  and  conditions, 
spawning fears of a “credit crunch” which could harm economic growth. Credit spreads which 
had  declined  to  extraordinarily  low  levels  picked  up  considerably,  as  illustrated  in  the 
accompanying graph. 
  
4 
 BIS Review 41/2008
 Policy reactions to the turbulence 
One should point out immediately that some part of the turmoil – an upward adjustment to 
the risk premia imbedded in the prices of a range of financial assets – should be welcomed 
as  a  normalisation  of  affairs,  such  premia  previously  having  been  unsustainably  low. 
However, authorities had to be mindful of the need to prevent total overshooting behaviour, 
and had to ensure the continued smooth functioning of the financial system as a whole. At 
the same time the hard-won gains in the fight against inflation had to be consolidated and 
protected,  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  Fortunately,  the  deterioration  in  the  global 
inflation  environment  due  to  the  rising  prices  of  energy  and  food  was  partly  offset  by  the 
continued impact of globalisation, the pursuit of sound macroeconomic policies and the effect 
of a long period of low inflation on inflation expectations.  
When  the  turmoil  struck  the  financial  markets  in  the  United  States  quite  visibly  in  August 
2007, the Federal Reserve responded decisively by loosening monetary policy and adding 
some liquidity to the money market. This provided some relief to cash-strapped borrowers. 
Over the subsequent six months the authorities in the US loosened monetary policy further, 
with the objective among other things to restore the affordability of housing and halt the rising 
delinquency  rate.  The  Fed  also  became  engaged  in  match-making  and  rescuing  troubled 
institutions.  
 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 5
 A number of prominent financial institutions had to write off huge amounts on account of bad 
loans,  dragging  down  their  share  prices  and  raising  concerns  regarding  their  status  as 
creditworthy counterparties. In the past few weeks the Federal Reserve put its balance sheet 
in  harm's  way  to  give  assurance  to  the  creditors  of  Bear  Stearns  (a  mid-size  investment 
bank) and extended that protection to the other primary dealers. In the UK in the meantime, 
an  institution  named  Northern  Rock,  which  to  a  significant  extent  relied  on  the  loan 
origination-securitisation  model,  became  the  first  UK  banking  institution  in  a  long  time  to 
experience a bank run as its depositors queued to withdraw their deposits. As the authorities 
increasingly became mindful of the risks of a widespread crisis developing, Northern Rock 
was  granted  emergency  liquidity  assistance  by  the  Bank  of  England  and  eventually 
nationalised by the British government.  
Internationally, regulators were given much food for thought by the turbulence in the financial 
markets.  The  ability  of  a  problem  in  one  area  of  the  financial  system  to  spread  and 
contaminate  other  areas  was  again  illustrated  rather  vividly.  The  problems  attached  to 
innovative  financial  products  were  again  underlined,  including  the  need  for  adequate 
transparency and disclosure of the exact nature of and risks attached to each type of asset. 
Although regulators certainly had a role to play, the need for investors to ultimately be wary, 
do  their  own  homework  and  not  assume  that  others  –  regulators,  credit  ratings  agencies, 
sellers  of  financial  products  –  have  already  done  it  for  them,  was  emphasised.  To  avoid 
future confusion regarding the risk attached to particular securities, ratings for the different 
types of obligation should be clearly distinguished and investors should never rely purely on 
ratings to determine investment policy. Credit-rating agencies will also have to work harder to 
ensure that users understand the nature of their ratings. 
Implications for the CMA 
It is only fair to point out that the countries of the CMA are “in this together”, in dealing with 
the impact of these disturbances. South Africa and Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland, through 
our currency union, have a shared financial market and similar if not identical interest rate 
policies. In many instances the same banks and financial institutions are active throughout 
the CMA.  
The direct CMA exposure to the sub-prime market and to structured products seems to be 
quite limited. One or two institutions with a strong international presence may have, through 
companies  in  their  groups,  some  exposure  to  the  now  discredited  instruments.  However, 
relative to their overall business and to their capital base, such exposure seems to be small. 
Fortunately, institutions in the CMA seem to have preferred to focus on more straightforward 
business and refrained from building up large positions in structured products. Not that banks 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2008
and other financial institutions in the CMA are not familiar with securitisation; many mortgage 
and  instalment  sale  contracts  have  already  been  securitised,  but  these  have  tended  to  be 
very straightforward “plain vanilla” securitisations. 
The international financial market turbulence has resulted in slower global economic growth, 
and  is  projected  to  continue  doing  so.  Recent  forecasts  suggest  a  significant  slowdown  in 
growth in the US, which is bound to spill over to the rest of the world. Talk of decoupling from 
the United States is dodgy, at best. Accordingly, CMA exports – and especially those exports 
destined for the countries most affected by the financial turmoil – are likely to be held back to 
some extent.  
As  far  as  the  money  market  in  the  CMA  is  concerned,  liquidity  has  remained  adequate 
throughout this episode of international financial market turmoil. The lack of enthusiasm to do 
business with other private-sector participants in the money market has not emerged in the 
CMA. Interbank lending, for instance, has continued without any disruption, and the interest 
rates  at  which  interbank  funds  are  placed  have  not  risen  significantly  (as  would  have 
happened  if  perceptions  of  risk  had  deteriorated).  For  instance,  the  margin  between  the 
South African Reserve Bank’s repurchase rate and the Sabor, or South African benchmark 
overnight rate, has not changed much over time. 
 
The  turbulence  prompted  investors  to  demand  higher  risk  premia  on  a  wide  variety  of 
securities. Securities issued by emerging-market countries were affected, and the CMA was 
no exception. Accordingly, the spread of debt instruments issued by CMA governments over 
“risk-free” US Treasuries have widened. However, as can be seen in the graph, this widening 
was mostly attributable to declining US Treasury yields, which attracted investors owing to 
their safe-haven status. 
  
 BIS Review 41/2008 
 7
 While it seems fairly safe to say that the pricing of financial instruments has been influenced 
by  this  turmoil,  it  is  more  difficult  to  establish  what  the  impact  has  been  on  non-resident 
capital  movements  –  in  other  words,  the  magnitude  of  capital  flows  rather  than  the  price 
thereof. South Africa currently runs a sizable deficit on the current account of the balance of 
payments, and has since the emergence of the deficit been able throughout to finance the 
shortfall through capital inflows. Since late 2007 the composition of the flows has changed: 
portfolio inflows have faltered but at the same time inflows of foreign direct investment and 
other investment funds have picked up considerably.  
The turmoil has so far been accompanied by high and often rising international commodity 
prices. Greater uncertainty for instance tends to be good for the prices of precious metals. 
Southern  Africa  has  generally  benefited  from  the  ongoing  boom  in  commodity  prices. 
However,  these  gains  also  imply  a  number  of  challenges:  These  include  dealing  with  the 
windfall  responsibly  by  not  allowing  the  bulk  of  it  to  be  translated  into  consumption; 
transforming  the  economy  in  such  a  way  that  the  quantities  of  commodities  produced  and 
exported increase in response to favourable prices; and promoting beneficiation.  
Levels  of  bad  debt  in  the  financial  system  of  the  CMA  have  remained  fairly  moderate.  As 
indicated  previously,  there  is  not  much  direct  exposure  to  structured  financial  products 
among  financial  institutions  in  the  CMA.  The  increase  in  overdue  loans  which  is  currently 
observed is from extremely low initial levels, and is not unexpected, given the increases in 
interest rates since mid-2006. 
Bank  supervisors  and  financial  supervisors,  more  generally,  in  the  CMA  have  again  been 
alerted  by  the  recent  events  to  the  forces  of  globalisation,  the  significant  cross-border 
activities undertaken by financial institutions in the region, and the accompanying risks. This 
has  underlined  the  need  for  continued  and  effective  cooperation  and  dialogue  between 
supervisory authorities, which are essential for effective cross-border supervision. 
This legitimate need should, however, not be confused with a need for more comprehensive 
and intensive financial regulation. The dislocation in certain financial markets has certainly 
been painful and some of the consequences far-reaching. While a worthy debate can also be 
entertained regarding possible regulatory changes in the light of the experience gained from 
the  sub-prime  fallout,  an  overambitious  extension  of  regulation  could  easily  be  the  wrong 
option.  Such  extensions  often  have  noble  intentions  but  unintended  consequences.  A 
modest and nuanced regulatory response is more likely to succeed than an overambitious 
8 
 BIS Review 41/2008
attempt to eliminate risk-taking (thereby possibly destroying much of the dynamism and most 
of the positive gains which have arisen from financial innovation).  
Conclusion 
Against a background of volatility in the global financial markets, the CMA seems in some 
respects to enjoy safe haven status. Very little exposure to the structured asset markets has 
contributed to maintaining a fairly good level of credit quality and adequate levels of liquidity 
in  the  integrated  CMA  financial  system.  Our  financial  institutions  are  now,  it  would  seem, 
being rewarded for not being too adventurous and aggressive in conducting their business. 
But to ascribe the relatively healthy state of affairs in the CMA only to lack of exposure to the 
structured asset markets would be unfair; the crucial role of CMA financial institutions’ sound 
internal risk management processes, robust levels of capital and solid supervision should be 
acknowledged. 
A  general  lesson  from  the  recent  events  is  that  it  is  better  to  assume  that  trends  rarely 
continue  forever.  This  rings  true,  whether  it  involves  the  prices  of  houses,  shares,  gold, 
platinum  or  any  other  asset.  Within  reason,  institutions,  regulatory  authorities  and 
policymakers  should  develop  feasible  contingency  plans  and  take  active  steps  to  make 
systems more robust in the event of significant reversals.  
In an article presented on behalf of Edward Gramlich at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City's  Economic  Symposium,  legislators  were  urged  to  better  protect  consumers  against 
predatory lenders and to improve regulation of mortgage lenders and banks (Gramlich,2007).  
Sound  institutions,  first-class  disclosure,  sustainable  policies,  the  building  up  of  adequate 
reserves – being robust in the face of a storm requires that the relevant authorities focus on 
basics  such  as  these.  Prudential  oversight  and  surveillance  by  regulators  and  risk 
assessment by market participants can also be enhanced by filling the gaps in information on 
global  financial  flows.  International  financial  institutions  such  as  the  International  Monetary 
Fund  (IMF)  have  taken  initiatives  in  this  area.  Some  authorities  have  already  put  in  place 
mechanisms to collect information to monitor capital flows by source countries and types of 
investors. However, the IMF has suggested that, given the severity of the current credit crisis 
in the US and notwithstanding the comprehensive monetary and fiscal policy steps already 
announced by their authorities, additional public funds might be needed to rescue the U.S. 
financial system in this instance. 
Despite  the  severe  U.S.  credit  crisis  and  its  palpable  spill-over  effects  on  international 
financial  markets,  the  CMA  region's  economies  have  thus  far  remained  buoyant  given  the 
greater resilience and flexibility that have resulted from sound macroeconomic policies and 
structural reforms adopted over the past few years. While one should not underestimate the 
difficulty  in  the  detail  of  doing  so,  the  financial  system  in  the  CMA  has  weathered  many 
storms  successfully  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  it  will  continue  to  do  so.  Central 
bankers will also have to continue to be vigilant as the United States credit turmoil unfolds, 
and if confronted by deterioration in local financial-market conditions, stand ready to do what 
is  required  to  facilitate  the  continuation  of  orderly  trade.  However,  inflationary  pressures 
currently  pose  a  greater  challenge  to  the  CMA  region's  economies  than  the  international 
financial  turmoil  and  equally  important  therefore,  is  the  assurance  that  we  will  continue  to 
protect  the  purchasing  power  of  the  money  in  your  pocket  through  appropriate  monetary 
policies i.e. the pursuit of price stability.  
References 
Bernanke,  B.S.  2007.  Housing,  Housing  Finance,  and  Monetary  Policy.  Speech  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City's  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming. 
31 August.  
BIS Review 41/2008 
 9
Bernanke,  B.S.  2008.  Fostering  sustainable  homeownership.  Speech  at  the  National 
Community reinvestment Coalition Annual Meeting. 14 March. 
Carney, M. 2008. Addressing financial market turbulence. Remarks presented to the Toronto 
Board of Trade. 13 March. Toronto: Bank of Canada. 
Gramlich, E.M. 2007. Booms and Busts, The Case of Subprime Mortgages. Article presented 
on  behalf  of  Edward  Gramlich  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City's  Economic 
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 30 August.  
Krugman, P. 2008. How bad is the mortgage crisis going to get? Fortune, 31 March. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2008. Flow of Funds Accounts of the 
United  States.  Flows  and  outstandings,  fourth  quarter  2007.  Federal  Reserve  statistical 
release. 6 March. 
South African Reserve Bank. 2007. Financial Stability Review. September. 
10 
 BIS Review 41/2008
