Heng Swee Keat: Developments in Asia and Singapore’s insurance 
industry 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the GE/FICS Award Ceremony, Singapore, 24 July 2008. 
 Mrs Fang Ai Lian, Chairman, Great Eastern Life, 
Mr Tan Hak Leh, Managing Director, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here on this happy occasion, made all the more significant as Great 
Eastern Life (GE Life) celebrates its centennial this year. 
For a corporation to achieve success for 100 years is a significant achievement. It attests to 
the  agility  and  business  acumen  of  its  leaders,  as  well  as  the  commitment  of  several 
generations  of  staff.  Today,  we  celebrate  GE  Life’s  achievement  as  the  first  insurer  in 
Singapore to acquire accreditation as a FICS assessment service provider. This reflects well 
on GE Life’s commitment towards staff development. 
Developments in Asia and Singapore’s insurance industry 
Despite the recent financial turmoil, the life insurance industry has held up relatively well in 
this  region.  While  regional  economies  would  not  be  insulated  from  the  global  economic 
slowdown,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  region  remains  good.  The  pace  of  economic 
growth and wealth creation in the region will drive demand for a range of insurance products. 
Indeed, estimates from Swiss Re show that life and general insurance premiums have been 
growing at a faster pace than GDP in most emerging Asian economies.  
An insurance company like GE Life, which is located in the heart of a dynamic growth region, 
is  well-positioned  to  capture  the  growing  opportunities.  Achieving  sustainable  long-term 
growth, however, is highly complex. Among the many segments in financial services, the life 
insurance industry has probably the longest time horizon. The industry takes on assets and 
liabilities that literally last a lifetime. Good actuarial data and analysis provide an important 
basis  for  risk  pricing  and  management.  But  future  trends  and  developments  such  as 
increasing  longevity  or  medical  breakthroughs  are  harder  to  predict.  Hence,  a  sound 
framework  on  asset-liability  management  and  a  continual  focus  on  risk  management  are 
critical. 
At  the  same  time,  markets  are  changing  and  innovating  rapidly.  Competition  comes  from 
many  sources,  while  the  needs  of  customers  will  continue  to  evolve.  To  keep  up  with  the 
competition,  intermediaries  have  to  continue  to  invest  in  research  and  development,  and 
provide  value-adding  products  and  services  in  risk  management,  underwriting,  actuarial 
analysis,  investment  and  financial  advice.  This  is  especially  important  in  the  context  of 
Singapore’s maturing population who will need good retirement planning services in order to 
remain financially independent through their golden years. 
Another  key  implication  of  the  long  time  horizon  is  the  special  relationship  with  the 
policyholder. In general, both the insurance company and the policyholders are entering into 
a  long-term  financial  commitment.  In  any  long-term  relationship,  the  quality  of  trust  is  of 
utmost  importance.  This  relationship  of  trust  can  only  be  sustained  by  good  advisory  and 
sales practices. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 1
Meeting challenges – people and values 
There is no magic formula for meeting the challenges I have just outlined. Rather, as always, 
the fundamentals boil down to having the right people with the right values.  
In  the  2007  Insurance  Banana  Skins  survey  conducted  by  UK’s  Centre  for  the  Study  of 
Financial Innovation (CSFI), the quality of talent was cited as one of the key risks facing the 
global  life  insurance  industry.  I  am  therefore  pleased  that  GE  Life  is  using  the  FICS 
framework to proactively develop talent for the company. 
As for values, I understand that GE Life embraces the 3 core values of integrity, initiative and 
involvement.  In  the  spirit  of  this  commemorative  year,  allow  me  to  borrow  your  values 
framework to illustrate its relevance to the industry as a whole. 
Integrity 
First, integrity. Integrity is the foundation of trust, and for the insurance industry with a long-
term  relationship,  this  is  crucial.  Even  as  more  complex  insurance  products  are  being 
introduced in the market, insurance intermediaries have a duty to ensure that consumers are 
only offered products they can understand and find suitable. Any undesirable sales practice 
such as churning and inappropriate switching will undermine the reputation of the insurance 
industry, and also affect its ability to attract good quality talent.  
Intermediaries must therefore uphold the highest standards of integrity, professionalism and 
exemplary business conduct, and ensure that any advice given is fair, objective and in the 
best  interest  of  the  client.  This  can  be  achieved  if  companies,  agency  managers  and  life 
agents take a collective long-term view and seek to build sustainable win-win relationships 
with their clients. Integrity pays off in a long-term relationship. Take care of clients’ interest, 
and the companies’ and agents’ interest will take care of itself. 
Management and supervisors play a critical role in ensuring that agents on the ground who 
interact  with  and  advise  consumers  adhere  to  regulatory  requirements,  and  to  the  fullest 
extent possible, industry guidelines on professional best practices. This is especially so for 
the more vulnerable segments of the population – the elderly and the illiterate, or the cash-
strapped, who may fall easy prey to get-rich-quick schemes. 
I  believe  that  with  the  collective  partnership  of  all  industry  participants,  individuals  and 
regulators, we can preserve the credibility and reputation of Singapore as an insurance hub.  
Initiative 
The  second  value  is  initiative.  As  part  of  a  national  effort  to  raise  the  level  of  skills  and 
competencies  of  Singapore’s  financial  sector  workforce,  the  FICS  was  established  to 
benchmark competency standards of financial professionals to international best practices. I 
congratulate  GE  Life  for  taking  the  initiative  to  become  the  first  insurer  to  be  successfully 
accredited  for  its  assessment  capabilities  in  underwriting,  relationship  management  and 
claims  handling  under  the  FICS.  GE  Life’s  agency  force  also  forms  the  first  batch  of 
candidates who have successfully attained FICS certification in the insurance industry. 
Involvement 
The third value is involvement. The FICS awards reflect a whole-of-company involvement. At 
the  company  level,  the  FICS  accreditation  status  recognizes  GE  Life’s  commitment  to 
benchmark  the  competencies  of  its  workforce  to  international  best  practices.  At  the  staff 
level,  the  FICS  certification  status  helps  promote  individual  attainment  of  the  standards  of 
professional  competency  and  fair  dealing  in  the  insurance  marketplace.  We  hope  that  GE 
Life will continue to keep up the momentum to participate in industry-wide efforts to raise the 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2008
professionalism  in  the  industry.  We  hope  that  we  will  catalyse  a  whole-of-industry 
involvement in this FICS effort. 
Conclusion 
I am therefore delighted this afternoon to present the FICS Accredited Assessment Service 
Provider award to GE Life. It is both a celebration of your achievements over the last 100 
years, and an affirmation of your commitment to continued excellence, building on the core 
values that have served you so well. May I also congratulate the 12 pioneer candidates who 
are awarded FICS Certification today. The industry looks to you to uphold the high standards 
of personal integrity, competency and professional conduct expected of all agents. 
On this note, I congratulate Mrs Fang Ai Lian and the staff of GE Life on this happy day, and 
wish you greater success for the next 100 years to come. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 3
