Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Housing microfinance in the Philippines 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Housing  Microfinance  Product  Launch,  Manila, 
15 May 2008. 
 DBP  SVP  Brillo  Reynes,  HUDCC  Assistant  Secretary  Celia  Alba,  fellow  workers  in 
government, representatives from the microfinance and the housing sectors, special guests, 
good morning. On behalf of the Monetary Board, I welcome all of you to the Bangko Sentral 
ng Pilipinas.  
Today is a busy day for the microfinance sector. Earlier this morning, we launched the 2008 
Microentrepreneur  of  the  Year  Awards  to  kick  off  our  search  for  the  country’s  outstanding 
microentrepreneurs.  
Now, we are launching the housing microfinance product. This coming together of housing 
finance  and  microfinance  has  been  cited  by  practitioners  as  a  development  breakthrough 
that  combines  the  best  practices  and  principles  of  microfinance  with  the  peculiarities  of 
housing finance.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  These  two  events  underscore  the  holistic  approach  that  we  are 
adopting in addressing social and economic objectives through microfinance.  
Housing  as  a  shelter  is  a  necessity.  And  as  a  sector,  it  has  the  potential  to  generate 
employment  across  its  supplier  groups  and  keep  the  economy  growing.  It  is  important 
therefore that we support it. 
However, the housing sector has yet to reach its full potential. Housing backlog persists due 
to  lack  of  available  and  affordable  housing  especially  for  those  who  are  not  members  of 
pension funds.  
With today’s launching of housing microfinance, our 3 million entrepreneurial poor will have 
access to housing finance under this pioneering program.  
This  pioneering  program  started  when  Vice  President  Noli  De  Castro,  concurrent  chair  of 
HUDCC led the crafting of this program with the Development Bank of the Philippines with 
assistance  from  Asian  Development  Bank’s  social  housing  and  community  development 
program – the Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project.  
This  was  subsequently  presented  to  the  Bangko  Sentral.  After  careful  consideration,  and 
bearing  in  mind  its  positive  impact  on  the  country’s  social  and  economic  objectives,  the 
Monetary Board approved housing microfinance products as a type of microfinance loan.  
As approved, the maximum loanable amount for home improvement loans is 150,000 pesos, 
while the maximum for house construction and acquisition is 300,000 pesos.  
The approval of the housing microfinance product as a type of microfinance loan is important 
as  it  will  enjoy  the  same  incentives  as  regular microfinance  loans.  Among  others, housing 
microfinance does not require collateral and documentary requirements are much simpler. In 
other  words,  this  housing  microfinance  addresses  the  usual  barriers  that  the  poor  face  in 
accessing housing finance.  
There are also built-in incentives for creditor banks. For instance, housing microfinance loans 
are eligible as alternative compliance to mandatory credit allocation to agrarian reform and 
other agricultural credit. In addition, housing microfinance loans shall have an assigned risk-
weight of as low as 0% (zero) when guaranteed by the Home Guarantee Corporation or a 
50% risk-weight if it is not guaranteed.  
BIS Review 61/2008 
 1
Nevertheless, even as we work to promote housing microfinance, risk management features 
are  embedded  in  the  product  design  for  banks  follow.  This  includes  the  use  of  cash  flow 
analysis  to  determine  the  clients’  ability  to  pay  and  requiring  a  good  track  record  as  a 
microfinance client.  
In  this  connection,  the  BSP  entered  into  a  Memorandum  of  Agreement  with  HUDCC  last 
month to set the standards and criteria for the accreditation of banks that can go into housing 
microfinance.  Under  this  MOA,  banks  that  wish  to  participate  in  this  particular  housing 
microfinance  should  first  be  accredited  by  HUDCC  and  the  DBP  to  confirm  if  they  are 
following the features approved by the BSP.  
Other banks that want to provide housing microfinance under a different scheme should get 
BSP’s prior approval.  
The  ideal  market  for  this  product  are  microfinance  clients  who  have  proven  their 
creditworthiness to their banks. With about three million active micro-borrowers, the market 
for housing microfinance looks promising indeed.  
I am confident therefore that we will see a significant increase in affordable housing finance 
that caters to the needs of the poor in a sustainable and non-subsidized manner.  
Let us therefore congratulate those who worked with dedication on this housing microfinance 
product that will empower microentrepreneurs to improve their quality of life and productivity 
through affordable housing.  
On  this  happy  note,  I  thank  all  of  you  for  joining  today’s  launching  of  the  housing 
microfinance. Mabuhay ang microfinance housing program for the poor!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2008
