Jean-Pierre Roth: The Swiss economy and financial centre – successes 
and new challenges 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss  National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements,  at  the  Handelskammer  Schweiz-Österreich  und  Liechtenstein  (Foreign  Trade 
Chamber for Switzerland-Austria and Liechtenstein), Vienna, 25 February 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Mid-2003  saw  the  start  of  a  remarkable,  broad-based  economic  upswing  in  Switzerland 
which is still underway, even if business cycle uncertainty has increased in the recent period. 
A  number  of  factors  indicate  that  the  long-term  growth  outlook,  too,  has  improved  for 
Switzerland.  These  factors  include  the  increasing  globalisation  of  our  economy  and  the 
opening  up  of  the  labour  market  to  the  EU.  The  Swiss  economy  is  participating  in 
globalisation  through  increased  direct  investment  as  well  as  growing  foreign  trade.  At  the 
same time, there is more competition on the domestic goods market, although a fair bit still 
remains to be done in this area to complement the opening up of the labour market to the 
EU.  
Globalisation  and  market  opening  present  companies  and  economic  policymakers  with 
challenges  that  become  particularly  acute  when  setbacks  occur  –  as  in  the  case  of  the 
current international financial market turbulence. Although the international money markets 
have now calmed somewhat, we have not yet seen the end of the turmoil on the financial 
markets – neither for the financial institutions involved nor for the international economy.  
After four years of strong growth and low inflation, this means more difficult times ahead for 
the Swiss economy. Due to the turbulence on the financial markets, the economic outlook 
has  become  more  uncertain  while,  at  the  same  time,  inflationary  pressure  has  heightened 
over  the  past  few  months  –  not  such  a  comfortable  position  for  a  central  bank.  A  positive 
element remains the achievements of the past few years, which have laid the foundations for 
a  higher  long-term  growth  trend.  These  need  to  be  further  improved  in  order  to  retain 
Switzerland as a dynamic business location. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 1
