Christian Noyer: Is inflation set for a comeback? 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at Deutsche Bank, Paris, 
19 March 2008. 
 With inflation surging everywhere, it is quite natural to wonder if we could have reached the 
end of this worldwide era of “great moderation” in both output and price volatility which has 
characterized Alan Greenspan’s tenure of office. 
True, one could argue that we are just experiencing one-off shocks in commodity and food 
prices whose inflationary consequences will wane rapidly thanks to the increased flexibility of 
our economies. 
But other possible scenarios are more worrying. Second-round effects could, after years of 
relatively well contained wages, be triggered by shifts in inflation expectations; through the 
catching-up  of  developing  economy, 
the  globalisation  process  could  have  become 
inflationary;  the  ageing  of  our  developed  European  economy,  the  necessary  fight  against 
global  warming  could  structurally  add  inflationary  pressures,....  and  the  room  for  monetary 
policy decisions could be restricted by the state of the financial and banking system and by 
the risks of slowdown of growth.  
I  would  like  to  review  these  issues.  In  order  to  avoid  any  misunderstanding  let  me 
immediately make my point. Even if it is clear that inflationary pressures have both increased 
and  changed  in  their  nature,  I  firmly  believe  that  monetary  policy  can  still  ensure  price 
stability, over the medium term. 
My central scenario for the short term is a scenario where after a couple of months inflation 
will recede in the euro area and come back “below but close to 2%” in accordance with our 
definition of price stability. 
It is not unusual to witness commodity and consumer prices acceleration in the initial phase 
of  an  economic  slowdown,  as  there  is  some  inertia  in  employment  and  commodity  prices 
dynamics with respect to activity. This has happened previously at the end of the 1990s, with 
a subsequent moderation in inflation. 
In the short run, recent inflationary shocks are likely to maintain inflation at a high level for 
most  of  2008  as  we  may  expect  a  significant  degree  of  persistence  in  energy,  industrial 
commodity or some food price increases (such as meat). In the euro area, HICP inflation has 
reached 3.3% in February. It might remain well above 2% in the coming months but ebbs 
later  this  year  according  to  ECB  staff  forecasts.  These  projections  rely  on  a  scenario  of 
global  economic  slowdown  and  moderation  in  commodity  prices,  which  would  contain 
pressures on  capacity  utilisation  in  the  labour and  product  markets.  They  are  all  the  more 
credible than we do not see at this juncture a major diffusion of price increases: less than 
30% of the consumption basket (energy and food) are responsible for more than 60% of the 
overall increase.  
There are nevertheless some upside risks to these projections. 
First, further shocks on food and commodity prices cannot be ruled out. On the demand side, 
should  emerging  countries  decouple  to  a  large  extend  from  the  United  States,  their 
contributions  would  then  be  sufficient  to  maintain  a  significant  pace  of  commodity  prices 
growth.  On  the  supply  side,  unexpected  climate  or  geopolitical  disruptions  may  lead  to 
shocks on production, as in the past few years. On top of both factors, in the current context 
of  raising  inflation  and  troubled  financial  markets,  commodities  attract  a  growing  part  of 
investment, speeding up sometimes rather artificially their price increases.  
Second, the triggering of possible second round effects is a well known source of concern for 
the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  The  common  desire  of  firms  and  households  to  offset 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 1
profit margin and purchasing power losses stemming from inflationary shocks may lead to a 
wage-inflation  spiral,  ending  in  deteriorated  output  prospects  and  welfare  losses  to  all 
parties. One should however note that nothing significant has materialised at this juncture. 
On  the  contrary,  remunerations  have  remained  well  in  line  with  productivity  gains  with,  to 
take an example, reference wages increasing by 0.3% in France during the fourth quarter of 
last year.  
From this point of view, protracted shocks to food and commodity prices put the anchoring of 
inflation  expectations  and  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  to  the  test.  The  recent  upward 
trend in European household and market expectations may be of some concern. However, 
as emphasised in a forthcoming issue of the Banque de France monthly Bulletin1, which is 
entirely devoted to various inflation related issues, currently available measures of inflation 
expectations  appear  crude  and  limited  in  terms  of  information  content  to  explain  short  run 
wage  formation  or  consumption  dynamics.  In  practice,  the  Eurosystem  has  a  prudent  and 
comprehensive  approach  when  considering  private  agents’  inflation  expectations.  While 
taking into account a large range of expectations indicators, the Governing Council does not 
react to them mechanistically. 
A  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  is  nevertheless  crucial  in  order  to  take  up  the 
challenges coming from the new inflationary environment. 
Among  the  long-run  evolutions  that  can  be  expected  with  a  high  degree  of  certainty,  the 
changing  impact  of  globalisation  on  inflation,  population  ageing  and  climate  change 
constitute threats to price stability and major new challenges for monetary policy. 
First, globalisation may turn out to be more inflationary in the future than in its early phase.  
This was one of the issues addressed in the recent international symposium of the Banque 
de France. 
For  over  ten  years,  with  the  growing  integration  of  our  economies,  powerful  forces, 
throughout the world, have been acting to enhance price stability. Each year, the integration 
of millions of people into the world labour market has increased global production capacity, in 
particular for tradable goods. For monetary policy in developed countries, this process has 
been equivalent to a sequence of positive supply shocks that took the form of a spontaneous 
decline in the import price of manufactured goods. All other things being equal, this terms-of-
trade  gain  has  allowed  for  a  lower  inflation  rate  for  a  given  capacity  utilisation  rate.  More 
fundamentally, and although things seem to be less straightforward in this area, it is possible 
that the increasing openness of our economies have structurally changed the wage and cost 
formation  process  in  a  manner  that  favours  price  stability.  It  is  clear  that  heightened 
competition triggered by imports reduces the market power of firms at the national level. But, 
other  more  indirect  effects  are  also  detectable.  According  to  studies  carried  out  at  the 
Banque de France, to be published in our next Monthly Bulletin2, the disinflationary impact of 
imports  appears  to  be  relatively  independent  of  import  volumes:  the  mere  existence  of 
potential competition renders the markets, in the words of experts, more “contestable” and 
influences behavioural patterns. 
These  disinflationary  forces  are  still  present.  However,  there  are  now  other  more  powerful 
forces that have the opposite effect.  
                                                      
1   V.Chauvin,  D.Irac,  N.Maggiar  et  H.Poncet,  « L’information  apportée  par  les  anticipations  d’inflation  sur  les 
salaires et la consommation dans la zone euro » ; J.Coffinet et S.Frappa, « Anticipations d’inflation dans la 
zone euro : que nous disent les marchés financiers ? » ; J.Coffinet et J.S.Mesonnier, « Anticipations d’inflation 
du secteur privé et conduite de la politique monétaire »  
2   S.Guilloux et E.Kharroubi, « L’impact des prix d’importations sur l’inflation domestique. Le rôle de la structure 
des échanges ». 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2008
First, a natural process of real appreciation of currencies in catching-up economies is taking 
place, leading to upward pressures on the prices of their imports. Along with the catching-up 
in terms of standard of living, the level of prices in emerging countries tends to converge to 
the level of advanced countries through a combination of appreciating currency and higher 
inflation.  Although  somewhat  hampered  by  exchange  rate  policies  in  the  past  decade,  it 
seems to gather speed now with, as an example, the most needed faster appreciation of the 
Renmibi and at the same time accelerating inflation in China. This process will affect import 
prices of manufactured goods in developed economies.  
Second,  the  growth  of  emerging  market  economies  and  the  rise  in  the  living  standards  of 
their populations are also leading to a surge in the demand for natural resources, food and 
energy, which logically has a strong and permanent impact on inflation. 
Furthermore, by strengthening the magnitude of global shocks in relation to more specifically 
domestic  shocks  and  favouring  the  international  transmission  of  the  latter,  globalisation 
introduces a much greater synchronisation of inflationary cycles between countries, with the 
ensuing risks of amplification.  
Overall,  the  effects  of  globalisation  have  ceased  –  probably  in  the  long  term  –  to  be 
spontaneously disinflationary. 
Other  factors  will  add  to  the  inflationary  pressures  in  the  medium  to  long  run.  Without 
elaborating  too  long  on  them  today,  I  want  to  mention  in  particular  population  ageing  and 
climate change. 
The  ageing  of  the  population  will  lead  to  a  significant  increase  in  public  spending,  for 
retirement  pensions  and  health  expenditure.  At  the  same  time,  the  growth  in  public 
indebtedness  during  the  past  twenty  years  will  require  an  adjustment  at  some  point.  Both 
issues will lead to a mix of economic policy decisions and there may be a conflict between 
firms and employees about the final burden sharing, with risks of a wage-inflation spiral.  
Climate  change  could  also  have  both  a  direct  impact  on  prices,  through  disruptions  in 
production,  and  an  indirect  impact,  through  policy  measures  to  curb  down  carbon  dioxide 
emissions.  
Climate  change,  through  unusual  weather  outcome  –  temperature,  rain  or  unusual 
seasonality – or disasters, would disturb climate sensitive productions such as food products 
or  electricity  (e.g.  hydroelectric  energy).  Scarcity  of  these  products  would  then  lead  to 
temporary overshooting in their prices. 
Measures to curb down carbon dioxide emissions will have a direct impact on prices through 
increases of indirect taxes and an indirect impact through the necessary adjustment of the 
production  process.  This  adjustment  will  involve  heightened  tensions  on  production 
capacities,  as  part  of  the  equipment  stock  will  have  to  be  discarded  due  to  changing 
regulations  or  due  to  increases  in  its  operating  costs  with  higher  taxes.  Some  temporary 
impact on inflation may therefore be expected during this process. 
However,  in  the  medium  run,  the  challenge  of  climate  change  may  lead  to  a  significant 
improvement  in  technological  progress,  which  will  lead  a  minima  to  reduce  energy 
consumption  and  carbon  dioxide  emissions  for  a  given  level  of  output  but  could  also 
stimulate productivity growth. This inflationary impact highlighted before would then be offset 
both by downward pressures on energy prices and by productivity acceleration. 
   As we can see from this rapid review of risks factors to inflation in the short to the long run, 
there is a clear upward bias to risks regarding inflation, which has to be taken into account by 
economic policy. 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 3
It is thus all the more necessary to insure a proper degree of competition on product markets 
and a well-functioning price system, inducing changes in consumption or production patterns 
according to the relative scarcity of products. There are large margins of improvement with 
respect to product market competition both in emerging and advanced countries. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  fulfilment  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  objectives  could  have  a  significant 
offsetting  impact.  Higher  employment  rates  and  acceleration  in  productivity  would  lead  to 
both less inflation and higher growth. The low current employment rates of the younger and 
older  workers  provide  a  wide  acceleration  margin  for  European  growth.  The  potential 
catching-up  of  information  technology  use  in  the  Euro  area  would  lead  to  a  substantial 
increase  in  productivity  growth.  Both  evolutions  would  significantly  reduce  the  inflation 
content of growth and help contain inflationary pressures. 
However, most of the burden lies on central banks, as “inflation is always and everywhere a 
monetary phenomenon”. The current “two pillar” approach of the Governing Council with a 
crosschecking between the economic and the monetary analysis has, I believe, permitted us 
to deliver a stance of monetary policy which has been totally appropriate to the situation of 
the  euro  zone.  The  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  at  a  level  consistent  with  price 
stability, which is currently observed in the financial market, is therefore completely justified. 
The years to come will give to the central bankers the opportunity to demonstrate that these 
years of “great moderation” are not just the result of lucky circumstances but are largely due 
to an improved monetary policy framework. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2008
