Thomas Jordan: Current challenges for the Swiss National Bank in the 
area of monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at 
the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Zurich, 
27 March 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
the  Money  Market  Event  of 
 With its forecast that GDP will grow by 1.5%-2.0% and the average inflation rate will amount 
to 2%, the National Bank is cautiously optimistic for the Swiss economy in 2008. However, 
since the summer of 2007, the international environment has taken a clear turn for the worse: 
Financial markets are in a serious crisis, the major economies are weakening and inflation 
rates are rising worldwide. This means that the SNB’s monetary policy is facing challenges 
on several fronts simultaneously. 
With regard to economic growth, the SNB is called upon to assess the consequences of the 
international financial crisis for the Swiss economy as precisely as possible and to analyse 
their implications for monetary policy correctly and at an early stage. On the inflation front, it 
must  ensure  that  the  measures  taken  in  connection  with  the  financial  market  crisis  do  not 
jeopardise  the  credibility  of  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  long-term  price  stability  or  shake 
established  inflation  expectations.  Finally,  the  challenge  in  the  money  market  is  two-fold. 
First, the SNB must try – despite volatile risk premiums and interest rate expectations – to 
keep the targeted three-month Libor as close as possible to the desired goal. Second, with 
its  operations  and  its choice  of  instruments,  it  must  contribute  to  a  well-functioning  money 
market. 
Even though there have been several innovations in the area of monetary policy instruments, 
the SNB’s options in this complex environment are limited, however. In particular, there is no 
magic  bullet  with  which  central  banks  could  restore  the  lost  confidence  among  market 
participants. In dealing with the financial market crisis, therefore, banks and other financial 
market  participants  must  also  try  to  help  restore  the  proper  functioning  of  markets  by 
implementing measures to shore up confidence. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 1
