Y V Reddy: Government-owned investment vehicles and capital flows – 
Indian perspective 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a session on “The Role 
of  Government-owned  Investment  Vehicles  in  Global  Capital  Flows”  at  the  International 
Capital Markets and Emerging Markets Roundtable, Washington DC, 14 April 2008. 
 Chairman Bill Rhodes, distinguished speakers and fellow participants,  
I am thankful to the organisers for inviting me to participate in the Roundtable on a subject of 
great contemporary relevance. The invite has provoked me to deliberate on the subject, hear 
distinguished speakers and also meet here to interact with friends. 
We know that government-owned investment vehicles (GIVs), also referred to as Sovereign 
Wealth Funds (SWFs), existed for long but they have acquired significance very recently due 
to their proliferation, growth in size and, above all, active participation in capital infusion in 
the aftermath of the recently observed financial turbulence. The International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) has to be complimented for its pioneering work and excellent document on the subject. 
The role of SWFs in global capital flows is also being debated in several fora, namely, the 
O.E.C.D., 
for 
International  Economics,  the  Central  Banking  Publications,  the  G  30,  the  Institute  of 
International Finance and the World Economic Forum.  
the  European  Commission, 
the  G7  Ministers, 
the  Peterson 
Institute 
Towards greater transparency 
It  is  useful  to  recognise  in  the  above  context  that,  of  late,  there  have  been  initiatives  to 
increase the transparency of all kinds of pools of capital as evidenced by the reports of the 
U.K. Hedge Fund Working Group (January 2008), led by Sir Andrew Large, and the Private 
Equity Working Group on Transparency and Disclosure (November 2007), led by Sir David 
Walker.  
Briefly stated, while there is intense debate on the subject of comfort with SWFs in global 
capital  flows,  the  present  discussion  could  be  considered  both  as  a  part  of  the  wider  and 
significant  debate  on  transparency  and  regulation  of  certain  broad  categories  of  investors 
and also as one that addresses specific factors relevant to one category, namely SWFs. It is 
useful to recognise in this regard that there is an overlap among the categories in terms of 
sources of finance since SWFs invest on their own account and also through hedge funds 
and private equity funds. In other words, one of the broader issues is regulatory safeguards 
in place with regard to investors of a kind that may not necessarily assure regulatory comfort 
to the host country. A related, and in a way the other side of the coin, is the transparency and 
governance  arrangements  in  regard  to  operation  of  SWFs  in  the  home  country.  It  is 
heartening to note that the IMF has begun covering in its Global Financial Stability Report, in 
addition to the SWFs, the issues relating to hedge funds and private equity funds. 
Public policy initiatives on SWFs 
The OECD approach in regard to SWFs is that international co-operation can build mutual 
trust and keep markets open. The OECD Investment Committee and its non-OECD partners 
have  agreed  that  over  the  coming  period  they  will  follow  a  two-track  approach  to  these 
issues. First track would involve dialogue among governments, SWFs and the private sector 
to improve understanding of both home and host country approaches to foreign investment. 
The  second  track  would  involve  exchange  of  experiences  in  relation  to  national  security 
protection,  developing  shared  views  on  investment  policies  that  observe  the  principles  of 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 1
that  also  avoid 
transparency  and  predictability,  accountability,  and 
proportionality, 
unnecessary restrictions to international investment, including by SWFs.  
The  OECD  has  recently,  on  4  April  2008,  released  a  report  which  is  intended  to  develop 
guidance for recipient country policies toward investments from SWFs. The OECD has also 
proposed to work on how governments can maintain their commitment to open international 
investment policies – including for SWFs – while also protecting essential security interests. 
The  resulting  framework  is  expected  to  foster  mutually  beneficial  situations  where  SWFs 
enjoy fair treatment in the markets of recipient countries and these countries can confidently 
resist protectionist pressures. 
The  European  Commission  (EC)  is  proposing  a  common  EU  approach  to  respond  to 
concerns  over  SWFs  and  enhance  the  transparency,  predictability  and  accountability  of 
SWFs'  investments  while  maintaining  an  open  investment  environment.  It  has  laid  out  the 
principles  which  should  shape  that  approach.  These  are  (a)  commitment  to  an  open 
investment  environment  both  in  the  EU  and  elsewhere,  including  in  third  countries  that 
operate SWFs; (b) support of multilateral work, in international organisations such as the IMF 
and OECD; (c) use of existing instruments at EU and Member State level; (d) respect of EC 
Treaty obligations and international commitments, for example in the WTO framework; and 
(e) proportionality and transparency. 
The  recent  joint  release  by  United  States,  Abu  Dhabi  and  Singapore  sets  out  Policy 
Principles  for  the  SWFs  as  well  as  the  countries  receiving  SWF  investment.  The 
responsibilities enjoined upon SWFs mainly relate to greater transparency in areas such as 
purpose, investment objectives, institutional arrangements, and financial information, strong 
governance structures, internal controls, and operational and risk management systems and 
the  need  to  respect  host-country  rules  by  complying  with  all  applicable  regulatory  and 
disclosure requirements of the countries in which they invest. The prescriptions for the SWF 
host countries stress on transparent inward investment rules, which are “publicly available, 
clearly  articulated,  predictable,  and  supported  by  strong  and  consistent  rule  of  law”  and 
favour non-discriminatory treatment for SWFs vis-à-vis other foreign investors.  
Of particular interest from a host country perspective, is the Media Release of the Treasurer 
of the Commonwealth of Australia in February 2008, which illustratively lays down a set of 
principles  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  Australia’s  foreign  investment  screening regime. 
The  principles  set  out  the  main  factors  that  are  considered  during  the  screening,  which 
include  determining  on  a  case  by  case  basis  and  consistency  with  national  interest;  while 
assessing  the  national  interest  in  any  given  case,  a  balanced  view  against  principles  is 
proposed. The principles set out the additional factors that need to be considered in relation 
to investment proposals by foreign governments and their agencies, over and above those 
that  apply  to  normal  private  sector  proposals.  While  the  Australian  Government  welcomes 
foreign  investment,  the  purposes  of  Australia’s  foreign  investment  screening  is  to  ensure 
consistency with their national interest. The Treasurer can reject proposals that are deemed 
contrary to the national interest or impose conditions on them to address the national interest 
concerns. The concerns may relate to Australia’s national security or economic development. 
The  examination  includes  implications  for  other  government  policies,  competition  and 
operations of Australia’s businesses. 
Recent  reports  suggest  that  Germany  is  contemplating  a  legislation  which  will  enable  it  to 
block “unwanted” investments by SWFs. The proposed law is expected to enable scrutiny of 
all  investments  where  the  investor’s  stake  in  the  investee  entity  is  likely  to  exceed  25  per 
cent, even up to three months after the investment has been made. This concern seems to 
stem  from  the  suspicion  that  some  of  the  SWFs  may  be  driven  by  “political  and  other 
motivations” and not purely by economic and commercial considerations.  
2 
 BIS Review 44/2008
India as a host country 
In  India,  the  regulatory  regime  governing  capital  inflows  does  not  recognise  SWFs  as  a 
distinct  category.  Hence,  their  investments  are  subject  to  normal  regulations  governing 
capital flows under the category of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Foreign Institutional 
Investments  (FII).  In  regard  to  some  sectors,  such  as  banking  and  financial  market 
infrastructure  companies,  there  are  limits  on  individual  holdings  and  the  investment 
proposals are subject to an element of due diligence processing with regard to fit and proper 
requirements. For this purpose, no discrimination is made between a domestic investor and a 
foreign investor, or between SWFs and others, as long as the policy criteria are met. Let me 
further elaborate on this position. 
The existing FDI policy permits investments under the “automatic route” and the “approval 
route” in most, though not all, of the activities. Under the automatic route, the investors are 
allowed  to  invest  in  the  identified  sectors  up  to  the  threshold  specified  for  those  sectors, 
without the need for a prior approval from regulators or the Foreign Investment  Promotion 
Board (FIPB). In respect of the other sectors, the investors will need a prior approval of the 
FIPB,  before  undertaking  any  investment.  The  FIPB  is  functioning  under  the  aegis  of  the 
Ministry of Finance and comprises representatives of various government departments, who 
are expected to ensure that the proposed investment addresses the administrative and other 
concerns before allowing investments in the concerned activity. Similarly, under the FII route, 
the FIIs registered with the securities market regulator (the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India – SEBI) can invest in the secondary market, without prior approval, subject to certain 
limits on individual FIIs and an overall aggregate limit for all FIIs, as a category, as well as 
the sectoral thresholds and other conditions applicable to FDI. SWFs can also invest directly 
as an FII or indirectly as a “sub-account” of a registered FII, which include hedge funds and 
investment  funds.  Accordingly,  any  SWF  can  invest  under  the  FDI  route  (automatic  or 
approval routes, as the case may be) or under FII route either directly or indirectly. Thus, on 
the inflows, there is generally no discrimination on the basis of the country of origin of the 
foreign investor or on the basis of category of foreign investors. 
The policy, however, does provide for a framework in regard to ownership and management 
of the entity investing in some sectors, particularly the financial sector, which is applicable 
equally to resident as well as non-resident investors.  
In respect of banks, acknowledgement from RBI for acquisition/transfer of shares is required 
for  all  cases  of  acquisition  of  shares  which  will  take  the  aggregate  holding  (direct  and 
indirect, beneficial or otherwise) of an individual or group to equivalent of 5 percent or more 
of the paid-up capital of the bank. The relevant factors for “fit and proper” assessment of the 
investor  include  the  source  of  funds  for  the  acquisition  and,  where  the  investor  is  a  body 
corporate, its track record of reputation for operating in a manner that is consistent with the 
standards of good corporate governance, financial strength and integrity. The process also 
envisages a higher level of due diligence when the share holding of the investor exceeds 10 
per cent in the investee bank’s paid up capital, which includes fit and proper status of the 
investor entity.  
An  amendment  to  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  has  been  proposed  which  envisages  prior 
approval of the Reserve Bank for acquisition of more than five per cent of the paid up share 
capital of a bank by any investor “directly or indirectly, by himself or acting in concert with any 
person”.  The  approval  will  be  accorded  after  ensuring  that  the  investor  would  be  “fit  and 
proper” from the perspective of public interest, interest of banking policy, emerging trends in 
banking and international best practices, and the interest of banking and financial system in 
India.  
In  the  case  of  investments  in  financial  market  infrastructure  companies,  such  as  stock 
exchanges,  the  guidelines  stipulate  a  desirable  dispersal  of  ownership.  Investment  by 
individual  entities,  including  investments  by  persons  acting  in  concert,  is  subject  to  a 
threshold of five per cent of the equity in these companies.  
BIS Review 44/2008 
 3
In  regard  to  Securitisation  and  Reconstruction  Companies  (SRC),  the  RBI  conducts  due 
diligence  on  the  sponsors  /  investors  before  giving  a certificate  of  registration  to  the  SRC. 
Any subsequent investment by any individual entity in excess of 10 per cent of the paid up 
equity  capital  of  the  SRC  also  acquires  the  status  of  a  “sponsor”  and  requires  prior 
permission of RBI which, as the regulator, is required to satisfy itself, among other things, of 
the “fit and proper” credentials of the investor.  
Foreign  investment  in  an  Indian  company  in  the  financial  services  sector,  through 
acquisitions, requires prior permission of the Reserve Bank which allows such investments 
only after ensuring that the regulatory concerns, if any, are appropriately addressed and that 
the bonafides of the overseas investor are satisfactory. Wherever necessary, the clearance 
or  comments  of  the  home  country  regulators  of  the  investing  entity  are  also  sought  while 
examining the requests. 
In  case  of  investments  by  foreign  investors  in  activities  other  than  the  financial  services 
sector,  where  there  are  security  or  other  administrative  concerns,  for  instance,  in  defence 
and strategic industries, and print media and broadcasting sectors, investments are allowed 
only under the “approval route”.  
In  order  to  assess  the  eligibility  of  an  entity  to  be  registered  as  FII  or  as  Foreign  Venture 
Capital Investor, SEBI takes into account all factors relevant to the grant of a certificate and 
in  particular  the  applicant's  track  record,  professional  competence,  financial  soundness, 
experience,  general  reputation  of  fairness  and  integrity  as  well  as  the  fact  whether  the 
applicant is regulated by an appropriate foreign regulatory authority.  
In brief, India is yet to consider a policy addressing investments by SWFs, except as a part of 
due diligence in regard to all investors. 
India as a home country 
In  India,  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India (RBI) and are managed as per the provisions of the RBI Act, consistent with the global 
best  practices.  The  Reserve  Bank  adheres  to  appropriate  prudential  norms  and  the 
transparency and data dissemination standards in regard to reserves management.  
Given  the  significant  increase  in  the  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  there  is  an 
increasing expectation in regard to returns. The returns on the foreign exchange reserves, 
under  the  present  framework,  are  constrained  by  the  mandate  to  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
which understandably lays a greater emphasis on safety and liquidity.  
It may, however, be possible to argue that a part of the reserves, which may be considered 
to be in excess of the usual requirements, be managed with the primary objective of earning 
higher returns. Given the limitations placed on the central bank by its mandate, it can be held 
that it will be appropriate to bestow this responsibility on a different sovereign entity. If and 
when the country considers setting up of a SWF for the purpose, one of the methodologies 
could  be  to  fund  SWF  by  purchasing  the  foreign  exchange  from  the  central  bank,  to  the 
extent required. These foreign currency funds could then be used by the sovereign entity for 
seeking  higher  returns  by  investing  in  assets,  which  a  central  bank’s  mandate  may  not 
permit. As the SWF will be a public enterprise, it will be required to conform to the applicable 
governance, transparency and disclosure standards.  
While it is possible to make a case for an Indian SWF, there are also weighty arguments for 
caution in this regard. First, it would be very difficult to reckon in the Indian context – as is the 
case  with  many  other  countries,  the  “reserve  adequacy”  in  a  dynamic  setting  and  on  that 
basis divert a part of “excess” reserves for a higher return from riskier assets. The current 
reserves management policy recognises this, based on experience during periods of both net 
inflows  and  outflows  and,  therefore,  the  overall  approach  to  the  management  of  India's 
foreign  exchange  reserves  takes  into  account  the  changing  composition  of  the  balance  of 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2008
payments  and  endeavours  to  reflect  the  “liquidity  risks”  associated  with  different  types  of 
flows and other requirements. 
Second,  while  most  other  countries  that  have  set  up  SWFs  have  amassed  large  reserves 
either  on  account  of  persistent  current  account  surpluses  or  due  to  revenue  gains  from 
commodity  exports,  in  particular  of  oil  and  gas,  the  Indian  economy  has  twin  deficits  –  a 
current account deficit as also a fiscal deficit. India’s export basket is diversified and does not 
have  any  dominant  “exportable”  natural  resource  output,  which  might  promise  significant 
revenue gains at the current juncture.  
Third, India has experienced consistent but manageable current account deficits barring very 
few  years  of  a  modest  surplus.  India  is  also  having  a  negative  international  investment 
position  (IIP)  with  liabilities  far  exceeding  the  assets.  The  large  reserves  have  been  built, 
over time, mostly on account of capital flows like foreign direct investments (FDI), portfolio 
flows through foreign institutional investors (FII), external commercial borrowing (ECB) and 
short-term credit. Further, the increasing reserves also reflect, in part, the lower absorption 
capacity of the economy, which may pick up with the economy moving on to a higher growth 
trajectory. 
In brief, the public policy is yet to take a conscious view on the desirability of establishing a 
SWF.  
SPV for use of reserves 
In  the  context  of  growing  developmental  needs,  particularly  of  the  infrastructure  sector,  a 
step  in  the  direction  of  using  a  small  part  of  reserves  for  development  has  recently  been 
taken after considerable deliberations. An announcement was made by the Finance Minister 
in the budget Speech 2007-2008 on February 28, 2007 to “use a small part of the foreign 
exchange  reserves  without  the  risk  of  monetary  expansion”  for  the  purpose  of  financing 
infrastructure  development  projects.  Accordingly  a  scheme  has  been  finalized  which 
envisages  RBI  investing,  in  tranches,  up  to  an  aggregate  amount  of  USD  5  billion  in  fully 
Government guaranteed foreign currency denominated bonds issued by an overseas SPV of 
the  India  Infrastructure  Finance  Corporation  Ltd.  (IIFCL),  a  wholly  owned  company  of 
Government of India. The funds, thus raised, are to be utilized by the company for on-lending 
to the Indian companies implementing infrastructure projects in India and/or to co-finance the 
ECBs  of  such  projects  for  capital  expenditure  outside  India  without  creating  any  monetary 
impact.  The  lending  by  the  SPV  under  the  arrangement  would  be  treated  as  external 
commercial  borrowings  (ECB)  and  would  be  subject  to  the  prescribed  reporting  and 
disclosure requirements. The bonds will carry a floating rate of interest. The investment by 
the RBI in the foreign currency denominated bonds issued by the SPV will not be reckoned 
as a part of the foreign exchange reserves, but will be a foreign currency asset on the RBI 
balance sheet.  
It is noteworthy that this arrangement is distinct in the sense that India is both a home and a 
host  for  the  IIFCL’s  subsidiary,  as  it  is  basically  a  SPV  for  channelising  foreign  exchange 
funds for meeting the requirements of the Indian private sector for infrastructure projects in 
India by drawing upon the foreign exchange reserves of the country available with the central 
bank.  
Summing up 
To sum up, India has not yet considered regulatory initiatives specifically addressing SWFs. 
Existing provisions in regard to fit-and-proper or take-over code are, however, applicable to 
all investors, including SWFs. Currently, the pros and cons for the establishment of an Indian 
SWF,  as  generally  understood  now,  are  still  under  debate.  India  is  monitoring  recent 
developments in regard to enhancing transparency and disclosure in respect of hedge funds, 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 5
private equity and SWFs. In particular, India is watching with great interest the development 
of global codes, standards and practices in regard to SWFs, both in view of the presence of 
SWFs in the Indian financial markets and the ongoing debate on establishing an Indian SWF. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2008
