Jean-Claude Trichet: A few remarks on communication by central banks 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
25th HORIZONT Award Ceremony, Frankfurt am Main, 16 January 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is with great pleasure that I have accepted the invitation from HORIZONT on the occasion 
of  the  25th  anniversary  award  ceremony.  I  am  honoured  to  see  so  many  distinguished 
guests  from  the  German  media  and  communications  industry  in  the  audience.  The  long-
standing tradition that this event enjoys demonstrates that media and communications play 
an important role in all aspects of modern societies, including, though perhaps more recently, 
that of monetary policy. In today’s address, I should like to talk about the challenges facing 
central bank communication, from a central banker’s perspective.  
International,  and,  in  particular,  European  media  and  many  other  intermediaries  play  a 
decisive role in the process of disseminating information about the ECB’s monetary policy. 
Media  coverage  of  monetary  policy  actions  is  an  important  channel  of  the  ECB’s 
communication strategy, and thus an important factor for our policy’s success. In the euro 
area, currently comprising 15 member countries (with the accession of Cyprus and Malta on 
1 January 2008) and beyond, national media have retained their important role in making the 
central bank’s actions and its objectives understood by national audiences. In my address, I 
will first elaborate on how central banks in general communicate, and then explain how the 
ECB addresses its audience. 
How central banks communicate 
It is widely accepted today that independent central banks are best placed to maintain price 
stability in the economy. The Maastricht Treaty, therefore, has bestowed the ECB with full 
independence  in  the  pursuit  of  its  mandate.  In  a  democracy,  independence  must  be 
accompanied by both transparency and accountability to the general public. In other words, it 
is the duty of independent central banks to be transparent and to communicate not only with 
specialised audiences, such as financial market participants, but also with the public at large. 
Transparency  is  multi-faceted,  but  basically  involves  making  information  available  to  each 
interested party that is “relevant” for their understanding of monetary policy decisions. 
Central  banks’  approach  to  communications  has  changed  radically  in  recent  years.  About 
more  than  a  decade  ago,  most  central  bankers  believed  that  “secrecy”  about  their  actions 
and intentions would be key to successful monetary policy.. Theoretical studies at that time 
suggested  that  secrecy  and  occasional  “surprises”  would  make  monetary  policy  more 
effective.1  Advancements  in  economic  and  monetary  theory  seem  to  have  altered  this 
paradigm.  Today,  most  central  banks  around  the  world  accept  the  importance  of  high 
standards  in  terms  of  transparency  and  greatly  emphasise  the  need  for  clarity  in  their 
communications. To give an example, it is common practice nowadays among central banks 
– and in particular at the ECB – to inform the public about monetary policy decisions as soon 
as the decision is taken. The ECB was the first to do so among major central banks in the 
industrialised  world.  This  increased  transparency  has  contributed  to  monetary  policy 
effectiveness.  
                                                 
1   See,  for  example,  Cukierman,  A.  and  A.  Meltzer  (1986),  “A  theory  of  ambiguity,  credibility,  and  inflation”, 
Econometrica, Vol. 54, pp. 1099-1128. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 1
investors.  With 
for  consumers  and 
The announcement of a numerical benchmark for price stability, in particular, has proven a 
powerful  instrument  to  foster  transparency  by  enhancing  the  public’s  understanding  of  the 
given central bank’s objectives. In its pursuit of price stability, the ECB’s Governing Council, 
for example, has made clear that it aims to maintain inflation rates below and close to 2% 
over the medium term. By announcing a quantitative definition of price stability, the ECB has 
provided a focal point for the formation of medium-term inflation expectations, “close to, but 
below 2%”, and has made a significant contribution to the long-term predictability of inflation 
developments and monetary policy.  
Central  banks  are  prudent  in  their communication  to  always  preserve  their  credibility  in  all 
circumstances. Let me also say that prudence in communication finds solid justification, not 
least,  in  the  existence  of  a  multitude  of  audiences  with  different  needs.2  Effective 
communication has clear benefits. First, and certainly more fundamentally, it fosters the long-
term predictability of monetary policy. This helps reduce uncertainty about inflation and the 
costs  associated  with  such  uncertainty 
its 
communications,  a  central  bank  can  influence  the  formation  of  inflation  expectations,  and 
ensure that they remain anchored at the levels consistent with the central bank’s objective. 
Without firm guidance on the goals of monetary policy, market participants could lose their 
point of reference which could result in them adjusting their longer-term inflation expectations 
as a mere reflection of current circumstances rather than taking into account the ability of the 
central bank to achieve its goal over the medium term. By contrast, in an economy in which 
inflation  expectations  are  solidly  anchored,  each  person  can  make  well-informed  financial 
decisions.  A  genuine  understanding  of  monetary  policy  and  its  goal  –  price  stability,  and 
therefore  the  preservation  of  the  purchasing  power  of  the  euro  –  also  creates  the  best 
conditions  for  correct  price  and  wage  formation  in  markets,  whereby  all  parties  concerned 
meet their obligations and second-round effects on wage and price setting stemming from 
transitory price increases (e.g. oil, commodities, food) are thus avoided. 
Second,  effective  communication  also  enhances  short-term  predictability.3  Through  their 
actions, central banks can directly control very short-term interest rates. However, given that 
for consumption and investment decisions the longer-term interest rates are more relevant, 
the whole yield curve is relevant for the effectiveness of monetary policy. Medium- and long-
term  interest  rates  largely  depend  on  private  expectations  regarding  future  central  bank 
decisions.  Lack  of  effective  central  bank  communication  would  eventually  lead  to  higher, 
more  volatile,  levels  of  long-term  interest  rates,  which  could  be  detrimental  to  economic 
activity.  By  contrast,  an  environment  in  which  the  predictability  of  interest  rate  movements 
and their relation to key macroeconomic developments is well understood supports correct 
price  formation  in  financial  markets,  contributes  to  the  efficient  allocation  of  funds,  and 
reduces  uncertainty  concerning  future  interest  rates.  In  such  an  environment,  firms  can 
improve their risk management and achieve better incentives to invest. 
How the ECB addresses its audience 
Let me turn to how the Governing Council of the ECB explains its monetary policy decisions 
to the public. Our communications aim to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. In 
this respect, the Governing Council fully subscribes to the basic principles of modern central 
bank communication described earlier. A high degree of transparency vis-à-vis our monetary 
policy  has  helped  the  public  to  hold  the  Governing  Council  accountable  for  its  policy 
                                                 
2   See Kahnemann, D. (2003), “Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioural Economics”, American 
Economic  Review,  Vol.  93(5),  pp.  1449-1475,  and  Lohmann,  S.  (2003),  “Why  do  institutions  matter?  An 
audience-cost theory of institutional commitment”, Governance, Vol. 16(1), pp. 95-110. 
3   See  Ehrmann,  M.  and  M.  Fratzscher  (2007),”Social  value  of  public  information:  testing  the  limits  to 
transparency”, ECB Working Paper No. 821, and the literature quoted therein. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2008
decisions. Communication on monetary policy with a single voice is desirable and has been 
efficiently applied from the start of monetary union. 
Establishing  an  effective  communication  policy  was  particularly  important  for  a  young 
institution that did not have its own track record, as was the case when the ECB started its 
operations  in  1999.  The  ECB  operates  in  a  multilingual  and  multicultural  environment.  We 
have  to  address  a  significant  number  of  audiences  in  each  culture,  the  general  public, 
opinion leaders, social partners, financial markets and, of course, the media as our partners 
who are key in the process of transmission of our messages to the audiences. These groups 
have different expectations with regard to the quantity and nature of our communications. For 
our  communication  policy  to  be  effective,  we  have  to  make  sure  that  our  messages  are 
transmitted in a consistent and timely manner throughout the euro area, and that there is an 
equal  treatment  of  media  across countries.  In  the  presence  of  23  official  languages  in  the 
European Union and 13 official languages in the euro area, it is very important to ensure that 
the  very  same  message  is  conveyed  to  citizens  in  all  countries,  and  that  appropriate 
translations are made.  
In  addition  to  providing  these  translations  of  the  ECB’s  official  communications  in  all 
languages spoken by the euro area countries, a number of channels are used to ensure full 
respect of the single voice principle. The Eurosystem-wide external communication activities 
of the national central banks are coordinated by the ECB. Due consideration has been given 
to the different cultures of communication existing in the euro area. As expected, the very 
diverse European national media are playing a key role in the transmission of the information 
to the various audiences of the ECB. Experience so far shows that the approach works well 
and that the media have contributed to a homogeneous understanding of the role and tasks 
of the ECB.4  
As  the  “porte-parole”  of  the  ECB  and  its  Governing  Council,  I  think  we  have  shown  our 
capacity to communicate in unison with a high level of team spirit in interaction with a highly 
sophisticated  and  complex  media  network  dealing  with  320  million  European  citizens 
speaking 13 languages.  
It  must  be  underlined  that  the  European  Central  Bank  decided  from  the  very  beginning  to 
embark on a bold concept of transparency. On 1st January 1999, at the moment of the start 
of the euro, the state of the art of central banking was, not to say anything immediately after 
each  decision  on  monetary  policy,  let  observers  and  markets  guess  what  had  been  the 
reasoning of the central bank and publish five or six weeks afterwards, the reasons why the 
decision was made in the form of “minutes of the decision-making college”. We decided from 
the first day of the euro that we would have a significantly higher level of transparency. 
First, we thought it was necessary to give to the public the economic and monetary diagnosis 
of  the  Governing  Council,  and  the  reasons  why  the  monetary  policy  decision  was  taken, 
immediately after the meeting. This quasi real time display of the detailed reasoning of the 
Governing Council took the form of five to six pages of “introductory remarks”. 
Second, we considered it to be useful to give additional explanations to the media, to market 
participants and to the general public in the form of a press conference that would take place 
immediately  after  the  Governing  Council  and  would  be  introduced  by  the  “Introductory 
Statement”. 
The  ECB,  in  so  doing,  contributed  to  a  significant  change  in  the  state  of  the  art  on 
transparency  of  central  banking.  Today  central  banks  are  more  often  giving  real  time 
information  on  their  decisions,  generally  in  the  form  of  explanatory  communiqués  that  are 
published  immediately  with  the  decision.  We  remain  nevertheless  quasi  unique  amongst 
                                                 
4   See Berger, H., M. Ehrmann and M. Fratzscher (2006), “Monetary Policy in the Media”, ECB Working Paper 
No. 679. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 3
major central banks in publishing a detailed analysis in quasi real time and in having a press 
conference. 
Why were we so keen to introduce a new and bold concept of transparency? I think we had 
three main reasons: 
Firstly we had to consider that we were launching a new currency to which we had to transfer 
the  full  legacy  of  stability,  of  confidence,  of  credibility  which  was  the  characteristics  of  the 
most credible previous national currencies. The Maastricht Treaty had been entirely based 
upon this benchmarking concept. And our goal, in the moment of the transition, was to fully 
respect the promise made to the people of the euro area namely: “The new currency will be 
at least as credible and as confidence inspiring as was your own national currency.” In this 
perspective  it  was  very  important  to  explain  in  real  time  our  decisions  to  be  as  clear  as 
possible  on  our  diagnosis  and  reasoning  with  a  view  to  convince  observers  that  the  new 
currency deserved fully this very high level of credibility.  
Secondly we also had to take into account the fact that we were issuing a new currency for 
eleven countries, eleven cultures and (soon to become twelve and then later on thirteen and 
fifteen today) and many languages. In this framework it was indispensable to have extremely 
clear single terms of reference from the very moment of the collegial decision. Otherwise it 
would have been unavoidable that various interpretations would have been given through the 
grid of various cultures and different languages. Had we waited for five of six weeks to give 
detailed explanations we would have been facing information and communication issues that 
would have been very difficult to solve.  
Thirdly, as explained before, and totally independently of the previous two reasons which are 
specific  to  the  euro  area,  academic  research  had,  particularly  in  the  90’s,  made  important 
advances in permitting to understand better the decisive role of transparency in establishing 
and  consolidating  the  credibility  of  central  banks  and  in  helping  them  to  solidly  anchor 
inflation expectations. 
Let  me  tell  you  in  concluding  these  short  remarks,  in  front  of  so  many  eminent 
representatives  of  German  media,  how  much  precisely  we  rely  upon  you  for  our 
communication with the general public, with all our fellow citizens. It is extremely important of 
course  for  a  central  bank  to  have  an  effective  communication  with  market  participants, 
investors and savers in Europe and in the world.  
For  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  its  Governing  Council,  which  is  the  guardian  of  the 
currency for 320 million people, it is to the public at large that we are accountable. Therefore 
communication with the general public is decisive, for it to be sure that it is well informed of 
our diagnosis, our analysis and our decisions. 
We  met  in  the  Governing  Council  last  Thursday  and  I  explained  fully  on  behalf  of  the 
Governing Council what are our present views and orientations.  
Let me sum up the core message of the Governing Council of the ECB to our fellow citizens: 
We  are  responsible  for  delivering  price  stability  –  namely  inflation  less  than  2%, 
• 
close  to  2%  –  in  the  medium  run.  It  is  our  Treaty  mandate.  It  is  what  the  people 
want. 
We presently have inflation higher because in particular of oil, commodities and food 
price increases and the effect of indirect taxes. 
For inflation to go down, back to our definition of price stability it is essential that we 
do not have prices and labour costs spiralling taking into account the present level of 
inflation and giving rise to what we call “second round effects”. All decision-makers 
whether private or public, including entrepreneurs and social partners should have 
that in mind all over the euro area. 
  4 
 BIS Review 6/2008
 Decisions  of  augmentation  of  prices  and  costs  that  would  depart  from  this 
recommendation  would  do  nothing  but  contributing  to  higher  inflation,  diminishing 
purchasing  power  in  the  medium  run,  diminishing  competitiveness  and  therefore 
hampering durably the job creation process which is presently a major success of 
the euro area. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 5
