Radovan Jelašić: Payment card business in Serbia  
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Round Table 
Discussion on Payment Card Business, Belgrade, 17 September 2008. 
 Distinguished members of the press, colleague bankers and hosts to this event, 
I would like first of all to warmly thank the organizers of this Round Table on payment card 
business  for  the  invitation  to  give  introductory  speech  and  to  take  part  in  the  discussions 
during  this  event.  Payment  card  business,  together  with  the  overall  system  of  payment 
operations, represents the backbone of a stable and efficient financial industry of any market. 
Supervision of these operations in Serbia, however, is under the remit of the National bank. 
Recently, we have been witnessing major, both technological and regulatory changes in the 
domain of payment card business equally in Europe and worldwide. Its significance in some 
economies  has  met  and  even  exceeded  that  of  payments  in  cash  and  has  consequently 
grabbed the attention of financial market regulatory authorities and central banks. 
Perhaps  the  most  significant  decision  in  this  domain  is  the  one  taken  by  the  Master  Card 
(under supervision, not to say pressure, of the European Antimonopoly Commission) to cut 
down cross-border interchange fees down to the zero level, and hence open up a new era in 
the relations between payment card systems, financial market regulatory authorities, banks 
and  traders  in  Europe  and  worldwide.  Besides,  the  initiative  of  the  European  Commission 
and the European Central Bank to develop a new European payment card system within the 
implementation  of  the  SEPA  agreement  (if  you’ll  permit  me  to  boast  a  bit,  following  in  the 
footsteps of our “Dina Card”) and to do so now when VISA and Master Card have already 
established  strong  positions  for  themselves,  shows  how  important  payment  cards  have 
become for the stability of payments systems, not only from the financial, but also from the 
social point of view. 
Today, we shall also attempt to discuss current issues prevailing in our economy. One of the 
topics  of  discussion  (and  often  a  bone  of  contention)  between  the  NBS  and  commercial 
banks in the course of several recent years has been the treatment of payment cards and 
debit card overdrafts. I sincerely hope we shall see further discussions on this matter as they 
strongly contribute to the improvement of the quality of the system. 
On our part, I wish to reaffirm the position of the NBS to continue its best efforts begun six 
years  ago  to  promote  further  intense  development  of  the  card  business  in  Serbia.  Let  me 
remind you that the number of transactions processed through the Dina Card system (set up 
by the NBS five years ago) averages over 25 million per year, of which almost one million are 
initiated by the mobile telephone. 
Our  projects  in  the  Dina  Card  system  in  cooperation  with  banks,  traders  and  telecom 
operators comprise:  
• 
• 
• 
Mobile telephone top up via SMS messages (available since April 2006)  
Transfer of remittances from abroad to Dina Cards (available since December 2007)  
Payment by Dina Cards via Internet (expected to be available from 25 September 
2008)  
Payment of state taxes and duties in the Treasury Administration of the Ministry of 
Finance using payment cards (expected to be available from May 2009)  
 What  further  steps  should  be  taken  in  the  domain  of  card  business  is  the  question  which 
keeps  coming  up,  but,  contrary  to  other  issues,  not  from  the  point  of  view  of  profit 
maximization,  but  from  the  aspect  of  socially  optimal  costs  of  payment  cards,  i.e.  more 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 1
efficient payment card business. One thing is for sure, the development of card business in 
Serbia should not match that in the USA where payment card frauds have been cut by 70%, 
number of payment cards issued has quadroupled, number of card issuers increased by 50% 
and  the  reference  rate  trimmed  to  a  quarter  of  its  value  since  1990s  to  date.  Now  guess 
whether the costs of interchange in those circumstances were decreased by the oligopolies, 
VISA and Master Card? The answer is no – costs of interchange have been increased. To 
me,  the  main  issue  is  no  longer  whether  the  NBS  does  or  does  not  need  to  take 
administrative measures to enable faster development of the card business in Serbia. The 
answer  is  yes,  administrative  measures  need  to  be  taken  by  the  NBS,  but  the  question 
remains  as  to  in  which  area  and  in  what  way  as  any  measure  has  its  advantages  and 
disadvantages. Should it be a measure relating to the maximization of the interchange fee on 
payments  via  debit  or  on  payments  via  credit  card,  or  a  measure  to  encourage  traders  to 
charge higher fees on payment card operations if they feel payment card business cuts too 
deep into their profits, or some altogether different measure.  
The main role of the NBS is to secure the efficiency of the payment card business over the 
medium  and  long  run,  and  in  order  to  do  so  we  have  been  analysing  measures  taken 
worldwide, from the EU countries to Australia. We welcome any support we can get in this 
effort and are certain that it will pay off even for banks in the medium and long run. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2008
