Mario Draghi: Monetary policy, expectations and financial markets  
Text of the Central Bank Whitaker Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, 
Dublin, 18 July 2008. 
 How central banks can motivate their decisions and communicate them clearly, completely 
and effectively is a significant aspect of monetary policy-making. This is not a new issue, but 
recent developments have raised pressing new policy questions.  
Communicating monetary policy has become an even more challenging task in the current 
context  of  rising  inflationary  pressures,  uncertain  economic  outlook  and  fragile  financial 
markets.  The  expansionary  monetary  policies  adopted  in  the  past,  together  with  severe 
structural tensions in the oil market, may have played a part in the present difficulties.  
My aim today is, first, to review the evolution of central bank communication in a longer-term 
perspective and examine the benefits of transparency, in particular for the euro area. I will 
then  address  the  implications  of  the  two  crucial  aspects  of  monetary  policy  that  we  must 
tackle  at  the  current  juncture,  namely  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy,  inflation 
expectations  and  the  surge  in  oil  prices,  and  the  communication  and  transparency 
challenges posed by the financial market turmoil.  
The road to better central bank communication: a historical perspective 
1.  
Until  the  late  1980s,  the  conventional  wisdom  was  that  to  be  effective,  policy  decisions 
should not be anticipated. An opaque and convoluted language was considered appropriate. 
Today,  that  view  has  been  superseded,  and  openness  and  clarity  in  central  banks’ 
communication are now considered mandatory.  
The change has been radical. Perhaps the key event was the move towards a clear definition 
of policy goals, which began in the 1970s when a number of central banks adopted explicit 
monetary targets.  
Awareness  of  the  importance  of  policy  commitment  and  good  communication  in  curbing 
inflationary  pressures  was  an  essential  ingredient  of  this  strategy.  As  Paolo  Baffi  argued 
when he was Governor of the Bank of Italy, with the advent of monetary targets “the actions 
of central banks are no longer cloaked in silence, and perhaps never will be again. Whereas 
in  the  past  silence  was  seen  as  a  guarantee  of  independence,  today  this  is  achieved  by 
giving an explicit account of one’s actions”.1 
This trend continued with the widespread adoption of quantitative targets for price stability, 
including,  in  a  number  of  countries,  a  specified  inflation  target.  A  study  by  the  Bank  of 
England  found  that  in  the  late  1990s  83  central  banks  out  of  94  surveyed  had  a  definite 
target, either for the exchange rate, for money supply, or for inflation.2  
Monetary authorities produce and release a vast amount of information: most central banks 
publish  macroeconomic  projections  and  specify  the  models  on  which  they  are  based.  For 
example, the ECB publishes the projections prepared by the Eurosystem and ECB staff four 
times a year. The Federal Reserve has been publishing its FOMC macroeconomic forecasts 
                                                 
1   Banca d’Italia, Annual Report for 1978, 1979, p.158.  
2   Fry,  M.,  D.  Julius,  L.  Mahadeva,  S.  Roger  and  G.  Sterne,  “Key  issues  in  the  choice  of  monetary  policy 
framework”,  in  L.  Mahadeva  and  G.  Sterne  (eds.),  Monetary  Policy  Frameworks  in  a  Global  Context, 
Routledge, London, 2000, pp. 1-216. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 1
for three decades now; it has recently extended the horizon and increased the frequency of 
the forecasts. 
Information has also become more timely. Central banks now inform the public as soon as a 
decision is taken, in press conferences or by releasing the minutes of meetings. The ECB 
publishes the motivations of the Governing Council’s decisions the day of its policy meeting, 
and  a  press  conference  by  the  President  adds  further  clarifications.  Only  a  few  years  ago 
things were very different. For example, until 1994 the Federal Reserve did not disclose its 
interest-rate decisions, which investors had to infer from open-market operations.  
In their statements, most central banks provide commentaries about future policy, although 
practices differ. Some of them offer only qualitative guidance. From 2000 to 2003 the Fed 
gave indications of the “balance of risks”; the ECB, when appropriate, gives signals through 
its  communication  channels.  Other  central  banks  have  gone  further  in  this  direction, 
accompanying their macroeconomic projections with an explicit forecast of the future path of 
policy rates. 
Not  only  does  transparency  on  objectives,  strategies,  analyses  and  decisions  ensure  the 
democratic legitimacy of independent monetary authorities, it improves central banks’ ability 
to attain their final goals, by shaping price-setters’ expectations and attenuating the cost, in 
terms  of  lost  output,  of  keeping  inflation  in  check.  It  also  enhances  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy.  Central  banks  directly  control  very-short-term  interest  rates,  but  most 
decisions  within  the  economy  are  affected  by  longer-term  rates,  which  in  turn  depend  on 
expectations  about  monetary  policy.  As  Michael  Woodford  has  observed,  “not  only  do 
expectations  about  policy  matter,  but,  at  least  under  current  conditions,  very  little  else 
matters”.3 
In  the  euro  area,  the  need  for  clear  communication  is  heightened  by  the  multilingual  and 
multicultural  environment.  Consistent  interpretation  of  the  ECB’s  decisions  by  the  various 
national  audiences  requires  the  establishment  of  common  terms  of  reference  and  their 
adaptation to the specific national contexts. The national central banks play a key role. 
However, we should not conclude from this that we now have a common paradigm covering 
every aspect of central bank communication. In fact, no consensus has yet emerged among 
academics  or  central  bankers  on  the  ideal  communication  strategy.  On  the  practice  of 
publishing the projected path for interest rates, for instance, some studies cite the risk that 
the  private  sector  could  give  too  much  weight  to  central  bank  information  and  accordingly 
under-invest in independent analysis of its own.4  
Research at the Bank of Italy shows that when central banks release their projected path for 
interest  rates,  market  participants  understand  well  the  information  it  contains.  However, 
central  banks  seem  to  communicate  effectively  even  when  they  disseminate  qualitative 
information only.5  
The existence of different views should not come as a surprise, as the “best practice” is likely 
to  depend  in  part  on  the  institutional,  cultural  and  economic  environment,  so  that  central 
banks  are  required  to  adopt  different  communication  strategies.  For  example,  so  far  only 
relatively small countries seem to follow the practice of communicating projected policy rates, 
possibly  because  their  close  dependence  on  external  conditions  may  make  it  easier  to 
convey the conditional nature of their projections. As Lucas Papademos pointed out recently, 
                                                 
3   M. Woodford, Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press, 2003. 
4   See J.D. Morris and H. S. Shin, “Social Value of Public Information”, 2002, The American Economic Review, 
and, on the empirical relevance of the argument, L.E. Svensson, “Social Value of Public Information is actually 
pro transparency”, 2005, NBER working paper 11537. 
5   G.  Ferrero  and  A.  Secchi,  “The  Announcement  of  Future  Policy  Intentions”,  2008,  Bank  of  Italy,  Working 
Paper Series, forthcoming. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2008
there is no single recipe for every detail,6 although good communication is now an essential 
component of any central bank’s toolkit.7  
Central bank communication, inflation expectations and commodity prices  
2.  
The  sweeping  changes  I  have  just  described,  and  their  lasting  effect  on  the  dynamics  of 
inflation, must be taken into account in assessing policy at the current juncture, when, driven 
primarily by oil and food prices, inflation in the euro area is about 4 per cent, a level unseen 
since the early 1990s. 
In  the  past  two  decades,  innovation  in  monetary  policy  design  and  communication  has 
helped to reduce the level and volatility of inflation, while the low level of real interest rates 
has  stimulated  employment  and  growth.  Inflation  expectations  are  better  anchored  today 
than in decades past, as both survey data and financial market indicators show. Moreover, 
long-run expectations appear more firmly anchored in countries where the monetary policy 
target is specified more clearly. For example in the euro area – where price stability is clearly 
and quantitatively defined – there is evidence that macro-economic news reports affect short-
term inflation expectations, whereas elsewhere they also affect long-term expectations.8  
Some  questions  concerning  the  link  between  monetary  policy,  inflation  expectations  and 
actual inflation remain open.9 It would be good to have more information on how aggregate 
inflation expectations affect pricing behaviour at the micro level. Also, while we have many 
gauges  of  the  inflation  expectations  of  households,  professional  economists  and  financial 
markets,  there  is  still  little  information  on  the  expectations  of  the  price-setters  themselves 
(such as businesses).  
In any case, the short-run trade-off between inflation and the stabilization of real economic 
activity  seems  to  have  improved  significantly.  Communication  has  certainly  been  a  key 
factor. However, a successful communication strategy requires a central bank to be credible. 
And this, in turn, means matching words with deeds.  
Our success to date in controlling inflation expectations depends crucially on the lessons we 
learnt from the oil price shocks of the 1970s. Central banks must now avoid the mistakes that 
were made then in a number of countries. Indeed, the experience with oil shocks over the 
last  few  decades  provides  a  striking  demonstration  of  the  benefits  of  credible  monetary 
policy, even in the current juncture. There is by now ample international evidence that the 
adverse  effects  of  oil  price  shocks  on  the  economy  are  significantly  less  severe  than  they 
were 30 years ago.10 
This result undoubtedly reflects structural changes in the economy, such as greater energy 
efficiency  in  production  and  consumption  and  more  flexible  labour  markets.  The  empirical 
evidence also suggests, however, that the enhanced credibility and the greater transparency 
of monetary policy have been key in cushioning the inflationary impact of oil shocks.  
                                                 
6   L.  Papademos,  “Monetary  policy  communication  and  effectiveness”,  speech  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Allied Social Science Associations, New Orleans, 5 January 2008. 
7   A.  S.  Blinder,  “Talking  about  Monetary  Policy:  The  Virtues  (and  Vices)  of  Central  Bank  Communication”, 
presented at the 7th BIS Annual Conference, Lucerne, 26-27 June 2008. 
8   M.J. Beechey, B.K. Johannsen and A. Levin, “Are Long-run Inflation Expectations Anchored More Firmly in 
the Euro Area than in the United States?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6536, 2007.  
9   See  for  example  B.  S.  Bernanke  (2008),  “Outstanding  Issues  in  the  Analysis  of  Inflation”,  speech  at  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 53rd Annual Economic Conference, Chatham, Massachusetts. 
10   See, for example, O. Blanchard and J. Galì, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices: Why Are the 2000s so 
Different from the 1970s?”, NBER Working PaperNo. 13368. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 3
Our  research  shows  that  even  in  the  past  the  impact  was  smaller  in  countries  where  the 
central  bank  had  a  clear  commitment  to  price  stability  and  enjoyed  high  credibility.  For 
example, estimates indicate that in the 1970s and 1980s it was about six times smaller in 
Germany  than  in  Italy.  And  in  Italy  the  transmission  of  oil  price  shocks  to  inflation  has 
decreased further since 1999, thanks to the credibility of the Eurosystem monetary strategy. 
According to recent results, moreover, the diminished impact of oil price shocks on inflation 
and  output  is  due  in  part  to  investors’  better  awareness  of  monetary  policy-makers’  anti-
inflationary orientation or, to put it differently, the credibility of central banks.11 
These considerations underpin the recent decision of the Governing Council of the ECB. Our 
forecasts indicated that the increase in inflation would be temporary, but it now looks more 
persistent  than  we  expected  a  few  months  ago.  Whereas  in  past  months  spill-over  effects 
had  been  modest  and  underlying  inflation  had  remained  subdued,  lately  the  risks  have 
increased. There are signs of an acceleration in internal costs of production, and measures 
of medium- to longer-term inflation expectations also now indicate tensions.  
It was to address the increased risk of second-round effects on wage and price setting and to 
reaffirm  a  commitment  to  restoring  price  stability  that  the  Governing  Council  decided  on  3 
July to raise rates to 4.25 per cent. Credibility cannot be taken for granted, a sort of once-
and-for-all  acquisition.  A  timely  move,  instrumental  in  keeping  inflation  expectations  under 
control,  is  certainly  preferable  to  the  late,  violent  corrections  many  countries  experienced 
decades  ago.  Indeed,  in  the  days  following  the  rate  hike, inflation  expectations  as  derived 
from the financial markets stopped rising.  
Policy-makers  worldwide  need  to  take  good  note  of  these  lessons  from  the  past. 
Expansionary global monetary policies may have accentuated the structural tensions within 
the  oil  market.  A  number  of  emerging  countries  are  currently  experiencing  rapid  and 
increasing inflation. In part this reflects the heavy incidence of food in their consumer-price 
indices, but in many cases it also derives from loose monetary conditions due to such factors 
as fast growth of money and credit aggregates and the choice of the exchange rate regime. 
These  developments  are  impacting  on  inflation  at  the  global  level  and  call  for  appropriate 
policy measures. The credibility of monetary policy needs to be preserved in the advanced 
countries and pursued in the emerging countries, by heightening awareness of the seriously 
worsening risk of inflation. 
that 
financial  markets  are  becoming 
increasingly  efficient  and  complete, 
Lessons from the financial market turmoil 
3.  
The link between monetary policy, communication and the financial markets has also gained 
importance.  
Now 
the 
transmission of monetary policy impulses to the economy is swifter than it was before and 
has  come  to  depend  more  heavily  on  the  way the  financial  markets  perceive  central  bank 
decisions.  Actual  and  expected  changes  in  official  rates  are  now  rapidly  transmitted  to  a 
wider range of financial assets and on to consumption and investment. The management of 
expectations is essential, as the release of information that diverges from market views may 
increase  volatility  and,  in  extreme  cases,  lead  to  an  unwinding  of  large  positions,  with 
potentially disorderly effects on liquidity and asset prices.  
Against  this  background,  the  financial  turmoil  has  raised  new  issues  for  monetary  policy-
makers. It is now more difficult to forecast economic developments and to assess the effects 
of policy decisions and communication on markets, on expectations and, ultimately, on the 
real economy.  
                                                 
11   See O. Blanchard and J. Galì, cit. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2008
it 
is  equally  possible 
The  consequences  of  the  recent  events  for  prudential  regulation  and  financial  supervision 
have  been  examined  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  report  “Enhancing  Market  and 
Institutional  Resilience”.  I  will  not  dwell  on  these  issues  today,  but  instead  focus  on  the 
lessons most directly relevant to monetary policy design and communication.  
A first lesson concerns the role of the monetary authorities in signalling the risks to financial 
stability. Independent central banks, with their sound reputation, their strong technical skills, 
and their medium- to long-term perspective, are in the ideal position to assess systemic risks 
emerging from financial markets and communicate them credibly to the public. Nevertheless, 
the markets have apparently failed to heed our warnings sufficiently, in this crisis as in past 
episodes.  
To many of us, last year’s crisis did not come as a surprise. In June 2007, in a speech at the 
Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  I  myself  expressed  concern  that  the  risk  of  a  broader  shock, 
resulting from a widespread decline in the appetite for risk, had increased. I warned that if the 
initial  price  movements  were  to  trigger  counterparty  concerns,  this  might  easily  generate 
deeper and more broad-based liquidity erosions, posing systemic risks.12 Other central banks 
and international institutions had issued analogous warnings, some of them even earlier.13 
Why  do  markets  trust  central  banks  on  monetary  policy,  while  they  seem  to  ignore  the 
signals provided repeatedly by monetary authorities on financial stability? One possibility, of 
course, strictly related to human psychology, is that after a protracted period of favourable 
macroeconomic conditions investors may become over-optimistic and underestimate risks.  
But 
too  effective 
communication requires words to be followed by deeds. This objective may necessitate wide-
ranging changes in regulations, supervisory practices and central bank responsibilities.  
The turmoil has shown that international coordination is essential to make private institutions 
more  transparent  and  avoid  the  potentially  destabilizing  effects  of  the  perverse  incentives 
that prevail in some segments of the financial system.  
As  for  central  banks,  it  has  been  maintained  that  if  they  are  to  be  as  credible  when  they 
comment  on  financial  risks  as  they  are  in  monetary  policy,  they  need  to  be  more  closely 
involved in the task of ensuring financial stability; in some cases this may mean reinforcing 
their  statutory  responsibilities.14  We  should  also  assess  carefully  whether  the  instruments 
currently available to central banks to preserve financial stability – for example by attenuating 
the  pro-cyclical  nature  of  financial  markets  –  are  adequate  to  this  formidable  task;  and 
whether  it  might  be  possible  to  overcome  economic  and  political  resistance  to  the  idea  of 
enlarging the central banks’ role in defending financial stability. 
But  preserving  financial  stability  may  also  have  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. Indeed, the link between monetary policy and financial stability poses a challenge to 
central  bankers.  We  must  seriously  reconsider  what  was  until  recently  a  widely  held  view, 
namely that monetary policy should play a passive role as financial imbalances are building 
up  and  should  only  intervene  after  the  crash,  injecting  liquidity  to  avoid  a  macroeconomic 
meltdown (known as mopping up after the event). We should assess whether and how far 
our  policy  instruments  should  also  be  used  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  to  contain  financial 
disequilibria  and  avoid  perverse  incentives  and  an  asymmetric  expansionary  bias  in 
investors’ perception of monetary policy.  
in  monetary  policy-making,  here 
that,  as 
                                                 
12   M. Draghi, “Monetary policy and new financial instruments”, Buenos Aires, 4 June 2007. 
13   See, for example, the press release of the Financial Stability Forum’s seventeenth meeting in Frankfurt, 29 
March 2007.  
14   See, for example, the Report of the Paulson Committee on Capital Market Regulation. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 5
Of course, it is extremely difficult to define the meaning of “disequilibria” in this area and to 
design a policy that will mitigate the risks of financial imbalances and crises while ensuring 
the  preservation  of  price  stability.  While  we  should  probably  avoid  asking  too  much  of 
monetary policy, we cannot ignore that excessively low interest rates and over-expansion of 
liquidity  and  credit  can  affect  the  financial  industry  by  encouraging  investors’  risk-taking 
behaviour.  This  implies  that  monetary  and  credit  developments  should  be  central  in  the 
communication  of  our  strategy.15  The  turmoil  has  confirmed  that  the  ECB’s  strategic 
emphasis on money and credit developments is appropriate.  
The second lesson we have drawn from the crisis is that to reap the full benefits of central 
bank transparency, the financial sector at large – financial institutions, financial instruments, 
and market behaviour – must also be transparent.  
First of all, a clear understanding of financial conditions is essential for policy decisions, since 
variables such as the leverage of the private sector, the distribution of debt and the riskiness 
of banks affect the transmission of monetary policy. 
Moreover,  when  financial  instruments  are  highly  complex,  the  balance  sheets  of  financial 
institutions  may  be  so  opaque  that  outsiders  –  central  banks,  supervisors  and  even 
shareholders – may fail to perceive the true degree of risk in the system and so react tardily 
to financial imbalances. It is even possible that a better predictability of central banks’ actions 
– concerning the future path of policy rates or their reactions in a crisis – coupled with the 
perverse  incentives  for  risk  prevailing  in  some  segments  of  the  financial  system,  might 
encourage risk-taking by private investors. 
In order to arrive at first-best solutions and improve the system’s stability, progress in central 
bank transparency must be accompanied by regulatory and supervisory action to make the 
financial  services  industry  less  opaque.  Indeed,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  greater 
transparency in this sector, not only to improve the world financial system’s resilience, but 
also to ensure that the stance of monetary policy is consistent with both price and financial 
stability.  
The  FSF  Report  encourages  financial  institutions  to  enhance  their  transparency  already  in 
their  2008  mid-year  reports  and  to  improve  reporting  standards  for  off-balance-sheet 
vehicles. The credit rating agencies also play a crucial role in this context, and the Report 
has indicated several measures to improve their performance.  
The  third  lesson  we  have  learnt  from  the  turmoil  is  that  when  tensions  arise  and  markets 
become illiquid, central banks may have to take care in explaining how they intend to act to 
maintain price stability while preserving orderly conditions on financial markets. This problem 
is likely to arise in particular on the money market, whose functioning is crucial to the liquidity 
of securities markets in general.  
In  times  of  great  uncertainty,  monetary  policy  has  to  be  perceived  as  a  stabilizing  force, 
providing  a  solid  anchor  to  inflation  expectations.  When  there  are  money-market  strains, 
distinguishing between liquidity provision and the reasons underpinning the setting of policy 
rates,  easy  enough  in  normal  circumstances,  becomes  difficult,  but  remains  nonetheless 
essential. On the one hand, the actions needed to restore market liquidity may blur monetary 
policy  signals;  on  the  other,  decisions  on  interest  rates  could  be  interpreted  as  revealing 
information unknown to the market, thus exacerbating tensions. 
In these circumstances, it is important to make sure that more active liquidity management 
by  the  central  bank,  which  is  necessary  to  ease  tensions  in  the  money  market,  is  not 
perceived as a signal of a looser commitment to price stability.  
                                                 
15   See  the  considerations  in  O.  Issing,  “In  search  of  monetary  stability:  the  evolution  of  monetary  policy”, 
presented at the 7th BIS annual conference, June 2008.  
6 
 BIS Review 92/2008
During the recent turmoil, the policy actions and the communication of the Eurosystem have 
carefully  distinguished  the  operations  needed  to  support  the  money  market  from  genuine 
monetary policy decisions. Since August 2007, the Eurosystem has repeatedly injected funds 
into  the  money  market  through  both  MROs  and  longer-term  operations,  in  order  to  serve 
banks’  demand  for  liquidity.  These  operations  have  been  accompanied  by  prompt 
communication  –  via  press  releases  or  other  channels  –  to  reassure  the  markets  that  the 
ECB  stood  ready  to  do  what  was  needed  to  guarantee  the  orderly  functioning  of  the 
interbank market and to reduce the volatility of very-short-term rates. At the same time, the 
Council  has  emphasized  its  determination  to  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  do  not  materialize  and  to  keep  inflation  expectations  consistent  with  price 
stability.  
These  events  have  demonstrated  that  central  banks,  and  the  ECB  in  particular,  are  well-
equipped  to  handle  these  problems.  Central  bank  interventions  have  been  effective  in 
avoiding  market  disruptions,  although  on  longer  money-market  maturities  a  substantial 
premium over official rates has emerged. The turmoil has also shown that in times of stress 
central banks must be prepared to enhance communication with the markets and to adapt 
their operational framework to market conditions, taking innovative steps when needed.  
The  recent  events  have  also  raised  a  number  of  new  questions  concerning  the  design  of 
these  operations  and  their  communication  to  the  market.  First  of  all,  central  banks  must 
consider carefully how far they should go in devising new instruments to provide liquidity. In 
particular, at what conditions should non-deposit-taking institutions be eligible for refinancing 
operations? 
Another  problem  is  whether,  and  to  what  extent,  the  tools  that  are  appropriate  in 
emergencies  should  be  announced  in  advance  to  the  market  or  even  used  in  normal 
situations. In order to address this issue, we need to analyse the trade-off between greater 
disclosure  –  which  would  acquaint  the  central  bank’s counterparties  with  the  non-standard 
procedures, thus facilitating their use in case of need – and the danger of exacerbating moral 
hazard, encouraging further risk taking.  
One  more  issue  on  which  we  need  to  reflect  concerns  the  measures  that  serve  to  make 
recourse  to  these  instruments  less  likely.  For  example,  recent  experience  has  made  it 
evident that the characteristics of deposit insurance schemes are key to containing the risk of 
bank runs and liquidity crises. 
The role of communication and the benefits of full transparency are also crucial in case of 
crisis. As the events of the past year have shown, the prompt public announcement by the 
central bank of interventions to support individual institutions may trigger herd behaviour and 
exacerbate liquidity problems. It is our communication that will induce either stigma or trust. 
The need to reach a common understanding of these problems is particularly pressing at the 
moment. The central banks must intensify their cooperation in order to prevent liquidity crises 
and  ensure  a  level  playing  field.  Enhanced  communication  and  collective  monitoring  of 
market developments, with coordinated steps to provide longer-term funds, is of the essence. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 7
