Ric Battellino: Housing affordability in Australia  
Background notes for opening remarks by Mr Ric Battelino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve 
Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Senate  Select  Committee  on  Housing  Affordability  in  Australia, 
Melbourne, 24 April 2008. 
 The  Reserve  Bank  is  very  pleased  to  have  been  invited  to  participate  in  this  inquiry  into 
housing affordability. 
The terms of reference of the Committee are wide-ranging and extend well beyond the areas 
in which the Reserve Bank has expertise. We will therefore limit our remarks to four areas – 
namely house prices, housing affordability, housing loan arrears and the rental market. 
The key points we would like to make are as follows: 
1. 
The increase in house prices in Australia since the mid 1990s, while very large, has 
been  part  of  a  broad  trend  evident  in  most  other  developed  economies.  This 
suggests that the main forces that have underpinned this rise have been global in 
nature, rather than country-specific. 
Traditional  measures  of  housing  affordability  have  declined  since  the  mid  1990s. 
Specifically, housing loan repayments have risen strongly relative to incomes. The 
overwhelming factor that has led to this is the rise in house prices; mortgage interest 
rates in Australia are no higher today than in the mid 1990s, when housing was at its 
most affordable. 
Despite the sharp fall in traditional measures of housing affordability, arrears rates 
on housing loans remain low by historical standards. To some extent, this is a sign 
of the extraordinary commitment of Australian households to meeting their housing 
loan repayments, even in the face of financial pressure. It is also the case, however, 
that  for  the  household  sector  as  a  whole,  rising  levels  of  income  have  allowed 
households to devote a larger share of their income to housing repayments, while 
maintaining or even increasing their overall living standards. This has meant that, for 
many households, traditional benchmarks of affordability – such as the often-quoted 
30 per cent rule – may now be somewhat dated. While the picture on arrears for the 
household  sector  as  a  whole  is  quite  benign,  there  are  nonetheless  significant 
pockets  in  the  community  where  the  high  price  of  housing  is  causing  financial 
distress. 
The rental market is currently very tight, with vacancy rates at low levels and rents 
rising quickly. This comes after a decade when rents increased by much less than 
the price of houses, causing rental yields to fall to levels that discouraged increases 
in the supply of rental properties. It is hard to avoid the conclusion that the rental 
market might have substantial further adjustment to undergo before rents stabilise. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
House prices 
1.  
Since  the  mid  1990s,  the  median  house  price  in  Australia  has  risen  by  180  per  cent, 
compared with an increase of a little over 30 per cent in the CPI. This real increase in house 
prices can be seen in the orange line in Chart 1. You can see that the rise in house prices 
has been much faster than that in construction costs, so the implication is that most of the 
increase in house prices has been due to increases in the price of land. 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 1
Chart 2 shows that all the major cities in Australia have experienced large increases in house 
prices, while Chart 3 shows that the increases have been reflected in both cities and country 
towns. In other words, the increases have been broadly spread across the country. 
 Chart  4  shows  that  Australia  has  not  been  alone  in  experiencing  this  rapid  rise  in  house 
prices. With very few exceptions, most developed countries have experienced a doubling or 
trebling of house prices since the mid 1990s. 
 
 2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
  
Two common elements in the countries that experienced rapid house price increases were 
financial  innovation  (which  greatly  increased  the  access  of  households  to  finance)  and 
relatively low interest rates (which reduced the cost of finance). The latter is true not only for 
the official interest rates set by central banks, but for longer-term rates set in capital markets. 
While there has been much discussion about the causes of the low long-term interest rates, I 
think it is fair to say that the majority view is that it has reflected a global excess of desired 
saving over desired investment – i.e. the so-called savings glut. Put another way: With the 
amount  of  money  that  people  wanted  to  save  running  ahead  of  the  amount  that  people 
wanted to invest in physical assets, there was a strong incentive for the financial sector to 
find  ways  to  issue  more  financial  claims  against  the  stock  of  existing  investment.  That,  of 
course, is a recipe for rising asset prices. 
In our view, the widespread nature of the increases in house prices, which, as I have noted, 
have encompassed most major countries and virtually all parts of Australia, makes it hard to 
attribute  them  only  to  factors  which  have  localised  effect –  e.g.  land  usage  policies,  taxes 
and transport arrangements. Rather, a big part of the increases over time is due to factors 
affecting  demand  and  capacity  to  pay,  such  as  increased  household  access  to  finance. 
Supply  considerations  are  more  likely  to  have  affected  prices  on  the  edges  of  urban 
development. These areas, of course, are important for households at the entry level of the 
housing market. 
Affordability 
2.  
The  standard  measures  of  housing  affordability  essentially  try  to  measure  housing  loan 
repayments relative to household income. There are various measures in existence. The one 
shown in Chart 5 is calculated by the Reserve Bank. It measures the proportion of average 
household  disposable  income  needed  to  cover  repayments  on  a  median-priced  house 
(assuming a 20 per cent deposit and a 25-year loan). The broad picture is that this ratio is 
now much higher than it was in the mid 1990s, and only a little below what it was in the late 
1980s. 
 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 3
 
There  are  three  factors  that  drive  changes  in  this  measure:  house  prices;  household 
incomes; and interest rates. Chart 6 shows how these factors have changed in recent years. 
 
  The  top  panel  of  the  graph  shows  the  ratio  of  median  house  prices  to  average  annual 
household  income.  In  the  mid  1990s,  house  prices  were  around  3  times  average  annual 
income; by the end of the housing boom in late 2003, this ratio had risen to about 6. It then 
declined  for  a  couple  of  years,  as  house  prices  stabilised  while  incomes  grew,  but  more 
recently house prices have been rising at least as fast as incomes. 
Mortgage interest rates are plotted in the bottom panel. They have shown a couple of cycles 
over the period shown in the chart, rising in the late 1990s and again in recent years, but 
these cycles have taken place around a flat trend. Mortgage interest rates today are much 
the same as they were around 1996-1997. 
We are therefore left with the conclusion that the decline in measures of housing affordability 
since the mid 1990s is almost entirely due to the rise in house prices relative to incomes. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Arrears 
3.  
Housing loan arrears are the most tangible indicator of the extent to which households are 
getting into difficulty with their housing loans. 
The series for the proportion of loans for which repayments are in arrears by more than 90 
days is shown in Chart 7. The key points worth noting about this chart are that: 
• 
While arrears rates rose somewhat between 2002 and 2006, they remain relatively 
low by historical standards, and in fact fell through much of 2007. 
The arrears rate for loans on banks’ balance sheets is about 0.3 per cent, while that 
for  securitised  loans  is  about  0.6  per  cent  in  total,  or  0.4  per  cent  for  prime 
mortgages. We estimate that there are around 15 000 households in Australia which 
are 90 days or more in arrears on their housing loan repayments. An additional 30 
000  or  so  are  between  30  days  and  90  days  in  arrears.  These  are  quite  low 
numbers for a country the size of Australia. 
   From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  there  do  not  appear  to  be  any  major  problems  here. 
Indeed, given the historically low level of unemployment, it would be surprising if there was a 
widespread problem with housing loan arrears at present. 
How do we square the relatively benign picture on arrears with the apparent sharp decline in 
housing affordability such as shown in Chart 5? The explanation largely lies in the fact that 
real  incomes  of  Australian  households  have  been  rising  quite  strongly.  This  has  allowed 
households to devote a larger proportion of their income to housing, while still maintaining 
their  living  standards  more  generally.  For  example,  a  typical  household  that  in  1996  was 
devoting 30 per cent of its disposable income to debt servicing would today be able to devote 
47 per cent of its disposable income to debt servicing while still having the same standard of 
living in terms of being able to buy other goods and services. This, broadly speaking, is the 
outcome that has occurred. 
It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  some  commentators  who  use  a  fixed  benchmark  for 
housing stress – such as housing repayments exceeding 30 per cent of income – are finding 
that more and more households are exceeding the benchmark. 
I should also point out that the 30 per cent benchmark is sometimes applied more loosely 
than  was  intended  by  those  who  initially  proposed  it.  The  benchmark  dates  back  to  work 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 5
done  for  the  Australian  Government’s  1991/92  National  Housing  Strategy.  That  work 
recommended that 30 per cent of income be adopted for the maximum level of housing costs 
for  households  in  the  bottom  40  per  cent  of  the  income  distribution.1  Some  commentators 
have  since  begun  to  apply  it  to  all  households,  including  those  with  very  high  levels  of 
residual  income.  More  generally,  the  rise  in  real  incomes  since  the  early  1990s  has 
substantially changed the basis on which the 30 per cent benchmark was calculated. 
While housing loan arrears for the country as a whole are quite low, there are some regions 
where the financial position of households is relatively tight. 
The pressures seem to be particularly concentrated in suburbs of western Sydney. Various 
measures point to financial pressures being more intense in this area: 
• 
First, arrears rates on housing loans in western Sydney are significantly higher than 
those in other parts of Sydney, or Australia more generally (Chart 8). 
   Second, suburbs in western Sydney feature prominently in lists of Australian regions 
with the highest proportions of households with relatively high debt-servicing ratios. 
Chart  9  is  published  by  the  ABS  using  data  from  the  2006  Census.  It  shows  the 
proportion of households in each of the major regions of Sydney that is paying more 
than 30 per cent of gross income in housing costs (including rent). While, as I noted, 
there  are  some  qualifications  surrounding  the  significance  of  the  30  per  cent 
benchmark,  it  is  nonetheless  the  case  that  the  proportion  of  households  paying 
more than 30 per cent in housing costs is higher in areas of western Sydney than in 
other parts of the city. 
                                                 
1   National Housing Strategy (1991), “The Affordability of Australian Housing”, National Housing Strategy Issues Paper No.2, p.7 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Chart 10 provides more detail on this. It shows the 15 regions across Australia that 
in 2006 had the highest proportion of owner-occupier households paying more than 
30 per cent in debt servicing. Parts of western Sydney are again over-represented in 
this  group.  In  the  Canterbury-Bankstown  region,  for  example,  49  per  cent  of 
households with housing debt were paying more than 30 per cent of their income in 
debt servicing. This compared with about 29 per cent for the Australia-wide average. 
   BIS Review 49/2008 
 7
In examining why the problems of housing affordability are more severe in western Sydney 
than in other parts of Australia, a few key features stand out: 
• 
First, the rise in house prices and the associated increase in turnover in this region 
came later than in the rest of Sydney, and the increase ended up being larger (Chart 
11).  An  implication  of  this  is  that  a  higher  proportion  of  households  in  this  region 
bought towards the peak of the market. 
   8 
  Second, incomes in this region have on average grown more slowly than elsewhere. 
Over  the  decade  to  2006,  for  example,  median  household  income  grew  by  an 
average rate of 3.7 per cent per annum in western Sydney, compared with 4.2 per 
cent  in  Sydney  overall,  and  5.0  per  cent  in  Australia.  In  other  words,  the  rise  in 
house  prices  in  western  Sydney  was  less  well  supported  by  income  growth  than 
elsewhere. As an illustration of this, even in 2001, at the low point in the interest rate 
cycle, a relatively high proportion of households in this part of Sydney had high debt-
service ratios. 
BIS Review 49/2009
 Third,  a  disproportionately  large  share  of  the  housing  loans  in  this  region  was 
sourced  from  non-bank  lenders.  This  may  imply  that  a  smaller  proportion  of  the 
borrowers  in  the  region  met  banks’  lending  guidelines  and/or  that  some  of  those 
marketing  the  non-bank  loans  arranged  loans  that  were  inappropriate  for  some 
people. The arrears rate on loans from non-bank lenders in this part of Sydney is 
running at three times that for loans on the major banks’ balance sheets. That said, 
it is still only about 1.5 per cent. 
This combination of outcomes created substantial financial pressures in this region after the 
housing boom ended in early 2004, as evidenced by the sharp rise in the arrears rate in the 
region over 2005 and 2006. Having said that, the situation appears to have stabilised in the 
past year, most likely due to rising income levels. 
The rental market 
4.  
The rental market is currently very tight right around Australia: 
• 
Vacancy rates are very low, at less than 1½ per cent on average across Australia 
(Chart 12); and 
 Rents are rising quickly. In the past year, newly negotiated rents rose by about 13 
per cent, while all rents outstanding (as measured in the CPI) rose by about 7 per 
cent (Chart 13). 
 BIS Review 49/2008 
 9
Why has this happened, and why isn’t more investment in rental housing taking place?  
To answer these questions, we need to look back to the start of the housing boom in the mid 
1990s. At that point, commonly used measures of gross yields on rental properties were in 
the order of 5-6 per cent. Over the subsequent decade, rents rose much less than dwelling 
prices,  so  that  rental  yields  fell  to  relatively  low  levels  –  about  3  to  4  per  cent  (Chart  14). 
During  this  period,  investment  continued  to  flow  into  rental  properties,  as  investors 
anticipated that capital gains would more than compensate for the low yield. 
  However,  once  it  became  clear  that  dwelling  prices  may  no  longer  keep  rising,  the  rental 
yield by itself was not sufficiently attractive to sustain the rate of investment, and the vacancy 
rate started to fall. 
Even though rents have been rising quickly recently, over the longer term the cost of renting 
has  risen  less  than  the  cost  of  buying  a  home  (Chart  15).  The  price  signals  are  therefore 
pushing households towards renting. On the other hand, the price signals facing investors 
are not conducive to increasing the supply of rental properties, as yields remain low and the 
prospects of capital gains uncertain. 
 
10 
 BIS Review 49/2009
It is hard to see how equilibrium can be restored to the market until rental yields return to 
more normal levels. One way for this to be achieved would be for house prices to rise more 
slowly than incomes and rents for a period. Measures that lower the cost of adding to supply 
of  housing,  particularly  low-cost  housing,  would  be  helpful  in  aiding  the  transition  process. 
This includes initiatives, such as that announced by the Australian Government in March, to 
help increase the supply of rental properties by giving tax subsidies to institutions investing in 
rental property. 
 BIS Review 49/2008 
 11
