Mary C Nkosi: Insurance broking services in Malawi 
Speech  by  Mrs  Mary  C  Nkosi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the 
Official Opening of SWIFT Insurance Brokers, Mzuzu Branch, 20 March 2008. 
 The Chief Executive of Mzuzu City Assembly, Mr. Chirwa 
The President of the Malawi Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Mr. Harrison Kalua  
The General Manager of Swift Insurance Brokers & Consultants, Mr. Penwell Nkhwazi  
Distinguished guests  
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am very delighted and honoured to be here tonight to witness this special occasion not only 
for Swift Insurance Brokers but also the people of Mzuzu and surrounding areas. First of all, 
on behalf of the Governor of Reserve Bank of Malawi, who is the Registrar of Insurance in 
Malawi and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate Swift Insurance Brokers & 
Consultants for its visible effort to make insurance broking services available to all people in 
a manner that is convenient to them. This is evidenced by the rapid growth (expansion) that 
the company has undergone within the short period of three years. This, I must say, is quite 
commendable  and  I  would  like  to  applaud  both  Management  and  staff  of  Swift  Insurance 
Brokers & Consultants for their efforts and hard work. 
As regulators, our primary objective is to safeguard the interests of the policyholder. This is 
why we take keen interest in projects that aim to serve the public better. The function tonight 
manifests Swift Insurance Brokers’ commitment to achieving this cause. On our part, we try 
to achieve this by, among other things, constantly monitoring the safety and soundness of 
insurance  market  players.  This  is  why  we  put  great  emphasis  on  your  adherence  to  our 
reporting  requirements.  I  am  glad  to  acknowledge  here  tonight  efforts  made  by  Swift 
Insurance Brokers in trying to comply with our requirements in this area noting that a number 
of insurance brokers have, generally, not done well in observing this requirement over the 
past years. For this reason, this year, we are embarking on a serious compliance monitoring 
exercise for all brokers to ensure that these regulatory requirements are fully complied with.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  think  I  would  be  failing  in  my  duty  if  I  do  not  recognize  and 
appreciate  that  Swift  Insurance  Brokers  is  a  truly  local  entity.  It  is  always  pleasing  to  see 
local  Malawians  offering  dedicated  and  professional  services  to  people  as  Swift  Insurance 
Brokers is doing at the moment. You will agree that not so long ago these services were a 
domain  of  foreign  companies  but  things  have  turned  around  now.  I  therefore  can  only 
encourage this positive development which is also a good sign that our insurance market is 
thriving, broadening and deepening for the benefit of the Malawian public.  
Ladies  and gentlemen,  let  me  also commend  Swift  Insurance  Brokers for  their  decision  to 
open  an  office  in  Mzuzu.  I  would  like  to  agree  with  Mr.  Mwaisimba  that  indeed  there  has 
been a gap in the delivery of broking services in this part of the country. This opening will 
offer  the  residents  of  Mzuzu  and  certainly  other  parts  of  this  region  a  rare  opportunity  to 
access broking services within their vicinity. I am sure most of you will agree that insurance 
products are not as straightforward to understand as is the case with other financial products 
like  banking  products.  By  its  nature,  insurance  is  a  lot  more  difficult  for  a  layman  to 
understand and appreciate. This is why it is important to have professionals to advise and 
properly inform the public before they commit their resources to buying insurance cover. As 
insurance  brokers,  you  are  therefore  entrusted  with  this  noble  responsibility  that  will  help 
build public confidence in our insurance market. I was interested in the presentation by the 
Business Development Manager, Mr. Mwase, particularly on the role of insurance brokers to 
the insured. I think there is need to emphasize that the broker largely represents the insured 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 1
as opposed to the insurer unlike an agent whose role is vice versa. Overall, however, let us 
partner each other and strive to attain a stable and viable insurance market.  
Ladies and gentlemen, it is important, however, to realize that this ultimate goal can only be 
achieved  if  companies  conduct  themselves  in  an  ethical  and  professional  manner.  As  a 
Supervisory  Authority,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  endeavour  to  level  the  playing  field  for  all 
market players and ensure that everyone is playing by the rule i.e. within the framework of 
the law and RBM regulations. It is our intention to promote fairness, soundness and stability 
in the market and this we will do. Perhaps the only set back currently is the insurance law. As 
you  are  aware,  the  Act  is  very  old  having  been  enacted  in  1957.  Certainly  it  has  been 
overtaken by events to the extent that its administration is almost ineffective in most aspects. 
We, however, are hopeful that the Insurance Bill which is pending tabling in Parliament will 
address this challenge.  
Finally, once again, let me congratulate Swift Insurance Brokers & Consultants for leading 
the way in bringing insurance broking services to the people of Mzuzu and the surrounding 
area.  Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  now  have  the  pleasure  to  declare  the 
Mzuzu Office of Swift Insurance Brokers & Consultants officially opened. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2008
