Su Ning: Keep good credit records and endeavor to aim for a 
harmonious society 
Speech  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Launch 
Ceremony of the National Credit Information Education Month, Beijing, 31 May 2008. 
 Vice Mayor Mr. GOU Zhongwen, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good  morning!  Welcome  to  the  launch  ceremony  of  the  National  Credit  Information 
Education  Month.  I  appreciate  your  care  and  support  to  the  building  of  China’s  credit 
information system. 
Enterprises  and  individuals,  as  the  subjects  of  a  credit  information  system,  comprise  an 
important  force  pushing  ahead  the  building  of  a  credit  information  system.  Improved 
awareness  of  enterprises  and  individuals  of  the  credit  information  system  and  expanded 
outreach can help protect the rights and interests of enterprises and individuals and promote 
the  healthy  development  of  the  credit  industry.  It  remains  a  priority  in  the  PBC’s  credit 
information work to popularize the knowledge about credit information, help enterprises and 
individuals  to  understand  and  use  credit  information  to  create  more  transaction  and 
development  opportunities.  In  recent  years,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Central  Publicity 
Department and with the support of the Ministry of Education and other central government 
authorities  and  local  governments,  the  PBC  has  undertaken  various  credit  information 
educational campaigns and achieved some good results. Credit information is no longer a 
strange word, but has penetrated into the daily life and economic and financial activities of 
the public, starting to influence behaviors of enterprises and individuals in its unique manner 
and  propelling  the  building  of  a  social  credit  system.  In  order  to  improve  understanding  of 
credit information system and expand its use, the PBC has decided to launch the National 
Credit Information Education Month, in a bid to generate synergy and magnify the results. 
Credit is not something that you are endowed  with. If default is not recorded or punished, 
people will not have the motive or discipline to value creditworthiness, and it is possible that 
honest  enterprises  and  individuals  will  turn  their  back  to  credit  and  honesty.  As  such,  the 
building of social credit is not only to be held up by moral standards, but also be regulated by 
legal and institutional systems. The credit information system, as an institutional guarantee 
regulating  credit-related  behaviors  of  enterprises  and  individuals,  is  the  foundation  for  the 
social  credit  system  and  the  cornerstone  for  the  stable  performance  of  a  modern  financial 
system. In recent years, the PBC has implemented policy measures of the State Council on 
social credit system building, organized commercial banks to establish a national database 
covering credit information of both enterprises and individuals, namely the credit information 
system for enterprises and individuals. Credit records were created for 13 million enterprises 
and nearly 600 million natural persons, including information of their borrowing activities and 
law-compliance  in  environmental  protection  etc,  facilitating  their  economic  and  financial 
activities  and  promoting  economic  and  social  harmony.  Banking  financial  institutions  have 
included  inquiry  into  the  credit  information  system  as  an  indispensable  step  in  pre-lending 
examination. Some regions mandate that personal credit reports should be referred to when 
reviewing candidacy of deputies of the National People’s Congress and delegates of China 
People’s Political and Consultative Conference and admitting public servants. Authorities in 
charge  of  human  resources,  social  security,  environment  protection  and  quality  inspection 
and quarantine also access the credit information system for information that will help them 
with  industrial  credit  building  and  law  enforcement.  The  credit  information  system,  while 
exposing and preventing financial risks, promoting the deepening of China’s financial sector 
and improving the international competitiveness of China’s financial sector, contributes to the 
improvement of the social credit environment and the healthy development of economy. 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 1
Today the National Credit Information Education Month is kicked off in Beijing. We hope the 
event  is  the  just  the  beginning  of  credit  knowledge  dissemination  and  the  improvement  of 
credit awareness. The PBC will continue to support and actively engage itself in the building 
of a credit system in Beijing so as to push forward the reform and development of Beijing’s 
financial sector. 
This event takes the theme of “Keep good credit records and enjoy a happy life”. If you want 
to  know  more  about  credit  information,  how  to  build  good credit  records  and  etc.,  you  are 
welcome to join our activities in the Education Month. 
I wish the Education Month a complete success. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2008
