Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the current financial markets 
correction 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
OECD Forum 2008 “Climate change, growth, stability”, Paris, 4 June 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at the invitation of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development on the occasion of its 2008 Forum. It is hardly surprising that the 
turbulence and volatility characterising the global financial system over the past 10 months 
will be the focus of my  remarks today – it is after all a matter that greatly concerns those 
present here. Both private and public institutions across the globe are still deeply immersed 
in  tackling  all  the  consequences  that  the  continuing  process  of  financial  deleveraging  is 
having on financial systems.  
Public  authorities  issued  clear  warnings  about  the  vulnerabilities  that  were  building  up  on 
account  of  a  significant  under-pricing  of  risks  in  some  segments  of  the  financial  markets 
already  in  early  2007.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  drew  attention  to  these 
vulnerabilities  through  its  semi-annual  Financial  Stability  Review  and  equivalent  warnings 
were  largely  communicated  by  other  central  banks  and  international  institutions.  Indeed,  I 
had  myself,  as  Chairperson  of  the  global  economy  meeting  of  Central  Bank  Governors, 
regularly expressed the view, in 2006 and at the beginning of 2007, on behalf of my fellow 
Governors,  that  our  judgement  was  that  there  was  a  significant  under-pricing  of  risks  in 
general in global finance. 
We do all what we can at the ECB to be equally forward-looking in both our actions and in 
helping delineate the solutions to the present situation that address the main  mechanisms 
underlying recent events which in my view are fairly well understood by now.  
Factors underlying the recent financial market turbulences 
Emerging from the myriad of problems associated with the US housing market correction, the 
sharpness  and  speed  of  the  current  turbulences’  contagion  to  unrelated  market  segments 
revealed  vulnerabilities  with  a  nature  and  complexity  that  had  not  always  been  well 
understood. Already known to market participants and policy makers alike well in advance of 
the turbulences, three broad factors reinforced one another in a way that almost nobody 
could have foreseen. Prior to the July 2007 rude awakening of financial markets participants, 
observers  and  regulators  at  large,  these  broad  elements  contrived  a  convergence  that 
resulted in the upward spiralling of asset prices, further leveraging, increasing complexity and 
shrinking  transparency.  In  closer  immediacy,  they  together  also  shaped  the  particular 
mechanisms that unleashed the turbulences, and the gradual amplification that characterised 
it. 
It is by now well recognised that the first factor – and the driving force behind the substantial 
rise in financial leverage – was a significant excess of savings over investment in the global 
economy which, in time, drove an increasingly aggressive “hunt for yield”. The ensuing surge 
of asset prices provided a spiralling, and in perspective temporary, environment of steadily 
rising financial market liquidity. As has been argued by many in the international community, 
the  period  just  preceding  the  current  financial  turbulences  shares  the  characteristics  of 
previous  historical  episodes,  whereby  there  is  a  sudden  and  widespread  recognition  and 
recoil  from  underlying  credits  whose  quality  was  in  fact  worsening  for  years.  The  various 
amplifiers that characterise modern financial systems which contributed to driving leverage 
up  –  the  most  notable  being  associated  with  the  originate-to-distribute  model  of  finance  – 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 1
also magnified the uncertainty about the extent of the imminent downturn, driving a massive 
run on riskier assets. 
No  account  of  the  vulnerabilities  that  resulted  in  this  period  of  turbulences  is  complete 
without identifying the ubiquity of interlinkages both within and across financial systems as a 
second  important  element.  I  share  the  view  that  modern  financial  intermediation  has 
proven  that  it  has  the  potential  to  effectively  spread  risk  and  it  has  undoubtedly  promoted 
economic  efficiency  and  made  capital  available  to  productive  sectors  that  would  have 
otherwise  not  had  access  to  any.  Alas,  the  evolution  of  the  financial  system  not  only 
facilitated  an  expansion  of  the  array  of  financial  instruments  available  to  investors,  it  also 
seeded  the  fragility  that  later  materialised  in  the  unprecedented  speed  and  reach  of 
contagion  during  the  unwinding  of  leverage.  Testimony  of  this  evolution,  even  when 
compared to just a decade ago, are the speed and degree of complexity of today’s capital 
flows;  the  relative  variety,  obscurity  and  interrelationship  of  many  classes  of  financial 
instruments; and the intertwined relationship of a growing variety of financial institutions. 
The complexity in the “originate-to-distribute” financial intermediation model clearly placed a 
heavy burden not only on the ability of investors to assess the risks they were taking, but 
more importantly also on the risk management procedures of large financial intermediaries. 
The “shadow banking system” that rapidly emerged as an excrescence of the formal banking 
sector – unlike its better understood and regulated sibling – rested on a poorly understood 
system of credence (provided by rating agencies) and the false perception that the only way 
for asset prices was upward. 
Abundant  liquidity  and  financial  complexity  provided  respectively  the  driving  force  and  the 
landscape  underlying  both  the  process  of  financial  leveraging  and  its  eventual  unwinding. 
The  weaknesses  unearthed  include,  as  a  third  and  essential  element,  financial  players’ 
incentive structures. Strictly speaking the purpose of the financial system is to write, manage 
and trade claims on future cash flows for the rest of the economy, a purpose that increasingly 
fell  victim  to  a  game  for  fees,  short-term  profits,  and  arbitraging  regulation.  Indeed,  most 
remarkably ex-post, the “shadow banking sector” did not have to set aside capital against the 
risk of things going wrong, as eventually they did when euphoria turned into sobriety. 
The  mechanics  of  the  unwinding  process  are  by  now  also  well  understood.  Following  one 
substantial shock to a single market segment (the US sub-prime related credit), the process 
of adjusting risk positions in the financial sector was hindered by a – in some cases complete 
–  breakdown  in  the  price  discovery  process  across  instruments  owing  to  the  lack  of 
understanding  of  the  distribution  and  magnitude  of  risks  underlying  the  various  financial 
instruments. In turn, the unprecedented system-wide dry-up of liquidity driven by reductions 
in position-taking by major financial intermediaries fed back into the overall uncertainty, thus 
escalating  measured  risk  and  frustrating  the  very  same  efforts  towards  risk  reduction. 
Indeed, the magnifying glass turned against those with business models most heavily relying 
on  it,  who  found  themselves  confounded  by  the  sheer  magnitude  and  speed  of  the 
confidence implosion. That this set of institutions extends well beyond the banking sector, is 
yet another reminder of the magnitude of the challenge that lies ahead. 
The response of the central banking community to the liquidity problems 
The  Eurosystem  makes  a  clear  distinction  between  setting  the  monetary  policy  stance  to 
maintain  price  stability  and  its  liquidity  decisions  taken  in  the  course  of  implementing  this 
stance. This distinction serves to isolate signals of the monetary policy stance from the noise 
introduced by liquidity movements and volatility in very short term rates. Since the onset of 
financial  tensions  in  August  2007,  the  actions  of  the  ECB  have  remained  in  line  with  this 
principle. 
In both “normal” and “turbulent” times, the primary aim of the Eurosystem’s open market 
operations is to keep the overnight rate as close as possible to the minimum bid rate. During 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2008
the  recent  period  of  turbulences  some  institutions,  even  if  solvent,  had  difficulties  in 
accessing  liquidity  in  the  interbank  market,  and  individual  banks  faced  higher  uncertainty 
about their liquidity positions, which led to volatile and somewhat unpredictable demand for 
liquidity.  For  this  reason,  open  market  operations  aimed  also  at  ensuring  the  continued 
access of solvent banks to liquidity and at smoothing the functioning of the money market. 
In these circumstances, in order to continue steering very short term interbank money market 
rates to the minimum bid rate, it has been necessary to supply liquidity in a way which has 
allowed  credit  institutions  to  fulfil  their  reserve  requirements  relatively  early  in  the 
maintenance  period.  That  is  to  supply  a  relatively  large  amount  of  liquidity  early  in  the 
maintenance period and a correspondingly smaller amount later in the maintenance period, 
so that the total amount of liquidity over an entire maintenance period is unchanged. This so-
called “frontloading” of reserves is different from the practice followed in normal times, when 
liquidity was supplied evenly throughout the reserve maintenance period, so that its supply 
was the same in the beginning and at the end of the maintenance period. 
Moreover,  liquidity  on  different  days  of  a  reserve  maintenance  period  was  no  longer 
substitutable during the turbulences, and short-term interest rates were no longer necessarily 
linked  to  liquidity  conditions  on  the  last  day  of  the  maintenance  period,  tending  rather  to 
behave  as  if  each  individual  bank  perceived  its  distribution  of  liquidity  shocks  as  strongly 
biased to the tight side, even if this was of course not the case at an aggregate level. 
As  a  response  to  the  changes  in  liquidity  demand,  the  Eurosystem  implemented  since 
August 2007 several, but relatively minor, changes to the way in which it supplies liquidity, 
while  maintaining  its  framework  for  monetary  policy  implementation  unchanged.  First,  as 
mentioned above, the Eurosystem has adjusted the distribution of liquidity supplied over the 
course of the maintenance period, by frontloading the supply of liquidity at the beginning of 
the period and reducing it later in the period. Note that liquidity is here defined narrowly as 
the banking system’s current accounts held with the Eurosystem. Roughly speaking, current 
accounts are equal to the difference between the outstanding amount of liquidity-providing 
open market operations and the liquidity-absorbing autonomous liquidity factors, which are 
those items of the Eurosystem balance sheet which are not under control of the central bank, 
the most important one being banknotes in circulation. Both in normal times and during the 
turbulences,  the  ECB  has  steered  the  aggregate  amount  of  current  accounts  so  that  on 
average in the maintenance period they are equivalent to reserve requirements.  
Second,  the  Eurosystem  during  the  turbulences  has  used  somewhat  differently  its  open 
market operations for supplying liquidity to the banking system. More specifically, 
1. 
The  use  of fine-tuning operations has  been  more  frequent  than  in  “normal  times”. 
Indeed, in certain phases of the turbulences, it was necessary to adjust the liquidity 
situation frequently in order to keep the very short term interest rates close to the 
minimum  bid  rate  notwithstanding  the  highly  unstable  and  unpredictable  liquidity 
demand. 
The amount of refinancing provided via longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) 
was increased significantly, initially through operations with a three-month maturity 
and,  since  April  2008,  also  through  operations  with  a  six–month  maturity.  The 
amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  the  one-week  main  refinancing  operations 
(MROs)  was  reduced  correspondingly,  so  that  the  total  amount  of  outstanding 
refinancing  remained  unchanged.  This  extension  in  the  average  maturity  of 
refinancing operations contributed to reduce the future liquidity needs of the banking 
system  and  is  assessed  to  have  had,  to  some  extent,  a  tempering  effect  on  term 
interest rates. 
2. 
Throughout the period of financial market turbulences, the ECB has promptly communicated 
to the market its liquidity policy intentions and explained its actions, which helped reassuring 
the market on the readiness of the ECB to take adequate measures when necessary. 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 3
to 
framework 
its  operational 
As a result of this liquidity policy, the Eurosystem maintained control over short-term money 
market rates, as indicated by the fact that the average level of EONIA has remained close to 
the  minimum  bid  rate  even  if  its  volatility  has  at  times  been  higher  than  in  normal  times. 
Moreover, the Eurosystem’s liquidity policy has supported banks’ access to liquidity and the 
general  functioning  of  the  euro  money  market,  without  the  need  to  make,  as  mentioned 
above,  any  structural  change 
for  monetary  policy 
implementation.  
The ECB did not have to implement any measures as regards the range of eligible collateral, 
because  it  already  accepted  a  broad  range  of  collateral  and  it  granted  a  large  number  of 
counterparties access to the refinancing operations. In fact, we consider that the operational 
framework  of  the  Eurosystem  has,  for  these  reasons,  provided  notable  stability  during  the 
turbulence  and  has  effectively  supported  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The 
operational and collateral framework of the Eurosystem has served us and the market well 
during the ongoing financial market turbulence. The collateral framework, which has been in 
place since the start of the EMU, has proven robust, in particular during the current financial 
market  turbulences.  Due  to  this  built-in  flexibility  and  robustness,  the  Eurosystem  could 
effectively  step  in  when  intermediation  in  interbank  markets  deteriorated.  Moreover,  the 
share of deposited collateral not used to cover credit from monetary policy operations has 
remained large on an aggregate level, suggesting that availability of collateral has not been a 
constraint on the Euroystem’s counterparties in the wake of the turbulences.  
It  is  important  to  recall  that,  as  the  turbulences  went  on,  central  banks  strengthened  their 
cooperation,  first  through  enhanced  information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of 
market developments and later on by coordinated steps to provide liquidity. 
As an example of joint actions between central banks during the turbulences, in December 
2007 the ECB agreed with the US Federal Reserve to grant loans in dollars with a maturity of 
one month to euro area banks, against collateral eligible for Eurosystem credit operations, in 
connection  with  the  Federal  Reserve  new  US  dollar  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF).  The 
Eurosystem  loans  were  financed  through  a  currency  arrangement  (swap  line)  with  the 
Federal Reserve, and granted at a fixed rate equal to the marginal rate of the simultaneous 
Federal  Reserve  tenders.  The  first  two  operations,  for  an  amount  of  USD  10  billion  each, 
were settled in December 2007 and renewed in January 2008. Similar operations were also 
carried out by the Swiss National Bank. These liquidity-providing operations did not have a 
direct effect on euro liquidity conditions, but were conducted to address the funding of euro 
area banks in US dollars and aimed at improving global funding conditions.  
Since  these  coordinated  actions,  the  G-10  central  banks  have  continued  to  work  closely 
together  and  to  consult  regularly  on  liquidity  pressures  in  funding  markets.  Owing  to 
continued pressures observed in the money market, the ECB, as well as the Swiss National 
Bank, resumed in March 2008 the US dollar liquidity providing operations in connection with 
the Federal Reserve Term Auction Facility, every second week for as long as needed, and 
for an increased amount of USD 15 billion each. This amount was further increased to USD 
25 billion each, on 2 May 2008. 
It is important to stress that the action in connection with the TAF marked, to my knowledge, 
the  first  systematic  and  multilateral  central  bank  co-operation  in  the  money  market  field,  a 
market which is central to the implementation of a central bank’s monetary policy. 
Key lessons and policy initiatives  
Substantial weaknesses in the functioning of financial institutions and markets were revealed 
by the episodes of turbulence, the high level of volatility and overshooting on a number of 
markets. The convergence of such diverse factors embodies the first “real magnitude” stress-
test of today’s global financial system. In retrospect, the shock to the global financial system 
following the burst of the internet bubble was, all things considered, relatively modest. The 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2008
challenge  ahead  lies  in  preventing  the  system  from  feeding  on  itself  through  a  spiralling 
process  of  leveraging.  Financial  complexity  is  an  inevitable  consequence  of  increasingly 
complex and global economic activity, and we must find ways of working out the necessary 
checks and balances. 
Various streams of work co-ordinated at the EU level aim at strengthening the supervisory 
and financial stability arrangements – including the introduction of a European mandate to 
national supervisors, the clarification and strengthening of the functioning of the committees 
of  supervisors  at  the  level  of  the  27  nations,  the  wider  use  of  colleges  of  supervisors  to 
reinforce the supervision of cross-border banking groups and the approval of a Memorandum 
of  Understanding  on  cross  border  cooperation  in  financial  crisis  situations  between  all 
relevant  authorities  in  the  EU  (namely  supervisory  authorities,  central  banks  and  finance 
ministries). Similar reflections have been launched in the US, for example let me mention the 
recent proposals issued by U.S. Treasury Secretary Paulson to strengthen the US financial 
regulatory structure, and are being considered in other nations. 
Equally  or  more  importantly  has  been  the  agreement  at  an  international  level  on  the 
appropriate  methodology  to  identify  the  common  lessons  on  a  co-ordinated  basis  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic  as  well  as  on  both  sides  of  the  Pacific.  The  present  episode  of 
turbulence is a global phenomenon, and thus only a global response can be effective. After 
the  Asian  crisis,  at  the  initiative  of  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  was  created  as  the  informal  grouping  where  a  synthetic 
diagnosis  of  the  state  of  global  finance  could  be  carried  out  with  a  view  to  identifying  the 
potential weaknesses affecting the international financial system and areas for improvement. 
The FSF “Report on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience” recently presented to the 
international community – and in particular to the G7 and to the International Monetary and 
Financial  Committee  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  –  presents  a  number  of  policy 
recommendations  to  avoid  the  recurrence  in  the  future  of  similar  financial  stresses.  It  is 
remarkable that we have a consensus at the international community level on implementing 
these recommendations with determination and in line with the recommended timeline. The 
community of central banks will be particularly alert for these recommendations to enter into 
force. In this context, allow me to recall those recommendations that have been identified as 
immediate priorities:  
• 
Financial institutions should fully and promptly disclose their risk exposures, write-
downs  and  fair  value  estimates  for  complex  and  illiquid  instruments  in  their 
upcoming mid-year reporting. They should do so consistently with leading disclosure 
practices as set out in the FSF report.  
The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and other relevant standard-
setters  should  take  urgent  action  to  improve  the  accounting  and  disclosure 
standards  for  off-balance  sheet  entities  and  to  enhance  guidance  on  fair  value 
accounting, particularly on valuing financial instruments in periods of stress.  
Financial  institutions  should  strengthen  their  risk  management  practices,  including 
rigorous  stress  testing,  under  the  support  of  supervisors’  oversight.  Financial 
institutions should also strengthen their capital positions as needed.  
By mid-2008, the Basel Committee should issue revised liquidity risk management 
guidelines and IOSCO should revise its code of conduct for credit rating agencies.  
   I  should  also  recall  those  main  areas  where  important  recommendations  have  to  be 
implemented  either  by  end-2008  or  at  the  latest  by  2009,  namely  revising  capital 
requirements under Pillar I of Basel II (e.g. certain aspects of the securitisation framework), 
strengthening  management  and  supervision  of  liquidity  risk  for  banks,  ensuring  effective 
supervisory  review  under  Pillar  II,  enhancing  transparency  and  valuation,  improving  the 
quality of credit ratings for structured products, strengthening authorities’ responsiveness to 
risk and enhancing robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system.  
BIS Review 71/2008 
 5
Now, expeditious and effective implementation is of the essence. Both should be facilitated 
by the fact that many recommendations are made by those authorities and entities mandated 
to apply them.  
Overall,  I  would  like  to  underline  two  broad  lines  of  actions  which  cut  across  many 
recommendations by the FSF. 
Firstly, augment transparency, as it is not only necessary to make the markets more efficient 
and  to  optimise  the  allocation  of  capital,  but  it  is  also  the  best  insurance  policy  against 
irrational  herd  behaviour  and  unjustified  contagion  in  times  of  stress.  The  present 
turbulences  have,  once  more,  demonstrated  that  opacity  regarding  the  stance  of  markets, 
financial instruments or financial institutions is a recipe for catastrophe. In the prelude to an 
episode of uncertainty and turbulence, absence of transparency inevitably triggers contagion 
and negative herd behaviour – we saw this at the heart of the Asian crisis, we very much 
also see it at the heart of the present episode. Transparency is essential both for financial 
instruments – sophisticated structured products, asset-backed securities, etc. – and for the 
financial institutions themselves. The absence of pertinent, credible and reliable information 
drives  market  participants  to  assume  the  worst  possible  hypothesis  on  those  financial 
instruments or institutions at stake and to act accordingly. 
Secondly, reduce pro-cyclicality, as it embodies two important features of global finance that 
are particularly adverse from a financial stability standpoint, namely an emphasis on short-
term considerations and an asymmetry in the response given to booms and busts. While in 
normal times the elements of pro-cyclicality built into global finance are less obvious, acute 
episodes of boom and bust make these factors particularly visible. Human nature being what 
it is, it is probably at the heart of the spontaneous pro-cyclical attitude of market participants 
triggering successive bipolar phases of exuberance and despair. But it is also true that some 
elements  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  financial  system  as  well  as  the  behaviour  of 
public authorities may contribute to augmenting the amplitude of the fluctuations. We can find 
such elements of pro-cyclicality in the set of new rules for capital adequacy for banks as well 
as for insurance companies which are more risk-sensitive, in the accounting rules and in the 
attitude of the supervisory authorities inclined to tighten prudential standards more in times of 
difficulty  than  during  the  preceding  boom  phases.  I  expect  that  the  planned  work  of  the 
international  community  in  this  area  will  provide  a  welcome  contribution  to  reducing  the 
degree of potential pro-cyclicality associated with the functioning of global finance.  
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2008
