Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The future of cards and payments – SEPA for 
cards 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the IEA & Marketforce’s Inaugural Conference on “The future of cards and 
payments”, London, 2 July 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
You may ask why a central banker is reflecting about cards. Isn't monetary policy sufficiently 
challenging these days? 
Let me give you three explanations for this:  
First,  it’s  a  great  pleasure  to  speak  before  such  distinguished  audience.  And  it’s  certainly 
always a pleasure to be in London. But I realize that this explanation may not suffice. 
Second, for central bankers efficient financial markets are crucial as they are a prerequisite 
for a smooth transmission of monetary policy. In this regard, keeping fragmented markets in 
the euro zone would not only mean lost opportunities but also less effective monetary policy. 
And  third,  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  in  1993,  European  customers  were  promised  a  single 
market – also for financial services. Retail banking has still some way to go in this regard and 
the cards market is one specific example for this. 
What is the ECB’s role in the SEPA project? 
BIS Review 86/2008 
  1
Let  me  emphasise  that  –  besides  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  –  one  of  the  key  tasks 
established  by  the  EU  Treaty  for  the  Eurosystem  is  to  promote  the  smooth  operation  of 
payment systems. Moreover, the Lisbon Agenda calls for the removal of technical, legal and 
commercial barriers also in financial markets. For the area of payments this means greater 
standardisation  and  harmonisation  promoting  competition  and  fostering  an  more  efficient 
allocation of resources. SEPA – the project to make all euro payments domestic payments is 
a  great  leap  forward  in  that  direction  –  common  technical  standards,  a  common  legal 
framework – the Payment Services Directive (PSD) – and opening the access to all systems 
and  providers  will  change  the  landscape  as  the  MIFID  is  changing  the  landscape  for  the 
securities business. 
What can the ECB do in practice to support it? 
While  the  EPC,  the  European  Payments  Council,  is  in  the  driving  seat  and  the  European 
Commission can provide legal framework for payments and pressure for more competition to 
keep the momentum, the ECB’s role is to analyse the issues at stake, offer a platform for 
debate  discussion  and  to  convince  audiences  of  the  advantages  of  a  single  market  for 
payments – and this is the reason why I am here today.  
Why is SEPA relevant for the UK?  
SEPA  offers  better  and  broader  services  to  the  euro  area  financial  services  market  from 
which anyone benefits that makes and receives payments in euro. The UK has achieved a 
lot with “faster payments” and is a perfect example for using cards intensively. It is obvious, 
however,  that  one  country’s  market  can  be  transformed  and  harmonized  quicker  than  15 
countries with different customers and payment traditions. But let me emphasize that all the 
achievements of the SEPA project – and those are and will be many – will create benefits for 
the market outside the euro area as well (standardisation and consolidation).  
2 
 BIS Review 86/2008
What are the benefits of SEPA? 
 
Let me very briefly quote a few studies about the benefits and the great potential of SEPA. 
According to the European Commission, the potential benefit from SEPA payments could be 
more than 100 bn. over the next six years and additional benefits can arise if SEPA will be 
used  as  platform  for  electronic  invoicing.1  There  is  also  empirical  evidence2  that 
harmonisation  and  standardisation  of  retail  payment  instruments  across  the  euro  area  are 
likely to create economies of scale in payment services in Europe. Significant cost efficiency 
gains could be realised if payment processing is consolidated across borders. In particular, a 
doubling  of  payment  volume  may  raise  total  costs  with  only  22  percent3  which  was 
demonstrated by one of the first cross-border mergers in this field.  
According  to  an  ECB  study,  banks  may  significantly  reduce  their  costs,  but  will  face 
increased  competition.4  SEPA  will  also  offer  banks  an  opportunity  to  market  new,  value-
added services related to the payment chain. 
Overall, SEPA offers great opportunities but SEPA migration is a challenge – for banks and 
for their customers. 
                                                 
1   CapGemini/EC (2008) “SEPA: potential benefits at stake - researching the impact of SEPA on the payments 
market  and  its  stakeholders”.  In  the  study,  sixteen  EU  countries  are  included  in  the  quantitative  analysis, 
representing  95%  of  the  GDP  of  the  EU-27.96%  of  the  non-cash  transaction  volume,  and  99%  of  the 
corresponding value. 
2   Bolt and Humphrey (2007). The sample used includes processors of FR, UK, NL, DE, PT, BE, GR, LU. 
3   Beijnen and Bolt (2007). 
4   Schmiedel,  H.  (2007)  "The  Economic  Impact  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area",  European  Central  Bank 
Occasional Paper Series, No 71, 2007. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 3
Where does the SEPA project currently stand? 
 
SEPA  was  launched  end-January  2008;  six  months  after  the  launch,  some  changes  are 
already visible. The number of SEPA credit transfers is increasing though still low given that 
we  are  in  a  piloting  phase.  Work  in  the  other  fields  is  advancing  well.  There  are  some 
concerns on the launch of the SEPA direct debit but I believe that the market will live up to its 
commitments  and  solutions  to  all  remaining  issues  will  be found,  especially  now  since  the 
EPC  has  agreed  on  some  improvements  in  the  SEPA  Direct  Debit schemes  to  meet  end-
users’  demands.  The  ECB  is  convinced  that  the  SDD  plays  a  crucial  part  in  realising  the 
SEPA  and  will  contribute  to  making  it  a  successful  project.  The  timely  transposition  of  the 
PSD into national law and clarity on the interchange fee for SDD from a competition authority 
perspective,  are  crucial  to  address  most  of  the  issues.  The  remaining  problems  regarding 
direct  debits  should  be  solvable,  be  it  via  upgrading  the  SDD  Rulebooks  or  via  additional 
optional services offered by banks. 
But let’s be clear: stalling does not lead anywhere – it’s a loss of time and makes competitors 
who  have  started  to  act  to  be  even  stronger.  Running  parallel  systems  is  very  costly. 
Therefore  a  clear  vision  and  a  clear  commitment  is  needed  for  the  realisation  of 
harmonisation and standardisation in retail payments across Europe.  
4 
 BIS Review 86/2008
How do cards and SEPA go together?  
 
The SEPA project includes a particular challenge. Card payments represent an essential part 
of retail payments, which make the standardistation and the creation of card schemes are 
important  element  of  the  SEPA  project.  Over  the  last  few  years,  volumes  of  cashless 
payments in the European Union (EU27) have increased by 7% per year.5 In Europe card 
payments  achieved  the  highest  volume  growth  and  have  become  the  most  widely  used 
payment instrument after banknotes and coins, with over 25 billion payments per year. There 
is a lot to win in the field of cards. 
A bird’s eye view on the European card market, however, shows very fragmented national 
markets, especially regarding card schemes – even though for processors, integration has 
started. The market is divided into a number of national schemes and international schemes. 
But  let  me  just  add  that  the  UK  belongs  to  the  few  countries,6  where  one  international 
scheme offers also the services of a national scheme.  
                                                 
5   ATKearney (2008): The SEPA Shake out! Challenges in Cards and Payments. 
6   Other examples are Austria and Cyprus. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 5
What are the benefits of SEPA for card users?  
 
SEPA  for  cards  means:  standardisation,  integration  instead  of  current  fragmentation  and 
more  competition,  more  choice  for  consumers  (which  schemes  to  use),  more  choice  for 
banks (which schemes to issue and to acquire and which processors to use), more choice for 
retailers (which schemes to accept) and more choice for infrastructures (which schemes to 
process). On top of this, a more efficient cards market will create incentives not to use cash 
as  often  –  this  is  particularly  important  for  consumers  and  banks.  The  potential  benefit  of 
cards replacing cash as a means of payment is considerable. For consumers, using cards 
instead of cash will considerably reduce transaction costs which are known to economists as 
so-called “shoe-leather-costs”.  
For banks, an increased use of cards would make cash handling less costly. For example, 
very  often  cash  is  withdrawn  on  Friday,  to  be  used  at  merchants  on  Saturday  and  to  be 
returned by them to the banks on Monday. According to a recent survey,7 the use of cards 
instead of cash is one of the most underestimated profitability drivers. An important step for 
banks, payment institutions and scheme managers towards an increased use of cards is to 
pursue the growth opportunities that this field offers. 
A  big  question,  however,  remains  what  overall  impact  SEPA  will  have  on  card  payments. 
Even though the benefits are very clear, these can only be fully reaped if the card market is a 
competitive  market  with  some  variety  and  choice,  instead  of  being  limited  to  only  a  few 
players with a strong position in the market for card schemes.  
Would SEPA integration together with a strong position of current players in the card market 
mean that national schemes disappear without trace? This cannot be the case.  
                                                 
7   ATKearney (2008): The SEPA Shake out! Challenges in Cards and Payments. 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2008
Nonetheless,  even  if  national  card  schemes  will  continue  to  exist,  the  integration  of  the 
European  cards  market  will  certainly  bring  changes.  The  opening  of  the  national  markets 
implies inevitably the potential for mergers, acquisitions, and sell-offs. More and more banks 
will be European banks, more and more processors will be European processors and even 
retailers will have and have already European wide presence. 
Will the European card market seize the opportunity of change to construct something to its 
benefit? Or will it stick to an agreement which will most likely be challenged sooner or later?  
What are current initiatives for an additional card scheme and what are the benefits? 
 
Let me mention several card scheme initiatives which have the potential to make competition 
in  the  European  cards  market  livelier.  EAPS  follows  an  interlinking  model  of  national  card 
schemes and a number of countries and a large number of (savings) banks are participating. 
The Monnet initiative investigates the creation of a new scheme and is – for the time being – 
driven by German and French banks. Payfair is a private initiative.  
The ECB welcomes all initiatives and praises the effort and dynamism of the driving entities. 
But  I  should  emphasise  that  the  ECB  is  neutral  towards  these  initiatives  and  towards  any 
new initiative that may appear. Some features of the existing initiatives are positive – some 
nonetheless  would  need  further  enhancement  –  as,  for  example,  a  clear  commitment  of 
EAPS for a future integration and the involvement of more euro area countries in the Monnet 
project, and if not now than definitely in a future phase of the project.  
All  these  initiatives  follow  different  concepts  and  models  adding  to  choice  and  innovation 
which characterises a dynamic market.  
BIS Review 86/2008 
 7
 
Let’s  assume  for  the  moment  an  additional  scheme  will  emerge:  first,  this  will  increase 
competition, especially if the new scheme follows an economical model without a strong card 
brand  preponderance  and  without  the  features  offered  by  international  credit  cards,  such 
instant  free  credit,  miles,  bonuses,  and  insurance.  This  will  naturally  imply  downward 
pressure on costs and fees, also for banks.  
Second, an additional scheme will offer an additional opportunity to substitute cash by cards 
through wider acceptance, especially if the new scheme follows a cost-efficient model.  
Looking forward, as a first step, an additional card scheme could start as a basic offering, 
before becoming a more sophisticated model at a later stage. Whether the scheme is debit 
or  credit  and  the  various  additional  offerings  to  cardholders  and  merchants  should  be  an 
issue of each issuing and acquiring bank. Overall, I am however convinced that the benefits 
of  an  additional  card  scheme  clearly  outweigh  the  costs  and  I  can  reassure  you  that  the 
continuation of any initiative in the way I outlined will continue to have our support.  
SEPA for cards: implementation challenges 
Certainly, on the way towards new schemes – whatever their origin is – and the realisation of 
SEPA for cards, some challenges persist. Knowing that examples of scheme rules already 
exist and that the EPC is working on the card standards, the most challenging phase for the 
creation of a new scheme seems to achieve a clear commitment and co-ordination among 
members. In this context it is worthwhile to mention that it is not only technical and business 
model differences which have to be overcome. SEPA is a European integration project, as is 
SEPA  for  cards.  As  a  member  of  a  European  multi-cultural  organisation  I  know  of  the 
importance not to overlook the cultural dimension either. An open mind and clear objectives 
are key in this context. With regards to the additional European card scheme, all participating 
parties should clearly recognise the objective of building a basic service, as a first step which 
can be further enriched by each individual issuer and acquirer. Let me reassure you that I am 
8 
 BIS Review 86/2008
confident  that  all  remaining  challenges  can  be  addressed  and  overcome  and  creative 
initiatives will be rewarded by success in the market. 
In this context, I would also like to underline the importance of communication. In this regard, 
I very much welcome the clarifications provided by the EPC on the SEPA Cards Framework 
published last week on 26 June. Proper communication is crucial for the success of SEPA as 
all  stakeholders  need  to  be  aware  about  SEPA  and  the  benefits  it  will  bring  to  them.  This 
clarification on the SEPA Cards Framework brings more clarity on what SEPA represents for 
the payment cards in Europe. I expect that this is only a first step of the banking industry in 
enforcing their communication vis-à-vis their users and that the work of the banking industry 
on this crucial projects get more visibility in the months to come. The ECB continues to stand 
ready to support the banking industry in this task. 
Closing remarks 
 
To conclude – SEPA is a far reaching initiative. It will reshape the market for retail payments 
in Europe. SEPA is a promise – stalling does not lead anywhere and operating many parallel 
systems is costly. SEPA for cards means decision for cross border solutions, new initiatives 
and creative ways forward are needed. SEPA means changes. Our host country has proven: 
it can be done; Belgium with the public sector in the lead is proving it can be done and other 
countries will follow. This is the reason why a central banker remains interested in the project 
and I hope any of you will be too. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 9
