Masaaki Shirakawa: Monetary policy challenges 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  2008 
International Conference "Frontiers in Monetary Theory and Policy", hosted by the Institute 
for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 28 May 2008. 
 Good morning. It is my great honor to address the Bank of Japan conference, hosted by the 
Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies.  On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of 
Japan, I welcome all the distinguished guests from central banks, international organizations, 
and academia. 
The role of monetary policy 
When I took office as Governor of the Bank of Japan about two months ago, I read again 
Professor Milton Friedman's well-known presidential address, "The Role of Monetary Policy," 
given at the American Economic Association Annual Meeting in 1968, recalling my days as a 
student of Friedman's last class at the University of Chicago. In the address, he put the role 
of monetary policy this way. 
The  first  and  most  important  lesson  that  history  teaches  about  what 
monetary  policy  can  do  –  and  it  is  a  lesson  of  the  most  profound 
importance – is that monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a 
major source of economic disturbance... There is therefore a positive and 
important task for the monetary authority – to suggest improvements in the 
[monetary] machine that will reduce the chances that it will get out of order, 
and  to  use  its  own  powers  so  as  to  keep  the  machine  in  good  working 
order...  A  second  thing  monetary  policy  can  do  is  [to]  provide  a  stable 
background for the economy... Our economic system will work best when 
producers and consumers, employers and employees, can proceed with full 
confidence that the average level of prices will behave in a known way in 
the future – preferably that it will be highly stable.1
What was intriguing here is that Friedman used the term monetary policy in a much broader 
context than we define now. Nowadays, the term monetary policy is used almost equivalent 
to  "interest  rate  policy  aiming  at  price  stability."  Monetary  policy  in  this  sense  has  been 
studied intensively and has been refined both in theory and in practice. Yet in his presidential 
address, Friedman pointed to the maintenance of well-functioning of financial markets and 
the  system  as  the  first  role  of  monetary  policy,  and  price  stability  as  the  second  role.  Of 
course,  not  much  would  be  gained  here  by  going  deeply  into  the  precision  of  these 
definitions, but these words and the terms of Professor Friedman seem to strike a chord with 
central bankers for two reasons. First, although the monetary policy in a conventional sense 
and  financial  system  policy  are  usually  considered  as  different  policy  prescriptions,  they 
become related in a complicated and delicate manner in critical phases. Second, while policy 
instruments  employed  by  a  central  bank  essentially  aim  at  providing  or  allocating  liquidity, 
such instruments are not earmarked for each policy and its objective, namely, price stability 
or financial system stability. The distinction between these two policies is often not that clear. 
                                                 
1   See Friedman (1968). 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 1
Experience of the bubble and its bursting 
Such  interrelation  came  to  the  fore  during  the  bubble  period  Japan  experienced  since  the 
latter half of the 1980s. As you are all aware, Japan's bubble was unprecedented in modern 
economic  history:  leverage  expanded  and  asset  prices  rose  sharply  and  vastly.  In  those 
circumstances,  tangible  investments  took  place  that  could  only  be  justified  as  long  as 
increases in asset prices would continue forever. Once the bubble burst, a massive amount 
of  economically  unworthy  assets  were  left  behind.  In  other  words,  asset  markets  failed  in 
making  efficient  intertemporal  allocation  of  resources,  which  per  se  became  the  source  of 
economic turmoil. 
The question of the relationship between monetary policy and the bubble is quite complex 
and the clear answer is yet to be provided. In that regard, many economic agents at that time 
had expectations that low interest rates would continue for a long time. I cannot convincingly 
say  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  bubble  formation.  Around  1988,  those  who  argued  for 
raising interest rates were a minority including academia or international organizations, given 
the extremely subdued inflation rate under the overheating economy. The annual growth rate 
of the consumer price index had been negative until March 1987 and the annual increase 
was only 0.7 percent in fiscal 1988 as a whole. Once the bubble burst, asset prices plunged 
and  the  capital  of  firms  and  financial  institutions  rapidly  eroded,  thereby  inflicting  severe 
damage on the entire economy. In particular, in Japan's financial system where banks played 
a predominant role in financial intermediations, the effects stemming from undercapitalization 
of the banking sector were extremely severe. During the initial periods after the burst of the 
bubble, adverse effects on the economy were brought about by a decline in demand from a 
high  level  and  the  negative  wealth  effect  stemming  from  the  plunge  in  asset  prices. 
Subsequently, it became evident that the dominant channel was lower productivity stemming 
from  the  misallocation  of  resources,  as  a  result  of  the  malfunctioning  of  financial 
intermediation. 
Currently, the United States and major European countries are experiencing financial turmoil 
in credit and funding markets. While there are some similarities between the current turmoil 
in the U.S. and Japan's experience during and after the bubble period, there are also various 
differences. Let me first point out the differences. First, the amount of losses seems to be 
quite  different.  The  losses  of  Japanese  deposit-taking  institutions  during  the  bubble  period 
totaled  some  US$1  trillion.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  current  financial  turmoil,  the  IMF 
estimated  the  worldwide  loss  to  be  approximately  US$945  billion, of which  about  half  was 
incurred  by  banking  sector,  although  these  IMF  estimates  were  based  on  various 
assumptions and thus warrant care in interpreting. Second, in the United States, the losses 
of  securitized  products,  which  triggered  the  recent  turmoil,  could  be  recognized  through 
prices traded in the markets. In the case of Japan, however, the losses were concentrated on 
non-tradable  loan  assets  that  lacked  marketability,  and  thus,  together  with  drawbacks  in 
accounting  systems,  led  to  a  delay  in  recognizing  the  losses.  Third,  in  the  U.S.,  financial 
institutions that had suffered massive losses promptly raised capitals. 
There are also similarities. Arguably, the bubble was formed, expanded, and burst. It is also 
common  in  both  cases  that  a  plunge  in  asset  prices  exerted  adverse  effects  on  the  real 
economy through the deterioration of the financial side. Based on Japan's experience, how 
the negative feedback loop of tighter financial conditions, a decline in asset prices, and the 
deteriorating real economy will evolve could be key to the future course of the economy. 
Challenges for monetary policy 
The  recent  and  current  episodes  of  financial  turmoil  in  the  past  twenty  years  show  that 
central banks face various challenges in the context of monetary policy as broadly defined by 
Friedman. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2008
The  first  challenge  is  how  we  should  define  and  understand  price  stability  which  is  an 
objective of monetary policy. Be it in Japan or in the U.S., many of recent bubbles occurred, 
quite  paradoxically,  following  continued  low  interest  rate  period  after  price  stability  was 
achieved or deflation scare heightened. While how a decline in inflation or low interest rates 
relates to aggressive risk-taking by economic agents is yet to be clarified, the experience of 
the  bubble  and  its  burst  tells  us  that  the  economy  sometimes  responds  in  a  nonlinear 
manner. During such a nonlinear process, complicated dynamics such as the feedback loop 
between the real and financial side of the economy play a decisive role. In other words, the 
first and the second role of monetary policy as identified by Friedman are closely related to 
each other. While policymakers and economists understand that price stability represents a 
situation  in which  prices  could  remain  stable  in  a  medium  to  long  term,  inflation  dynamics 
could evolve with a long lag and accompany nonlinear effects. Against such a backdrop, if 
we  focus  narrowly  on  the  current  observed  inflation  rate,  there  is  a  risk  that  necessary 
monetary  policy  adjustments  might  be  delayed,  inducing  large  fluctuations  in  economic 
activities. In that regard, central banks around the globe seem to strive for exploring optimal 
ways to communicate a quantitative expression of price stability with different consequences. 
Central banks under an inflation targeting regime announce the target level of inflation rate. 
The Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank (ECB) announce some kind of numerical 
definition  of  price  stability,  while  the  Federal  Reserve  provides  a  medium-term  forecasted 
value of inflation given the current economic conditions and appropriate policy. 
The second challenge is how to design financial system policy. Although we can recognize a 
risk of a nonlinear change of the economy such as the burst of the bubble, we cannot take 
preemptive  monetary  easing  before  a  bubble  burst.  It  is  impossible  to  forecast  precisely 
when the burst will take place. Once we recognize such a change, it is appropriate to cut the 
policy interest rate more than the standard Taylor rule suggests, as with the current policy by 
the Fed. At the same time, the Japanese experience shows that it is quite difficult to create 
sufficiently benign financial conditions only with a reduction in the policy interest rate when 
the balance sheets of firms and financial institutions are severely devastated. When looking 
at the current U.S. financial situation, the yields of corporate bonds with low credit standings 
have not been reduced yet compared with the level in summer 2007, despite the massive 
decrease  in  the  policy  rate.  The  fact  suggests  that  in  addition  to  the  policy  interest  rate 
changes ex post, it is important to design a policy and institutional framework less prone to 
the  formation  of  a  bubble  ex  ante.  While  I  have  already  mentioned  possible  measures  in 
terms  of  monetary  policy,  how  to  align  supervision  and  regulations  remains  an  important 
challenge that needs to be addressed, so as not to let financial institutions' behaviors amplify 
economic fluctuations. 
The third challenge is the so-called banking policy of central banks. For effective monetary 
policy, stable financial system and well-functioning financial markets are indispensable. The 
events  since  summer  2007  have  highlighted  that  the  loss  of  market  liquidity  has  played  a 
crucial  role.  Although  the  mechanism  of  drying  up  market  liquidity  has  not  yet  been  fully 
investigated, central banks have been making efforts to restore market liquidity by means of 
their own banking functions. In that regard, the Bank of Japan has shown itself to be at the 
frontiers. For example, in 2001 it introduced a new method of liquidity provision with relatively 
longer  maturities  to  a  wider  range  of  financial  institutions.  This  is  equivalent  to  the  Term 
Auction Facility (TAF) introduced by the Fed in December 2007. In 2001, the Bank of Japan 
introduced  a  standing  facility  to  financial  institutions  including  securities  companies.2  It 
corresponds  to  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  (PDCF)  introduced  by  the  Fed  in  March 
2008.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Japan  carried  out  a  twist  operation  –  a  mixture  of  liquidity 
provision  and  issuance  of  bills  sold,  where  a  central  bank  acts  as  a  kind  of  broker  in  the 
money  market.  Furthermore,  it  purchased  asset-backed  securities,  and  purchased  stocks 
                                                 
2   As for the actions taken in 2001, see Bank of Japan, Open Market Operations Division (2001, 2002). 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 3
held  by  banks.  All  those  measures  were  policy  prescriptions  aimed  at  revitalizing  the 
functioning  of  financial  markets  and  financial  system.  Although  they  would  not  usually  be 
classified as monetary policy measures, the effects of monetary policy cannot be evaluated 
without considering the banking policy conducted by a central bank. In the changing financial 
environment, central banks are bound to continuously review their operations. 
Concluding remarks 
The challenges I have described are very practical for central banks. While they are all quite 
difficult ones for central banks to tackle, central banks should conduct their policy by finding 
the  answers  to  them  one  by  one.  In  such  a  process,  central  banks  make  the  most  of 
available  academic  wisdom.  Central  banks  often  face  situations  unexplained  by  existing 
theories. For that very reason, I believe that central banks must be ever learning institutions. 
At the same time, we should make efforts to convey to academia whatever puzzles we have 
found in practice. In turn, the theories developed in academic circles would find their way to 
be  fed  back  to  central  bank  circles  as  valuable  input  for  the  proper  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. 
I am convinced that candid and inspiring discussions in various aspects of monetary policy 
will  take  place  at  this  conference,  that  the  discussions  will  be  applied  to  the  future  policy 
implementation among  central banks, and that the nexus between practice and theory will 
push back the academic frontiers furthermore. 
Thank you for your attention, and I wish you a big success of the conference. 
References 
Bank  of  Japan,  Open  Market  Operations  Division,  "Money  Market  Operations  in  FY2000," 
Market Review, 01-E-4, 2001. 
---, ---, "Money Market Operations in FY2001", Market Review, 02-E-3, 2002. 
Friedman, Milton, "The Role of Monetary Policy", American Economic Review, 58 (1), 1968, 
pp. 1-17. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2008
