Erkki Liikanen: The euro, integration and growth 
Remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Brussels Economic 
Forum  2008  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
in  Europe:  10  Years  On, 
Brussels, 16 May 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Ten  years  of  experience  have  shown  that  the  monetary  union  has  made  a  tremendous 
contribution to the underpinnings for stable growth in the euro area.  
The most important channel has been the maintenance of monetary stability, which reduces 
distortions and costs caused by price uncertainty. In this respect, the euro has done very well 
and this has been reiterated many times today. Rightly so.  
I want to discuss other important aspects of growth in the euro area, many of which benefit 
from  the  common  currency.  I  will  start  by  saying  a  few  words  about  the  role  of  financial 
integration  in  catalyzing  financial  development.  Related  to  this,  I  will  discuss  briefly  some 
recent studies that show how equal access to financial markets is an important determinant 
of competition in the broader economy.  
And finally, I will talk about productivity in non-market services; in particular, how improved 
productivity  in  the  provision  of  public  services  will  be  indispensable  in  reconciling  sharply 
rising  old-age  dependency  with  acceptable  level  public  services.  The  last  aspect  is 
particularly crucial now in Finland, which is the first EU country to face population ageing, but 
it will soon been a major issue for the others, too.  
But let me start with financial integration.  
Financial integration and growth  
It  is  difficult  to  think  of  a  less  opportune  time  to  preach  the  virtues  of  financial  integration. 
Things  being  as  they  are,  one  gets  the  impression  that  what  global  financial  markets  are 
propagating today is not growth, but risks and instability.  
The  persistent  turbulence  since  last  August  has  demonstrated  once  again  that  financial 
markets suffer from bipolar tendencies. Overshooting tends to be followed by undershooting. 
This  time,  a  period  of  exuberance  and  indifference  towards  risk  has  been  followed  by  a 
period of exaggerated nervousness, risk aversion and distrust.  
Once again, there are lots of lessons to be learned for financial institutions, central bankers, 
regulators,  supervisors.  Our  vocabulary  has  been  enriched  by  great  many  acronyms  that 
were hardly heard of a year ago, such as ABS, CDO’s, SIV’s, ABCP’s and so on. We are just 
starting to form a picture of what this debacle means for policies. Eventually, the storm will 
pass, and we will draw some conclusions. Here the recent report of the Financial Stability 
Forum, chaired by my Italian colleague Mario Draghi, has made a major contribution.  
The  issues  that  we  are  facing  are  serious  but  they  must  be  put  in  a  perspective.  Many 
countries  gradually  liberated  their  capital  account  and  removed  credit  controls  in  1980'ies. 
The  consequences  for  the  Nordic  financial  markets  were  profound.  There  was  a  period  of 
exuberance in the late 1980s, a housing and credit boom, followed by a banking crisis and a 
deep depression.  
The  Nordic  experience  was  not  uncommon  in  those  times,  when  many  countries  were 
liberalising  their  markets,  and  it  carries  some  resemblance  to  what  we  are  experiencing 
today. In both cases, advances in financial integration, combined with lack of sophistication 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 1
from  market  participants  and  policy  makers,  led  to  excesses  and,  eventually,  to  a  costly 
correction.  
But  what  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  is  that  no  country  experiencing  difficulties  in  those 
times, seriously considered reinstating capital controls as a response to the crisis. Although 
the  pain  at  the  time  was  real,  there  simply  was  no  question  that  the  benefits  of  financial 
integration far outweighed any costs of transition.  
The rapid growth experienced by Nordic countries including Finland over the last 15 years 
would  have  been  simply  inconceivable  without  liberalised  financial  markets.  The  cost  of 
learning  was  high,  but  we  emerged  from  the  crisis  stronger  and  competitive.  And  so  it  is 
today.  We  should  recognise  and  learn  from  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  that  manifest 
themselves  in  the  market  turmoil.  We  should  design  the  appropriate  policy  and  regulatory 
responses.  
But we must not lose sight of the simple fact that the very same financial innovations that 
now propagate turmoil also carry the potential of tremendous benefits in terms of lower cost 
of finance and better diversification of risks. The challenge is to find the right balance of risks 
and rewards. We need better incentive structures. We need better performance from rating 
agencies. We need to enhance transparency. The regulators need to pay more attention to 
liquidity risks. But still, we cannot design policies that eliminate risks.  
The EU has made progress in financial integration. Last year, the ECB and the Commission 
each  published  a  report  (Financial  Integration,  ECB  2007;  European  Financial  Integration 
Report,  EC  2007)  on  the  state  of  financial  integration  in  the  EU.  The  same  issues  were 
further  elaborated  in  the  Commission  report  EMU@10,  released  just  ahead  of  this  forum. 
These  reports  found  that,  in  markets  closely  linked  to  monetary  policy,  the  euro  has 
catalysed substantial integration. In particular, interbank markets are well integrated – or at 
least were, and hopefully will be again, once the turmoil passes – as are government bond 
markets and, increasingly, also corporate bond markets.  
On the other hand, much remains to be done in other areas. The infrastructure supporting 
bond  and  equity  markets  is  fragmented  and  hinders  competition.  And,  retail  banking 
continues to be mainly national.  
Even a cursory look at how, say, housing finance works in the EU reveals that EU citizens 
face  a  different  reality  in  different  EU  countries.  Interest  rate  linkages  differ,  loan  margins 
differ, fees differ, collateral requirements differ, and so forth. Not all of these differences are 
undesirable; some of them may, for example, reflect quite legitimate variations in attitudes 
towards risk.  
But it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that not all EU citizens have access to the same level 
of financial services. This carries a welfare cost, and that cost is carried by EU citizens in the 
form of diminished opportunities to allocate consumption and investment over time.  
Ample evidence from various sectors of the economy shows that financial development goes 
hand in hand with financial integration. Protected sectors seldom develop. And so it is also in 
financial services: it is the pressure of cross-border competition that will motivate innovation 
and productivity improvement. The best way to guarantee a high level of financial services 
for EU citizens is to remove the remaining obstacles to competition.  
Better provision of services is one benefit of financial integration, better diversification of risks 
is another. In times of turbulence, domestic orientation of a bank may look like a benefit – 
after  all,  it  insulates  the  bank  from  trouble  originating  from  abroad.  But  a  purely  domestic 
institution is highly exposed to country risk; when the crisis hits, it tends to hit hard, as we 
found out in the crisis fifteen years ago. 
The  nature  of  diversification  is  that  risks  materialise  more  often,  but  each  bank  shares  a 
smaller part of them. Inherently, internationally diversified financial institutions are in a better 
position  to  weather  turbulent  times.  This,  of  course,  provided  that  we  design  appropriate 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2008
regulatory and supervisory structures that allow holding cross-border institution to the same 
prudential standards as domestic institutions.  
Going international is one way for a financial institution to diversify risks. Another way is to 
securitize  and  sell  those  risks.  I  realise  that  this  may  sound  like  a  bad  idea  these  days. 
Fundamentally,  securitization  is  an  important  innovation  that  carries  substantial  promise  of 
better risk management and, ultimately, even better financial stability. It seems obvious that 
banks, which generally operate on a rather thin capital cushion, are not the institutions best 
equipped to carry the bulk of the systemic risks of housing booms and busts. Why not allow 
international investors such as insurance companies, pension funds, sovereign wealth funds 
carry part of the risk? There is nothing fundamentally wrong about securitization – it was the 
recent complex, structured applications that went wrong.  
Besides cheaper funding and better diversification of risks, there is yet another reason why 
we should be interested in financial integration and, as a part of it, increased securitization. In 
the  coming  decades,  the  global  population  will  age.  Between  now  and  then,  those 
approaching  retirement  will  want  to  save.  As  a  result,  there  will  be  an  increasing  global 
demand for financial assets. Those economic areas that are able to generate good-quality 
financial assets are going to be the winners in the global allocation of capital and financial 
services. Securitization is one important way of generating such assets.  
The euro, competition and productivity  
As I noted in the beginning, the euro supports growth in various ways. Better anchoring of 
inflation  expectations  creates  a  more  secure  foundation  for  contracts  and  spending 
decisions. Broader home market helps European companies to utilise economies of scale. 
And finally, the euro creates a platform for financial integration and development which, in 
turn, are important determinants of competition and productivity.  
On  this  last  aspect,  Rajan  &  Zingales  wrote  a  couple  of  years  ago  a  provocative  book, 
“Saving Capitalism from Capitalists”. In the book they examined the various ways in financial 
markets spread wealth and opportunity. The message is that the most important function of 
financial markets is to promote competition and weaken the power of the incumbent.  
Without  well-functioning  financial  markets,  economic  power  is  in  the  hands  of  those  who 
have  liquid  wealth,  collateral  and  connections,  not  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  ideas. 
That is the recipe for stagnation. Financial markets create the opportunities for newcomers to 
dislodge  the  incumbent,  to  leapfrog  them  by  innovating.  Competition  increases,  monopoly 
rents fall, and productivity increases.  
If  Europe  is  to  accelerate  growth  potential  and  promote  the  Lisbon  targets,  increased 
competition is a necessity. Many are familiar with the study by Bayomi, Laxton and Pesenti 
from 2004, which suggests that increasing competition in the euro area to the US level could 
boost its output by no less than 12 percent.  
Another  study,  conducted  in  the  Bank  of  Finland  for  the  Finnish  economy,  examined  the 
effects of a general increase in competition both in product markets and in labour markets. 
The increase in competition is defined as a reduction of excess rents in these markets by just 
a fifth – in other words, monopoly profits in the economy are reduced by 20 percent. This 
assumed reduction in rents is rather modest, and the model does not assume the increased 
competition to  have  any  effects  on  the  rate  of  technological  change,  so  the  total  effect  on 
output  is  not  huge,  only  about  three  percent.  But  more  interestingly,  real  wages,  which 
initially fall, as wages are brought closer to the labour market equilibrium, soon rise again, 
and end up also three percent above their initial level. Also employment increases by almost 
two percent.  
These are just model simulations and open to criticism, but the conclusion I draw from this is 
the following: Product market reforms, if implemented well, are an important counterweight to 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 3
labour  market  reforms.  They  can  support  real  wage  development  at  times  when  labour 
market reforms may have negative short-run effects on wages.  
Productivity in public services  
The  single  market,  the  euro,  and  free  trade  provide  the  right  framework  for  the  euro  area 
private sector to flourish and employ in the coming decades. However, for that strategy to 
work  we  need  to  ensure  that  there  is  labour  force  for  the  private  sector  to  employ  in  the 
coming decades.  
Population  ageing  of  the  scale  we  are  facing  will  exert  tremendous  demands  on  the 
resources  of  our  economies.  These  demands  are  partly  financial:  the  cost  of  old-age 
pensions and health care will increase substantially and will challenge the sustainability of 
public finances. To avoid taxes increasing to unsustainable levels, pre-funding is a necessity 
in most countries.  
Private sector productivity growth may also help, but does not solve the issue. First, pensions 
tend reflect wages, through the accrual mathematics and through indexation, so that when 
productivity gains boost wages, pensions tend to follow, with a lag, but eventually almost one 
to one. And second, when private  sector wages increase, so do the wages of health care 
professionals on public payrolls. This is the well-known Baumol’s disease.  
With  population  ageing,  the  real  demand  for  public  health-care  and  elderly-care  services 
increases. So at the same time as working-age population shrinks, the public sector needs to 
hoard an increasing number of workers. The labour resources available for the private sector 
will diminish from two directions.  
This is a challenge for which the response cannot be purely financial. If the economy simply 
lacks the labour force to meet the rising demand for health care professionals, no amount of 
prefunding  can  change  that.  Hence,  the  other  part  of  the  response  must  be  to  ease  the 
physical constraints by increasing productivity in public services.  
Increasing productivity in public services is an agreed policy priority in many countries. Still, 
experience shows that it is not an easy subject to discuss or to debate. When speaking about 
productivity, an economist thinks about more and/or better services from same resources. A 
health care professional may think about less personnel per patient, less time available to 
respond to individual needs, and longer queues to operations.  
To  win  the  case  in  a  debate,  we  need  to  have  a  response  to  these  concerns.  One  useful 
used way to conceptualise the issue is to think in terms of outputs and outcomes of public 
services.  An  output  is  the  actual  physical  result  of  action:  a  consultation  with  a  doctor,  a 
home visit by a long-term care professional and so forth. Productivity in producing outputs 
measures the efficiency of public services.  
In contrast, outcomes relate to the ultimate policy goals: better health for the population, safe 
and  dignified  life  for  the  elderly.  Productivity  in  terms  of  outcomes  requires  not  only  that 
outputs are produced efficiently, but also that the outputs that are produces are effective in 
delivering the desired outcomes. 
So  why  does  the  debate  on  productivity  tend  to  raise  red  flags  amongst  health  care 
professionals.  It  is  because  there  is  a  general  temptation  to  focus  a  productivity  program 
primarily  on  outputs  rather  than  on  outcomes.  The  reason  is  simple:  First,  outputs  are 
typically far easier to measure than outcomes; second, the link from inputs to outputs tends 
to be far easier to establish than the link from inputs to outcomes.  
A  productivity  program  that  concentrates  on  outputs  may  make  great  leaps  in  output 
productivity, but no gain in terms of outcome productivity, because it promotes outputs that 
do not correctly reflect the quality of services. This would be a sad result, indeed, and all too 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2008
common.  It  is  what  gives  productivity  a  bad  name  and  undermines  public  support  for  the 
reform of public services.  
These concerns need to be taken seriously. We need to resist the temptation to concentrate 
only on what can be easily quantified. We have to accept that not all policy goals are easily 
measured. Sometimes we may need to rely on information that is qualitative, even anecdotal. 
Efficiency  in  producing  outputs  is  vital  for  maintaining  high  quality  public  services,  but  we 
must never lose sight of the fact that the ultimate policy objectives are defined in terms of 
outcomes.  
In short, we need to do right things and we must do them well.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The euro has been a success to an extent few would have predicted ten years ago. Signs 
are good that this success will continue – that the euro will continue to underpin price stability 
and to promote economic and financial integration in the euro area and beyond.  
But to be able to do that, the euro relies on strong political and public support. Population 
ageing  will  present  a  challenge  for  that.  If  the  euro  area  fails  to  prepare  for  ageing 
appropriately,  its  economy  will  suffer,  and  eventually  pressures  will  mount  on  monetary 
policy: monetary policy will be asked to do something it cannot do. And then continuing the 
success story would become much more difficult.  
That is why it is so important for us to keep up the momentum in building a public sector that 
can  weather  the  pressures  of  population  ageing.  It’s  a  long  journey,  so  we  have  to  keep 
moving.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 5
