Jürgen Stark: Main challenges for monetary policy in a globalised world 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Conference  “Monetary  Policy  in  Sub  Saharan  Africa:  Practice  and  Promise”,  Cape 
Town, 28 March 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  
The  issue  I  have  been  invited  to  reflect  upon  today,  namely  the  challenges  to  monetary 
policy in an increasingly interdependent world, is a topic that ranks highly on monetary policy 
makers’ agendas. The ongoing global financial market turmoil reminds us that no country is 
immune  from  economic  and  financial  shocks  originating  outside  the  boundaries  of  its 
jurisdiction.  In  pursuing  their  mandates,  central  banks  need,  therefore,  to  assess  the 
implications of economic and financial integration for the conduct of monetary policy. 
In my remarks today, I would first like to address three questions: 
1) How has globalisation affected domestic inflation? 2) How does globalisation alter the way 
that domestic economies react to economic disturbances? 3) How has globalisation affected 
the way that monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the economy?  
The answers to these three key questions will allow me to stress what I consider to be the 
main challenges for monetary policy in a globalised world.1  
The impact of globalisation on domestic inflation  
2.  
We all agree that globalisation offers great opportunities. It increases the scope for efficiency 
gains  through  increased  specialisation  and  better  use  of  comparative  advantages  in  the 
international  production  of  goods  and  services.  In  the  medium  to  long  term,  this  reduces 
production  costs,  increases  the  world’s  production  capacity  and  generates  gains  that  are 
passed  on  to  consumers  in  the  form  of  lower  prices  for  a  large  number  of  goods  and 
services.  Globalisation  brings  about  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  factors  of  production, 
which,  in  any  economy,  increases  the  level  of  output  that  can  be  sustained  without 
generating inflationary pressures.  
In the short to medium term, an increase in the volume of a developed country’s trade with 
emerging low-cost countries exerts downward pressure on the prices of imported goods and 
close  substitutes  in  the  developed  economy  while  giving  rise  to  a  gradual  relocation  of 
production. 
Viewed  from  this  perspective,  globalisation  has  resulted  in  a  very  significant  shock  to  the 
terms  of  trade  of  developed  economies,  with  the  integration  of  China,  India  and  eastern 
Europe into the world economy gradually increasing the global supply of labour – particularly 
low-skilled labour. By making skilled labour relatively scarcer, globalisation has reduced the 
relative wages of unskilled workers in industrialised countries.2  
                                                 
1   For stylised facts about trade globalisation and its probable effects on euro area inflation, see ECB (2008). 
2   The  relative  returns  on  skilled  and  unskilled  work  measure  relative  shifts  in  labour  demand.  This  measure 
incorporates  both  relative  wages  and  relative  hours  worked.  For  instance,  in  the  euro  area,  globalisation 
seems to have led to a relative increase in hours worked in those sectors that employ highly skilled workers, 
while relative wages have remained fairly stable. In the United States, it appears that both hours worked and 
wages have increased in those sectors that employ highly skilled workers (ECB (2008)). 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 1
The secular decline observed in transportation and communication costs has made it easier 
for firms to relocate the production of goods and services requiring larger amounts of low-
skilled  labour  to  those  newly  emerging  economies,  while  industrialised  countries  tend  to 
specialise in the production of goods and services requiring larger amounts of skilled labour. 
For example, the euro area specialises more in medium to high-tech exports, by comparison 
with China, which has specialised mainly in low-tech sectors such as textiles, clothing and 
footwear. 
In fact, technological progress has been so fast that for many goods and services it is even 
possible to allocate different stages of the production chain to different parts of the globe, in 
accordance with their relative levels of skilled or unskilled labour. 
As a result, in all major OECD economies import prices have declined relative to domestic 
producer prices over the last 20 years. Estimates by OECD staff3 suggest that in the period 
from  1996  to  2005  the  integration  into  world  trade  of  non-OECD  economies  –  particularly 
China  and  other  Asian  economies  –  reduced  annual  domestic  inflation  by  an  average  of 
around 0.2 percentage point in both the United States and the euro area.4  
Over the last two to three years, however, globalisation has also been seen to have an effect 
on  world  demand.  Economic  development  has  brought  about  an  increase  in  global 
consumption of food and other commodities, especially in China and other Asian countries. 
This  has  resulted  in  higher  food  and  commodity  prices  worldwide,  which  have,  to  some 
extent,  offset  the  effect  that  lower  prices  of  imported  goods  and  services  have  had  on 
domestic inflation. 
There  is  not  much  that  monetary  policy  can  do  about  the  sudden,  perhaps  permanent, 
increase in the relative prices of food and commodities, but to accommodate its mechanical, 
first-round,  effect  on  headline  inflation.  However,  a  central  bank  aiming  to  maintain  price 
stability in the medium term has to carefully monitor price and wage formation dynamics so 
that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored and no second-round effects emerge.  
This implies that the objective of monetary policy must be defined in terms of an aggregate 
and not in terms of a partial or so-called “core” price index which excludes, for example, food 
or energy prices, in order to allow the central bank to identify in a timely manner long-lasting 
trend dynamics. 
In  their  assessment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  central  banks  realise  that  the  ultimate 
impact of increases in the prices of oil and commodities – including food – on inflation and 
output  dynamics  will  depend  crucially  on  the  reaction  of  economic  agents,  particularly 
participants in labour and product markets. 
Their  reaction  will  be  influenced  by  their  expectations  regarding  the  response  of  monetary 
policy to such developments. 
An absence of second-round effects following food and commodity price pressures depends 
crucially  on  inflation  expectations  being  firmly  anchored  at  levels  in  line  with  the  central 
bank’s objective. 
In  the  presence  of  food  and  commodity-driven  pressures  on  headline  inflation,  there  is 
always  a  risk  of  inflation  expectations  becoming  unanchored  and  a  damaging  wage-price 
spiral being established. Given the costs of curbing such unpleasant inflation dynamics once 
they  have  started,  a  price  stability-oriented  central  bank  should  react  in  a  timely  and  pre-
emptive manner on the basis of a comprehensive analysis of the shocks to headline inflation. 
                                                 
3   Pain and Sollie (2006). 
4   Pain and Sollie (2006) argue that in the United States the impact is evenly distributed over the ten-year period 
considered, whereas in the euro area the disinflationary effect is concentrated mainly in the period 2001-05. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2008
The impact of globalisation on the structure of the domestic economy 
3.  
Over the past 20 years we have experienced a significant decline in the level and volatility of 
inflation  in both  developed  and  emerging  economies.  This  has  often  been  associated  with 
the growing empirical evidence of a flattening of the Phillips curve. Can globalisation alone 
account  for  changes  in  the  way  that  the  domestic  economy  –  and  inflation  in  particular  – 
reacts to economic shocks?  
Globalisation may have played a role in this process through two distinct channels. 
First,  the  short-run  Phillips  curve,  which  typically  relates  inflation  to  excess  domestic 
demand,  may  have  flattened  owing  to  the  increase  observed  in  trade  and  production 
specialisation  across  countries,  with  domestic  inflation  increasingly  being  affected  by  cost 
pressures arising in trade partners.5  
Second,  globalisation  may  have  played  a  role  in  reducing  the  inflationary  effect  of  excess 
demand is linked to the reduced ability of firms to increase their mark-ups in the presence of 
aggregate demand shocks.6 Globalisation may, for example, increase competition, reducing 
firms’ ability to pass an increase in costs on to consumer prices.7  
Without neglecting the impact of globalisation on inflation, the main factor responsible for the 
reduced  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  excess  domestic  demand  is  certainly  the  substantial 
improvement seen across many economic regions in the conduct of monetary policy. After 
the great inflation of the 1970s, policymakers worldwide have progressively recognised the 
importance of a sound institutional framework for macroeconomic performance, in particular 
the role of central bank independence in achieving and maintaining price stability. 
The independence of central banks ensures that monetary policy focuses on inflation without 
being  distracted  by  political  desires  to  fine-tune  the  economy  or  exploit  a  perceived  short-
term trade-off between inflation and output growth, which does not exist in the long term and 
is conducive only to the creation of higher levels of inflation. 
Economic agents have gradually come to terms with this significant shift to a credible, price 
stability-oriented  monetary 
inflation  expectations 
accordingly.8  
The  lessons  for  monetary  policy-makers  are  very  clear:  there  is  no  room  for  complacency 
and no reason to believe that inflation has been brought under control forever. 
Independence alone does not suffice if it does not translate into actual price stability. 
regime  and  have  adjusted 
their 
                                                 
5   Galí  and  Monacelli  (2005)  model  a  small  open  economy  trading  with  an  infinite  number  of  other  foreign 
economies.  In  the  model’s  Phillips  curve,  they  show  that  the  more  open  the  economy  is  and  the  more 
substitutable domestic goods are with regard to foreign goods, the lower the coefficient for the domestic output 
gap becomes. Research conducted at the IMF and the BIS (IMF (2006) and Borio and Filardo (2007)) finds 
supporting evidence for the hypothesis that the increase in international trade and production specialisation 
has  increased  the  importance  of  global  indicators  of  economic  slack  and  inflation,  relative  to  domestic 
indicators, in explaining domestic inflation in developed countries. Ciccareli and Mojon (2005) also argue that 
in  a  sample  of  OECD  economies  domestic  inflation  is  driven  by  a  global  inflation  process,  which  at  short 
horizons is a function of global real developments. The robustness of such evidence remains controversial, 
however,  as  empirical  estimates  depend  on  the  specification  of  the  estimated  Phillips  curve  (Ihrig  et  al. 
(2007)). 
6   Batini et al. (2005). 
7   Rogoff  (2003)  contends  that  globalisation  may,  in  fact,  have  had  the  opposite  effect  on  firms’  pricing 
behaviour, arguing that the increase in competitive pressures arising from globalisation means that the cost for 
firms  of  setting  the  price  at  the  wrong  level  is  much  higher  than  it  would  be  with  less  competition.  Hence, 
globalisation would lead to firms revising their prices more frequently and, eventually, increase the sensitivity 
of inflation to demand fluctuations through a steepening of the Phillips curve. 
8   Coogley and Sbordone (2008) also argue that the lack of persistence in inflation in recent years is due to the 
low inflation environment. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 3
Central  banks  would  be  well  advised  not  to  regard  the  observed  flattening  of  the  Phillips 
curve as a structural feature of the economy that is unrelated to monetary policy. 
The ongoing increases in the prices of oil and commodities – including food – are already 
threatening to spill over to other price sub-components and increase pressure on the general 
price level in both developed and emerging countries. In these circumstances, central banks 
must not deviate from their commitment to price stability.  
4.  
The impact of globalisation on the transmission mechanism of monetary 
policy 
Let me now turn to the impact that globalisation could have on the way that monetary policy 
affects inflation, namely the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, and its implications 
for central banks. 
In particular, I will focus on developments in financial markets, given their fundamental role in 
the chain that transmits the monetary policy impulse to the rest of the economy. 
First of all, increasing financial markets integration is likely to have increased the impact of 
shocks – including monetary policy actions – originating in a particular country or economic 
region  on  the  global  economy.  In  the  last  25  years  the  ratio  of  total  foreign  assets  and 
liabilities to GDP has more than tripled in industrialised countries and has increased by 150% 
in emerging and developing countries.9  
The  liberalisation  of  national  financial  markets,  declining  communication  costs  and  vibrant 
financial  innovation  have  fuelled  cross-border  investment  flows.  This  has  increased  the 
importance of global factors on the pricing of assets, on the relationship between supply and 
demand  for  capital  and  savings,  as  well  as  on  the  risk  premia  that  investors  require  for 
holding certain assets.10  
Thus, it is not surprising that central banks have traditionally devoted a substantial amount of 
resources  to  understanding  the  way  in  which  foreign  developments  affect  their  domestic 
objectives and the way in which monetary policy decisions are transmitted to the rest of the 
economy. 
To  fully  appreciate  the  impact  of  changes  of  the  global  financial  system  on  the  monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism,  one  should  bear  in  mind  two  key  features  of  financial 
markets  developments:  rapid  financial  products  innovation  and  the  emergence  of  new 
financial intermediaries.  
Financial innovation, in theory, is generally supportive of economic growth and improves the 
allocation of savings, because it contributes to create deeper and more complete financial 
markets. 
Furthermore,  under  normal  circumstances,  it  increases  the  efficiency  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  because  central  banks’  actions  can  potentially  influence  a 
larger number of economic agents. 
In  general,  monetary  policy  can  be  more  stable  and  interest  rates  less  volatile  because 
smaller  policy  rate  changes  would  be  needed  in  order  to  achieve  the  desired  effect  on 
aggregate demand. 
                                                 
9   Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). 
10   There  is  a  growing  body  of  literature  that  supports  the  view  that  the  transmission  of  financial  market 
developments across the world has in recent years reached a point at which financial markets in any given 
country will react to economic news that is expected to change the path of monetary policy rates in the major 
industrialised economies.. See, for example, Ehrmann et al. (2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2008
However,  in  several  episodes  of  post-war  history  we  have  witnessed  waves  of  financial 
liberalisation  and  innovation  that  have  been  associated  with  excessive  market  euphoria, 
leading to unsustainable asset price dynamics. 
The  ongoing  financial  market  turbulences  are  one  example.  In  the  last  few  years  new 
computing and information-processing technologies have supported the rise of new – often 
esoteric – financial instruments explicitly designed to unbundle and repackage the pay-offs 
and risks associated with primitive, more conventional financial products and securities. This 
trend  –  which  originally  aimed  to  improve  the  sharing  of  risks  across  savers  –  was  later 
extended to lending institutions, which, in the context of a search for higher returns, led to 
exponential  growth  in  credit  derivatives  such  as  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  and 
collateralised debt obligations (CDOs).  
Together  with  a  number  of  benefits,  such  as  improved  diversification  of  risk  and  deeper 
capital markets, these developments also had two negative side effects, namely a significant 
increase in leverage and unprecedented growth in the marketisation of financial instruments. 
The  fact  that  banks’  balance  sheets  shifted  away  from  relatively  illiquid  assets  (such  as 
mortgage loans) towards a business model whereby the banks originated underlying loans 
which were then made tradable and negotiated in the open market (the so-called “originate 
and distribute” model) made it harder to draw clear distinctions between previously distinct 
categories of financial player. 
At  the  same  time,  new  investors  –  notably  hedge  funds  –  were  born  out  of  the  need  for 
market-makers in previously unknown types of securities. 
The  emergence  of  these  new  categories  of  investors  and  financial  intermediaries,  the 
behaviour  and  incentives  of  which  can  be  quite  different  from  those  of  traditional  market 
players (such as banks),11 in combination with product innovation, has probably changed the 
way  that  shocks  spread  across  financial  markets.  This  probably  also  has  an  effect  on  the 
way that monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the rest of the economy. 
The proliferation of financial intermediaries adding value primarily by securitising and making 
liquid – i.e. rendering tradable in the market place – assets that until a few years ago would 
have been highly illiquid and remained on banks’ balance sheets has increased the ability of 
the financial system to create and supply liquidity. 
However,  if  the  securitisation  of  illiquid  assets  such  as  mortgage  loans  is  fostered  by 
unsustainable  dynamics  in  the  price  of  the  underlying  assets,  and  if  the  products  are  not 
sufficiently  transparent,  an  “originate  and  distribute  model”  that  seeks  to  create  market 
liquidity  in  this  way  can  increase  systemic  risks  and  ultimately  increase  the  risks  to  price 
stability.  
The mechanism that was, until last summer, fuelling the creation of liquidity and credit could 
start to work in the opposite direction. Regulatory weaknesses allowed the explosion of credit 
creation  on  the  basis  of  what,  ex  post,  have  clearly  been  shown  to  be  faulty  assumptions 
regarding the true level of market risk. 
Beyond  these  considerations,  however,  the  question  for  policy-makers  is  whether  central 
banks ought to be more active in such circumstances and adapt their conduct to the changes 
that have occurred in the monetary transmission mechanism. 
In my view, the ECB has shown itself to be ready to take all necessary steps to ensure the 
provision of sufficient liquidity to allow the financial system to continue functioning properly. 
Since the first signs of strain appeared in the money market, the ECB has provided additional 
liquidity to money markets. 
                                                 
11   Rajan (2006). 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 5
Liquidity-providing  measures  should  by  no  means  be  confused  with  a  weakening  of  the 
monetary  policy  stance.  The  ECB  remains  firmly  focused  on  price  stability,  with  its  policy 
stance reflecting the Governing Council’s assessment of the risks to price stability in the euro 
area.  
Central  banks  should  devote  maximum  effort  to  understanding  the  extent  to  which  the 
transmission channel of monetary policy may, in a stable macroeconomic environment, be 
affected by a high degree of integration in global financial markets and ever more complex 
market microstructures. 
For example, globalisation and financial innovation may have combined in the last two years 
to make the long end of the yield curve less responsive to the tightening of monetary policy 
than  would  be  expected  on  the  basis  of  historical  experience  –  especially  in  the  United 
States, but also in the euro area. 
It is very likely, in fact, that the global ample liquidity, in particular global savings flowing into 
the  United  States  was  driven  by  the  unsustainably  low  risk  return  profile  offered  by  new 
financial products and the illusion that the credit risk premium had almost disappeared. 
Finally, central banks should be very cautious when communicating with the markets, and 
the public in general, in order to make very clear the conditional nature of monetary policy 
decisions and avoid fostering unsustainable expectations among market participants. 
In some circumstances, unfounded expectations of a particular future policy could have an 
amplifying  effect  on  asset  prices  and  thereby  contribute  to  the  build-up  of  such  financial 
imbalances, which would unwind quickly, and in a costly manner, once expectations change. 
This  last  observation  leads  me  on  to  another  issue  on  which  central  banks  and  academic 
scholars have been working for many years, namely the question of whether central banks 
should include asset prices in some way in their targets when setting interest rates – and if 
so, when.  
Asset prices and monetary policy 
5.  
To help me in my discussion of the role of asset prices in monetary policy, I would like first to 
summarise what I think are some generally shared views and to look at the positions held by 
the  two  broad  camps  that  have  emerged  from  this  debate.  These  camps  have  arrived  at 
opposing policy conclusions.  
I believe that almost everybody in the central banking and academic communities agrees on 
four points: 
First,  central  banks  face  an  exceptionally  difficult  task  in  assessing  whether  or  not  asset 
prices are being driven by fundamentals at any given point in time. Therefore, while central 
banks ought to do their best to obtain as much information as possible on the sustainability of 
asset price developments, they should be aware that identifying bubbles in real time is a very 
risky  business.  Thus,  the  results  of  their  assessment  should  be  interpreted  with  particular 
caution.  
Second,  central  banks  should  not  target  asset  prices.  Targeting  asset  prices  would,  by 
definition, mean that monetary policy’s response to fundamentally-driven increases in asset 
prices is similar to its response to asset price bubbles, as bubbles are often difficult to identify 
in real time.  
Third,  central  banks  should  take  into  account  information  from  asset  prices  both  in  their 
forecasting exercises and in their assessment of the current state of the economy, as asset 
price movements can affect the behaviour of economic agents and can have an impact on 
price  stability.  Nonetheless,  the  typically  high  levels  of  volatility  in  asset  prices  and  their 
unstable links with future macroeconomic conditions suggest that they should have limited 
weight by comparison with other indicators. 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2008
Fourth,  although  central  banks  can  influence  asset  prices  by  means  of  monetary  policy 
actions, the relatively large swings in policy rates that could be needed to curb boom and 
bust cycles in asset prices could pose a significant threat to macroeconomic stability in the 
short term. 
Building  on  these  generally  agreed  conclusions,  two  possible  monetary  policy  approaches 
have been suggested. 
On the one hand, some argue that central banks should lean against asset price bubbles, as 
such bubbles have the  potential to create lasting distortions in the economy. In a world in 
which  asset  price  bubbles  are  very  difficult  to  identify  and  the  curbing  of  boom  and  bust 
cycles in asset prices can prove very costly in terms of inflation and output, leaning against a 
possible  bubble  can  be  seen  as  an  insurance  policy  in  case  a  bubble  is  indeed  being 
created. The proponents of this view argue that even if a central bank does not wish to target 
asset prices directly, some insurance is desirable, given that boom and bust cycles in asset 
prices may be damaging to economic stability.  
Others, by contrast, advocate a sort of flexible inflation-targeting approach. They argue that 
the  premium  for  this  “insurance  policy”  is  too  expensive,  since,  by  reacting  to  changes  in 
asset prices, the central bank could seriously destabilise the economy in normal times when 
no  bubbles were  present.  As  a  result,  they  argue,  a  policy  of  leaning against  asset  prices 
could  lead  to  serious  communication  and  accountability  difficulties.  Instead,  they  propose 
that central banks remain focused on maintaining price stability and respond to asset prices 
only  to  the  extent  that  they  provide  information  about  current  and  future  macroeconomic 
conditions. 
Overall, central bankers may draw some lessons from both camps: 
First, asset prices should not normally be granted a special role in monetary policy-making. 
Second, 
circumstances: 
1. 
leaning  against  asset  price  movements  may  be  advisable  under  some 
when  the  probability  of  asset  prices  being  driven  by  non-fundamental  forces  is 
estimated to be high; 
when the probability of the bubble bursting in the near future is low; 
when the bubble is expected to be sensitive to modest interest rate increases; and 
when  the  cost  of  the  expected  collapse  in  asset  prices,  were  the  bubble  to  be 
allowed to persist, is estimated to be significant.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
While leaning against asset prices can be considered by central banks on a case-by-case 
basis when the four conditions I have just listed are met, this tends, admittedly, to happen 
only very rarely.  
The  ECB’s  two-pillar  monetary  policy  strategy  is  well  suited  to  cope  with  the  challenges 
brought about by asset price developments. In particular, having an explicit monetary pillar 
guarantees that the ECB has considerable expertise in the analysis of monetary and credit 
developments and in the analysis of their impact on price stability. The close link between 
monetary  developments  and  evolving  imbalances  in  asset  and  credit  markets  implies  that 
monetary analysis enables to detect such imbalances at an early stage and to respond to the 
implied risks to price and financial stability in a timely and forward-looking manner. This has 
proved to be an invaluable asset for the ECB, notably in times of global financial turbulence. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 7
6.  
Conclusion: Globalisation does not change the rules of monetary 
policy-making 
Challenging  though  globalisation  may  be  for  monetary  policy,  globalisation  does  not 
fundamentally alter the rules for monetary policy-making.12 Over the medium to longer term, 
inflation still remains a monetary phenomenon. This means that price stability is there for us 
to achieve.  
While  international  liquidity  conditions  may  influence  market  interest  rates  and  thus  the 
transmission of monetary policy to real activity and inflation, central banks retain the ability to 
control short-term interest rates, which have an effect, in turn, on the domestic cost of credit 
and  long-term  interest  rates.  However,  as  I  said  earlier,  the  success  of  monetary  policy  is 
dependent  on  central  banks  properly  adapting  their  analyses  in  line  with  the  changing 
environment,  taking  account,  among  other  things,  of  the  potential  impact  of  financial 
innovation and liberalisation on the monetary policy transmission channel.  
In  such  an  environment,  it  is  clearly  important  for  stability-oriented  monetary  policies  to 
analyse developments in areas such as external prices and international trade and financial 
flows. Asset prices and exchange rates should not necessarily be given any special status 
and  should  instead  be  taken  into  account  by  monetary  policy  only  to  the  extent  that  they 
have an impact on price stability in the medium term.  
I shall conclude my address today with a few remarks on the structure of the international 
financial  architecture  and  its  relationship  with  domestic  price  stability-oriented  monetary 
policies. My view, which is shared by most members of the central banking community, is 
that the best international monetary architecture is one in which each central bank focuses 
on achieving price stability at home. This does not mean, however, that individual monetary 
policies should function in isolation. On the contrary, the ongoing financial turmoil has shown 
the  value  of  a  timely  and  open  exchange  of  information  on  an  international  level  between 
central banks and regulators in the presence of increasing financial globalisation. 
Thanks to the existing framework for cooperation, the ECB, in conjunction with other major 
central banks around the world, has been able recently – and without changing its monetary 
policy stance – to help to avoid a global liquidity squeeze by providing the euro area financial 
system with additional refinancing during this period of heightened risk aversion.  
However,  cooperation  does  not  mean  coordination.  Each  central  bank  has  just  one  policy 
instrument, and this instrument can only achieve a single domestic objective, namely price 
stability. As a result, central banks would be well advised to react to foreign developments 
only if these become relevant for domestic price stability. International cooperation helps to 
exploit  the  synergies  that  exist  in  monetary  policy-making  with  a  view  to  establishing  an 
environment of global monetary stability.  
References 
Batini,  N.,  B.  Jackson  and  S.  Nickell  (2005),  “An  open  economy  New  Keynesian  Phillips 
curve for the UK”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52, pp. 1061-1071. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2007),  “Globalisation  and  monetary  policy”,  Remarks  at  the  Fourth 
Economic  Summit,  Stanford  Institute  for  Economic  Policy  Research,  Stanford,  California 
(March). 
Borio, C. and A. Filardo (2007), “Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on 
the global determinants of domestic inflation”, BIS Working Paper No 227 (May).  
Ciccareli, M. and B. Mojon (2005), “Global Inflation”, ECB Working Paper No 537. 
                                                 
12   See, for example, Woodford (2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 35/2008
Coogley, T. and A. Sbordone (2008), “Trend Inflation, Indexation, and Inflation Persistence in 
the New Keynesian Phillips Curve”, American Economic Review, forthcoming. 
ECB  (2008),  “Globalisation,  trade  and  the  euro  area  macroeconomy”,  Monthly  Bulletin 
(January).  
Ehrmann,  M.,  M.  Fratscher  and  R.  Rigobon  (2005),  “Stocks,  bonds,  money  markets  and 
exchange  rates:  measuring  international  financial  transmission”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No 
11166 (March). 
Galí, J. and T. Monacelli (2005), “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small 
Open Economy”, Review of Economic Studies 72 (3), pp. 707-734. 
Ihrig,  J.,  S.  B.  Kamin,  D.  Lindner  and  J.  Marquez  (2007),  “Some  Simple  Tests  of  the 
Globalization  and  Inflation  Hypothesis”,  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers  No  891 
(April), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
IMF (2005), “How has globalization affected inflation?”, Chapter III, World Economic Outlook 
(April).  
Lane, R. and G. Milesi-Ferretti (2006), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and 
Extended  Estimates  of  Foreign  Assets  and  Liabilities,  1970-2004”,  IMF  Working  Paper 
WP/06/69 (March). 
Pain, N., I. Koske and M. Sollie (2006), “Globalisation and inflation in the OECD economies”, 
Economics Department Working Papers, No 524 (November). 
Rajan,  R.  G.  (2006),  “Has  Finance  Made  the  World  Riskier?”,  European  Financial 
Management, Vol. 12, No 4, pp. 499-533. 
Rogoff, K. (2003), “Globalisation and global disinflation”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: 
Adapting to a Changing Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 77-112. 
Woodford, M. (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Control”, NBER Working Paper No 13329, 
forthcoming  in  Galí,  J.  and  M.  Gertler  (eds.),  The  international  dimensions  of  monetary 
policy, University of Chicago Press. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 9
