Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark  
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 24 April 2008.  
 Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. 
At last year's meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks I said the following about 
the  economic  situation  in  the  USA:  "There  is  no  sign  either  that  the  problems  faced  by 
companies  specialising  in  mortgage  loans  to  less  creditworthy  households  will  spread  to 
other areas of the financial markets". I was not the only person to hold that view. 
I have been reminded that economic predictions should always be taken with a grain of salt.  
It is no exaggeration to say that things have developed somewhat contrary to the predictions. 
The economic forecasts for the USA and Europe have gradually been adjusted downwards 
over the last year or so. What started as problems for companies specialising in subprime 
mortgages has spread to other parts of the financial sector – also outside the USA – and is 
now  dampening  output  and  employment.  This  again  has  a  negative  impact  on  financial 
enterprises. 
The current assessment is that the USA is heading for a recession that will not subside until 
the 2nd half of 2008 at the earliest. Then the situation – at best – will only slowly improve. It 
looks as if Europe will avoid actual recession, but must be prepared for modest growth rates 
of between 1 and 2 per cent in the coming years. 
This  development  has  taken  most  people  by  surprise,  although  the  boom  in  the  USA  had 
peaked  before  the  subprime  crisis.  It  is  positive  that  developing  countries  and  emerging 
market economies have so far steered clear of the economic downturn. This has mitigated 
the slowdown in the global economy. At the same time, inflation has risen worldwide, driven 
by  increasing  energy  and  food  prices.  The  price  increases  limit  the  scope  for  further 
expansion  of  economic  policy.  There  is  a  risk  that  inflation  expectations  will  be  pushed 
upwards, triggering a wage and price spiral. 
Needless to say, the impact of higher food prices is most severe in the poor countries, and 
the issue is rapidly climbing to the top of the international agenda. 
Today,  it  is  estimated  that  losses  in  the  financial  sector  could  be  as  high  as  1,000  billion 
dollars, or three times Denmark's domestic product – without comparison, I should add. Both 
financial  enterprises  and  others  have  suffered  losses,  primarily  in  the  USA,  but  also  in 
Europe. The greatest losses have been observed in some of the world's largest banks, and 
one bank has been on the brink of failure. These enterprises have had thousands of highly 
educated  and  highly  paid  employees  and  managers  at  their  disposal  in  order  to  avoid 
precisely such losses. 
The  events  have  led  to  self-examination  among  financial  enterprises  and  authorities  who 
were too late to see the problems and take action. How could the situation get so much out 
of hand, and how can we prevent this from happening again? 
Much has already been written about the background to the crisis. And I am sure that the 
course of events will be the subject of many learned papers in the coming years, relying on 
the advantages of hindsight. 
Basically, financial business is all about forming a link between people who at a given time 
need to spend more than they own and earn and others who are in the opposite situation. 
This intermediation enables enterprises to invest in anticipation of future profits. It enables 
households to buy houses and flats with a down payment of only 20 per cent. And it enables 
governments to operate with budget deficits from time to time. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 1
Financial intermediation – at its best – ensures that savers receive the optimum return with 
the chosen risk profile, and that the most profitable investments are sought. Intermediation 
takes  place  across  national  borders,  and  the  financial  sector  is  at  the  forefront  of 
globalisation.  The  importance  of  a  well-functioning  financial  sector  to  a  modern  economy 
cannot be overrated. 
However,  in  recent  years  financial  intermediation  has  expanded  at  an  excessive  pace, 
combined  with  sophisticated  product  development  –  and  risk  assessment  systems  and 
incentive structures have not been able to keep up in the competition for market shares. 
Where  this  development  led  to  an  atmosphere  of  euphoria,  greed  and  imprudence  could 
prevail. 
Some  degree  of  caution  is  reintroduced  when  investors  get  too  close  to  the  fire  and  burn 
their fingers. However, other action is also required. It is a safe bet today that rules will be 
tightened. 
As the tide is turning, it is a question of striking the right balance between tightening the rules 
and safeguarding the role of financial intermediation in society. 
Last autumn, the G7 countries asked the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) – which includes 
the  ministries  of  finance,  central  banks  and  financial  supervisory  authorities  of  major 
countries, among others – to analyse the factors and weaknesses that led to the crisis and 
propose solutions to boost the resilience of the financial markets and institutions. The results 
are  interesting  to  read  and  ought  to  be  compulsory  for  anyone  involved  in  the  financial 
sector. 
FSF tabled 67 proposals under 5 main headings: 
The  first  group  of  proposals  concerns  tighter  requirements  for  the  financial  institutions' 
capital, liquidity and risk management. A larger buffer is required. The obvious obstacle is, of 
course, how to implement such requirements in a situation where they could make things go 
from bad to worse. 
The second group of proposals aims at increasing transparency in the markets by publishing 
all relevant risks and ensuring more reliable valuations. Uncertainty has increased because 
the  financial  institutions  have  only  partially  declared  their  losses  and  because  it  has  been 
difficult to state the value of assets no longer traded. 
A third group of proposals addresses the role of rating agencies in financial intermediation. It 
is necessary to improve the quality of the rating process in order to avoid conflicts of interest, 
and  to  improve  awareness  of  the  results.  Authorities  should  reconsider  their  use  of  rating 
agency services. 
Fourthly,  it  is  suggested  that  for  all  large  cross-border  banks  worldwide  a  group  of 
representatives  from  the  relevant  national  supervisory  authorities  should  be  set  up.  This 
proposal  reflects  awareness  that  the  authorities  are  currently  inadequately  equipped  to 
handle  potential  crises  in  banks  with  subsidiaries  and  branches  operating  across  national 
borders. 
Finally, central banks are encouraged to be more flexible, including to expand their lending 
facilities.  One  of  the  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  current  crisis  is  that  central  banks' 
lending facilities have been inadequate in relation to banks experiencing a credit crunch. 
As  you  can  hear,  we  must  all  do  our  bit:  private  enterprises,  governments,  supervisory 
authorities  and  central  banks.  It  is  recommended  that  most  of  the  proposals  should  be 
implemented this year. The rest in 2009.  
And how will all this affect us in Denmark? 
It  may  sound  strange,  but  the  international  economic  slowdown,  as  it  is  now  predicted, 
comes at a rather convenient time for Denmark. The economy has been strong for a number 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2008
of  years,  underpinned  by  low  interest  rates  and  expansionary  fiscal  policy.  Employment  is 
record high, and unemployment at the lowest level for a generation.  
The current-account surplus has fallen substantially, but fortunately no financial imbalances 
have accumulated during the upswing. Overall, households are well-consolidated with sound 
financial buffers, although the housing market has been weak for 18 months. 
However,  the  Danish  economy  has  been  close  to  its  capacity  limit  for  some  time.  The 
shortage  of  labour  has  intensified  the  pressure  for  higher  wage  increases,  and  the  gap 
between growth in Danish and foreign wages has widened in recent years. Annual consumer 
price  inflation  reached  3.1  per  cent  in  March,  primarily  driven  by  higher  energy  and  food 
prices,  as  was  also  the  case  elsewhere.  Consumers'  expectations  of  price  increases 
continue to rise. 
The  shortage  of  labour  curbs  economic  growth  in  Denmark.  In  Danmarks  Nationalbank's 
most recent forecast – from March – the central estimate is that the Danish economy will shift 
to markedly lower growth in the coming years. However, unemployment will not reach a level 
that is compatible with sustainable long-term development in wages until 2010. 
Previously, financial turmoil usually went hand in hand with currency unrest in Europe. So 
far, there have only been few indications of this. It would be natural to give the credit to the 
fewer European currencies, brought about by the euro. It is an advantage to Denmark that 
the euro exists and has now been adopted by 15 EU member states.  
Combined with the European Central Bank's supply of liquidity in response to the financial 
turmoil, this has mitigated the risk of major negative real-economic impacts. 
The  financial  system  in  Denmark  has  not  been  unaffected  by  the  financial  turmoil.  But 
fortunately the effect has been less significant than in several other countries. The reason is 
that  Danish  investors  have  only  to  a  small  extent  invested  in  –  and  thus  lost  money  on  – 
subprime-related assets. We have our own good mortgage-credit products. 
However,  in  Denmark  we  have  also  seen  how  the  uncertainty  has  made  banks  more 
reluctant  to  grant  each  other  uncollateralised  loans  in  the  money  market,  particularly  for 
longer  maturities.  The  result  has  been  shorter  maturities  and  higher  financing  costs.  This 
mainly  affects  the  banks  that  have  built  up  considerable  deposit  deficits  in  recent  years, 
based on the assumption that they would be able to raise inexpensive liquidity in the money 
market or by issuing bonds. 
In  the  current  situation,  and  in  accordance  with  international  recommendations,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank, like other central banks, is reviewing its lending facilities. This is an ongoing 
process.  However,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  well-run  Danish  banks  should  not  find 
themselves in an unnecessary liquidity squeeze because of the international financial turmoil. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you a successful meeting. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 3
