Stefan Ingves: The need for a strengthened insolvency and resolution 
framework for banks – a central banker’s perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  International  Bar 
Association’s  14th  Annual  Global  Insolvency  and  Restructuring  Conference,  Stockholm, 
19 May 2008. 
 As a central banker, the tasks assigned to me are to maintain price stability and to promote a 
sound and efficient payment system. In short, I deal with economics and finance. So what 
does  this  have  to  do  with  your  business,  insolvency  law?  What  is  a  central  banker  doing 
opening this conference on insolvency and restructuring?  
Actually, there are more links between the fields than you might think. As I said, one of my 
tasks is to oversee the payment system. Without a functioning payment system, no modern 
economy is able to function for very long. But what we call the payment system is really not 
much more than a system where money is transferred electronically from one bank account 
to another, in a longer or shorter chain of intermediaries with the central bank as a hub. If 
there is a problem in one of those intermediaries, there is a problem in the payment system. 
And if the problem is not technical but financial in nature, this may lead you right into the area 
of insolvency law and bank restructuring regimes.  
But in fact, there is also a link of a more general nature. Maintaining price stability, which is 
the central bank’s primary objective, means that overall prices should be stable. That task is 
made  more  difficult  if  some  markets  are  not  working  properly,  for  instance  if  there  are 
“bubbles”, or misalignments, in asset prices. I think that we can never fully protect ourselves 
against  this  happening.  But  a  first  step  is  to  ensure  that  the  market  has  an  incentive  to 
assess  risks  properly.  This  can  only  be  achieved  if  it  is  clear  to  the  agents  that  they  are 
always  responsible  for  their  investment  decisions.  To  ensure  this,  you  need  well  designed 
and credible insolvency frameworks.  
So, what is the problem? Well, the situation varies between countries of course. But in many 
cases, quite frankly, I do not think that our present regimes for dealing with weak banks are 
adequate. In particular, I doubt that they will be of much use in a situation where the payment 
system is at risk. And moreover, I fear that our attempts to deal with the situation in the heat 
of the moment may require us to take action that will solve the immediate problem, but which 
may in the end reduce the long term market discipline. 
What I call for is a special insolvency and resolution framework for banks and other deposit 
taking institutions. A system that works not only when there are minor banking problems, but 
also when the payment system is at risk. Such a regime does not presently exist in Sweden 
– in fact, many countries lack such a regime. Indeed, this gap in the regulatory framework 
has  been  demonstrated  in  the  recent  period  of  financial  turbulence,  where  a  number  of 
countries have found it necessary to take extraordinary measures with regard to banks and 
other financial institutions in order to maintain financial stability. 
Today, I will try to sketch the broad features of such a resolution framework. In brief, it is a 
question of finding a system that makes it possible to close banks quickly and efficiently at a 
low  cost  to  the  deposit  guarantee  system,  while  making  shareholders  and  uninsured 
creditors  bear  the  responsibility  for  their  investment  decisions.  But  it  must  also  allow  for 
special measures to be taken in the exceptional situation where the failure of a bank risks 
destabilising the financial system as a whole. Also in such situations the government needs 
to have a strong negotiating position against the shareholders. 
But, first, how did I arrive at this conclusion? Well, from an analysis of the role of the banks in 
the economy and the safety net which has been built up around the sector. And from some 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 1
experience from dealing with real crises. To get the right perspective, I think it is useful to 
start at this end.  
What is so special about bank failures? 
Bank failures have always been a problematic issue for governments. A bank failure affects 
not only shareholders and professional investors, but also all the ordinary people who have 
put their money in the bank in the belief that it will be safe there. It is not without reason that 
you often hear the reference to widows and orphans running the risk of losing their money in 
connection with bank problems.  
And  even  if  the  depositors  may  in  the  end  recover  much  of  their  money  in  a  subsequent 
insolvency  procedure,  they  may  lose  access  to  the  money  in  their  bank  account,  and  the 
possibility to make payments from it, for quite some time. As most of us have most of our 
money in a bank account, we may find it difficult to quickly find the means needed to pay our 
rent and food if this happens. And you may also be affected by the failure of other peoples’ 
banks. For instance, if your employer’s bank gets into problems, the pay-roll account might 
be frozen and you might not get your salary. And if your employer cannot quickly get credit 
from another bank, he may not be able to pay his subcontractors and his utility bills. He may 
also find it difficult to manage the risks in his business, for instance in relation to trades in a 
foreign currency. At worst, he may need to shut down entirely. A bank failure can thus have 
negative effects on the real economy. 
The close and complex financial links between the banks also mean that a failure can have a 
knock on effect on the other banks in the system. Particularly problematic in this respect will 
be  the  failure  of  a  bank  which  has  a  key  position  in  the  payment  system.  That  is,  a  bank 
which many other banks use as their intermediary when making payments to one another. 
The  mere  rumour  that  such  a  bank  is  having  problems  can  thus  paralyse  the  payment 
system.  
A further complication is that banks are vulnerable in a special way. If confidence is shaken, 
deposits and other financing can usually be withdrawn at short notice. The assets can not be 
disposed of that easily. A bank may be forced to sell its assets at fire sale prices to meet a 
run;  if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst  the  bank may  become  insolvent.  Banks  are therefore 
very sensitive to a shift in confidence. 
A  bank  failure  can  thus  affect  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  The  more 
widespread the problem and the larger the risk of the crisis spreading through the system, 
the greater is the threat to financial stability – and in the end to the real economy. Clearly, the 
failure of a bank where a lot of people, companies and other banks have their accounts, and 
which  is  an  important  provider  of  credit  and  risk  management  tools,  will  normally be  more 
problematic than the failure of a small bank. But also the failure of a small bank will have 
wider effects, and even quite severe ones if it happens at a bad time.  
Given these wider effects of any bank failure, a number of special regulations to deal with the 
banks have been introduced over the years. As a result, the banking sector is now among 
the most regulated industries in our economies. The safety net includes financial supervision 
to monitor the risk taking of banks, with regulations on how much capital a bank needs to 
hold and how it should manage its risks. The banks’ owners enter into the business knowing 
that a serious breach of these regulations should lead to a revocation of the licence and the 
bank being closed.  
The safety net also includes the ability of the central bank to lend on special conditions to an 
illiquid but solvent bank when financial stability is at risk. In many countries, there is also an 
explicit guarantee to the small depositors, for which the banking sector itself is to take the 
responsibility. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2008
But  this  safety  net,  while  reducing  the  risks  involved,  provides  no  full  protection  against 
failures. In particular, it does not extend to the case when the financial system is threatened 
in its entirety. And while the formal depositor protection should reduce the pressure from the 
public on the government to intervene in a bank failure, if the scheme is not properly set up, 
this expectation may prove unfounded.  
The government has a direct interest in an efficient insolvency and resolution 
framework  
So the stakes are still high for the government in a banking crisis. While owners have little to 
lose when capital is low, and many creditors are protected by the deposit insurance, the state 
–  and  the  whole  economy  in  the  end  -  may  at  worse  suffer  enormous  losses.  Therefore, 
unlike the situation in ordinary companies, the lack of an efficient insolvency regime will not 
primarily be a creditor problem only, but a problem which will fall right into the government’s 
lap.  
And if the insolvency framework is not efficient and cost effective, it may be rational for the 
government to intervene beyond the ordinary regulatory framework. If there is no other way 
to deal with the problem, it may even be rational to contribute capital directly. This may be 
the case even if such an investment cannot be justified on the basis of a corporate capital 
investment  appraisal.  The  alternative  of  not  intervening  may  simply  be  very  much  more 
expensive. 
Now, if this intervention by the government makes the owners and creditors better off than 
they would have been otherwise, the rules of the game change completely. If owners and 
creditors can speculate on a bail-out, market discipline will be eroded. Clearly, this needs to 
be  avoided.  And  the  conclusion  is  that,  if  anything,  it  is  even  more  necessary  to  have 
effective and efficient insolvency and resolution frameworks for banks than for companies in 
general. 
In the Swedish banking crisis, the public interest was secured by special crisis 
legislation 
So, how do we fare in this respect? Well, let us take a look at some real crises.  
I will start with the case with which I am most familiar, the Swedish financial crisis in the early 
1990s.  I  got  involved  in  the  management  of  the  crisis  in  my  capacity  as  an  official  at  the 
Ministry  of  Finance.  At  the  time,  the  country  had  severe  macroeconomic  and  financial 
problems,  with  a  number  of  banks  reporting  losses.  Moreover,  the  banks  were  finding  it 
increasingly  difficult  to  obtain  financing  in  the  international  capital  markets,  a  source  of 
funding  they  were  heavily  dependent  on.  The  international  counterparties  reduced  their 
exposures not only to those banks that were having fundamental problems, but to Swedish 
banks in general.  
In order to avoid a collapse of the banking system, it was necessary to take action. We tried 
several  measures  to  contain  the  “silent  run”  on  the  banks.  What  proved  effective  was  the 
declaration by the government that the banks would meet their debt obligations as they fell 
due. This general guarantee, as it has been called, did not take the form of a legally binding 
guarantee, but was merely a political commitment that the creditors would not suffer losses.  
At  the  same  time  it  was  necessary  to  deal  with  the  banks  in  distress.  And  it  was  quite 
obvious that we could not do this within the normal court-based insolvency procedure. This 
procedure would simply be too slow, and would not take into account the need to keep the 
operations running in order to maintain the functioning of the financial system.  
With  creditors  insulated  against  losses  by  the  guarantee,  and  with  the  formal  insolvency 
regime assessed to be inappropriate, we needed to find another way to ensure that losses 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 3
for  which  the  shareholders  were  responsible  would  not  fall  on  the  tax-payers.  In  order  to 
secure this, we needed to take control of the banks concerned before capital was completely 
eroded. Needless to say, we found ourselves in a rather poor bargaining position against the 
shareholders.  
Fortunately, a Bank Support Act, laying out the principles for the possible actions, could be 
implemented quite swiftly. A special crisis management authority was also set up. Inspired by 
the US model, where the authorities can take control of a bank when capital falls below a 
certain level, this temporary crisis legislation gave the government the right to take over the 
shares  in  undercapitalised  banks.  The  Bank  Support  Act  also  made  it  possible  to  tie 
conditions  to  the  actual  use  of  the  guarantee.  Thus,  the  main  rule  was  that  any  financial 
support  given  directly  to  a  bank  would  result  in  a  proportional  dilution  of  the  original 
shareholders’ holdings. The Bank Support Act also laid the basis for arranging private take-
overs where possible. And, not least, for the orderly winding up of unviable banks. 
The  measures  imposed,  while  quite  restrictive  to  the  shareholders,  were  deemed  as 
appropriate  by  the  legislator  and  the  judicial  system  in  light  of  the  wider  public  interest  of 
maintaining financial stability at a low cost to the government and the tax-payers.  
All  in  all,  I  think  that  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  outcome  was  not  too  bad,  given  the 
circumstances.  I  am  also  not  too  worried  that  the  measures  imposed  have  led  to  a 
weakening of market discipline in this country.  
Nevertheless,  this  does  not  mean  that  we  could  not  have  done  better  if  the  appropriate 
legislation had been in place already at the outset of the crisis. Moreover, I am afraid that it 
may  be  more  difficult  to  handle  a  crisis  by  drafting  temporary  legislation  in  the  midst  of  a 
crisis today. First, the banking sector is more internationalised. In the Swedish case, many 
banks are part of large cross-border banking groups with strong intra-group links, which may 
not  be  easy  to  dissolve  quickly.  This  means  that  it  is  not  obvious  that  a  crisis  could  be 
handled  on  a  national  basis.  Second,  Sweden  is  now  a  member  of  the  EU.  Any  measure 
taken will thus have to be in compliance with EU legislation. 
Sweden has actually also had recent experience of the failure of a deposit taking institution. 
The failure in 2006 of the credit institution Custodia again displayed the problems in relying 
on  the  ordinary  corporate  bankruptcy  regime.  Custodia  was  tiny,  so  there  was  clearly  no 
systemic risk. But it highlighted a number of deficiencies in the legal framework. It turned out 
to  be  a  long  process  to  finally  have  the  institution  closed,  something  which  may  have 
contributed  to  the  failure  coming  at  higher  costs  to  the  deposit  insurance  scheme  than 
necessary.  
Other countries appear to have had similar experiences 
Taking a broader outlook, it is not uncommon that countries rely on some modification of the 
ordinary  corporate  insolvency  procedure  to  deal  with  weak  banks,  and  in  some  cases  a 
different regime altogether. And many countries seem to be able to handle small problems 
within their ordinary framework.  
But when it comes to those exceptional circumstances where the payment system and the 
stability of the financial system are at risk, the common denominator between different crises 
seems to be that the authorities did not find it possible to rely on the normal rule. Instead 
there have been special provisions or special crisis legislation.  
A case which I followed closely was the Asian crisis in the late 1990s. Like in Sweden in the 
early 1990s, it was necessary to take specific measures to avoid a serious interruption of the 
financial  system.  And  there  are  a  number  of  emerging  markets  which  have  had  similar 
experiences  and  have  been  confronted  with  the  same  dilemma  of  how  to  secure  financial 
stability without overly eroding market discipline in the long run.  
4 
 BIS Review 62/2008
But I think that until recently, most industrialised countries may have felt quite removed from 
this  problem.  The  recent  experiences  in  the  UK,  the  US  and  Germany  with  extraordinary 
measures  needed  to  deal  with  the  crises  in  the  building  society  Northern  Rock,  the 
investment  firm  Bear  Sterns  and  the  bank  IKB  respectively,  is  a  reminder  that  these 
situations can, and in many cases have, surfaced anywhere.  
They also seem to confirm that the measures that you wish to take may be in conflict with 
laws and regulations which were not drafted with the specificity of a banking crisis in mind, 
but nevertheless apply to banks in these situations. A telling example is the Northern Rock 
experience, where it was assessed that the preferred option to fix a private takeover might be 
difficult to arrange given the design of the regulations on insider trading and take-overs. More 
generally, there is also a debate on whether measures that restrict the rights of the existing 
shareholders  might  be  in  conflict  with  company  law  and  even  with  human  rights  more 
generally, and on whether guarantees extended might be in conflict with state aid rules.  
I  want  to  make  it  clear  that  I  have  no  views  on  market  abuse  regulations,  regulations  on 
shareholder rights in company law or state aid rules as such. They fulfil an important function 
and  as  far  as  I  can  see  usually  work  well  together.  The  fact  that  human  rights  must  be 
respected can hardly be called into question. And I wish to emphasise that I do not call into 
question the role of the EU in the regulation of our markets. On the contrary, it is important to 
deal with these issues on an international level.  
But  the  overall  framework  has  not  been  drafted  with  the  specific  situation  in  the  banking 
sector  in  mind.  It  may  therefore  be  difficult  to  find  suitable  solutions  in  a  crisis  situation 
without  running  the  risk  of  breaking  a  number  of  regulations.  It  is  not  acceptable  that 
decision-makers should have to fumble in an acute crisis situation, trying to steer clear of this 
risk.  It  is  also  important  that  the  action  by  the  authorities  in  such  a  situation  is  evaluated 
against a regulatory framework fit for its purpose. A framework which makes it possible to 
maintain a proper balance between the different parties involved also in a crisis situation. 
There is a need for a special insolvency and resolution framework for banks  
In  my  opinion,  all  this  points  in  one  direction.  A  special  insolvency  regime  is  needed  for 
banks and other institutions that are covered by the safety net. 
In this country it has long been said that banks should be covered by the ordinary corporate 
bankruptcy  legislation,  at  least  as  long  as  there  is  no  direct  threat  to  the  system.  This  is 
because government intervention over and above the existing safety net for the banks should 
be avoided.  
I believe that this is the wrong way to look at it. The ordinary bankruptcy regime does not 
sufficiently recognise the need for speed when dealing with banking problems. Moreover, the 
techniques  normally  used,  such  as  a  stay  on  payments,  are  ill  adapted  to  banks.  To 
supplement financial supervision and the deposit guarantee with a special insolvency regime, 
would not be adding an additional safety net to the benefit of depositors. It is quite simply a 
way of ensuring that the safety net protects those it was intended to protect but no others, 
and at a reasonable cost to the deposit guarantee system and society as a whole.  
But  it  should  also  be  recognised  that  in  situations  where  there  is  a  threat  to  the  financial 
system in its entirety, it may be needed to take partly different measures than in an ordinary 
bank failure. In these situations, the key focus must be on maintaining the vital functions in 
the interest of society as a whole.  
Perhaps the idea to have a partly different framework in these situations seems odd to you? 
After all, we normally expect the same legislative acts to apply regardless of the state of the 
economy or the situation in the financial system.  
But the situation is not unique. A similar situation exists in the health sector, where society 
has set up a framework to deal with our usual flus, broken bones and heart attacks. There 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 5
are doctors and hospitals to deal with our problems. And there may be guidelines on how 
long sick leaves will be needed for a certain diagnosis. But I think that it is also clear that in 
some severe situations, a different framework will need to be applied. In case of an epidemic 
disease,  such  as  the  avian  flu,  there  may  be  a  need  to  direct  those  infected  to  separate 
hospitals. And it may be necessary to establish an order of priority for the allocation of the 
scarce medical resources. One where the guiding principle may be the survival of the society 
as  a  whole.  It  may  also  be  the  case  that  the  crisis  regulations  clash  with  the  normal 
regulations. For instance, you are normally not entitled to take a sick day if you are actually 
healthy. Now, even healthy people may be asked to leave their offices to avoid the disease 
from spreading, while the key employees may be asked to go to work to keep the operations 
running. When the principles clash, it will be vital for society that the ones needed to contain 
the epidemic will prevail. And if that special framework is not already in place, the politicians 
will need to get involved.  
Clearly,  a  bank  failure  cannot  be  compared  to  a  serious  injury  or  sickness  in  terms  of 
personal suffering. But it can be an event which will make many people’s lives very difficult. 
And  a  systemic  banking  crisis,  like  an  epidemic,  may  stall  the  functioning  of  our  entire 
economies. It is therefore important to be able to deal with an ordinary bank failure as well as 
a more serious systemic crisis. And just like in the health sector, when the regulations clash, 
it must be clear which ones will dominate.  
There  is  another  similarity,  I  believe.  Like  with  the  flu,  it  may  be  difficult  at  first  to  tell  the 
nature  of  the  disease.  It  may  not  be  obvious  at  first  if  it  will  be  possible  to  deal  with  the 
problem  bank  within  the  normal  framework,  or  if  there  will  be  a  need  to  take  special 
measures. Therefore, all cases should be dealt with within the same overall structure. 
A speedy insolvency procedure with a fast pay-out to depositors at a low cost to the 
deposit guarantee scheme… 
Setting  up  a  framework  to  deal  with  an  ordinary  bank  failure  does  not  need  to  be  overly 
complicated. Experiences from, for instance, the United States and Canada show that it is 
quite feasible to close banks that do not follow the rules without this leading to consumers 
losing confidence in the financial system, and at relatively low cost. The solution is based on 
the deposit guarantee authority having a right, in fact an obligation, to intervene in a bank 
when the capital falls below a certain level. One first ensures that the depositors covered by 
the  guarantee  have  access  to  their  funds.  Then  the  authorities  can  choose  from  a  broad 
arsenal of measures, including the transfer of the assets and liabilities to another bank or the 
merger with another bank, to solve the problem at the least cost to the deposit guarantee 
scheme. 
I  think  that  there  are  two  characteristics  of  these  kinds  of  systems  which  merit  particular 
attention.  First,  the  ability  to  take  swift  measures  and  to  write  down  claims  quickly.  It  is 
important to restore access to the liquidity held in the bank accounts as quickly as possible 
not  only  for  the  insured  depositors,  but  also  more  generally.  Second,  the  system  is 
constructed such that the principle that owners take the first loss, and after this the creditors 
in any order of priority that might exist, cannot be circumvented. The swift intervention means 
that there is no point in running to the bank to “get first in line”. The fact that the possibility of 
a profit reflects a risk of a loss is fundamental in a market economy, and the system thus 
ensures that this principle is maintained. 
…with robust financing of the deposit guarantee  
A related issue refers to the need to set up a deposit guarantee scheme in such a way that 
the responsibility for the small depositors is fully internalised by the banking sector not only 
on  paper  but  also  in  practice.  In  addition  to  the  need  for  a  quick  pay-out  to  depositors  to 
avoid the risk of a run, it is also important that the financing of the scheme is robust.  
6 
 BIS Review 62/2008
Many schemes rely on a mutual responsibility, where the remaining banks will come up with 
the  financing  to  cover  the  insured depositors  of  a  failed  bank,  in some  cases  relying  on  a 
fund which has been built up in advance. This works fine as long as it is only small banks 
that suffer problems. However, if a larger bank is affected, there is a risk that the problems 
will spread as other banks are forced to contribute substantial funds from their own balance 
sheets.  Given  that  many  markets  are  very  concentrated,  with  a  few  banks  dominating  the 
market,  the  failure  of  the  largest  banks  will  be  difficult  to  finance  in  these  kinds  of  mutual 
systems.  
Particularly  vulnerable  are  the  kind  of  small  private  schemes  which  rely  solely  on  the 
remaining  banks  coming  up  with  money  after  a  failure.  The  deposit  guarantee  can  then 
rather become a destabilising factor without the problem bank necessarily needing to be a 
particularly important actor in the payment system or on the financial markets.  
Clearly,  you  want  to  avoid  a  situation  where  government  intervention  may  be  necessary 
simply because of a poorly designed deposit guarantee system.  
A solution to the problem was put forward in a Swedish government enquiry a few years ago. 
The trick is to make the banks internalise the cost of the guarantee not at the industry level, 
but  at  the  level  of  the  individual  bank.  The  way  to  do  it  is  to  set  up  a  state-administered 
system  to  which  all  the  banks  pay  a  fee  in  relation  to  their  risks,  much  like  an  ordinary 
insurance policy.  
Sure, the state still stands the risk in the event of a large failure. But in this system, it is duly 
compensated for the risk. And the financing is robust. If implemented widely, this solution will 
also make for a more level playing field between banks from different countries competing 
partly  on  the  same  markets.  I  therefore  hope  that  the  proposal  will  get  more  international 
attention than it has so far. 
There must be a strong negotiating position for the government even when financial 
stability is threatened 
The above set up is a good set up to be able to handle the average bank failure. But, again, 
in  some  situations  a  different  regime  may  be  needed.  In  particular,  this  may  be  the  case 
when  it  comes  to  larger  and  more  complex  banks  in  a  situation  of  markets  turmoil,  when 
there is a systemic threat to the financial system. In this situation, it may not be possible to 
immediately  revoke  the  licence  for  a  bank  which  is  in  serious  violation  of  the  supervisory 
regulations.  The  focus  will  need  to  be  on  maintaining  the  key  operations  in  the  financial 
system. To secure this, the bank may need to stay open, at least for a while. The challenge 
is  to  secure  also  in  these  cases  that  the  state  does  not  end  up  with  the  losses  that  the 
shareholders and creditors should bear. 
The first principle is to ensure that the bank’s owners will bear the first loss in a crisis. This 
does  not  need  to  be  very  complicated  in  practical  terms.  In  principle  it  is  a  case  of  the 
supervisory  authority  having  the  possibility  to  quickly  and  efficiently  write  down  the  capital 
against  losses  and  ensure  that  the  owners’  control  over  the  bank  is  reduced  to  a 
corresponding degree. Such a write-down in capital must, of course, be final in order to have 
the  desired  effect.  It  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  the  owners  will  not  find  the  time  to 
violate  the  decision  by  transferring  assets  outside  of  the  bank.  The  appointment  of  a 
temporary administrator with a mandate to sign off any large payment or asset transfer may 
thus be a useful tool. 
The next step, to ensure that the state does not have to bear the creditors’ losses, is more 
difficult, however. The reason for this is that the banks’ funding consists to a large degree of 
borrowing with a short duration, which in turbulent times may tend to disappear.  
BIS Review 62/2008 
 7
There are sophisticated regimes under development… 
It is possible to resort to more or less sophisticated solutions to deal with the problem.  
One means is to fix a system that enables the authorities to take control over the bank and to 
write down not only capital but also claims in an orderly manner, while extending a guarantee 
to the new financing needed when the bank is under public control. The payments needed to 
maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  would  be  effectuated,  while  other  payments 
could be temporarily stopped.  
A draft model for such a system was presented by the Banking Law Committee in Sweden in 
2000  and  the  proposal  is  currently  being  considered  by  the  Swedish  Government.  As  I 
understand it, there is also work being done in other countries to bring about solutions that 
would  mean  that  the  authorities  could  claim  in  all  credibility  that  it  was  possible  to  reduce 
claims even in more complex cases, where there was a risk to financial stability. Ideas that 
have been put forward include immediately being able to impose a partial payment stop on 
certain claims, haircuts, in connection with the authorities taking control over the bank and 
transferring the assets to a temporary bank, known as a bridge bank.  
To  be  effective,  all  these  proposals  make  considerable  demands  for  having  IT  systems  in 
place that can quickly distinguish different types of claims. A number of other preparations 
are also required, for instance to be able to transfer contracts. It is thus not enough for the 
legal structure to be in place; there must also be a practical solution that quite simply does 
not provide any incentives to “push one’s way to the front of the queue”.  
I welcome these efforts to strengthen the frameworks and look forward to seeing the results.  
But  I  believe  that  one  should  have  realistic  expectations  of  the  possibility  to  write  down 
claims  in  a  shaky  market  situation.  The  experiences  from  the  Swedish  banking  crisis  and 
also the Northern Rock case show us that in such situations it may be necessary to have an 
extensive guarantee of the banks’ obligations to stop a bank run or secure continued access 
to the international capital markets.  
…and a simpler way which has proven its worth in real crisis situations 
I would therefore recommend also introducing regulations that give the government the right 
to take over the ownership of a bank in a certain situation. If this is done in the right way, it 
will not only deal with the requirement that the shareholders should be held responsible, it 
will  also  minimise  the  risk  that  the  government  will  need  to  bear  costs  that  the  creditors 
should bear.  
For this to work, the government  should have the right to take over the shares before the 
capital is completely wiped out. There are at least two reasons for this. First, there is a risk 
that the owners will “gamble for resurrection” when the capital is low. Second, it is almost 
always  the  case  that  the  situation  proves  to  be  much  worse  than  one  thought.  When  the 
capital is at zero on paper, there may in actual fact be a large deficit.  
It is not without controversy that the government is given the right to nationalise a bank. It 
may be particularly sensitive in countries that have a recent history of state ownership. But I 
believe that the possibility for compulsory acquisition of the shares is a proper tool. Again, 
the  owners  enter  into  the  business  knowing  that  a  serious  breach  of  the  supervisory 
regulations  should  result  in  the  revocation  of  the  licence  and  the  loss  of  control  over  the 
bank. The fact that an expropriation may be an alternative to the revocation of the licence in 
such a situation when financial stability is at risk is important to restore a proper balance of 
powers.  As  long  as  these  powers  of  the  state  are  clear  beforehand,  this  should  be 
acceptable to the shareholders.  
8 
 BIS Review 62/2008
Returning again to the Swedish crisis, I believe that it was a decisive factor that the banks 
realised early on that the government support measures were no free lunch. When this was 
made clear, the owners had strong motives to recapitalise the banks themselves.  
Of  course,  the  idea  should  not  be  to  end  up  with  a  state  owned  banking  system;  equally 
important is to have an exit strategy.  
Regardless of how the system for managing problems is constructed, it is also important that 
there  is  finality  in  the  intervention.  There  are  several  examples  of  what  can  go  wrong 
otherwise. Any errors should be corrected by means of damages, rather than reversing the 
decision.  
There should be many tools 
If there is a system in place that means there is a credible threat that the owners will lose 
their  influence  in  a  situation  where  the  bank  is  in  serious violation  of the  regulations,  then 
there  is  scope  to  try  out  alternative  methods  of  solving  problems  in  individual  cases.  It  is 
desirable  that  the  authorities  should  have  a  broad  range  of  tools  at  their  disposal.  It  is 
reasonable  that  the  deposit  guarantee  or  the  government  can  take  part  in  a  voluntary 
restructuring  where  the  owners  contribute  capital,  or  that  the  government  can  issue 
guarantees in the case of a private takeover. Important is that owners and creditors should 
not  be  able  to  gamble  on  such  solutions  always  being  the  cheapest  option  for  the 
government. 
Cooperative banks may be converted into a limited liability company  
One special issue is how to deal with cooperative banks and savings banks. These are often 
small, but it cannot be excluded that problems in such banks can have systemic implications. 
It is not realistic to believe that a savings bank facing major problems can be restructured in 
its  original  legal  form.  To  solve  the  problems,  the  alternative  to  winding  up  the  bank  and 
selling  the  assets  is  to  convert  the  bank  into  a  public  limited  company.  We  saw  some 
examples  of  this,  too,  in  the  Swedish  crisis,  where  some  savings  banks  and  other 
cooperative financial institutions had to be restructured. 
Accounting issues need to be sorted out 
When  one  gets  to  the  point  where  the  government  takes  control,  there  are  also  more 
practical problems to deal with. This is a stage where the assets must be inventoried and 
where bad loans may need to be transferred to special asset management companies. One 
important aspect with regard to the feasibility of a quick and efficient solution is therefore the 
existence  of  clear  regulations  for  evaluating  assets  and  liabilities  in  a  situation  where  the 
government intervenes.  
One  particular  question  is  how  to  deal  with  a  situation  where  the  government  provides 
support for existing operations, for instance by injecting capital or providing a guarantee. The 
purpose of the intervention is to save the functions and not the bank as such. However, this 
action can have a positive effect on the value of the bank. In principle, it is reasonable that 
the value should reflect the value of the operations without reference to potential government 
support measures.  
Additional legal issues 
So  if  all  this  has  been  put  in  place,  is  one  home  and  dry?  At  the  national  level,  yes.  On 
condition  of  course  that  a  number  of  basic  conditions  are  met.  The  most  fundamental 
requirement is that there is an effective legal system. It is not possible to close one’s eyes to 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 9
the  corruption  in  the  legal  apparatus  in  some  countries,  making  it  almost  impossible  to 
establish  that  a  bank  has  gone  bankrupt  in  such  countries.  If  this  is  the  case,  the  type  of 
insolvency  framework  has  little  importance.  The  importance  of  reliable  property  rights  and 
registers  and  the  possibility  to  seize  collateral  cannot  be  emphasised  strongly  enough. 
Finally,  it  is  of  course  also  important  that  the  financial  supervisory  authorities  dare  to  take 
difficult decisions. The people who work with these issues should therefore have sufficient 
legal protection.  
International contagion effects and the need for a code of conduct  
The  international  dimension  has  become  more  and  more  important.  The  financial  systems 
are interlinked and there is a considerable risk of contagion effects. Many banks are also a 
part of international groups with a more direct financial link between parts of the group. All of 
this of course creates a need to discuss how to manage banks in distress at an international 
level.  
The  EU,  with  a  single  market  for  financial  services  and  common  regulations,  has  good 
reason  to  go  further.  Much  has  been  done  in  the  area  of  coordination,  with  a  number  of 
documents on how to coordinate in a crisis now in place. But I think that we could go further 
in  the  direction  of  setting  up  minimum  requirements  for  a  crisis  resolution  framework  for 
banks  and  other  institutions  covered  by  the  financial  safety  net.  Here  one  can  draw  some 
parallels  to  the  work  on  fiscal  policy  frameworks,  where  the  EU  has  come  a  long  way  in 
terms of coordination and codes of conduct in the event of macroeconomic crises.  
Where do we go from here? 
It  is  time  to  sum  up.  My  message  is  that  it  is  important  for  us  to  get  in  place  an  efficient 
regulatory  framework  for  weak  banks.  A  framework  which  combines  the  need  to  maintain 
stability  and  minimise  costs  to  the  public  sector  in  the  short  term  with  the  requirement  for 
long-term market discipline. 
Returning to the health-care metaphor I started out with, we need to be able first of all to deal 
with  the  ordinary  flus  and  broken  bones  of  the  financial  system.  But  we  also  need  to  be 
prepared to deal with a more serious event. A possible outbreak of avian flu in the financial 
system. 
I have tried to outline the broad lines of such a framework. In short, the following is needed: 
• 
An insolvency regime which ensures that banks can be effectively closed at a low 
cost to the deposit guarantee system  
An effective depositor protection with a quick pay-out to depositors and a credible 
financing  
The ability to take special measures, such as guarantees, to avoid the failure of a 
bank threatening the financial system in its entirety  
A broad tool box to be able to enforce, also in those exceptional cases, the principle 
that the state will not bear the losses of shareholders and creditors, where it should 
be  possible  to  tie  conditions  to  any  guarantee  issued  and  with  the  option  of 
temporary nationalisation as a last resort. 
   But drawing up a broad structure is perhaps the easiest part. After that, it is necessary to find 
a concrete legal framework. In the end, this responsibility falls on our governments. A few 
countries seem to have much of this in place already. And some have come quite far in this 
work and devote quite a lot of resources to the project. Those that have not I think are well 
advised to get started. It is just never a good idea to set up the fire brigade first when the city 
is on fire.  
10 
 BIS Review 62/2008
But it is a delicate task trying to find an efficient and legally secure system which will also 
work cross border. I therefore see an important role for you who are lawyers specialising in 
insolvency  and  restructuring  in  a  much  needed  international  debate  on  how  best  to 
strengthen the insolvency regime for banks and deposit taking institutions. This is an area 
where all of the good forces need to combine. 
As  long  as  we  all  remember  to  look  up  every  now  and  then  to  check  that  the  individual 
patches  make  for  a  nice  quilt,  I  have  no  doubt  that  we  will  be  able  to  come  up  with  the 
necessary improvements. 
With this rather positive outlook I end my remarks. I thank you very much for your attention 
and I wish you a successful conference. 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 11
