Martín Redrado: Latin America and Argentina – the effect of international 
financial turmoil 
Keynote speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the 
Bank of Russia, Moscow, 26 June 2008. 
 Emerging  markets  face  definitely  a  hostile  international  financial  scenario.  The  global 
economy is going through its worst stage in more than a decade. As I said over a year ago in 
Basel when shocks first hit financial markets, volatility is here to stay. And we will witness its 
consequences for some time to come.  
Credit  markets  in  developed  countries  are  still  deteriorating.  Money  markets  continue  to 
show signs of tension despite innovative tools generated by monetary authorities. Libor and 
Euribor rates are recording wide spreads compared to yields on low counterpart risk such as 
U.S. treasuries. This is largely due to credit risk perceptions among banks, with some degree 
of overshooting in financial institution spreads. Current prices of banks’ CDS show that it will 
take  time  to  correct  this  situation.  As  uncertainty  regarding  each  institution’s  exposure  to 
“toxic waste” persists, banks continue to avoid lending among themselves. Then, demand for 
liquidity  as  a  precautionary  measure  to  confront  potential  materialization  of  contingent 
liabilities is what predominates in the financial markets.  
Even though exceptional central bank steps helped mitigating pressures at the most critical 
times, they are still insufficient to recover investor – or, even worse, consumer – confidence.  
In the U.S., current conditions show at least a substantial difference from previous episodes: 
the trigger to current turmoil is the real estate market. Therefore, the adjustment is different 
and, maybe, deeper than before. The social sensitivity that arises from this sector is reflected 
in  U.S.  Congressional  initiatives,  which  attempt  to  generate  an  orderly  resolution,  calling 
upon the government, banks and investors to share the burden of expected losses. 
In the euro area, divergence is probably a reflection of disparities among member countries. 
While Germany grows at higher-than-expected rates, Mediterranean economies, at the other 
edge, are virtually stagnant. The credit cycle begins to show the first signs of what, in other 
times,  were  periods  of  credit  tightening,  especially  due  to  an  incipient  deceleration  in 
household  financing.  For  these  reasons,  a  reversal  in  the  capital  flows  of  banks  from 
subsidiaries  in  the  emerging  world  to  meet  liquidity  and  solvency  requirements  in  their 
headquarters is something to closely monitor.  
We are witnessing a growing use of unconventional instruments to deal with the crisis in the 
developed world. We have experienced an unprecedented increase in U.S. liquidity windows 
to avoid disruptions in the financial system and to recapitalize it. When examining academic 
contributions  by  board  members  such  as  Bernanke  or  Mishkin,  it  is  clear  that  the  risk 
management  approach  underlies  the  Federal  Reserve’s  current  behavior.  In  Europe, 
pragmatism is also a commodity. We see that the major central banks are prepared to adopt, 
without hesitation, a systemic liquidity approach, which includes, among other mechanisms, 
acquiring illiquid assets from banks to improve their financial position. 
We have seen all across the developed countries the kind of “unconventional policymaking” 
that was very much condemned in the emerging world.  
But today´s outlook in developing economies is different. For the first time, we are not at the 
epicenter  of  the  crisis.  Also,  conditions  for  contagion  are  less  evident.  While  there  are 
currently signs of a slowdown in industrialized economies, emerging ones have continued to 
grow at the rates close to the ones seen in recent years.  
BIS Review 85/2008 
 1
Prices  of  financial  assets  in  emerging  markets  and  those  of  Latin  America  in  particular 
continue to reflect the turbulent international market scenario. However, they show a relative 
degree of strength both vis-à-vis their performance in previous situations of high volatility and 
the  performance  of  other  class  of  risky  assets  (e.g.  High  yield  in  the  U.S.,  structured 
products). Also, there is marked differentiation between specific countries. This is the case, 
for example, of certain countries in Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa with significant current 
account and fiscal deficits, making them more vulnerable to foreign capital outflows.  
Latin  America  is  for  the  first  time  in  decades  managed  under  stronger  macroeconomic 
principles. Most of the economies are experiencing robust growth, underpinned by a buoyant 
domestic  demand.  They  show  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  and  better-matched, 
more  solvent  and  deeper  financial  systems.  The  region  is  finally  leaving  behind  the  well-
known “original sin” as the form of currency mismatches that characterized the past decades, 
significantly reducing our exposure to foreign currency debt. 
In perspective, the eighties are acknowledged as a period of deep fiscal dominance, which 
ended up in a collapse of many economies derived from overspending and over-indebtness 
processes. These, in some cases, led to hyperinflation episodes. Recently, many emerging 
markets reduced the fiscal stimulus as economic growth became more stable and resilient. 
As  a  result,  financing  needs  are  not  an  issue  as  in  the  past,  even  though  shallow  capital 
markets all over the region act as a constraint for sustainable growth over the long term. In 
fact, financial development is key – and will be even more so in our agenda. The depth of the 
financial  system  and  its  integration  with  international  capital  markets  has  a  powerful 
disciplinary effect as it reduces incentives to follow expansionary policies as foreign capital 
flow out to other markets with more predictable returns. 
On the liability side, important progress has also been made in the region. The public debt to 
GDP ratio decreased almost 30 percentage points over the last five years. This reflects, in 
part,  better  liability  management,  which  also  shows  up  in  the  enormous  reduction  in  the 
exposure  to  foreign  currency  debt,  providing  solid  grounds  for  developing  domestic  yield 
curve in local currency. 
All  over  Latin  America,  financial  systems  are  well  capitalized  and  less  exposed  to  public 
sector debt, another sin from the past. Not long ago, we used to have not only central banks 
but also the financial system financing the treasury with no limits whatsoever.  
On  the  external  front,  the  steady  increase  in  commodity  prices  has  provided  a  significant 
boost to the increase in exports for many of the countries in the region. This together with 
more flexible exchange rate arrangements and more diversified trade patterns has resulted 
in a rise in current account surpluses and in positive flows of foreign direct investment.  
But,  prospects  of  reduced  global  growth  are  undoubtedly  a  warning  signal  for  the  region. 
Against this backdrop, we can see two effects coming: a direct one on the level of activity 
through lower trade flows, particularly from countries tied to the U.S. such as Mexico, Chile, 
Ecuador, Venezuela and the Caribbean. Especially given the specificity of their products for 
the U.S. market, in which case a re-routing to other countries would be more difficult. Some 
of these economies are also impacted through the remittances channel. Many Central and 
South American countries are heavily dependent on family remittances from immigrants who 
work primarily in the construction sector in the U.S., an activity which is suffering the brunt of 
the crisis. 
The other effect is indirect in nature: it entails an impact on international commodity prices as 
a result of lower growth. I believe this effect will be mild insofar as recession in the U.S. does 
not worsen. 
Both hard and soft commodity prices soared early this decade, particularly, in the case of the 
former, leading to one of the longest-lasting upward trends.  
Soft  commodities  have  accumulated  increases  ranging  from  100%  to  150%  since  the 
beginning of the century, with an acceleration in 2007-2008. This is leading to historically low 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2008
stock  to  consumption  ratios;  the  lowest  in  the  last  three  decades.  Just  to  give  you  an 
example, corn inventories are 30% below the average of the last ten years.  
Unlike past cycles, the current situation combines not only supply shocks, but also – in my 
view  –  elements  of  structural  change,  disrupting  the  typical  price  pattern  in  most 
commodities, characterized by a reversal to the mean process. 
The evolution in the demand for commodities has played a major role in price behavior in 
recent years. Thanks to the above-trend growth of the most populated emerging economies, 
deep changes are taking place in the social and economic approaches of those regions. This 
structural shift has led to an unusual demand for infrastructure and housing, that is, to a large 
extent,  pressing  on  hard  commodity  prices.  In  addition,  higher  per  capita  income  alters 
consumption habits, mainly in the form of more and better foodstuffs (e.g., China currently 
consumes  almost  55  kilograms  of  meat  per  year  per  person,  while  10  years  ago  it  was 
consuming  40  kilograms  and,  in  1990,  only  28  kilograms).  Agricultural  commodities  also 
show low income elasticity. 
Meeting  these  needs  for  goods  and  services  somehow  entails  a  virtuous  cycle  for  vast 
emerging regions, where there has been a significant growth in wealth, fostering even more 
the demand for certain products.  
A relevant example is the marked growth of Indian and Chinese demand for gold for jewelry, 
a factor that accounted for approximately 75 percent of the rise in world purchases for that 
purpose in 2007. 
In  the  cases  of  soy  and  corn,  where  my  country  is  a  key  international  player,  demand  is 
consistently outpacing supply due to a hike in food consumption in the emerging world and a 
growing  demand  for  biofuels  in  the  industrial  countries.  Although  this  initiative  should 
undoubtedly  be  welcome,  rushing  into  it  could  be  counterproductive.  In  this  sense,  in  the 
U.S. – the largest provider of corn – demand for this cereal to produce ethanol is gradually 
absorbing  the  export  balance,  clearly  tightening  global  supply.  In  Europe,  biodiesel  shows 
the  same  behavior,  although  feedstock  is  more  diversified,  just  like  the  case  of  ethanol, 
which is produced mainly from wheat. Nevertheless, subsidies to biofuel development are a 
central issue given the distress caused by the worldwide surge in food prices.  
Finally, another phenomenon adding uncertainty is the fact that these commodities are now 
considered a financial asset class. The interest they arouse in investors may be due to the 
fundamentals of physical markets still dominating the trend. However, if speculation becomes 
more  widespread,  we  might  enter  into  a  more  volatile  stage.  The  futures  markets  play  a 
major  part  in  setting  international  prices  for  many  agricultural  and  energy  commodities. 
Preserving  its  adequate  operation  is  one  of  the  top  priorities  for  policymakers.  The  recent 
U.S. Commodities futures trading commission initiative to gather more detailed information 
on transactions conducted by noncommercial traders is a step towards this goal. 
This combination of elements poses a new conundrum, whose evolution in time is plagued 
with uncertainty and risks. Anyhow, it is difficult to think both in prices returning to historical 
averages and in rises similar to those of recent years.  
Insofar  as  growth  in  emerging  countries  converges  to  sustainable  long-term  rates, 
commodity  prices  will  regain  a  more  predictable  pattern  of  behavior,  which  will  also 
contribute to lower international volatility. 
Under the background of this international setting, in Argentina the monetary and financial 
regime  has  faced  the  most  significant  challenge  since  the  crisis  of  2001-2002.  However, 
when we look at the results achieved, it is clear that we definitely managed to rise to it. For 
the first time in decades regardless of external and domestic disruptions, the central bank is 
providing  monetary  and  financial  stability,  two  essential  public  goods  for  sustainable 
development. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 3
We know that the country has a long history of macroeconomic instability. Monetary regimes 
have unsuccessfully shifted from one extreme to the other. Therefore, in an economy with 
precedents such as confiscation of deposits (1989, 2001), hyperinflation (1989, 1990), mega-
devaluations (1989, 1990, 1991, 2002), and a default on the public debt (2001), the monetary 
system  cannot  set  itself  an  exclusive  goal,  ignoring  the  economy’s  idiosyncrasy  and 
vulnerabilities. To achieve long-term monetary and financial stability, this historical evolution 
needs to be taken into account.  
It follows logically that, in the past 25 years, our economy has spent over a third of its time off 
the dynamic stability path (defined as the range between two standard deviations of the long-
term  trend),  against  Australia’s  18  percent  or  Brazil’s  25  percent.  Argentina  shares  its 
resources and position in the world with these countries, and it is expected to be somewhat 
symmetrical with them as regards the impact of external shocks. 
These phenomena have severely harmed long-term performance, and were not cost-free in 
terms of welfare: excessive volatility is probably the main reason for our country’s economic 
stagnation in the last three decades of the previous century. Furthermore, the past quarter of 
a century was prolific in terms of the lessons learned from the crises of diverse origin and the 
consequences  for  the  monetary  and  financial  regime.  We  know  that  the  channels  through 
which  excessive  volatility  affects  economic  performance  are  different.  In  this  type  of 
economies, where society has developed a high risk aversion and the need to prevent a new 
crisis becomes a priority objective, macroeconomic policy coordination is critical.  
If there are doubts about the intertemporal solvency of any of the macroeconomic policy set, 
the  conventional  monetary  policy  room  for  manouver  can  be  limited.  When  designing 
monetary  policy,  it  is  important  to  take  the  fiscal,  financial  and  external  conditions  into 
account. An autistic monetary regime that dodges these issues, at the risk of becoming an 
additional source of uncertainty, would be of no use. 
In Sargent’s words, there is no robust monetary regime for an inconsistent fiscal policy. Our 
twentieth century history says a lot about the close link between the lack of fiscal solvency 
and  inflation.  Even  though  in  recent  years  the  restriction  has  eased  thanks  to  the  surplus 
public  accounts,  the  literature  on  fiscal  dominance  problems  is  not  limited  to  the  current 
period.  It  is  well  known  that  tax  revenue  structure  depends  on  the  current  relative  price 
structure – hence the need to address the question under a general equilibrium approach.  
Similarly, doubts as to the financial system’s solvency or external sustainability can also limit 
monetary  policy  room  for  maneuver.  As  to  external  solvency,  it  would  be  wrong  to  tailor 
exchange rate policy to temporary trends: part of the current pressure for the appreciation of 
emerging  currencies  relates  to  commodity  prices  (through  the  current  account)  and  the 
investors’ risk appetite (through the capital account), which may clearly be temporary instead 
of permanent forces. 
Further  research  in  the  economic  literature  has  highlighted  the  difference  in  treatment 
according to whether the trend is caused by permanent or temporary factors. In a financial 
world characterized by capital flow volatility, a massive amount of capital may lead to some 
kind of “Dutch disease,” with unsustainable paths and high real variable volatility.  
This kind of problem might be often the case in small economies, where the local financial 
market may be negligible as compared to international flows, and where it is very difficult to 
know the equilibrium level of real variables.  
Thus, temporary forces that work from the market side may lead to nominal exchange rate 
overshooting  (whether  up  or  down).  Far  from  adjusting  towards  the  long-term  equilibrium 
level,  this  may  cause  excessive  volatility  and  distort  relative  price  signals  for  savings  and 
consumption. 
All in all, it is clear that uncertainty faced by an economy such as Argentina’s is not limited to 
the notion of risk. While in the latter case the stochastic process to generate data is known, 
in  the  former  the  true  model  of  macroeconomic  operation  is  unknown.  A  frequency 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2008
distribution bar chart of the Argentine GDP in the last 25 years would show that it is equally 
probable to grow or fall at a 10 percent rate, so there are empirical problems to project the 
trend of fundamental variables. I remember that the 1998 national budget provided for a 4.7 
percent economic growth for the following year, and in 1999 the decline ended up surpassing 
3 percent. This an eloquent example to illustrate the problem. Similar references could be 
made to the consumption path or long-term equilibrium exchange rate. 
Against  an  uncertain  background,  my  approach  is  to  prevent  euphoria,  adopting  prudent, 
gradual  and  coordinated  policies  to  lead  the  economic  convergence  process  towards  its 
“cruising speed.” In that framework, the classical dilemma of rules versus discretion cannot 
be  addressed  with  a  “corner  solution.”  Extreme  strategies  such  as  rigid  and  lock-in  rules 
would  not  only  lead  to  nowhere  but  also  not  even  meet  the  initial  aim  of  building  fast 
credibility if agents do not perceive their consistency with the other policies.  
On the other extreme, we cannot pursue pure discretion strategies. The demand for flexibility 
might  be  the  perfect  excuse  for  “not  having  a  plan”  and  validating  persistent  trends  in 
nominal variable imbalance. Between both ends, the pillars of our development model must 
gradually and patiently be built based on a path that adequately combines the right doses of 
flexibility and credibility. 
This  approach  is  not  an  isolated  case  in  the  world  either.  Only  50  percent  of  inflation-
targeting countries – where there is theoretically no central bank intervention in the foreign 
exchange market – effectively pursue a free floating regime policy. In the field of monetary 
policy,  this  resulted  initially  in  the  recovery  of  the  basic  functions  of  money,  with  the 
normalization  of  the  financial  system.  In  the  current  phase,  it  refers  to  the  rebuilding  of 
transmission channels of traditional policy tools to adequately use them when the economy 
nears its steady state. 
Then, our country is still going through a transition phase typical of post-crisis periods. And 
these  transition  stages  –  where  key  macroeconomic  variables  converge  to  their  long-term 
values  –  take  time  and  raise  enormous  challenges.  Unlike  the  cases  of  Brazil,  Mexico  or 
Southeast  Asia,  the  abandonment  of  the  convertibility  regime  included  simultaneously  an 
institutional breakdown, a huge devaluation, the destruction of the financial system and the 
default on the public debt.  
There  are  several  examples  of  the  normalization  phase  that  is  still  taking  place:  monetary 
transmission channels are just being rebuilt, since credit to the private sector accounts for 
only 12 percent of the economy; far below the Latin American average. 
The experience of other emerging economies shows that consistency and gradualism in both 
policy design and implementation are the adequate approach during this phase. Therefore, 
patiently rebuilding the power of monetary policy is a key step towards stability. Under these 
circumstances,  a  sustainable  and  long-lasting  reduction  of  inflation  depends  on  the 
comprehensive,  joint  and  coordinated  action  of  the  monetary  policy,  the  fiscal  policy,  the 
wage policy, and the competition policy during the transition phase. The path is a sequential 
one while we build the traditional monetary tools as effective policy instruments. 
Within this framework, our’s monetary and financial framework is based on three main pillars: 
First, a robust and consistent monetary policy that ensures the equilibrium between supply 
and demand in the monetary market. This system is the most appropriate for an economy 
that still makes intensive use of relatively liquid means of payment and has a relatively low 
bank penetration. 
Second, a managed floating exchange rate regime that enables us to weather situations of 
financial  stress  –  that  is,  a  regime  that  provides  predictability.  We  do  not  want  to  prevent 
variables  from  converging  to  their  long-term  values,  but  we  would  rather  avoid  excessive 
volatility as a source of unnecessary disturbances in economic decisions. On the other hand, 
we do not want to provide any sort of insurance that favors speculative flows. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 5
Third, countercyclical financial policies to provide buffers against volatility. These include the 
accumulation of foreign reserves and a sound financial system that buffers turmoil, instead of 
spreading it. 
I cannot find a more telling proof of the reasons why we have pursued antyciclical policies –
such  as  foreign  reserve  accumulation  –  during  these  years:  the  recent  external  shock  we 
faced can be compared to the effect of the Mexican crisis of 1995 in terms of the magnitude 
of outflows, but had a mild impact on domestic variables. The monetary and financial system 
truly protected it against financial contagion.  
A  true  example  of  our  risk  management  approach  is  the  recovery  of  banking  liquidity  and 
solvency. Due to an improved regulatory framework, we developed a sound financial system. 
Another  of  the  achievements  of  the  financial  policy  implemented  by  the  central  bank  has 
been the reduction in exposure to the public sector, which currently accounts for only 14.6% 
of  assets,  almost  36  p.p.  below  the  maximum  reached  in  the  period  following  the  crisis  in 
2001-2002.  
The setting of a global cap of 35% on this exposure since July 2007, as well as maximum 
limits on the basis of bank capital and the jurisdiction of their operations, and the elimination 
of  the  bias  in  capital  adequacy  requirements,  among  other  measures,  made  it  possibly  to 
definitively crowding-in the private sector. 
Balance sheet normalization was also reflected in bank liabilities, as deposits by the private 
sector have become the sector’s main source of funding. Currently, the liquidity rediscounts 
granted  by  the  central  bank  during  the  crisis  have  almost  disappeared  from  bank  balance 
sheets (amounting to only 0.4% of financial system assets). 
Our  risk  management  approach  addressed  three  basic  aspects  to  deal  with  the  crisis: 
preserving sufficient liquidity, foreign exchange market stabilization, and regulatory changes 
to soften the impact of turbulences on the financial system. The liquidity stress caused by 
international financial volatility in the local market was dealt with through measures such as 
buying back part of the central bank notes directly, or auctioning floating-rate and then fixed-
rate  repos  –  distributed  among  institutions  according  to  their  market  share,  and  extending 
their terms from 7 to 30 days. 
The  U.S.  dollar  has  historically  represented  a  safe  haven  for  Argentinians  in  times  of 
uncertainty. Therefore, to curb depreciation expectations by acting in the foreign exchange 
market  has  positive  implications,  not  only  for  money  market  expectations  but  also  for 
financial  system  stability.  Thus,  we  have  demonstrated  that  the  current  managed  floating 
exchange rate regime is the most appropriate at this time of our economic history.  
Regarding the FX market evolution, the right question to ask is: what would have happened 
under the same circumstances but with a pure floating exchange rate regime in place? The 
timely  intervention  curbed  depreciation  expectations  and,  thus,  the  potential  pressure  on 
prices with minimal use of reserves. 
I  mean,  it  is  a  regime  that,  without  providing  any  sort  of  “foreign  exchange  insurance,” 
prevents excessive volatility from affecting economic decisions.  
The benefits of this kind of policies are well-known in the modern economic literature. Recent 
studies factor segmentation of and restricted access to financial markets into the analysis of 
FX policy. The most relevant conclusions suggest that, in terms of maximizing social welfare, 
the  best  choice  is  a  less  flexible  foreign  exchange  regime,  where  access  to  hedging 
instruments  is  more  limited.  And  this  is  a  more  realistic  conceptual  framework  for  our 
economy. 
All in all, central bank actions show the consistency and robustness of our strategy, which 
are  allowing  us  to  pass  the  current  stress  test  with  no  stress.  This  resilience  is  not  a 
coincidence. It is actually a consequence of the existence of multiple preventive mechanisms 
built  throughout  recent  years  so  as  not  to  jeopardize  stability  in  situations  like  the  current 
6 
 BIS Review 85/2008
one.  We  proved  to  have  the  necessary  “artillery”  to  “buffer”  domestic  variables  while 
maintaining  monetary  prudence  in  the  face  of  turbulences  with  clear  symptoms  of 
permanence in time. 
I always stated that good economic analysis implies not to bundle countries as they follow 
very  different  patterns  and  are  at  different  stages  in  their  paths  towards  long-term 
sustainability.  
Simplistic  comparisons  among  the  various  countries’  situations  may  lead  to  inappropriate 
policy recommendations. However, we can find some similarities between the Russian and 
the Argentine cases. 
In  my  opinion,  Russia  and  Argentina  share  some  common  economic  features  in  recent 
history. Both are economies that are in sort of transition phases. Both countries began the 
90´s  with  a  process  of  deep  transformations.  In  the  case  of  Russia  it  was  about  building 
market institutions. In our case it had to do more with the reconstruction of many of these 
institutions. Of course, these are no easy times and there are no single recipes. Becoming a 
market economy is not just about privatizing public companies, opening financial markets to 
the world and deregulating every single market from one day to the next. Unfortunately, both 
countries learned this the hard way. 
Both  countries  suffered  painful  crisis  that  made  the  traditional  tools  for  the  subsequent 
recovery mostly unavailable. The lack of key fiscal and monetary policy instruments given the 
collapse and the need to regain confidence on the domestic currency after the default and 
the devaluation were some of the common features.  
But, as well as we share a history of economic crisis, we can also speak up about robust 
recoveries.  The  upturn  came  in  place  relatively  quick  and  still  lasts  in  both  countries.  The 
recovery  in  economic  activity  took  four  quarters  to  show  up  an  increase  in  year-on-year 
terms.  Notwithstanding,  yearly  GDP  growth  rate  averaged  roughly  9%  since  the  recovery 
begun. 
A  common  feature  of  emerging  market  crisis  is  a  sharp  depreciation  of  its  currencies.  In 
these episodes, the usual “overshooting” phenomena took place, with FX depreciating in real 
terms 68% in Argentina and 46% in Russia. But, as economies begun to stabilize, currencies 
entered a process of appreciation in real terms, reducing almost half of the initial jump.  
Also, economic activity recovered on the backup of strong export performance, fueled in part 
by commodities prices. Oil prices begun to increase in 1999, giving a strong boost to Russian 
economy, and agricultural quotes picked up from 2003, pushing up activity in Argentina. This 
was the seed for a strong process of foreign reserve accumulation, which allowed for both 
countries to almost triple stocks in three years since the worse of the crisis. 
One of the main drivers of the crisis was banking system. A common feature of those years 
was the heavy burden of public sector debt on banks balance sheet. Although in Russia the 
collapse  was  mainly  driven  by  a  sort  of  sudden  stop  that  made  impossible  to  keep  rolling 
over short term public debt, in the case of Argentina, private deposit withdrawals did the job.  
At  the  end  of  the  day,  we  can  state  in  both  cases  that  inconsistencies  between  fiscal 
(unsustainable public debt dynamics) and exchange rate policy (overvalued real exchange 
rates) in a context of diminished global liquidity ended up in a crisis. But as well as in the 
case of FX, terms of trade, reserve accumulation and GDP growth, the recovery took place 
at a remarkably fast pace.  
Even though our monetary policy designs were alike during the aftermath of the crisis (e.g. 
Control of money growth and managed floating exchange rate regime) we, both, still have a 
long way to go. There are many pending issues to deal with over a longer horizon such as 
further deepening of local financial markets, strengthening fiscal and monetary institutions. 
Meanwhile,  find  our  way  out  of  current  domestic  tensions  derived  from  high  prices  in 
commodities markets is definitely a more immediate source of concern. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 7
To  sum  up,  policy  makers  around  the  globe  face  key  dilemmas.  While  challenges  are 
significant, now we seem to understand that policy recipes vary from one country to the other 
in this complex scenario. This progress is, obviously, welcomed. Especially for us, emerging 
markets’ policy makers, as we have to catch up with growth, deal with the tensions derived 
from buoyant economies and, most importantly, build institutions at the same time.  
In fact, it is more a synchronic than a sequential two-fold challenge: advancing towards the 
aims  set  to  develop  our  economies  and  building  institutions  simultaneously.  To  implement 
these policies effectively, the only possible way is to keep the consistent (i mean consistent 
with  the  history  and  idiosyncrasies  of  each  economy)  and  gradualist  approach  that  has 
guided us in recent years. The approach that seems to be the rule rather than the exception 
not only in the emerging world but also all across developed countries. 
8 
 BIS Review 85/2008
