Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Speech by  Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at a hearing 
before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 
26 March 2008. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
Economique et Monétaire, je me réjouis d'apparaître devant votre commission aujourd'hui et 
de poursuivre notre dialogue régulier. Je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation 
de  la  situation  économique  et  monétaire,  en  expliquant  les  raisons  sous-jacentes  à  nos 
récentes  décisions  de  taux.  Ensuite,  je  vous  donnerai  de  plus  amples  explications  sur  la 
distinction opérée par la BCE entre la définition de notre politique monétaire d’une part, et la 
preservation  du  bon  fonctionnement  du  marche  monetaire  d’autre  part.  Zum  Abschluss 
möchte ich einige vorläufige Schlussfolgerungen für die Regulierung, Aufsicht und Stabilität 
der Finanzmärkte ziehen. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Since my previous appearance before the European Parliament in mid December, inflation 
has remained at relatively high levels of above 3%. The incoming information has confirmed 
our assessment of prevailing upside risks to price stability over the medium term, in a context 
of continued vigorous money and credit growth. Strong upward pressure on inflation in the 
short term mainly stems from the recent increases in energy and food prices. Looking ahead, 
the inflation rate is expected to remain significantly above 2% for most of the year. Hence the 
period of relatively high inflation rates will be more protracted than previously expected.  
The  March  2008  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  foresee  HICP  inflation  to  range 
between  2.6%  and  3.2%  in  2008,  and  between  1.5%  and  2.7%  in  2009.  These  projected 
ranges have shifted upwards, mainly as a result of higher food and energy prices. I should 
stress  that  the  staff  projections  are  based  on  a  number  of  purely  technical  assumptions 
which  are  unrelated  to  policy  intentions,  such  as  the  use  of  market  expectations  in  the 
assumptions for short-term interest rates.  
In the view of the Governing Council, risks to the medium-term outlook for inflation are on the 
upside. These risks include further rises in oil and agricultural prices. Furthermore, taking into 
account  high  capacity  utilisation  and  tight  labour  market  conditions,  wage  growth  may  be 
stronger  than  currently  expected,  as  well  as  the  pricing  power  of  firms,  notably  in  market 
segments  with  low  competition.  Moreover,  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  may 
increase beyond what is foreseen. 
At this juncture, it is therefore imperative that all parties concerned meet their responsibilities 
and  that  second-round  effects  on  price  and  wage-setting  stemming  from  current  inflation 
rates are prevented. To that end, schemes in which nominal wages are indexed to consumer 
prices  must  be  avoided.  This  is  key  to  preserving  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and 
thereby the purchasing power of all euro area citizens.  
Turning to economic activity, in the fourth quarter of 2007, real GDP grew by 0.4% quarter-
on-quarter,  following  a  rise  of  0.8%  in  the  third  quarter.  Incoming  information  confirms  the 
picture of moderating growth. Looking forward, ongoing growth is expected. The euro area 
economy has sound fundamentals and does not suffer from major imbalances. Investment 
growth – while dampened by the global slowdown – should provide ongoing support. At the 
same  time,  employment  and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly  and 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 1
unemployment rates have fallen to levels not seen for 25 years. Accordingly, consumption 
growth should continue to contribute to economic expansion. 
This assessment is reflected in the latest ECB staff projections, which foresee annual real 
GDP growth in the range of 1.3% to 2.1% in 2008 and of 1.3% and 2.3% in 2009. These 
ranges have been revised downwards, reflecting weaker global demand, stronger pressure 
from commodity prices and less favourable financing conditions than foreseen in December.  
In the view of the Governing Council, uncertainty about the prospects for economic growth 
remains  unusually  high.  Downside  risks  relate  to  a  potentially  broader  than  currently 
expected  impact  of  financial  market  developments.  Further  downside  risks  stem  from  the 
scope for additional increases in commodity prices, protectionist pressures and the possibility 
of disorderly developments owing to global imbalances. 
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to 
longer-term  horizons.  On  the  basis  of  data  available  up  to  January,  the  underlying  money 
and credit expansion remains strong, even taking temporary factors into account, such as the 
relatively flat yield curve. There is little evidence that the financial market turbulence since 
August 2007 strongly influenced the overall dynamics of broad money and credit aggregates. 
Bank loans to the domestic private sector have grown at annual rates around 11% for the 
past two years. While the growth of household borrowing has moderated over recent months, 
loan growth to non-financial corporations remains very strong. 
In  line  with  its  mandate,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  remains  strongly  committed  to 
preventing second-round effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price stability over 
the medium term. Against this background, on 6 March, we decided to leave the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. The current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving our 
price  stability  objective.  Indeed,  the  firm  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations is of the highest priority. The Governing Council will continue to monitor very 
closely all developments.  
The separation of the tasks of determining the monetary policy stance on the one 
hand and the preservation of the proper functioning of the money markets on the 
other hand 
Let me now address the issue of the separation between the determination of the monetary 
policy stance on the one hand and its actual implementation on the other hand, meant as 
keeping short-term rates close to the level chosen by the Governing Council. In accordance 
with the Treaty provisions, the primary objective of the ECB is to maintain price stability in the 
euro area. To that end, the Governing Council determines, on the basis of its economic and 
monetary analyses, the appropriate monetary policy stance by setting the key ECB interest 
rates at the level that ensures the maintenance of price stability over the medium term. In 
view of safeguarding its credibility and firmly anchoring long-term inflation expectations, it is 
crucial that the Governing Council sets the appropriate monetary policy stance on the basis 
of no other considerations than the delivery of price stability in the medium term.  
Once the appropriate level of the key ECB interest rates has been set, the Executive Board 
of the ECB implements monetary policy so that the level of the key interest rates decided by 
the  Governing  Council  actually  prevails  in  the  money  market.  For  this  purpose,  the  ECB 
steers, primarily by means of open market operations, the liquidity which is lent to euro area 
credit institutions against adequate and sound collateral and for a given and short period of 
time. By so doing the ECB also fosters a smooth functioning of the euro area money market.  
The steering of liquidity has been an important element of the Eurosystem’s framework for 
monetary  policy  implementation  since  the  launch  of  the  euro.  By  these  means,  market 
participants get clear and loud the signal about the orientation of the monetary policy stance 
and this fosters the predictability and credibility of the Governing Council’s monetary policy 
decisions.  The  fact  that  these  decisions  are  firmly  based  on  the  objective  of  price  stability 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2008
and the concomitant fact that the steering of liquidity is in turn dependent on these decisions, 
but  in  no  way  influences  them  ensures  that  price  stability  is  maintained  over  the  medium 
term. This also ensures that the liquidity provision aimed at promoting the smooth functioning 
and  resilience  of  money  markets  is  also  fully  in  line  with  the  primary  objective  of  price 
stability.  
Particularly  after  the  onset  of  financial  tensions  in  August  2007,  the  principle,  that  the 
steering  of  liquidity  is  subservient  to  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  does  not  affect  it, 
appeared of the essence.  
In this period of acute turbulences, the ECB has succeeded in containing deviations of very 
short-term  interest  rates  from  the  official  interest  rate  set  by  the  Governing  Council.  As  a 
result, the ECB has ensured a continued effective implementation of monetary policy in line 
with the stance, thereby also contributing to safeguarding overall financial stability.  
Since  the  last  Hearing  in  December,  tensions  have  continued.  During  this  period,  the 
Eurosystem  remained,  as  usual,  in  close  contact  with  other  major  central  banks.  In  this 
context,  on  11  March  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  decided,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Federal  Reserve  to  offer  US  dollar  funding  to  Eurosystem  counterparties  as  it  did  in 
December  2007  and  in January  2008.  Through  the  operations  currently  being  undertaken, 
liquidity for an overall amount of up to USD 30 billion is provided. The Swiss National Bank is 
following an analogous course of action. 
Overall,  given  its  flexible  design,  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  with  its  broad 
range of instruments has thus far proved to be resilient and effective. Even in the course of 
the  ongoing  financial  turmoil,  there  has  been  no  need  to  adjust  or  extend  the  existing 
framework, e.g. by introducing innovative instruments or a broader range of collateral.  
Recent developments regarding financial stability and supervision  
I  would  now  like  to  share  with  you  the  ECB’s  assessment  of  the  current  financial  stability 
situation. I will also touch briefly upon the possible policy measures which are being prepared 
at the European and international level in response to the financial turmoil.  
With  the  global  financial  system  undergoing  a  process  of  de-leveraging,  the  euro  area 
financial stability outlook continues to be clouded by considerable uncertainty. Since my last 
hearing  before  your  Committee,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  total  valuation  and  income 
losses  facing  the  global  financial  system  are  clearer.  Yet  considerable  uncertainty  still 
remains about the reliability of total cost estimates and about how the costs will eventually be 
spread. There is also uncertainty about the possibility of feedback effects onto the financial 
system, including questions about what the ultimate impact on the intermediation of credit – 
both through financial institutions and markets – will be. Moreover, until conditions in the US 
housing  market  show  signs  of  improvement,  the  possibility  of  continuing  tensions  in 
structured credit markets cannot be excluded.  
In the period ahead, large euro area banks are likely to face pressure on their revenues on 
account  of  lower  activity  levels  in  the  structured  credit  markets  as  well  as  from  a  general 
retrenchment from risk-taking across many business lines. At the same time, the banks are 
facing increased funding costs. Consistent with this, a number of financial market indicators – 
including bank equity prices and credit default swap spreads – have generally been reflecting 
expectations of weaker profitability as well as concerns about credit and counterparty risks. 
On the positive side, several years of strengthening profitability had by mid-2007 left the euro 
area  banking  sector  in  a  strong  financial  position  to  face  the  possibility  of  a  credit  cycle 
downturn.  
All  in  all,  given  the  heightened  uncertainties,  and  in  an  environment  where  balance  sheet 
conditions could unexpectedly change, vigilance is more than ever of the essence. Financial 
institutions  will  need  to  step  up  their  efforts  to  effectively  manage  the  risks  that  may  lie 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 3
ahead. From the central banks’ perspective, restoring confidence among economic agents 
and  market  participants  is  crucial  in  the  current  environment  of  great  uncertainty  and  high 
market volatility. One very important contribution the ECB makes to preserving confidence is 
to  continue  firmly  anchoring  medium  to  long  term  inflation  expectations  for  the  euro  area 
while at the same time ensuring the smooth functioning of the short-term money market.  
At  the  current  juncture,  priority  has  been  given  to  comprehensively  draw  lessons  and 
formulate  policy  responses  to  address  the  challenges  raised  by  the  financial  market 
turbulence. The key areas have been identified and since my last hearing before you, work 
has been progressing intensively both internationally and in the EU. The Financial Stability 
Forum and the ECOFIN have developed preliminary assessments warranting further policy 
action. In that context, let me mention some areas I see as requiring timely responses: 
First,  with  regard  to  improving  disclosure  and  valuations  of  structured  finance  products, 
financial institutions are called upon to promptly and fully disclose on- and off-balance sheet 
risk exposures. Moreover, guidance is warranted by auditors and supervisors with the aim of 
enhancing the clarity and robustness of structured product valuations, particularly in relation 
to illiquid assets.  
Second, credit rating agencies, whilst eliminating conflicts of interest, should take measures 
to expand the scope of information provided to investors – thus facilitating their exercise of 
due diligence, while improving governance and rating methodologies. If their endeavours will 
not prove to be adequate, public policy action would need to be considered.  
Third, supervisors should ensure that banks retain adequate capital and liquidity buffers. In 
this context, work is underway to refine certain aspects of the capital adequacy framework, 
especially  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of  securitisation  and  off-balance  sheet  exposures. 
Moreover, further supervisory guidance needs to be developed for liquidity risk, incorporating 
the lessons from the turmoil and focusing on liquidity stress-testing and contingency funding 
plans.  
These are three examples of areas where very important progress should be made. More 
generally, I would call for a further significant change of culture at the national, European and 
global  level.  I  would  sum  up  this  cultural  change  with  two  words:  transparency  and  anti-
cyclicality. “Transparency” because enhanced public information on financial instruments, on 
markets and on institutions is not only necessary to permit market participants to take optimal 
economic decisions, but is also the only way we have of avoiding contagion, herd-behaviour 
and,  therefore,  the  propagation  of  turbulences  in  times  of  difficulty.  And  “anti-cyclicality” 
because  a  large  number  of  rules,  regulations  and  procedures  have  a  tendency  to  foster 
behaviour that is largely procyclical, amplifying the booms as well the busts in the cycle. We 
must  look  at  all  parts  of  global  finance  with  a  view  to  diminishing  progressively  their  pro-
cyclical components, which implies, in particular but certainly not exclusively, eliminating to 
the  greatest  possible  extent  asymmetry  in  the  treatment  of  booms  and  busts  and,  where 
necessary,  extending  as  far  as  possible  the  time-horizon  adopted  by  all  the  institutions 
concerned.  
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2008
