Kevin M Warsh: Remarks on covered bond framework 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the US Department of the Treasury Press Conference on Covered Bond 
Framework, Washington DC, 28 July 2008.  
 On  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  I  am  pleased  to  join  Secretary  Paulson  and  my  fellow 
bank supervisors today. 
Financial  markets  continue  to  show  the  ill  effects  of  turmoil  triggered  by  mortgage  losses. 
The real economy is underperforming in terms of growth and job creation, a result in part of 
financial  strains.  And  financial  institutions  themselves  are  affected  by  the  generalized 
pullback  in  liquidity  and  deteriorating  credit  quality.  Nearly  one  year  after  the  onset  of 
financial  market  distress,  many  financial  institutions  have  retreated  from  certain  business 
lines,  limited  their  participation  in  markets  for  some  financial  products,  delevered  their 
balance sheets, and taken other actions aimed at balance sheet repair. These developments 
are both necessary and expected. 
But, the path to a new financial market architecture, however uneven and improvised, will not 
only  be  marked  by  the  forces  of  retrenchment.  The  path  should  equally,  in  my  view,  be 
distinguished by the creative impulses that drive product and market innovation. It is perhaps 
too  convenient  to  denigrate  the  attributes  of  dynamism  and  ingenuity,  particularly  late  in 
economic  cycles,  when  the  forces  of  innovation  can  disappoint  and  weaken  the  real 
economy.  Policymakers  and  market  participants  alike  should  recognize  that  innovation--in 
our  product  markets,  labor  markets,  and  yes,  our  financial  markets--is  likely  to  prove  a 
necessary  net  contributor  to  economic  growth  in  the  coming  period.  We  should  also  be 
reminded that financial innovation need not be equated with product complexity. 
While some take comfort in the presumption that global economies have decoupled, I would 
note  that  our  global  financial  markets  are  more  integrated  than  ever.  Financial  products 
successfully  developed  in  a  single  geography  often  can  be  readily  exported  to  another; 
readily,  that  is,  if  the  new  product  export  befits  investor  preferences  and  policymakers 
remove  barriers  to  their  adoption.  Today's  introduction  of  the  Treasury  Covered  Bond 
Framework  may  be  illustrative  of  the  benefits  of  product  innovation  in  globally  connected 
financial markets. 
Treasury's discussions with market participants suggest that a covered bond framework may 
attract investor interest and facilitate greater access to mortgage credit. High-quality assets 
might be financed if banks are allowed to manage pools of loans, substituting new loans into 
the pool as others become delinquent. Newly issued covered bonds backed by high quality 
mortgage loans and issued by strong financial institutions may find a growing investor base 
in the United States. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  long  accepted  a  broad  range  of  high-quality  collateral  from 
depository institutions at its discount window. Highly rated, high-quality covered bonds would 
generally fall within that broad range as eligible collateral. Private lenders also are likely to 
find such bonds attractive as collateral for credit extensions. 
Financial  innovation,  properly  understood,  can  increase  the  diversity  of  funding  sources, 
improve the distribution of risks, and provide incentives to monitor such risks--all helping to 
promote  economic  growth.  The  Federal  Reserve  seeks  to  encourage  new  and  innovative 
sources of funding, and will continue to work with other policymakers and market participants 
to accomplish this important objective.  
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
