Yves Mersch: Society forming changes and their impact on information 
needs 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the  2007 
EUROSTAT  Conference 
for  Modern  Society“,  Luxembourg, 
7 December 2007. 
“Modern  Statistics 
 In 1999 the late Eugenio Domingo Solans gave a speech in Luxembourg during which he 
insisted on the importance of good statistics for the conduct of monetary policy. Since then 
euro  area  statistics  have  considerably  improved  and  yet,  as  users  of  statistics,  we  are 
constantly requesting improvements of existing statistics or even the establishment of new 
requirements. 
So, are we users just experts in statistical harassment, as one may say, or are we modifying 
our data requests because we need to do so? 
I  strongly  believe  that  we  need  to  do  so  because  of  the  non-static  nature  of  our  modern 
societies and the necessity to dispose of statistical data describing the underlying nature of 
the changes to the stakeholders. Indeed, the economy that statistics are supposed to cover 
is changing at an impressive speed and should statistics be useful, then they have to keep 
up with the pace and adapt to the changing environment. 
According to this view, one of the important roles of statistics is to provide policy makers with 
data  and  tools  necessary  to  assess  the  level  of  uncertainties  and  to  provide  common 
reference points when entering decision-making processes. Only by using statistical data are 
we able to clear the view and guess what is the best way forward thus optimizing the rules 
versus  discretion  trade-off.  So,  statistical  data  collection,  compilation  and  dissemination  is 
not  an  aim  in  itself  but  a  necessity  to  achieve,  and  share,  an  efficient  decision-making 
process at all levels of society. 
But, what are these changes that impact our need for information? 
Commissioner Almunia has already provided some important definitions concerning modern 
society and modern statistics. I would like to emphasis some factors requiring changes to our 
societies today which find their origin in: 
• 
• 
• 
political and institutional changes 
economical and financial evolution 
exogenous factors 
Political and institutional changes 
During the last 50 years, the institutional set up has been subject to various changes such as 
the  creation  of  the  IMF,  the  EEC,  the  OECD  etc.  Most  of  these  new  bodies  required  new 
types  of  data  compared  with  the  data  needed  by  previous  institutions.  The  most  recent 
examples  are  the  introduction  of  the  single  European  currency  and  the  creation  of  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  which  are  at  the  start  of  new  information  needs.  Indeed, 
monetary  policy  is  almost  impossible  without  good  statistics.  Therefore,  once  European 
States had decided to go in the direction of a Monetary Union, the point was not only to put 
some people together in a room to take decisions but to enable that group of people to take 
good  and  transparent  decisions.  In  view  of  the  different  cultural  backgrounds,  different 
operational  and  institutional  frameworks  were  underpinned  by  different  data  requirements. 
With a common policy making-set-up what would be the statistical adjustment requirement? 
The only way forward was to establish a common framework for existing statistics as well as 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 1
developing a set of new statistics. This work started well before the start of Monetary Union 
and  there  still  remains  room  for  improvement.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the 
important work done by the European system of statistics. 
So, faced with a new type of user requirements (i.e. monetary policy for what is at present a 
monetary  union  of  soon  13  countries),  the  European  Statistical  System  (ESS)  and  the 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) statistical services successfully established the 
needed statistical framework. It was therefore important to define a set of harmonised data to 
be  collected  by  the  respective  national  authorities,  be  they  central  banks  or  national 
statistical institutes, in all of the euro area member countries. 
At  the  same  time  it  should  be  highlighted  that  most  of  these  national  institutions  already 
collected  data  for  their  own  national  needs  and  that  the  development  of  the  euro-zone 
statistical needs did not necessarily offset the national statistical requirements designed for 
and evolved in a national policy-making environment. In this regard, it may be pointed out 
that part of the existing national and euro area statistical needs are unfortunately not totally 
coherent reflecting the transfer of monetary policy making to the higher European level while 
retaining other areas of economic policy at the national level. In this regard, I strongly urge 
users of statistics i.e. policy makers as well as compilers to reflect on the fact that reacting to 
changing societies does not only imply the development of new statistics but also a strong 
reflection  on  the  need  to  maintain  currently  available  “old”  statistics.  This  phenomenon 
probably  reflects  the  inertia  of  existing 
the  resistance  of  national 
bureaucracies to transferring competences to the supranational level. 
Very  often  these  needs  are  defined  without  consultation  of  other  institutions  already 
collecting  data,  or  there  is  consultation,  but  minor  differences  concerning  the  data  needs 
used  to  collect  different  sets  of  data  persist.  What  would  be  better  would  be  to  try  to 
overcome these differences and to collect a single set. A single set might not be perfect for 
all the regulators concerned but it would be adequate and cost less. 
institutions  and 
Economic and financial evolution 
During the debt crisis in Latin America in the late 1980's, most of the actors involved had to 
accept the fact that they had been surprised by the crisis. In the aftermath of the crisis, the 
IMF decided to introduce a new data standard, the Special Data Dissemination Standard, in 
order to collect additional information on the situation of its member countries and to publish 
this information much faster than it had been done in the past. This new data requirement 
was felt necessary since it is supposed to better inform economic actors and therefore create 
an early warning system for financial crises. 
The  “new  economy”  and  its  important  productivity  gains  due  to  information  technologies 
generated the need for more detailed data concerning prices – for instance Hedonic prices to 
capture ever faster changes. 
The present crisis in the American mortgage market will also call for additional information. 
Indeed  financial  innovation  supposed  to  spread  risk  and  thus  liberate  capital  and  increase 
liquidity was found not to be stress resistant. Credit risk transfer with increased complexity 
and dissemination in parallel decreased both access to information and the exercise of due 
diligence. 
The  lack  of  transparency  triggered  a  wave  of  mistrust  impairing  the  proper  functioning  of 
whole segments of financial markets. 
It had been expected that the generalized phenomenon of the mispricing of assets had its 
origin  in  some  institutional  developments  such  as  Hedge  funds  or  Private  equity  and 
increased  disclosure  was  requested  in  this  direction.  However,  the  unfolding  of  the 
turbulence  identifies  a  lack  of  transparency  associated  with  the  “originate  and  distribute” 
model, the role of rating agencies and the limits to the supervisory boundaries. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2008
The  foreseeable  response  will  be  more  disclosure,  better  information  and  increased 
statistical coverage. In all, greater transparency. 
Exogenous factors 
The  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  2001  were  also  at  the  beginning  of  additional 
information needs. 
In  the  recent  past,  the  US  customs  have  requested  more  private  information  from  people 
travelling into the USA and most countries are now introducing new biometric passports. 
In the same vein, the United-States, in the war against terror, requested as much information 
as possible about financial transactions in order to reduce the financing of terrorists. Hence, 
they  obtained  access  to  additional  and  mainly  very  confidential  information  on  financial 
transactions worldwide through SWIFT. 
Where is the end? 
Will we continuously increase data needs or are there limits? 
There are at least two limits. 
• 
data production generates costs 
The  increasing  data  requests  on  the  part  of  regulators  generate  increased 
production costs and therefore decreases competitiveness. 
privacy concerns 
Access to more detailed data going as far as the data collected through SIWFT in 
foreign jurisdiction raises concerns about privacy. Indeed, regulators and authorities 
nowadays  have  access  to  more  detailed  information  about  individuals  through 
various  databases  established  for  taxation,  war  against  terror,  business  statistics 
etc. Not only is there a risk that we collect too detailed and confidential information 
but  also  that  these  databases  are  interlinked.  The  constitutional  checks  and 
balances  have  to  be  adjusted  to  these  developments  as  well  as  our  consensus 
concerning the rights of an individual versus the rights of society as a whole. 
 Conclusion 
The essential question is to know whether all these data requests are really necessary. 
Indeed, is it necessary to collect so much specific and detailed data? 
I think that is not the case and there are several possible ways forward in order to reduce the 
associated reporting burden. 
• 
Better cooperation between regulators and the political will to abandon some very 
specific  and  detailed  requests  made  by  a  single  regulator  in  order  to  build  up 
common needs and data requests. 
Collect  more  appropriate  data:  when  introducing  new  data  requests,  statisticians 
should review their needs in order to abandon those that are not important in order 
to maintain the burden at an appropriate level and avoid increasing it constantly. It 
should  be  said  that  policy  makers  must  also  accept  a  certain  loss  of  detailed 
information since policy makers are the driving force behind the data requests. 
Collect  the  important  information  and  derive  details  on  the  basis  of  less  frequent 
surveys. 
  Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 3
