Anselmo L S Teng: Macao’s financial sector – exhibiting steady 
development 
Speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the 2008 
AMCM Spring Cocktail Reception, Macao, 11 March 2008. 
 The Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Francis Tam, 
The Honourable Director of the Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office of the 
Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Zhou Zhikui,  
The Honourable Chairman of the Macau Association of Banks, Mr. Ye Yixin, 
The Honourable President of the Macau Insurers’ Association, Mr. Si Chi Hok, 
The Honourable President of the Macau Insurance Agents and Brokers Association, Mr. Tou 
Kam Seng, 
The Honourable President of the Federation of Macau Professional Insurance 
Intermediaries, Mr. Frank Ip, 
The Honourable President of the Macau Financial Markets Association, Mr. Chan Kam Chun, 
The Honourable President of the Association of Macau Financial Employees, Mr. Ng Chi 
Peng, 
Distinguished guests, friends of media, dear colleagues, 
Good afternoon, 
First of all allow me to give a warm welcome on behalf of the Monetary Authority of Macao 
(AMCM),  to  Mr.  Francis  Tam,  Mr.  Zhou  Zhikui  and  the  honoured  guests  who  attend  this 
cocktail reception. At the same time, I would like to express my gratitude for all the help and 
support you have rendered to AMCM in the past year. 
Only  those  who  have  survived  the  harsh  winter  appreciate  the  warmth  of  spring.  After  a 
severe  winter  which  can  happen  only  once  in  half  a  century,  we  gather  gaily  today  when 
flowers bloom in the mellow March air. We look back and forward to celebrate the arrival of 
the Year of the Rat. 
2007  is  an  eventful  year.  Global  economic  growth  has  slowed  down  due  to  the 
reverberations  arising  from  the  subprime  crisis  originated  in  the  US.  At  the  same  time, 
financial  risk  which  has  hidden  under  years  of  economic  prosperity  starts  to  take  its  toll. 
There is the bank run of a financial institution in the UK, heavy losses have been incurred by 
giant multi-national financial groups. All these fiascos have created shock and uncertainties 
in  international  financial  markets.  However,  despite  all  these  turmoils  in  the  international 
financial  environment,  Macao  continues  to  enjoy  a  burgeoning  economy.  Financial  risk  is 
under proper control while the financial sector exhibits steady development. We can attribute 
all  these  successes  to  the  endeavour  of  the  MSAR  Government  and  all  sectors  of  our 
community,  the  prosperous  services  industry  and  the  locomotive  effect  of  large  scale 
infrastructural  investments.  It  goes  without  saying  that  we  benefit  much  from  the  strong 
support and continued economic growth of our Motherland. 
In the past year, under the leadership of the MSAR Government, AMCM candidly fulfilled its 
duties.  Via  its  persistent,  risk  based  prudential  supervision,  AMCM  laid  a  solid  foundation 
based  on  which  the  Macao  financial  sector  achieved  steady  development.  Thanks  to  the 
strong  economy,  the  financial  sector  of  Macao  has  scored  flying  colours  again.  We  can 
witness  that  the  financial  markets  have  become  more  steady  and  active,  the  number  of 
financial institutions is on the rise accompanied by more ramified network, financial operation 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 1
continues  to  expand,  continued  innovation  is  found  in  financial  products,  quality  and 
sophistication  of  service  is  being  enhanced,  asset  quality  continues  to  improve  while  risk 
management is being strengthened.  
As  at  the  end  of  2007,  the  number  of  banks  in  Macao  stood  at  28,  with  total  assets  of 
MOP328.1  billion  which  was  an  increase  of  20%  year-on-year.  Deposits  were  valued  at 
MOP268.2 billion and total loans stood at MOP108.6 billion which exhibited annual increase 
of  16.3%  and  42.2%  respectively.  Loan  deposit  ratio  stood  at  40.5%,  operational  profit 
amounted  to  MOP4.146  billion  while  non-performing  loans  ratio  dropped  to  0.6%.  Capital 
adequacy ratio stood at a robust level of 14.35%. 
Moreover, although the number of institutions remained the same, business volume of non-
bank  financial  institutions  including currency  exchange,  remittance  and  securities  exhibited 
hefty increase by 43.6%, 47.3% and 221.1% respectively. 
Simultaneously,  our  insurance  sector  scored  excellent  results.  There  were  24  insurance 
institutions  operating  in  Macao  in  2007.  Total  annual  insurance  premiums  amounted  to 
MOP3.22 billion which was an increase of 29.8% year-on-year. Among which, life insurance 
premium  was  MOP2.25  billion  while  property  insurance  accounted  for  MOP970  million.  In 
addition, there was a marked development in private pension fund business. As at the end of 
2007, there were 35 registered retirement funds in which 432 retirement plans participated 
involving 78,859 employees which was an increase of 23.7% year-on-year and accounted for 
28.17% of the working population. Assets under management were valued at MOP3.7 billion, 
an increase of 32% year-on-year. 
In handling the foreign exchange reserves and the MSAR reserve fund, we have consistently 
adopted a prudent and stable investment principle. In 2007, we achieved reasonable results 
in managing and growing the reserves. Foreign exchange reserve stood at MOP106.3 billion 
as at the end of 2007 which was an increase of 45.4% year-on-year. At the same time the 
MSAR reserve fund was valued at MOP12.24 billion, an annual growth of 5.34%.  
Financial supervision is the major responsibility of AMCM. In accordance with the principles 
issued by relevant authoritative international organizations, we incessantly apply our prudent 
supervision to financial institutions to ensure healthy and stable development of our financial 
markets and financial institutions. In the past year, we emphasized on anti-money laundering 
(AML) and risk management. In AML aspect, we have continuously since the early 1990’s 
been revising our original AML structure in accordance with the ever changing development 
of international standard and change in local environment. Our efforts are sixfold. First, we 
adopted  the  recommendations  of  the  mutual  evaluation  of  APG/OGBS  by  formulating  and 
implementing  a  practicable  action  plan.  We 
liaison  with  relevant 
organizations,  especially  the  Financial  Intelligence  Office  and  relevant  associations  in  the 
financial sector to establish a mechanism for regular communication. Third, we reviewed the 
execution of relevant guidelines by seeking the opinions of market participants. We are now 
revising  existing  guidelines  by  also  taking  into  consideration  the  recommendations  of  the 
2006 APG/OGBS mutual evaluation and discoveries of our supervision. Fourth, we rolled out 
comprehensive  training  for  the  industry,  which  included  industry  wide  seminars,  exchange 
indeas 
inspections,  symposium  on  money 
laundering/financing  terrorism  trend  and  case  study.  Fifth,  we  reinforced  AML/CFT 
propaganda. Via public media or other channels such as open exhibitions, advertisements, 
and leaflets, we attempted to enhance public knowledge and cooperation in our AML/CFT 
efforts. Last, we accepted technical assistance from the IMF in perfecting the procedures and 
practicable  arrangements  relating 
the  realm  of  risk 
management,  AMCM  adopts  a  risk-based  approach  in  accordance  with  international 
standard  and  practice  in  its  daily  supervisory  work.  On  the  premise,  we  continued  to 
supervise all authorized institutions by conducting on-site inspections, off-site surveillances 
and  prudential  meetings.  In  2007,  AMCM  issued  “Guideline  on  Management  of  Country 
to  AML  on-site  inspection. 
then  reinforced 
to  discoveries 
in  on-site 
relating 
In 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2008
Risks” and “Determination of Market Risk Adjusted Capital Adequacy Ratio” to be adopted by 
financial institutions which will no doubt enhance the stability of our financial system. 
In  the  domain  of  insurance  supervision,  we  emphasized  on  the  revision  and  perfection  of 
related legislations. At the same time we strengthened our inspection efforts, bashed illegal 
insurance activities. In perfecting related legislations, we revised “Mandatory Automobile Civil 
Liability  Insurance”  and  “Mandatory  Labour  Civil  Liability  Insurance”.  Simultaneously,  we 
enhanced  inspection  of  AML  measures  implemented  by  insurance  institutions.  In  2007, 
AMCM  carried  out  on-site  inspections  on  insurance  institutions  operating  in  Macao, 
accentuating our efforts in regulating the operation of our insurance market.  
We  strive  to  maintain  a  stable  exchange  rate.  In  2007,  China  achieved  record  high  trade 
surplus. There was a hefty increase in exchange reserves. The Yuan continued to appreciate 
against US Dollar which gave rise to depreciation of the Pataca against the Yuan. It fueled 
the  pressure  on  inflation  in  Macao.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  AMCM  adhered  to  rules  of 
currency board and link rate, maintained the relative stability of the Pataca, which facilitated 
stable operation of the Macao economy.  
AMCM  promotes  actively  cross  border  financial  cooperation.  In  2007,  as  usual,  AMCM 
participated in activities relating to financial cooperation with the Mainland, our neighbouring 
regions,  countries  and  international  organizations  and  encouraged  the  financial  industry  of 
Macao  to  communicate  and  cooperate  with  overseas  entities.  For  instance,  we  promoted 
closer  cooperation  between  our  financial  sector  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries  and 
actively  participated  in meetings  with  relevant  international  and  regional  organizations.  We 
hosted  related  international  activities  and  successfully  hosted  the  OGBS  2007  annual 
general  meeting.  We  advocated  and  deepened  financial  cooperation  between  Macao  and 
Guangdong  as  well  as  between  Macao  and  Shenzhen.  We  reinforced  cooperation  with 
various financial regulatory bodies with a view to effectively bashing illegal financial activities 
through execution of cross border supervision. We actively encouraged the enlargement of 
RMB  business  in  Macao,  promoted  further  development  of  RMB  business,  propagate  the 
circulation of Pataca on the Mainland, reinforced cross border settlement and cooperation in 
financial infrastructure and opened up the clearing system for Hong Kong Dollar cheques. 
In retrospect, we are proud to say that 2007 was again a fruitful year for the Macao financial 
sector. I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Monetary Authority of Macao, to 
express our heartfelt gratitude for the continued guidance and support from Mr. Francis Tam; 
for the care and support from Mr. Zhou Zhikui; and sincere thanks to the practitioners of our 
financial sector for their hard work in the past year. I would also like to congratulate you on 
the results achieved by you ladies and gentlemen in the past year. At the same time, I would 
also like to thank the colleagues of AMCM for their hard work. 
There are new challenges ahead at the beginning of the year. There is a shadow hanging 
over  the  global  economy  right  at  the  start.  The  US  subprime  crisis  appears  to  be 
deteriorating which adds uncertainty to the international financial markets. Financial risk has 
increased. Against such an international economic and financial backdrop, it is possible that 
Macao will be adversely affected to a certain degree. It is likely that the Macao economy will 
experience  a  slow  down  after  rapid  growth.  Therefore,  financial  institutions  should  put  risk 
mitigation  as  their  primary  objective  this  year.  With  the  support  of  the  MSAR  Government 
and market participants, AMCM will continue to enhance and strengthen risk management 
based on the concept of risk-based supervision to ensure the stability and development of 
our  financial  industry.  Simultaneously,  we  shall  strive  to  maintain  the  opening  up, 
diversification  and  internationalization  of  our  financial  sector  to  create  a  healthy  financial 
environment conducive to the sustainable prosperity of Macao. 
Last but not the least, I sincerely wish you success and good health. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 3
