Peter Pang: The role of SMEs in Asian development   
Statement by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
and  Head  of  Delegation,  Hong  Kong,  China,  at  the  41st  Asian  Development  Bank  Annual 
Meeting, Madrid, 5-6 May 2008. 
 Let  me  first  thank  the  Government  of  Spain  and  the  people  of  Madrid  for  their  warm 
hospitality.  I  welcome  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  ADF  X  negotiations  ahead  of  this 
meeting,  providing  timely  and  critical  resources  to  the  ADB  to  further  its  work  in  poverty 
reduction in Asia. 
The remarkable development of the region over the past decade has significantly improved 
the  lives  of  its  people.  Yet,  eradicating  poverty  remains  a  huge  challenge,  and  the  rapid 
economic  growth  has  brought  about  a  new  set  of  development  issues.  We  therefore 
welcome the extensive review of the Bank’s Long-Term Strategic Framework over the past 
two years to identify the new challenges faced by the region and the launch of Strategy 2020 
to guide the Bank’s work in the next decade. 
I  am  glad  to  see  that  Strategy  2020  correctly  puts  a  greater  focus  on  the  sustainability 
aspects of growth as Asia enters the next stage of development. Among other priorities, I am 
also  happy  to  note  more  emphasis  being  given  to  private  sector  development  and  private 
sector  operations.  Enabling  the  private  sector  with  firms  investing,  creating  jobs  and 
improving productivity is crucial to sustaining the long-term economic growth and expanding 
opportunities for the poor. In this regard, supporting the development of a vibrant small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) sector will be of particular importance.  
SMEs play a vital role in the economic growth of developing countries, typically accounting 
for over 90% of business establishments and about half or more of output and export shares. 
Their entrepreneurship, flexibility and responsiveness to change are essential driving force of 
economic development. The employment opportunities they create improve the livelihood of 
thousands of millions of poor people. In many developing countries, and in fact in developed 
economies as well, SMEs account for as much as 70% of the labor force. 
Despite the important role of SMEs in the economy, their growth is often constrained by the 
lack of capital, among other impediments such as regulatory red tape. Their small size, lack 
of credit ratings and the generally underdeveloped capital markets in the region deny SMEs 
access  to  bond  and  equity  financing.  Banks  are  also  reluctant  to  lend  to  SMEs  or  charge 
them a high interest rate, since SMEs usually do not have strong credit history and cannot 
provide substantial collateral.  
Making available SME financing at reasonable cost is therefore crucial to the growth of this 
important sector. Providing policy loans directly to SMEs helps, but the assistance is limited 
relative  to  the  enormous  financing  needs  and  there  are  always  concerns  about  economic 
distortions and the efficient use of public resources. To achieve greater and more sustainable 
SME financing, it is necessary to develop market-based approaches which are commercially 
viable  to  mobilise  private  sector  investment  into  the  SME  sector.  I  encourage  the  ADB  to 
further  work  on  this  front,  including  exploring  possible  mechanisms  such  as  credit 
enhancement and securitisation. Scaling up private sector lending would require a change in 
the  skill  mix  of  the  ADB,  in  particular  in  strengthening  its  market  expertise  and  risk 
management.  Partnering  with  domestic  agencies  and  private  sector  financial  institutions, 
other  international  financial  institutions  and  developed  members  in  the  region  that  have 
relevant experience would be useful in utilising their expertise, building the capacity of the 
Bank, and sharing credit risk. 
There are, of course, other important areas concerning the development of the region where 
the  ADB  could  play  a  meaningful  role  as  identified  in  the  new  Long-Term  Strategic 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 1
Framework. As a member of the Bank and the region, we stand ready to provide support and 
look  forward  to  strengthening  our  cooperation  with  the  ADB  in  furthering  the  development 
agenda of the region. And lastly, to successfully implement Strategy 2020, further enhancing 
the organisational effectiveness of the ADB will be of critical importance. We welcome the 
Bank’s  commitment  to  develop  a  more  robust  results  framework  and  to  continue  its 
institutional reforms, and we look forward to ongoing efforts by the Bank in this regard. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2008
