Jean-Claude Trichet: Award acceptance speech for the Grand Cross 1st 
class of the Order of Merit 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Award of 
the Grand Cross 1st class of the Order of Merit by the President of the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Berlin, 3 April 2008. 
 Mr President, 
Dear Eva, 
Your Excellency, 
Dear friends, 
I will not attempt to conceal the fact that I am extremely touched: touched to be here with 
you,  Mr  President,  in  this  magnificent  palace  of  yours;  very  touched  to  have  such  a 
prestigious  honour  bestowed  on  me  by  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany;  and  touched  to 
find myself surrounded by so many friends with whom we have worked with such energy in 
deepening and strengthening the friendship that exists both between France and Germany 
and across Europe as a whole. 
Mr  President,  thank  you  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  for  awarding  me  this  Grand  Cross, 
which  I  regard  as  an  honour  bestowed  on  the  whole  of  the  Executive  Board  and  the 
Governing Council and all of the staff of the European Central Bank.  
Mr  President,  dear  Horst,  being  here  with  you  today,  I  am  inevitably  reminded  of  certain 
shared experiences, events that are now etched firmly in my memory as landmarks in what 
has been a truly historic period. 
• 
My  first  memory  is  of  the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall  in  1989.  You  were  tasked  with 
organising the reunification of Germany as State Secretary at the Federal Ministry of 
Finance.  I  remember  accompanying  you  in  1990  on  a  long  journey  by  helicopter 
over  East  Germany  to  Berlin,  during  which  you  explained  to  me  the  colossal 
economic and financial stakes involved in reunification. 
My second memory is of the Soviet Union itself suffering serious financial problems 
prior  to  its  collapse  in  1991.  We  were  in  Moscow  together  with  our  partners,  the 
other G7 state secretaries, to negotiate with the Kremlin – which had, by then, lost 
all of its power and had an “end of empire” feel to it – with a view to rescheduling the 
Soviet Union’s debt.  
My  third  memory  is  of  the  decision  in  Europe  to  enter  into  intergovernmental 
negotiations with a view to establishing the single currency. You were negotiating on 
behalf of Germany. We met many times in order to prepare the text of the Maastricht 
Treaty. I will always remember a long discussion we had in 1991, when I remember 
having  the  impression  that  we  had  convinced  each  other  that  our  respective 
countries really wanted to go through with this – but on two conditions: first, that the 
institutional  structures  put  in  place  were  flawless;  and  second,  that  there  was 
irrefutable evidence of the monetary convergence of the countries invited to merge 
their currencies. 
  As  far  as  our  two  countries  were  concerned,  that  meant  the  complete  convergence  of  the 
Deutsche Mark and the French franc even before the introduction of the single currency. We 
had concluded that an essential precondition for the creation of the single currency was that 
the new currency had to be at least as solid and at least as credible and retain its value at 
least as well as the national currencies that preceded it. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 1
And  finally,  of  course,  there  was  that  crisis  meeting  at  a  Washington  hotel  in  September 
1992, at the end of which our two central banks found a way to save the European exchange 
rate mechanism by preserving the link between our two currencies. Several of us here today 
took part in that particularly tense – and particularly successful – meeting. 
Mr  President,  you  can  be  sure  that  the  European  Central  Bank  and  its  Executive  Board, 
Governing Council and staff will – while remaining completely independent – continue to be 
faithful  to  the  primary  objective  assigned  to  us  by  the  Treaty.  This  is  what  the  European 
democracies that ratified the Treaty expect of us. This is what our 320 million fellow citizens 
of  the  euro  area  expect  of  us.  They  want  price  stability.  Medium-term  price  stability  is  a 
necessary precondition for sustainable growth and strong job creation. And as regards the 
latter,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  euro  area  has,  on  a  net  basis,  seen  the  creation  of  a 
remarkable 15.7 million new jobs in the nine years since 1 January 1999 – more than three 
times the total for the nine years prior to the euro and considerably more than have been 
created in the United States over the same nine-year period. 
Now,  more  than  ever,  we  have  numerous  challenges  to  face.  The  central  banks  of 
industrialised countries have to ensure price stability in their individual economies, which are 
characterised not only by extremely rapid progress in science and technology, but also by 
both globalisation and significant demographic change, particularly population-aging. But we 
also  face  challenges  at  the  European  level,  having  to  implement  the  necessary  structural 
reforms, deepen and strengthen the Single Market, particularly in the euro area, and pursue, 
with the utmost rigour and credibility, the enlargement of the euro area. 
Mr President, thank you again for this great honour. The institution over which I preside is 
very  grateful  indeed.  This  will  encourage  us  all  to  continue  to  pursue  with  professionalism 
and energy the historic task entrusted to us. 
Mr President, dear Eva, please also allow me to say that, on a personal level, Aline and I 
regard  this  honour  as  a  perfect  example  of  the  profound  friendship  that  exists  between 
France  and  Germany,  a  friendship  that  has  been  placed  at  the  service  of  the  European 
Union as a whole. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2008
