Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  US  Congress,  Washington  DC, 
2 April 2008. 
 Chairman Schumer, Vice Chairman Maloney, Representative Saxton, and other members of 
the Committee, I am pleased to appear before the Joint Economic Committee. In response to 
deterioration  in  the  near-term  outlook  for  the  economy  and  intensified  strains  in  financial 
markets,  in  recent  months  the  Federal  Reserve  has  eased  monetary  policy  substantially 
further and taken strong actions to increase market liquidity. In my remarks today, I will first 
offer my views on conditions in financial markets and the outlook for the U.S. economy, then 
discuss recent actions taken by the Federal Reserve.  
Although our recent actions appear to have helped stabilize the situation somewhat, financial 
markets  remain  under  considerable  stress.  Pressures  in  short-term  bank  funding  markets, 
which  had  abated  somewhat  beginning  late  last  year,  have  increased  once  again.  Many 
lenders  have  been  reluctant  to  provide  credit  to  counterparties,  especially  leveraged 
investors,  and  have  increased  the  amount  of  collateral  they  require  to  back  short-term 
security  financing  agreements.  To  meet  those  demands,  investors  have  reduced  their 
leverage and liquidated holdings of securities, putting further downward pressure on security 
prices. 
Credit availability has also been restricted because some large financial institutions, including 
some commercial and investment banks and the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), 
have reported substantial losses and writedowns, reducing their available capital. Several of 
these firms have been able to raise fresh capital to offset at least some of those losses, and 
others are in the process of doing so. However, financial institutions’ balance sheets have 
also expanded, as banks and other institutions have taken on their balance sheets various 
assets  that  can  no  longer  be  financed  on  a  standalone  basis.  Thus,  the  capacity  and 
willingness of some large institutions to extend new credit remains limited.  
The effects of the financial strains on credit cost and availability have become increasingly 
evident,  with  some  portions  of  the  system  that  had  previously  escaped  the  worst  of  the 
turmoil – such as the markets for municipal bonds and student loans – having been affected. 
Another  market  that  had  previously  been  largely  exempt  from  disruptions  was  that  for 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) issued by government agencies. However, beginning in 
mid-February, worsening liquidity conditions and reports of losses at the GSEs, Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac, caused the spread of agency MBS yields over the yields on comparable 
Treasury securities to rise sharply. Together with the increased fees imposed by the GSEs, 
the  rise  in  this  spread  resulted  in  higher  interest  rates  on  conforming  mortgages.  More 
recently,  agency  MBS  spreads  and  conforming  mortgage  rates  have  retraced  part  of  this 
increase,  and  conforming  mortgages  continue  to  be  readily  available  to  households. 
However, for the most part, the nonconforming segment of the mortgage market continues to 
function poorly.  
In  corporate  debt  markets,  yields  and  spreads  on  both  investment-grade  and  speculative-
grade  corporate  bonds  rose  through  mid-March  before  falling  more  recently.  Issuance  of 
investment-grade  bonds  by  both  financial  and  nonfinancial  corporations  has  been  quite 
robust so far this year, but issuance of new high-yield debt has stalled. Strains continue to be 
evident in the commercial paper market as well, where risk spreads remain elevated and the 
quantity of commercial paper outstanding, particularly asset-backed paper, has decreased. 
Commercial  and  industrial  loans  at  banks  grew  in  January  and  February,  but  at  a 
considerably slower pace than in previous months. 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 1
These  developments  in  financial  markets  –  which  themselves  reflect,  in  part,  greater 
concerns about housing and the economic outlook more generally – have weighed on real 
economic  activity.  Notably,  in  the  housing  market,  sales  of  both  new  and  existing  homes 
have  generally  continued  weak,  partly  as  a  result  of  the  reduced  availability  of  mortgage 
credit, and home prices have continued to fall.1 Starts of new single-family homes declined 
an  additional  7  percent  in  February,  bringing  the  cumulative  decline  since  the  early  2006 
peak  in  single-family  starts  to  more  than  60  percent.  Residential  construction  is  likely  to 
contract somewhat further in coming quarters as builders try to reduce their high inventories 
of unsold new homes. 
Private payroll employment fell 101,000 in February, after two months of smaller job losses, 
with job cuts in construction and closely related industries accounting for a significant share 
of the decline. But the demand for labor has also moderated recently in other industries, such 
as business services and retail trade, and manufacturing employment has continued on its 
downward  trend.  Meanwhile,  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  have  risen  somewhat  on 
balance,  and  surveys  indicate  that  employers  have  scaled  back  hiring  plans  and  that 
jobseekers are experiencing greater difficulties finding work. The unemployment rate edged 
down in February and remains at a relatively low level; however, in light of the sluggishness 
of  economic  activity  and  other  indicators  of  a  softer  labor  market,  I  expect  it  to  move 
somewhat higher in coming months.  
After rising at an annual rate of about 3 percent over the first three quarters of last year, real 
disposable  income  has  since  increased  at  only  about  a  1  percent  annual  rate,  reflecting 
weaker  employment  conditions  and  higher  prices  for  energy  and  food.  Concerns  about 
employment  and  income  prospects,  together  with  declining  home  values  and  tighter  credit 
conditions, have caused consumer spending to decelerate considerably from the solid pace 
seen during the first three quarters of last year. I expect the tax rebates associated with the 
fiscal  stimulus  package  recently  passed  by  the  Congress  to  provide  some  support  to 
consumer spending in coming quarters.  
In the business sector, the pullback in hiring that I noted earlier has been accompanied by 
some  reduction  in  capital  spending  plans,  as  weaker  sales  prospects,  tighter  credit,  and 
heightened uncertainty have made business leaders more cautious. On a more positive note, 
the  nonfinancial  business  sector  remains  financially  sound,  with  liquid  balance  sheets  and 
low  leverage  ratios,  and  most  firms  have  been  able  to  avoid  unwanted  buildups  in 
inventories. In addition, many businesses are enjoying strong demand from abroad. Although 
the prospects for foreign economic growth have diminished somewhat in recent months, net 
exports should continue to provide considerable support to U.S. economic activity in coming 
quarters.  
Overall, the near-term economic outlook has weakened relative to the projections released 
by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the end of January. It now appears likely 
that real gross domestic product (GDP) will not grow much, if at all, over the first half of 2008 
and  could  even  contract  slightly.  We  expect  economic  activity  to  strengthen  in  the  second 
half of the year, in part as the result of stimulative monetary and fiscal policies; and growth is 
expected  to  proceed  at  or  a  little  above  its  sustainable  pace  in  2009,  bolstered  by  a 
stabilization  of  housing  activity,  albeit  at  low  levels,  and  gradually  improving  financial 
conditions.  However,  in  light  of  the  recent  turbulence  in  financial  markets,  the  uncertainty 
attending this forecast is quite high and the risks remain to the downside.  
Inflation  has  also  been  a  source  of  concern.  The  price  index  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures  rose  3.4  percent  over  the  twelve  months  ending  in  February,  up  from  2.3 
percent over the preceding twelve-month period. To a large extent, this pickup in inflation has 
                                                 
1  
In  February,  sales  of  existing  homes  are  reported  to  have  turned  up  slightly,  but  sales  of  new  homes 
continued to move down. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2008
been the result of sharp increases in the prices of crude oil, agricultural products, and other 
globally  traded  commodities.  Additionally,  the  decline  in  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the 
dollar  has  boosted  some  non-commodity  import  prices  and  thus  contributed  to  inflation. 
However,  the  so-called  core  rate  of  inflation  –  that  is,  inflation  excluding  food  and  energy 
prices – has edged down recently after firming somewhat late last year. 
We expect inflation to moderate in coming quarters. That expectation is based, in part, on 
futures markets’ indications of a leveling out of prices for oil and other commodities, and it is 
consistent with our projection that global growth – and thus the demand for commodities – 
will slow somewhat during this period. And, as I noted, we project an easing of pressures on 
resource  utilization.  However,  some  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  have  risen,  and, 
overall, uncertainty about the inflation outlook has increased. It will be necessary to continue 
to monitor inflation developments carefully in the months ahead.  
 I  turn  now  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  policy  responses  to  these  financial  and  economic 
developments. 
Well-functioning  financial  markets  are  essential  for  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  and, 
indeed,  for  economic  growth  and  stability.  To  improve  market  liquidity  and  market 
functioning, and consistent with its role as the nation’s central bank, the Federal Reserve has 
supplemented  its  longstanding  discount  window  by  establishing  three  new  facilities  for 
lending to depository institutions and primary dealers. 
The  lending  facilities  now  in  place  offer  depository  institutions  and  primary  dealers  two 
complementary alternatives for meeting funding needs. One pair of facilities – the discount 
window for depository institutions and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility for primary dealers – 
offers daily access to variable amounts of funding at the initiative of the borrowing institution. 
A second pair of facilities – the Term Auction Facility for depository institutions and the Term 
Securities Lending Facility for primary dealers – makes available predetermined aggregate 
amounts  of  longer-term  funding  on  pre-announced  dates,  with  the  interest  rate  and  the 
distribution  of  the  awards  across  institutions  being  determined  by  competitive  auction. 
Although these facilities operate through depository institutions and primary dealers, they are 
designed to support the broad financial markets and the economy by facilitating the provision 
of liquidity by those institutions to their customers and counterparties. 
The Primary Dealer Credit Facility was put in place in the wake of the near-failure of Bear 
Stearns, a large investment bank. On March 13, Bear Stearns advised the Federal Reserve 
and  other  government  agencies  that  its  liquidity  position  had  significantly  deteriorated  and 
that it would have to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy the next day unless alternative sources of 
funds became available. This news raised difficult questions of public policy. Normally, the 
market  sorts  out  which  companies  survive  and  which  fail,  and  that  is  as  it  should  be. 
However,  the  issues  raised  here  extended  well  beyond  the  fate  of  one  company.  Our 
financial  system  is  extremely  complex  and  interconnected,  and  Bear  Stearns  participated 
extensively in a range of critical markets. With financial conditions fragile, the sudden failure 
of Bear Stearns likely would have led to a chaotic unwinding of positions in those markets 
and  could  have  severely  shaken  confidence.  The  company’s  failure  could  also  have  cast 
doubt on the financial positions of some of Bear Stearns’ thousands of counterparties and 
perhaps of companies with similar businesses. Given the current exceptional pressures on 
the global economy and financial system, the damage caused by a default by Bear Stearns 
could  have  been  severe  and  extremely  difficult  to  contain.  Moreover,  the  adverse  effects 
would not have been confined to the financial system but would have been felt broadly in the 
real  economy  through  its  effects  on  asset  values  and  credit  availability.  To  prevent  a 
disorderly failure of Bear Stearns and the unpredictable but likely severe consequences of 
such a failure for market functioning and the broader economy, the Federal Reserve, in close 
consultation  with  the  Treasury  Department,  agreed  to  provide  funding  to  Bear  Stearns 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 3
through  JPMorgan  Chase.  Over  the  following  weekend,  JPMorgan  Chase  agreed  to 
purchase Bear Stearns and assumed Bear’s financial obligations. 
The Federal Reserve has taken additional measures to improve  market liquidity. We have 
initiated  a  series  of  twenty-eight-day  single-tranche  term  repurchase  transactions  with 
primary dealers, expected to cumulate to $100 billion outstanding, in which dealers may offer 
any of the types of collateral that are eligible for conventional open market operations. We 
have also expanded and extended reciprocal currency arrangements (“swap lines”) with the 
European  Central  Bank  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank.  Using  these  swap  lines,  the 
participating  central  banks  are  providing  dollar  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  in  their 
jurisdictions,  which  should  improve  the  functioning  of  the  global  market  for  dollar  funding. 
These  facilities  and  programs  will  be  kept  in  place  as  long  as  conditions  warrant  their 
ongoing use. We are working closely with the Securities Exchange Commission to monitor 
the  financial  conditions  and  funding  positions  of  primary  dealers  who  might  seek  Federal 
Reserve credit. 
To date, the recent liquidity measures implemented by the Federal Reserve seem to have 
been  helpful  in  addressing  some  of  the  strains in  financial markets.  Funding  pressures  on 
primary dealers appear to have eased somewhat, and liquidity seems to have improved in 
several  markets,  including  –  as  noted  earlier  –  the  market  for  agency  mortgage-backed 
securities.  To  the  extent  that  these  measures  improve  market  functioning,  they  will  have 
favorable  effects  on  the  ability  and  willingness  to  make  credit  available  to  the  broader 
economy.  More-liquid  markets  also  increase  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy,  which  in  turn 
improves  our  ability  to  meet  the  goals  set  for  us  by  the  Congress  –  namely,  to  promote 
maximum employment and price stability. 
As  you  know,  in  response  to  the  further  weakening  of  economic  conditions,  the  Federal 
Reserve has continued to ease the stance of monetary policy. The FOMC reduced its target 
for the federal funds rate by a total of 125 basis points in January and by an additional 75 
basis points at its March meeting, leaving the current target at 2-1/4 percent – 3 percentage 
points below its level last summer. As the Committee noted in its most recent post-meeting 
statement, we anticipate that these actions, together with the steps we have taken to foster 
market liquidity, will help to promote growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic 
activity. 
Clearly,  the  U.S.  economy  is  going  through  a  very  difficult  period.  But  among  the  great 
strengths of our economy is its ability to adapt and to respond to diverse challenges. Much 
necessary  economic  and  financial  adjustment  has  already  taken  place,  and  monetary  and 
fiscal policies are in train that should support a return to growth in the second half of this year 
and next year. I remain confident in our economy’s long-term prospects.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2008
