Nicholas C Garganas: The single monetary policy and the analytics of 
OCAs – what has the euro area experience taught us? 
Speech by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at a public lecture, 
Athens, 30 April 2008. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  give  this  public  lecture  on  the  European 
experience with monetary union. The fact that the lecture is taking place at my Αlma Μater 
makes this occasion a particularly special one for me, and I am grateful to Howard Davis and 
Kevin Featherstone for extending me the invitation. I hope that what I have to say will provide 
some food for thought. Indeed, I am hopeful that I may be able to convince some sceptics in 
the audience – and I know that they are out there – that monetary union among European 
countries can and does work! 
The  adoption  of  the  euro  by  11  EU  countries  in  1999  was  a  remarkable  achievement.  It 
represented  the  culmination  of  a  process  of  integration  and  convergence  that  had  begun 
some 50 years earlier. The creation of the euro could be viewed as the end of a process, 
with  Europe  having  finally  reached  full  economic  and  monetary  integration.  Such  a  view, 
however,  would,  at  best,  be  incomplete.  Although  the  introduction  of  the  euro  marked  the 
culmination of a long process, it also marked the beginning of another one. In particular, it 
created new challenges for economic policy. I will focus on these challenges in what follows.  
A  natural  starting  point  for  analysis  of  the  benefits  and  costs  of  a  monetary  union  is  the 
theory of optimum currency areas, originated by Robert Mundell in the early 1960s, and an 
important reason for his Nobel Prize in Economics. This literature on optimum currency areas 
identifies two main costs of a country’s participation in a monetary union. These costs are the 
loss of an independent monetary policy and the ability to alter the nominal exchange rate in 
order to mitigate the effects of asymmetric shocks. The theory also identifies the desirable 
characteristics  that  potential  members  of  a  single  currency  area  should  have  in  order  to 
minimise these costs. The characteristics are sometimes viewed as preconditions for judging 
whether a nation should join a currency union.  
I  will  argue  that  this  traditional  way  of  thinking  about  judging  optimality  is  incomplete. 
Underlying my argument are the following two factors.  
• 
First, the traditional approach has to be modified to take modern developments in 
monetary theory and policy into account. In a world in which monetary policy is best 
suited to achieve price stability, the loss of monetary policy independence may not 
be very costly. In fact, for a small open economy, such as Greece, it may actually 
provide net benefits.  
Second, it can be misleading to view the optimum-currency-area characteristics as 
preconditions  for  ensuring  the  success  of  a  country’s  participation  in  a  monetary 
union. In particular, to view the characteristics as preconditions overlooks the fact 
that the characteristics, or criteria, can themselves be endogenous. I will argue that 
the creation of a monetary union can itself create conditions that are favourable to 
the well-functioning of the union.  
 The loss of monetary policy independence to the ECB  
I.  
Let  me  first  turn  to  the  matter  of  the  loss  of  monetary  independence.  Modern  monetary 
theory  emphasises  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  providing  price  stability.  By  so  doing, 
monetary policy can best provide a stable environment, which is a prerequisite for growth. 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 1
This view contrasts strongly with the view that monetary policy can be used for fine-tuning 
the economy.  
The  intellectual  underpinnings  of  the  emphasis  on  price  stability  can  be  traced  to  Milton 
Friedman’s and Ed Phelps’ critique of the Phillips curve in the late 1960s. On a brief personal 
note,  I  was  privileged  to  have  been  taught  macroeconomics  at  LSE  by  A  W  Phillips. 
Professor  Phillips  was  an  excellent  teacher  who  made  contributions  in  many  areas  of 
macroeconomics.  In  fact,  it  is  well  known  that  Milton  Friedman  tried  to  recruit  him  to  the 
University of Chicago, but, fortunately for LSE, he declined. The Phillips curve expressed the 
idea of a trade-off between inflation and unemployment. The Friedman-Phelps insight, which 
helped earn those economists their respective Nobel prizes, was that the trade-off was, at 
best,  temporary.  Repeated  attempts  to  reduce  unemployment  by  allowing  inflation  to  rise 
would  result  in  ever-increasing  inflation  with  unemployment  returning  to  its  natural  rate. 
Although  the  Friedman-Phelps  hypothesis  swept  through  academia  in  the  1970s,  policy 
makers  were  slower  to  catch  on.  As  a  result,  the  1970s,  and  in  some  cases  the  1980s, 
provided  a  real-world  laboratory  for  testing  the  Friedman-Phelps  hypothesis.  As  we  now 
know, central banks that kept trying to pin down the rate of unemployment wound up with 
both high inflation rates and high unemployment rates. This was a lesson that would not be 
lost on subsequent generations of central bankers.  
Building  on  the  Friedman-Phelps  insight,  Finn  Kydland  and  Ed  Prescott  showed  that  a 
central bank engaged in discretionary policies has an incentive to promise low inflation, but 
then to run an expansionary monetary policy that produces higher inflation without lowering 
unemployment.  In  a  contribution  that  helped  earn  these  authors  the  Nobel  Prize  in  2004, 
Kydland  and  Prescott  showed  that,  to  be  credible,  central  bankers  must  demonstrate  that 
they are fully committed to a low-inflation objective. Full commitment in the Kydland-Prescott 
framework,  necessitates  independence  from  political  pressures  to  follow  inflationary 
monetary policies. Otherwise, once inflation expectations become entrenched, it can be very 
difficult  to  reduce  them.  The  costs  of  doing  so,  in  terms  of  higher  unemployment,  can  be 
substantial.  Again,  the  experiences  of  country  after  country  which  pursued  expansionary 
monetary policies in the 1970s and 1980s provided the laboratory.  
These  insights,  and  the  subsequent  literature  built  around  them,  contributed  to  the  now 
widely-held view that central banks should have independence from the political process with 
a mandate to achieve price stability. In this way the monetary authorities can make the best 
possible contribution to supporting sustained economic growth and employment creation.  
The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  can  be  seen  in  this  light.  It  involves  three  key 
elements. First, there is the objective of price stability which the ECB defines as a year-on-
year increase in consumer prices for the euro area of “below, but close to, 2 per cent”. The 
“close  to”  was  added  in  2003  to  establish  a  safety  margin  above  zero  inflation  to  guard 
against  deflationary  risks.  Price  stability  is  a  medium-term  goal  reflecting  the  long  lags 
involved in the transmission of monetary policy.  
Second, the “two pillars” of economic and monetary analyses have been formulated so as to 
enable the ECB to attain its objective.  
• 
In  the  economic  analysis,  an  assessment  of  current  economic  and  financial 
developments from the perspective of the interplay between supply and demand in 
the  product  and  factor  markets  is  made.  This  provides  short-  to  medium-term 
indications of inflation.  
As  a  cross-check  to  the  economic  analysis,  the  monetary  analysis  focuses  on 
money and credit developments in recognition of empirical evidence suggesting that 
monetary growth and inflation tend to be related in the medium to long run.  
 The  final  element  is  central  bank  independence.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  grants  full  political 
independence to the ECB in its pursuit of price stability. In a democratic society, however, 
central  bank  independence  needs  to  be  counterbalanced  by  accountability,  that  is,  an 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2008
obligation on the part of the central bank to explain its decisions to the public and its elected 
representatives, including, in the case of the ECB, those in the European Parliament. In turn, 
accountability requires transparency with respect both to objectives and decision-making. To 
this end, monetary policy decisions taken by the ECB are explained “in real time” at a press 
conference immediately after each rate-setting Governing Council meeting.  
The success of the ECB’s monetary strategy is borne out by its record. Since the inception of 
the euro area, average inflation in the euro area has been 2.08%, a shade higher than the 
ECB’s definition of price stability. Inflation expectations have also remained firmly anchored 
around  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability,  attesting  to  the  ECB’s  credibility.  Long-term 
interest rates have been at historically low levels.  
For countries such as Greece, with histories of high inflation, the gains from joining the euro 
area  have  been  very  substantial.  For  years,  Greece  suffered  from  double-digit  inflation. 
Growth  was  anaemic  and  unemployment  rose  in  spite  of  periods  of  fairly  loose  monetary 
policy. Nominal interest rates were high, reaching close to 30 per cent at times during the 
1980s.  In  contrast,  the  low  levels  of  nominal  interest  rates  experienced  in  the  euro  area, 
reflecting  the  low  levels  of  inflation  expectations,  have  created  conditions  for  an  improved 
business climate, higher investment and, ultimately, higher growth.  
In sum, the loss of monetary policy independence, identified in the earlier optimum-currency-
area literature as one of the two main costs of joining a monetary union, is not necessarily a 
cost  after  all.  That  earlier  literature  was  formulated  in  the  context  of  Keynesian  demand-
management  policies  that  were  popular  in  the  1960s.  Since  that  time,  however,  both 
economic theory and the experience of high unemployment coupled with high inflation have 
taught us the importance of a credible monetary policy aimed at providing price stability.  
Moreover,  I  have  argued  that  for  countries  with  histories  of  high  inflation  and  political 
interference  in  policy  formation,  a  credible  monetary  policy  can  be  attained  by  joining  a 
monetary union with an independent central bank. I also mentioned, however, that the earlier 
literature on optimum currency areas identified a second cost of joining a monetary union – 
the loss of the exchange-rate instrument. After all, monetary policy can be focused on price 
stability, but, in the face of an asymmetric shock, the nominal exchange rate may change so 
that adjustment is facilitated. How important, then, is the exchange-rate instrument in dealing 
with asymmetries among the countries participating in the euro area?  
II.  
Asymmetric shocks and the loss of the exchange rate as a policy instrument: 
the preconditions for monetary union reassessed  
The early literature on optimum currency areas included a search for mechanisms that could 
replace the exchange rate or compensate for its absence. This search led to the identification 
of  a  number  of  criteria  on  which  the  optimality  of  a  potential  currency  area  could  be 
assessed. These criteria effectively became preconditions for forming a single currency area.  
I  will  argue  that  this  traditional  view  is  static  in  nature.  It  assumes  that  a  country’s 
characteristics  are  immutable.  In  fact,  the  experience  of  the  euro  area  suggests  that 
participation  in  a  monetary  union  can,  in  itself,  induce  changes  in  economic  structure  and 
performance that make the currency area optimum. Much academic research, based on the 
experience of European monetary union, indicates that the creation of a monetary union can 
itself  create  conditions  favourable  to  the  well-functioning  of  the  union,  either  through 
endogenous  changes  in  the  way  the  economies  of  the  union  operate  or  through  policy 
changes induced by the existence of the union. Let me illustrate by discussing some of the 
so-called preconditions enumerated in the early literature and looking at their evolution within 
the euro area.  
Mundell, in 1961, identified high mobility of the factors of production (both capital and labour) 
as a precondition for giving up the use of the national exchange-rate. While labour mobility is 
still low within the euro area, reflecting, in part, linguistic and cultural differences, the mobility 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 3
of capital has been increasing as evidenced by the positive effect that the euro has had on 
intra-euro  area  FDI.  Between  1999  and  2006  (the  latest  data  available),  the  stock  of  euro 
area FDI more than doubled, from around 14 per cent of euro area GDP to over 30 percent.  
The importance of the mobility of financial capital was highlighted not only by Mundell (1961), 
but also by James Ingram who, in 1962, emphasised the role that financial market integration 
could play in reducing the costs of monetary union. Deeper financial market integration can 
help  in  a  number  of  ways.  First,  it  can  cause  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
impulses to become more similar throughout the countries of the union. Second, it can help 
reduce the impact of asymmetric shocks by causing equilibrating movements in capital flows. 
Finally, it can allow members of the union to insure against the impact of asymmetric shocks 
since  it  provides  opportunities  for  diversification  of  income  sources.  If  members  of  the 
monetary union hold claims on other countries within the union, then the income effect of any 
asymmetric shocks would be mitigated.  
The introduction of the euro has helped make euro area financial markets more integrated. 
The  money  market  has  been  almost  perfectly  integrated  since  the  formation  of  monetary 
union. The significant growth of the euro corporate bond market also provides evidence of 
integration and widens the range of potential investors to which firms have access. National 
bonds  and  equity  market  returns  exhibit  closer  co-movements  than  they  did  prior  to  the 
introduction of the euro. The main area where financial integration has lagged is that of retail 
banking  where,  in  spite  of  an  increase  in  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  recent 
years, cross-border activity remains relatively limited.  
Forces for further integration will continue, as market participants increasingly exploit the new 
environment  of  monetary  union.  In  addition,  a  number  of  initiatives,  supported  by  the 
Eurosystem  and/or  the  Commission,  are  further  encouraging  integration.  An  example  is 
TARGET2,  the  new  payment  platform  for  the  financial  system,  which  began  operating  in 
November  2007.  As  integration  proceeds,  we  can  expect  that  monetary  transmission 
mechanisms across the euro area will continue to converge, helping the implementation of 
the single monetary policy and bringing the euro area closer to an optimum currency area.  
Ronald McKinnon, in 1963, added the criterion of openness. The more open the economies 
of a monetary union, the less effective nominal exchange rate changes will be in facilitating 
adjustment because the changes are more likely to feed onto domestic prices and wages, 
offsetting the competitiveness gains.  
Recent  empirical  evidence,  however,  has  shown  that  a  common  currency  (as  opposed  to 
separate currencies tied together with fixed exchange rates) can promote openness, or trade 
integration. The basic intuition underlying this view is that a set of national currencies is a 
significant barrier to trade. In addition to removing the costs of currency conversion, a single 
currency  and  a  common  monetary  policy  preclude  future  competitive  devaluations,  and 
facilitate  foreign  direct  investment  and  the  building  of  long-term  relationships.  These 
outcomes, in turn, can promote (over-and-above what may have been attained on the basis 
of the elimination of exchange-rate uncertainty among separate currencies) reciprocal trade, 
economic  and  financial  integration,  and  the  accumulation  of  knowledge.  Greater  trade 
integration  can  increase  growth  by  increasing  allocative  efficiency  and  accelerating  the 
transfer of knowledge.  
The euro area’s experience indicates that the euro has indeed acted as a catalyst for trade 
integration. Intra-euro area trade in goods increased from 26% of euro area GDP in 1998 to 
33% in 2006. Intra-area trade in services has also risen. Recent empirical work has shown 
that similar increases in trade have not taken place among European countries which did not 
adopt the euro.  
Kenen (1969) emphasised product diversification, the idea being that countries which were 
more  diversified  or  less  specialised  in  production  would  be  less  likely  to  face  asymmetric 
shocks. Indeed, before the formation of European monetary union, there was considerable 
worry that monetary union would cause national economies to become more specialised as 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2008
production became concentrated to reap the benefits of scale and agglomeration economies. 
Whilst  there  is  perhaps  little  evidence  that  the  advent  of  monetary  union  has  caused 
economies  to  become  even  more  diversified,  there  is  no  evidence  that they  have  become 
more specialised, thus allaying these early fears.  
Another  contribution  to  optimum-currency  area  literature,  again  made  by  Peter  Kenen  in 
1969,  brought  out  the  importance  of  establishing  a  fiscal  transfer  mechanism  at  the 
supranational level in order to help stabilise economies hit by asymmetric shocks. While such 
a centralised fiscal mechanism is extremely limited in Europe, the Stability and Growth Pact 
with its emphasis on budgets being either in balance or surplus over the economic cycle is 
designed to ensure that national budget have the flexibility to react to adverse asymmetric 
shocks.  
In sum, the creation of the euro may itself be contributing to the very conditions that make 
the  use  of  nominal  exchange-rate  adjustments  among  the  members  of  the  euro  area  less 
necessary  than  was  the  case  before  they  joined  the  euro  area.  Nevertheless,  it  can  be 
argued that a country surely must give up something if it no longer has the exchange-rate 
tool. My reaction to this argument is that adjustment of the nominal exchange-rate is not a 
magic  bullet.  One  should  not  expect  an  economy  with  competitiveness  problems,  running, 
say, current account deficits equal to 6 per cent of GDP, to depreciate the nominal exchange 
rate and become competitive for-ever-after. We tried this policy in Greece in the 1980s; and 
wound  up  with  higher  inflation,  undiminished  current-account  deficits,  and  a  currency  that 
became prone to speculative attacks.  
By its very nature, the current account is the result of intertemporal decisions with respect to 
savings and investment by the private sector and government. It should not be surprising, 
then, that the nominal exchange rate cannot be relied upon to bring about lasting adjustment. 
Such  adjustment  requires  changes  in  an  economy’s  structure,  and,  as  I  have  argued, 
membership in a monetary union can encourage those changes.  
Conclusions  
III.  
I have argued that ways of thinking about monetary union have evolved considerably from 
the  early  days  of  the  literature  on  optimum  currency  areas.  Developments  in  modern 
macroeconomics recast the goals of monetary policy. The focus nowadays on price stability 
and the creation of the conditions necessary to support growth and employment changes the 
balance  of  the  arguments  about  the  cost  of  giving  up  an  independent  monetary  policy. 
Provided that the monetary policy framework at the union level delivers price stability, there 
is little to be lost from transferring monetary policy to the union level.  
The  success  of  the  euro  area  has  demonstrated  that  one  size  can  fit  all.  Let  me  briefly 
mention three pieces of evidence which support this. First, inflation dispersion has declined 
and  has  been  around  1  percentage  point  since  the  second  half  of  1999.  This  compares 
favourable with inflation dispersion across a monetary union of similar size, the US. Second, 
the decline in inflation dispersion has not been at the expense of higher growth dispersion. 
Growth dispersion has remained close to its historical average of around 2 percentage points 
and, if any trend is discernable, it is a downward one. Finally, business cycles appear to have 
become more correlated.  
The evidence from almost 10 years of monetary union in Europe points to a euro area which 
is  endogenously  adapting  itself  to  become  an  optimum  currency  area.  The  euro  area 
provides clear evidence that the criteria identified in the earlier literature do not need to be 
exogenously in place prior to monetary union. I do not want to leave you with the impression, 
however, that euro area policy-makers can sit back and relax because all the necessary work 
has  been  done.  After  all,  I  began  this  lecture  by  remarking  that  the  adoption  of  the  euro 
created  new  challenges  for  economic  policy.  The  adoption  of  the  euro  was  neither  the 
beginning nor the end of an optimum currency area among European countries. The process 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 5
is ongoing, and much more needs to be done, especially in regard to structural policies, to 
ensure that the euro area becomes a more dynamic force for growth in the global economy. 
It is my view that the experience of the euro area to date only serves to highlight the fact that 
a currency union requires flexibility and competition in factor and product markets. These are 
the characteristics that will make monetary union work more effectively.  
Thank you for your attention.  
Bibliography  
Baldwin, R. (2006) “The euro’s trade effects”, ECB Working Paper no. 594.  
Ingram,  J.  C.  (1962)  Regional  Payments  Mechanisms:  The  case  of  Puerto  Rico,  Ralleigh: 
University of North Carolina Press.  
Kenen,  P.  (1969)  “The  Optimum  Currency  Area:  an  eclectic  view”  in  Mundell,  R.  and 
Swoboda,  K.  (eds)  Monetary  Problems  of  the  International  Economy,  Chicago:  Chicago 
University Press.  
Krugman, P. and Venables, A. (1996) “Integration, Specialization and Adjustment”, European 
Economic Review, 40, 3-5, 959-67.  
Kydland,  F.  and  Prescott,  E.  (1977)  “Rules  rather  than  Discretion:  the  inconsistency  of 
optimal plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85, 473-91.  
McKinnon, R. (1963) “Optimum Currency Areas”, American Economic Review, 52, 717-25.  
Mundell, R. (1961) “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas”, American Economic Review, 51, 
657-65.  
Rose, A. K. and Stanley, T. D. (2005) “A Meta-Analysis of the Effect of Common Currencies 
on International Trade”, Journal of Economic Surveys, 19, 3, 347-65. 
6 
 BIS Review 54/2008
