John Hurley: Recent issues in financial stability 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland, to the Institute of Internal Auditors, Dublin, 18 April 2008. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be back speaking to members of the Irish District Society of the Institute of 
Internal Auditors on the occasion of your 20th Annual Conference. I would like to thank your 
chairman, Fintan Geraghty, for the invitation to speak today. 
A  few  years  ago,  before  I  became  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services 
Authority  of  Ireland,  I  had  the  honour  to  make  the  opening  remarks  on  the  eve  of  your 
conference. Throughout my working life, I have always been conscious of the importance of 
the Internal Audit role. 
In my address this morning, I will comment on recent issues in financial stability, focussing 
on  developments  in  international  financial  markets  and  the  outlook  for  both  international 
growth  and  the  domestic  economy.  I  will  also  briefly  comment  on  the  pivotal  role  that  the 
auditing and accounting professions have in enhancing the resilience of financial markets.  
I see that the focus of this year’s conference is on the challenges facing the profession in 
delivering assurance to stakeholders on the effectiveness of risk controls in a changing and 
turbulent  environment.  The  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services  Authority  like  all  major 
organisations,  financial  and  other,  places  significant  reliance  on  reports  and  opinions  by 
external and internal auditors in relation to corporate governance and internal controls. We 
have established close relationships with accountancy and auditing bodies in the context of 
supervising  regulated  entities.  As  you  know,  the  principles-based  approach  to  financial 
regulation  in  this  country  places  a  lot  of  reliance  on  financial  organisations  to  adopt  and 
adhere to the highest standards. Auditors and compliance personnel have a key role to play 
in this system. Under financial services legislation, auditors are now required to report certain 
matters to the Financial Regulator, such as material defects in financial systems and controls 
or  in  accounting  records.  While  the  respective  orientations  differ,  auditors,  and  internal 
auditors in particular, can provide valuable independent assurance on many other issues. 
I would like to turn now to the main focus of my address this morning, namely, recent issues 
in financial stability.  
What is financial stability? 
Let me start by defining what we mean by financial stability. Financial stability exists when 
the  various  parts  of  the  financial  system  such  as  payments  and  settlements  systems, 
financial  markets  and  financial  intermediaries  such  as  banks  can  operate  smoothly  and 
without interruption and with each part resilient to shocks. A stable financial system is able to 
absorb  adverse  shocks.  The  maintenance  of  a  stable  financial  system  is  fundamentally 
important to the operation of the economy. For example, it facilitates the provision of credit, 
the  security  of  depositors’  funds  and  the  smooth  operation  of  payments  systems.  Serious 
financial instability can manifest itself in terms of banking crises and recession and can be 
very costly for any economy in terms of disruption and reduced output and employment.  
Ireland  is  well  placed  in  terms  of  the  institutional  arrangements  that  exist  in  relation  to 
financial stability. The Central Bank and Financial Services Authority is the organisation in 
Ireland responsible for financial stability issues. When the Central Bank was restructured in 
2003, the new body was designed with financial stability in mind with both the Central Bank 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 1
and  the  single  Financial  Regulator  operating  within  the  one  organisation.  Both  of  the 
constituent parts work closely together to contribute to the maintenance of financial stability, 
though their focus of interest differs. The role of the Central Bank relates to surveillance of 
developments in the wider economy and the financial system as a whole, while the Financial 
Regulator focuses on the prudential health of individual financial institutions, in addition to its 
consumer protection mandate. Both perspectives are necessary to fully assess the risks to 
stability and to take the necessary actions by way of mitigation. The real advantage of our 
structure  is  the  seamless  sharing  of  expertise  and  information  that  comes  from  operating 
under the one umbrella. Such co-operation strengthens our assessment capabilities and the 
speed with which we can act. These institutional arrangements have been tested in recent 
months, and I am happy to state that they have proved to be effective in dealing with the 
recent financial market turbulence.  
Our organisation contributes to maintaining financial stability in several ways. We maintain a 
regular dialogue with the financial sector to exchange views on current and emerging issues. 
In addition, as a member of the ECB’s Governing Council, I participate in the formulation of 
monetary  policy  and  the  setting  of  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area.  This  has  as  its  primary 
objective  the  maintenance  of  low  inflation  which  also  contributes  to  financial  stability. 
Furthermore, the Central Bank has a key role in providing liquidity to Irish banks and we are 
responsible  for  oversight  of  the  payments  and  settlements  systems.  Our  organisation  is 
continually  assessing,  and  stands  ready  to  deal  with,  emerging  problems  and  potential 
shocks to the financial system. There is the closest co-operation between the Central Bank 
and Financial Regulator on financial stability issues. In particular, the Financial Regulator had 
introduced a variety of measures, prior to the onset of the market turmoil, which led to the 
financial services industry here being well placed to deal with the challenging environment. 
Finally, we publish an annual Financial Stability Report.  Our hope is that the wide-ranging 
analysis in the Report conveys the importance of a stable financial system and encourages 
discussion  of  the  financial-stability  environment  among  the  general  public,  the  business 
community and the financial sector. 
Recent issues in financial stability 
On balance, our current assessment is that while the outlook for financial stability in Ireland 
and globally has deteriorated in recent months, domestic financial institutions remain sound 
and capable of absorbing shocks. There are a number of current and longer-term issues that 
have a bearing on this assessment.  
International financial markets 
Ireland is an extremely open economy by international standards. Our relatively large trading 
sector and the significant presence of foreign multinational firms and international financial 
services  companies  means  that  our  economy  and  its  financial  system  are  influenced 
significantly by developments in the global economy and international financial markets. This 
is  why  Ireland  could  not  be  immune  from  the  current  disruption  in  international  financial 
markets. 
As  to  the  origins  of  the  current  developments,  the  low  interest  rate  environment  has 
undoubtedly  played  a  part.  With  a  steady  availability  of  credit,  and  relatively  low  interest 
rates,  there  was  an  increased  desire  on  the  part  of  investors  to  acquire  assets  earning  a 
higher return without, however, paying due regard to the associated higher risk associated 
with this. In particular, during this time, the international banking sector had compensated for 
falling  margins  on  traditional  business  by  investing  in  structured  finance  products  or 
originating  collateralised  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  without  fully  taking  on  board  the  risks 
inherent in these products. On the liabilities side, there was a move towards more volatile 
wholesale 
loans, 
securitisation and issuance of covered bonds. Banks also extended back-up credit lines to 
issuance  of  debt  securities, 
funding  sources  such  as 
interbank 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2008
structured investment vehicles (SIVs) or conduits whose business model was based largely 
on  the  continued  smooth  operation  of  the  asset-backed  commercial  paper  market.  These 
developments exposed the international banks to a variety of risks such as possible losses 
on their investments in structured products, losses on their retained tranches of CDOs, the 
volatility of wholesale funding sources in adverse market conditions, and the risk of funding 
contingent  liabilities  to  SIVs  and  conduits  for  which  some  banks  had  made  inadequate 
provision.  
I would stress that the domestic banking sector was largely insulated from these trends, in 
part by the exceptional performance of the Irish economy over the last 15 years. Irish banks 
shared the experience of their international peers in that margins on traditional business had 
fallen  over  the  longer  term.  However,  because  of  the  high  level  of  demand  in  Ireland, 
profitability was maintained without recourse to investing in structured products or conduits 
as described earlier. 
The  re-pricing  of  risk  in  international  financial  markets  and  the  associated  turmoil  was 
triggered  in  mid-2007  when  international  investors  became  nervous  about  the  underlying 
value  of  their  investments  in  assets  that  consisted  of  pools  of  US  subprime  mortgages. 
These  assets  had  been  created  under  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model  whereby 
mortgages  were  issued  to  borrowers  by  an  originator  (i.e.,  a  bank  or  broker)  but  were 
subsequently  packaged  together  and  sold  on  to  investors.  An  increasing  number  of  these 
mortgages  have  become  non-performing  since  mid-2005.  These  losses  became  an 
international problem, as many of the investors including banks that had bought these assets 
were located outside the US. Uncertainty about the size and the identity of those investors 
holding the losses gave rise to increased risk aversion in the marketplace and marking down 
of the value of these types of assets.  
The uncertainty rippled through a variety of financial markets and caused disruption. Arising 
out  of  concerns  about  banks’  exposures  to  risky  assets,  counterparty  risk  heightened  and 
problems began to spill over to the interbank market – where banks borrow from and lend to 
each  other.  As  a  result,  there  was  increased  uncertainty  in  key  markets  where  banks 
traditionally  raised  funds.  Disruption  to  funding  markets  is  particularly  problematic  for  all 
banks since they regularly need to renew portions of their funding.  
The bout of turbulence in international financial markets has persisted for longer than many 
commentators  would  have  predicted.  Since  mid-2007,  there  remain  ongoing  tensions  in 
international financial markets amid a steady flow of negative news. Through late-2007 and 
into 2008, central banks – including the ECB – have continued to provide funds to promote a 
smoother functioning of the interbank money market. However, the cost of term borrowing for 
banks in this market has remained high. In addition, other longer-term bank funding markets 
remain relatively closed, as banks continue to be reluctant to lend to one another other than 
for short maturities, while many asset-backed securities, leveraged loan and structured credit 
markets are virtually inactive. Term premia are expected to remain elevated for some time 
because  of  wider  problems  in  the  financial  system  such  as  uncertainties  regarding  the 
valuation  of  complex  products,  counterparty  mistrust  and  continuing  uncertainty  about  the 
ultimate  location  of  mounting  losses  on  assets  linked  to  the  US  subprime  residential 
mortgage sector.  
International economic growth 
Against  the  background  of  the  problems  in  global  financial  markets,  there  have  been 
downward revisions of economic growth across many countries. This has occurred because 
of concerns over the scale of the losses being incurred by the banking sector internationally 
and the potential for knock-on effects in terms of a lower availability of funds for borrowers 
and a higher cost of credit. Many surveys of banks’ current credit standards indicate that they 
have  been  tightened  because  of  the  financial  market  turbulence.  On  a  practical  level,  this 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 3
means  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  borrow  funds  for  consumption  and  investment  and,  as  a 
consequence, globally there could be relatively less economic growth. 
It is estimated by the International Monetary Fund that the global economy expanded by 4.9 
per cent in 2007 and will grow by 3.7 per cent in 2008. This latter projection is significantly 
lower than forecast last October. There are increased signs that the deterioration in the US 
housing market is starting to spill over to the broader economy and the outlook for consumer 
spending appears to have weakened. Many observers are of the view that the US economy 
may experience little or no growth for some time.  
Despite continuing problems in financial markets, the latest economic data remain consistent 
with moderate but ongoing real GDP growth in the euro area. While growth is expected to 
moderate  somewhat  from  its  2007  rate,  euro  area  economic  activity  is  still  expected  to 
continue to expand this year. However, the risks to this outlook would appear to be on the 
downside. They arise from the significant uncertainty related to the problems that financial 
markets are experiencing and the risks surrounding the global growth outlook. For instance, 
the implications for growth stemming from developments in the United States remain highly 
uncertain. The full implications of financial  market developments for the US economy, and 
subsequently for the global economy, may not be fully apparent yet. Hopefully, the initiatives 
discussed by the G7 last weekend will help reduce these uncertainties.  
Turning to price developments in the euro area, sharp increases in food and energy prices 
have had a significant impact on the harmonised Eurosystem inflation rate in recent months, 
pushing it well above 3 per cent. The headline rate is expected to moderate gradually over 
the course of the year, but the risks to the outlook are clearly on the upside. Looking ahead, 
the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  signalled  that  it  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments over the coming weeks. 
Implications for the Irish economy 
The outlook for the Irish economy in 2008 is undoubtedly more challenging now than was 
envisaged last year. As a result, real GDP is projected to increase by 2.4 per cent while real 
GNP is forecast to increase by 1.9 per cent in 2008. Although this is a much-reduced rate of 
growth  by  the  standards  of  our  experience  since  the  mid-1990s,  it  still  remains  a  good 
performance  by  international  standards.  The  OECD  confirmed  this  view  in  their  latest 
assessment of the Irish economy published this week. This noted that, despite the slowdown, 
the  economic  fundamentals  remain  strong  and  it  pointed  to  our  skilled  workforce,  flexible 
labour  market,  moderate  taxation,  business-friendly  regulatory  environment  and  our  sound 
fiscal position.  
The key domestic issue is the marked decline in house-building activity expected in 2008. All 
of the various leading indicators of housing supply are pointing to a reduction in activity. For 
instance,  completions  recorded  for  January  2008  were  the  lowest  since  early-2003.  The 
Central  Bank’s  latest  estimate  is  for  about  50,000  houses  to  be  completed  this  year  and 
about 45,000 next year. This is a necessary adjustment to a more sustainable level of output. 
However, it is having adverse knock-on effects in terms of job losses and lower consumption.  
External  demand  will  be  affected  this  year  by  pressures  on  competitiveness  and  weaker 
growth in Ireland’s main trading partners. In recent years Ireland’s competitiveness position 
has deteriorated somewhat due to a combination of the appreciation of the euro, a domestic 
price  level  which  continues  to  remain  stubbornly  high  –  although  inflation  is  projected  to 
reduce  towards  the  end  of  the  year,  higher  wages  and  non-labour  costs  relative  to  our 
trading  partners  and  a  slowdown  in  productivity  growth.  Over  the  longer  term,  the  key  to 
restoring  competitiveness  is  containing  domestic  inflationary  pressures,  including  the 
evolution  of  pay,  and  to  improve  productivity  growth.  A  number  of  policy  measures  are 
relevant  in  this  regard  including  boosting  competition,  reducing  the  regulatory  burden  on 
business, investing in infrastructure, improving educational standards, encouraging R&D and 
innovation, maintaining macroeconomic stability and increasing flexibility. In general, Ireland 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2008
needs to remain a good place to do business with policy settings supportive of enterprise, 
investment and innovation.  
The labour market has performed well over recent years and unemployment is at a level that 
probably represents a position close to full employment for the Irish economy. The expected 
slowdown in the economy this year, however, will have implications for the performance of 
the labour market. Employment is expected to increase by just 0.5 per cent in the coming 
year,  which  is  less  than  the  anticipated  growth  in  the  labour  force  and,  therefore,  the 
unemployment  rate  could  increase  to  5.9  per  cent.  Despite  the  projected  increase,  our 
unemployment  rate  is  expected  to  remain  below  the  European  average.  It  may  be  worth 
recalling that the labour market proved particularly resilient to the last significant downturn in 
economic growth in 2001/2002. 
Some pick up in economic growth is likely in 2009 on the basis that house-building activity 
will  stabilise  or  contract  only  modestly,  and  there  will  be  some  recovery  in  the  global 
economy. At this stage, growth in Irish GDP and GNP are forecast to recover to 3.6 per cent 
and 3.2 per cent, respectively, in 2009.  
Property prices and private-sector indebtedness 
I would now like to turn to recent developments in the property market – both residential and 
commercial.  
We  have  come  through  a  buoyant  period  in  the  residential  market.  In  previous  years,  the 
Central Bank expressed its concern about the persistently high rate of capital appreciation. 
However, residential prices are now about 9 per cent lower than this time last year, although 
there are tentative indications that the pace of decline in prices has eased somewhat. It is 
important to bear in mind that these developments should be seen as part of a necessary 
adjustment  following  many  years  of  exceptional  house  price  inflation.  For  instance,  prices 
rose by about 12 per cent in 2006 alone and by over 50 per cent between 2002 and 2006.  
With  respect  to  future  price  developments,  as  I  stated  recently,  residential  prices  are  now 
returning to more realistic levels. I stated in 2006 that, at that time, a gap was opening up 
between the price of residential property and the fundamentals supporting that position. This 
gap is now in the process of closing. There are a number of factors that may help to stabilise 
the market. On the supply side, developers have been very prompt in responding to declining 
demand and we have seen national completions contract sharply. The underlying demand 
for housing continues to remain strong, as evidenced by the fact that rents are continuing to 
grow  strongly  (about  9  per  cent  per  annum),  although  there  is  recent  evidence  of  some 
softening  in  rental  growth.  Affordability  has  begun  to  improve  again  due  to  lower  house 
prices and changes to stamp duty  and mortgage interest relief. The combination of higher 
rents and improvements in affordability may already be bringing the relative costs of buying 
and  renting  closer,  helping  to  re-establish  equilibrium  in  the  market.  There  are,  of  course, 
risks  stemming  from  the  unsettled  international  financial  market  environment  that  could 
negatively affect this scenario. 
The  rate  of  increase  of  prices  in  the  commercial  property  sector  is  easing  following 
exceptional  rates  of  appreciation  in  recent  times.  The  continued  uncertainty  in  the  global 
financial  markets  may  be  impacting  on  investor  demand  for  commercial  property  by 
increasing  funding  costs  and  tightening  credit  conditions.  In  addition,  commercial  property 
tends  to  follow  the  economic  cycle  more  closely  than  residential  property,  and  near-term 
developments in the real economy could be particularly important for the performance of the 
commercial  property  market.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  commercial  property 
investors are currently maintaining a cautious investment strategy and, consequently, capital 
appreciation is expected to ease further in early-2008, as transaction activity slows.  
The  CBFSAI  has  been  concerned  for  some  time  about  the  level  of  private-sector 
indebtedness. There has been a welcome improvement with respect to these trends recently, 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 5
namely, the rate of credit growth has slowed and the rate of accumulation of private-sector 
indebtedness has moderated accordingly. The most recently published figures indicate that 
private-sector  credit  increased  year-on-year  by  about  16  per  cent  compared  with  annual 
rates in the region of 30 per cent in early-2006. It is expected that this downward trend will 
continue into 2009. However, an important distinguishing feature of the Irish economy has 
been that Irish households do not appear to have consumed their capital gains on housing to 
any great extent and, accordingly, their consumption does not appear as reliant on credit as 
is  the  case  in  many  other  countries  which  have  experienced  relatively  large  cumulative 
increases  in  house  prices.  Two  additional  mitigating  factors  are  the  significant  share  of 
households  with  no  mortgage  on  their  primary  residence  and  the  substantial  net  worth  of 
many households. 
Overall assessment of financial stability  
Notwithstanding the deterioration in the outlook for financial stability both here and abroad in 
recent  months,  domestic  financial  institutions  remain  sound  and  capable  of  absorbing 
shocks. The strength of the Irish economy is continuing to support the stability of the financial 
system,  and  Ireland  has  a  healthy  domestic  banking  sector  with  good  shock-absorption 
capacity.  Membership  of  the  European  economic  and  monetary  union  has  increased  our 
ability to manage the challenging international environment.  
The health of the banking sector remains robust according to the key indicators. The sector 
is profitable and well capitalised. The level of non-performing loans remains low by historical 
standards.  Finally,  the  sector’s  funding  arrangements  are  good.  The  Central  Bank  and 
Financial  Services  Authority  with  the  cooperation  of  the  key  domestic  banks  has  regularly 
stress-tested the banking sector. These exercises involve measuring the financial health of 
the sector in difficult economic circumstances, and the results indicate that the sector has the 
capacity to weather a significant slowdown. Notwithstanding the robust health of the sector, 
the issues which I have outlined earlier pose challenges for the sector. 
International  banks  have  been  negatively  affected  by  recent  events,  both  directly  through 
losses  on  their  US  subprime  assets  and  through  a  variety  of  other  indirect  channels. 
However,  Irish  banks  have  not  had  to  absorb  similar  losses  because  the  domestic  banks 
have no significant direct exposures to US subprime mortgages and very limited exposures 
through  investments  and  credit  lines  extended  to  other  financial  companies  or  special 
purpose  vehicles.  The  banks’  provisional  year-end  results  confirm  that  losses  arising  from 
the US subprime issue are relatively small.  
In light of the scale of the disruption in international financial markets, it was inevitable that 
the domestic banking sector would find it more challenging to raise funds on a term basis. 
However,  Irish  banks’  liquidity  arrangements  are  good  and  the  sector  is  comfortably 
satisfying  the  more  robust  prudential  liquidity  requirements  put  in  place  by  the  Financial 
Regulator prior to recent events. In addition, Irish banks are well positioned to access central 
bank funding, both because of the broad range of collateral acceptable in the Eurosystem for 
obtaining  these  funds  and  the  significant  volume  of  this  high-quality  collateral  available  to 
them.  
Lessons – the way forward 
Before  concluding,  I  should  say  that  the  financial  authorities  and  governments  in  many 
countries are assessing how to turn the corner on the recent period both from a short-term 
and medium-term perspective. At an EU level, ECOFIN has set out a roadmap for dealing 
with such episodes of turbulence, while the Financial Stability Forum, which brings together 
national  authorities,  international  financial  institutions,  financial  regulators  and  central 
bankers, has reviewed the lessons from a global perspective and presented them at the G7 
last weekend.  
6 
 BIS Review 46/2008
In  the  short  term,  all  international  commentators  agree  on  the  fundamental  importance  of 
restoring  confidence  in  the  creditworthiness  and  financial  health  of  banks.  The  prompt 
disclosure  by  relevant  banks  of  their  exposures  and  associated  losses  would  seem  to  be 
crucial in this respect. In the medium term, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) has identified 
a number of broad policy areas where further action is required to increase the resilience of 
the global financial system. These relate to enhanced transparency about banks’ exposures 
to  structured  products  and  off-balance  sheet  vehicles,  improving  the  valuation  of  assets 
when markets are illiquid, reviewing aspects of the new Capital Requirements Directive and 
banks’ management of liquidity risks, examining issues around market functioning including 
the role of credit agencies, strengthening the authorities responsiveness to risks and, finally, 
robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system. 
In  relation  to  the  initiative  on  transparency  and  disclosures,  the  auditing  and  accounting 
professions have a key role in ensuring the clarity and integrity of data reported by financial 
institutions. In the medium term, the Forum proposes that auditors help to develop principles 
to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  risk  disclosures.  Further,  they  are  asked  to  engage  in  regular 
discussions with both industry representatives and investors to discuss the key risks faced by 
the financial sector and to identify the risk disclosures that could most usefully be made at 
that time. Auditors have also been assigned a significant part to play in addressing potential 
weaknesses in financial firms’ valuation practices and disclosures, especially at times when 
fair  valuation  is  required  but  the  relevant  markets  are  illiquid.  For  instance,  it  has  been 
identified that firms that have performed relatively better during the turmoil had established, 
prior to recent events, rigorous internal processes for the valuation of complex or potentially 
illiquid securities. In contrast, those firms that performed relatively worse had weaker internal 
processes. In the period ahead, auditors are being asked to work with financial institutions to 
improve their valuation methodologies and to clarify the uncertainties associated with these. 
This would contribute greatly to market confidence. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  the  Irish  economy  and  its  banking  sector  continue  to  demonstrate  their 
strength against the background of a challenging international environment. While the growth 
rate of the economy is expected to slow this year, it will still represent a good performance by 
international standards, and growth  is expected to recover  in 2009 and subsequent years. 
Prices  in  the  residential  housing  market  are  in  the  process  of  returning  to  more  realistic 
levels. The health of the domestic banking sector remains robust.  
The  likely  duration  of  the  difficult  international  environment  is  highly  uncertain.  Pending  a 
return to more normal conditions, we continue to monitor the situation very closely. We are 
also  actively  involved  in  international  efforts  towards  understanding  the  origins  of  these 
events,  drawing  lessons  that  can  be  learned  to  help  avoid  a  repeat  of  the  turmoil  and 
implementing  initiatives  to  improve  the  resilience  of  the  international  financial  system.  The 
auditing and accounting professions have a pivotal role to play in that process.  
BIS Review 46/2008 
 7
