Mark Carney: Bank of Canada’s views on the Canadian economy and its 
monetary policy objective 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 30 April 2008. 
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members.  
It is a pleasure for me to appear before your committee for the first time as Governor of the 
Bank of Canada. We at the Bank appreciate the opportunity to meet with your committee, 
which we usually do following the release of our Monetary Policy Reports. These meetings 
are  important  in  terms  of  our  accountability  to  Canadians,  since  they  allow  us  to  keep 
members of Parliament and, through you, all Canadians, informed of the Bank's views on the 
economy,  the  objective  of  monetary  policy,  and  the  actions  that  we  take  to  achieve  that 
objective. These meetings have been very valuable for the Bank over the years, and I hope 
that we will continue them during my tenure as Governor. 
Before Paul and I take your questions, I would like to give you some of the details from our 
latest Monetary Policy Report, released last week.  
Growth  in  the  global  economy  has  weakened  since  the  January  Monetary  Policy  Report 
Update,  reflecting  the  effects  of  a  sharp  slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  ongoing 
dislocations  in  global  financial  markets.  Growth  in  the  Canadian  economy  has  also 
moderated. Buoyant growth in domestic demand, supported by high employment levels and 
improved terms of trade, has been substantially offset by a fall in net exports. Both total and 
core CPI inflation were running at about 1.5 per cent at the end of the first quarter, but the 
underlying  trend  of  inflation  is  judged  to  be  about  2  per  cent,  which  is  consistent  with  an 
economy that is running just above its production capacity. 
The U.S. economic slowdown is now projected to be deeper and more protracted than was 
expected at the time of the January Update. Our latest projection reflects a more pronounced 
impact  on  consumer  spending  from  the  contraction  in  the  U.S.  housing  market  and  from 
significantly tighter credit conditions.  
The deterioration in economic and financial conditions in the United States will have direct 
consequences for the Canadian economy. First, exports are projected to decline, exerting a 
significant  drag  on  growth  in  2008.  Second,  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  will 
continue to affect the cost and availability of credit. Third, business and consumer sentiment 
in Canada is expected to soften somewhat. Nevertheless, domestic demand is projected to 
remain strong, supported by firm commodity prices, high employment levels, and the effect of 
the cumulative easing in monetary policy.  
We at the Bank project that the Canadian economy will grow by 1.4 per cent this year, 2.4 
per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010. The emergence of excess supply in the economy 
should  keep  inflation  below  2  per  cent  through  2009.  Both  core  and  total  inflation  are 
projected to move up to 2 per cent in 2010 as the economy moves back into balance. There 
are  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank's  new  projection  for  inflation;  these  risks 
appear to be balanced. 
In line with this outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to achieve the 
inflation  target  over  the  medium  term.  Given  the  cumulative  reduction  in  the  target  for  the 
overnight  rate  of  150  basis  points  since  December,  including  the  50-basis-point  reduction 
announced  last  week,  the  timing  of  any  further  monetary  stimulus  will  depend  on  the 
evolution  of  the  global  economy  and  domestic  demand,  and  their  impact  on  inflation  in 
Canada. With that, Paul and I would now be pleased to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 1
