Shamshad Akhtar: Policy tradeoffs and structural issues 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Golden 
Jubilee of the Pakistan Institute of Development Economic, Islamabad, 11 March 2008. 
 In 
the  state  of 
the  economy. 
Resilience  of  Pakistan’s  economy  in  the  face  of  unforeseen  global  and  multiple  domestic 
shocks has been a subject of debate – proponents of outgoing Government arguing that it 
has  strengthened,  while  opponents  criticize 
these 
circumstances, I propose to provide a neutral, unbiased and economic reasoning for why and 
where we stand today? I encourage Pakistan Institute of Development Economics (PIDE) to 
further investigate and provide a professional economic perspective on the economy with the 
objective  of  feeding  properly  into  policy  advice.  In  providing  my  perspectives,  I  propose  to 
highlight  the  emerging  challenges  posed  by  the  weak  global  economic  scenario,  its 
consequent  impact  on  the  domestic  economy  which  was  already  under  strain,  and  then 
discuss the policy options and solutions, especially the structural changes that are required 
to put Pakistan on the road to sustainable economic recovery. 
Pakistan entered the 21st century after displaying an average economic performance in the 
1990s  on  numerous  fronts.  In  deference  to  the  historical  pattern  of  growth  path  and 
associated business cycles, the economy gained momentum. From 2000 onwards: foreign 
exchange reserves grew, the debt-to-GDP ratio fell, and inflation, in particular core inflation, 
decelerated.  Dynamism  of  financial  sector,  benefiting  from  the  change  of  ownership  and 
management  and  strong  regulation  and  supervision,  helped  revive  real  economy  and 
exploited untapped economic potential. Financial sector assets rose to $180 billion (125% of 
total  GDP)  as  banks’  were  capitalized  and  the  stock  market  remained  buoyant.  Corporate 
and  banking  sector  profitability  attracted  cumulatively  foreign  direct  investment  of  $11.9 
billion, remittances at $22.4, and net portfolio flows were $5.0 billion. 
Since late 2004 domestic vulnerabilities reemerged and mounted as the fiscal and external 
current account deficits rose above 4% of GDP and induced inflationary pressures. Risks to 
macroeconomic stability just after few years of robust growth and stability are not surprising. 
A  quick  review  of  Pakistan’s  economic  history  reveals  that  episodes  of  strong  economic 
growth in the 1960s and then in 1980s were both followed by the slowdown in growth and 
weaknesses in macroeconomic indicators.  
Why  is  Pakistan  vulnerable  to  these  cyclical  downturns?  Why  cannot  the  country  have 
sustainable  economic  performance?  The  oscillating  growth  performance  over  the  years  is 
largely  because  of  inherent  domestic  structural  rigidities  which  have  yet  to  be  effectively 
tackled  to  ensure  macroeconomic  stability  and  the  desired  growth  path.  Proper  diagnosis 
and effective resolution of issues and implementation of broad ranging structural reforms is 
critical to skirt such bouts of slowdown in growth and instability.  
Aside  from  the  broader  development  debates,  what  is  unusual  currently  is  that  Pakistan’s 
economy is simultaneously faced with twin shocks, global and domestic. The global shocks 
are represented by international financial market turmoil and the unprecedented increase in 
global  commodity  prices,  while  rising  fiscal  and  external  current  account  imbalances 
characterize the domestic shocks. In the backdrop of (relative) slowdown in foreign exchange 
inflows in FY2008, these shocks have resulted in pressure on the exchange rate and foreign 
exchange  reserves,  heavy  government  borrowings  from  the  central  bank,  and  a  rise  in 
domestic inflation.  
Combined,  both  international  and  domestic  events  have  complicated  short  term  economic 
management  disrupting  monetary  management  which  had  succeeded  in  bringing  the  core 
inflation down to 5.2% by May 2007 – below the peak levels of 8.3% in October 2005 and 
brought  to  surface  more  starkly  the  vulnerabilities  economy  faces.  Like  most  economic 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 1
phenomenon,  these  international  shocks  and  domestic  deficits  are  interrelated  and  entail 
stringent  tradeoffs  when  it  comes  to  devising and  implementing  a  well-coordinated,  timely, 
and  enduring  policy  response.  Unless  immediately  addressed,  the  present  economic 
vulnerabilities  emerging  in  Pakistan’s  economy  risks  reversal  of  the  high  growth  trajectory 
and even disruption of the gains achieved. Below, I attempt to give the basic reasons for the 
(re)emergence  of  these  shocks  and  deficits,  highlight  the  complexities,  and  suggest  some 
sustainable solutions.  
The global scene 
Worldwide  central  bankers,  economic  policy  makers  and  businesses  are  overwhelmed  as 
global economy slides in tailspin. Financial market turmoil caused by subprime debacle has 
sparked numerous debates regarding the origins of this event, effects of its aftermath, both in 
terms  of  contagion  and  policy  responses  across  the  globe.  Risks  of  spread  of  contagion 
associated  with  US  and  UK’s  credit  crisis  and  liquidity  crunch  have  compounded  as  the 
financial  and  economic  losses  magnify  and  thwart  global  financial  stability  and  economic 
growth prospects. Combined with record-high international commodity prices (in particular oil 
and  food  prices)  global  inflationary  risks  have  intensified.  Emerging  markets  like  Pakistan, 
which were thus far insulated mainly due to low exposure to the subprime paper, are likely to 
be impacted by the second round effects of the financial market turmoil which are now visible 
by way of sluggish world economic growth as US downturn is setting in.  
To mitigate these risk, US has launched a unprecedented package involving: easing liquidity 
through special funding windows, cutting policy rate, in five rounds, to 225 bps and providing 
US$200 billion fiscal package. This package, while warranted, is fairly controversial because 
of  the  associated  moral  hazard  and  inflationary  consequences  of  rate  cuts  and  easing  of 
liquidity. Since the appropriate size of the stimulus cannot be calibrated with any precision, 
the  aggressive  stimulus  by  way  of  a  monetary  accommodation  is  likely  to  compound  the 
global  inflationary  pressures  which  were  already  rising  in  wake  of  (i)  supply  constraints 
magnified  due  to  world  wide  shortages  of  strategic  products  (such  as  wheat)  and  oil 
substitution efforts that diverted use of corn as a bio-fuel and (ii) growing demand pressures 
with rising world income. Fuelling the international commodity prices has also been the fall in 
US dollar which has driven investors to chase gold and oil markets. In a globally integrated 
world  the  costs  of  re-anchoring  inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  be  punitive.  No  wonder, 
other  central  banks,  with  the  exception  of  few  such  as  Federal  Reserve  and  Bank  of 
England, have either further tightened their monetary policy or kept on hold to existing levels 
of tightening.  
Developing  understanding  of  the  origins  of  the  financial  crisis  and  adequacy  of  its  policy 
responses  is  critical.  Analysts  have  largely  identified  collapsing  US  sub-prime  mortgage 
market  as  the  key  cause  for  financial  market  turmoil.  However,  the  sub-prime  mortgage 
debacle  appears  more  of  a  symptom  rather  than  a  cause  of  this  evolving  credit  crisis. 
Underlying causative factors is the sustained decline in inflation and inflation volatility and the 
associated  notable  decline  in  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  in  most  developed  and 
developing  economies.  This  resulted 
in  complacency  and  central  banks’  adopted 
accommodative monetary policy for longer period that induced excessive liquidity. Combined 
with  regulatory  and  supervisory  gaps  in  oversight  of  off-balance  sheet  and  nonbank 
transactions, 
for  overleveraging  without  appropriate  risk 
management frameworks. 
Arguably, these developments increased appetite for and under pricing of risk (although the 
pricing  of  risk  was  (and  is)  becoming  increasing  difficult  in  the  face  of  fast-paced  financial 
innovations), elevated asset prices, increased capital flows across borders in search of better 
yields  (reflecting  global  macro  imbalances),  “carry  trade”  and  currency  misalignments. 
Although, monetary conditions had begun to tighten, the sub-prime mortgage crisis caused 
liquidity squeeze that resulted in loss of confidence and panic among investors and lenders 
this  provided  opportunities 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2008
(and now central banks) as they could not offload the complex risky assets and structured 
financial products. Since banks turned to rescue and bought off chunks of these papers, with 
low mark-to market valuations these resulted in losses to a number of financial institutions 
and write offs required capital injections. This fortunately was possible given the growth in 
sovereign funds which are waiting for acquisition and other deals. 
Could it be possible that by accommodating the oil and food prices and (attempting) to revive 
the economy, US is setting the stage for another round of easy monetary policy and liquidity 
situation. In my opinion, the key issue for central banks is to differentiate between need for 
short-term liquidity to rescue troubled financial entities and need for adoption of a credible 
monetary policy stance which aims to calibrate liquidity management in a way that it does not 
aggravate inflationary risks which in turn would trigger further complication and protract the 
global  economic  recovery.  While  lowering  interest  rates,  central  banks  have  to  weigh 
inflationary  risks  against  the  risk  of  recession  and  financial  instability.  In  bailing  financial 
entities, the central banks have to be concerned with “moral hazard” associated with such 
policy response as it often encourage more risky endeavors by salvaging institutions whose 
sole purpose of existence is risk taking and profit making.  
Not  only  is  Pakistan  facing  different  sets  of  complex  challenges,  but  the  emerging  global 
economic  scenario  itself  underscores  that  country  does  not  mimic  the  policy  response  of 
advanced  economies.  Advanced  countries  that  are  selectively  lowering  interest  rates  are 
those  that  have  enjoyed  low  inflation  for  sometime  but  are  now  facing  steeper  risks  of 
downturn.  As  such,  there  trade  off  for  growth  supportive  policies  relative  to  inflation  is 
understandable  as  risks  associated  with  US  slowdown  would  threaten  global  economic 
outlook and financial vulnerabilities. Pakistan on the other hand has relatively stable financial 
system,  but  mounting  aggregate  demand  pressures  are  now  visible  in  rising  inflation  and 
rising  inflationary  expectations.  Tightening  of  monetary  stance  and  flexible  exchange  rate 
management are the two key central bank policy responses. These however will have more 
distinct  impact  if  the  Government  reverts  to  fiscal  prudence  and  efforts  to  this  count  are 
visible through recent reduction in oil and other subsidies.  
Turning to the domestic front 
Structural Reforms: An Assessment. To understand the economic complexities at hand it 
is  important  to  trace  briefly  Pakistan’s  economic  growth  trajectory  and  experience  of 
structural  reforms.  Over  the  last  three  decades,  economic  growth  has  stumbled:  While 
growing  around  6-7%  in  late-1970s-1980s  and  growth  faltered  over  1988-2001  to  4.4%. 
From 2000, efforts launched have resurrected growth to an average of 6.3% over the last few 
years. The growth path was disrupted frequently by the inability of the government to adhere 
to prudent macroeconomic management and to consistently implement structural reforms.  
There is evidence, corroborated by the IMF Independent Evaluation Office1 that Pakistan’s 
macroeconomic framework and structural reforms suffered because of the lack of ownership 
of economic agenda and excessive focus on macroeconomic stabilization without supportive 
real  sector  as  well  as  institutional  and  structural  reforms.  This  resulted  in  slippages  in 
conditionalities and/or weak implementation of the reforms at best as releasing disbursement 
to meet economy’s financial crunch outweighed compliance with structural reforms.  
Problems with design and sequencing of structural reforms resulted in suboptimal outcomes 
of policies adopted. Few striking examples would illustrate this. Macroeconomic stability has 
often  been  disrupted  as  fiscal  slippages  were  a  norm  given  spending  was  not  aligned  to 
resource  envelop  that  has  been  for  years  constrained  by  narrow  tax  base.  These  trends 
                                                 
1  
IMF (2002), “Evaluation of Prolonged Use of IMF Resources”, Chapter 9: Pakistan, Independent Evaluation 
Office, Washington D.C.  
BIS Review 33/2008 
 3
made  fiscal-monetary  coordination  difficult.  Continued  recourse  of  deficit  financing  from 
central bank and other domestic financing sources has prevented containment of inflationary 
pressures, while constraining private sector credit demands. In real sector, industrialization 
has suffered because of excessive emphasis on import substitution and the incentive regime 
carried anti-export bias; consequently Pakistan suffers vulnerabilities stemming from lack of 
industry and export diversification.  
Nevertheless,  structural  reforms,  adopted  since  1990s  have  been  refined  in  the  recent 
decade. Among others, notable are following steps:  
Openness of the economy. Deregulation, price liberalization and lowering of tariffs,2 and the 
government’s  increased  willingness  to  cede  greater  role  to  the  private  sectors  in  the 
economy has improved the incentive regime.  
Greater fiscal space. Broadening of sales tax base, lowering of tax rates and improvements 
in  tax  administration  together  helped  in  raising  the  tax  revenue;  offsetting  the  losses 
stemming from tariff liberalization. Tightening of fiscal deficit over FY2002-2005, decline in 
debt3 and lower debt servicing (partly through the restructuring of external debt and partly 
through  improved  debt  management)  allowed  space  for  raising  development  expenditures. 
Sustaining  growth  in  development  expenditures  is  becoming  a  challenging  as  tax  base  is 
limited  by  exemptions  and  a  significant  proportion  of  taxable  bodies/incomes  remained 
outside the tax net.  
Privatization and deregulation. Government’s success in extricating itself from the provision 
of  goods  and  services  in  a  number  of  areas  by  sale  off  of  public  companies  has  helped 
generate proceeds. This has helped temporary alleviate fiscal needs and would also reduced 
state enterprises recourse to budget. Privatization has already helped improved accessibility 
and efficiency particularly in banking, telecommunications, and airline industries as well as 
the mass media (radio, television, etc.).  
Improving demographics. Albeit slow, Pakistan has managed to reduce its population growth 
rate. Large population offers strong domestic market and human resource for industry, but it 
does pose challenges and tradeoffs. Feeding population when crop productivity and yields 
are  low,  meeting  their  social  services  obligation  and  growing  demands  overstretch 
infrastructure  and  natural  resource  base.  Besides  harnessing  better  population  potential, 
emphasis  on  slowing  population  growth  is  likely  to  generate  significant  gains  in  coming 
decades.  
Governance  and  institutions.  Over  the  last  10  years,  institutional  reforms  have  helped 
establish regulators and NADRA (that has helped reduce transaction costs through issuance 
of  IDs  etc.),  unbundled  power  sector,  building  capacities  for  public:  private  partnership  in 
infrastructure  development  etc.  According  to  the  World  Bank’s  Report  on  Doing  Business 
2008, Pakistan ranked at 76th position out of 178 countries in terms of ease in doing business 
and placed at 11th position amongst Asian economies.  
Supported  by  these  reforms  and  capital  inflows,  Pakistan’s  investment  rate,  which  has 
hovered  around  18%,  has  now  risen  by  almost  5  percentage  points  to  23%  in  FY07. 
Encouragingly, public investment has also risen from 3.9% of GDP in FY03 to 5.2% of GDP 
by FY07. Enhanced resource mobilization would be key to maintaining momentum for growth 
in public investment. 
                                                 
2   The average tariff rate has declined from 56% in 1994 to around 7.6% by 2007. The decline in the tariff led to 
a significant increase in trade volumes (correspondingly the trade to GDP ratio has risen from 25 percent in 
FY00 to 33 percent in FY07). 
In time, the fiscal reforms led to a sustained reduction in the debt to GDP burden (92.9 as % of GDP in FY00 
to 57.7% by FY07). 
3  
4 
 BIS Review 33/2008
Current  challenges.  Pakistan  is  at  a  critical  cross  road.  On  one  hand,  there  are 
achievements  to  be  recounted.  The  country’s  smooth,  though  protracted,  transition  to 
democracy  and  the  preceding  few  years’  economic  performance  that  managed  to  excite 
foreign interest in Pakistan lends us confidence that Pakistan has strong economic potential 
and  can  attract  global  capital.  On  the  other  hand,  there  remain  key  economic  risks  and 
challenges  that  the  country  faces.  Unless  addressed  holistically  these  could  threaten 
economic  prospects;  a  luxury  Pakistan  can  ill-afford  given  the  geopolitical  context  and  the 
emerging global challenges.  
Re-emergence  of  twin  deficits  has  complicated  monetary  management.  Borrowings  from 
SBP induce expansion in reserve money and Government’s high recourse to banking system 
potentially  crowds  out  private  sector  credit.  These  complications  introduce  volatility  in 
overnight and other interest rates weaken the monetary policy transmission mechanism and 
hurts investment potential.  
Growing demand for goods and services, both from domestic sources and from abroad has 
helped  domestic  industry,  but  has  also  enhanced  import  reliance.  Over  FY03-07,  import 
growth (including oil) averaged 24.7% outpacing export growth (13.4%) leading to a widening 
external current account deficit. During this period, capital inflows funded fully the external 
current  account  deficit  and  the  residual  helped  in  building  foreign  exchange  reserves 
(growing by $5.6 billion over FY03-07). Even if oil prices fall and foreign inflows are restored, 
sustainability of external account will remain under stress as export growth may be impacted 
by the global slowdown. Containing both the external and the fiscal account imbalances is 
one of the challenges for the government.  
Solutions, strategy and structural reforms: future agenda. So what is the solution in this 
situation? The answer is to conduct counter-cyclical policies to curb demand pressures by 
dealing with the root cause of deficits; the sustainable and enduring solution is not only how 
to finance these deficits but more importantly how to introduce structural changes to reduce 
these deficit in a sustainable manner, while reflecting on approaches to meet the country’s 
development requirements.  
To  resolve  macroeconomic  imbalances  on  a  sustainable  basis  and  meet  the  growing 
development  requirements,  there  is  need  to  as  high  priority  focus  on  enhancing  national 
saving  rate,  which  is  a  basic  ingredient  to  increase  the  productive  capacity  (possible  only 
through well sequenced structural reforms) of the economy to match rising demand. Saving 
rate  has  now  been  historically  low  and  a  combination  of  policies  including  a  country  wide 
campaign  through  incentives  can  help  encourage  savings.  This  among  others  requires  to 
maintain  high  and  stable  real  interest  rate,  which  given  the  current  high  inflationary 
environment  is  only  possible  with  high  nominal  interest  rates.  In  turn,  a  higher  production 
level in the economy will encourage more savings. The challenge in this context is to remain 
vigilant about controlling consumption through counter cyclical policies.  
Recognizing  the  need  to  bring  the  twin  deficits  within  sustainable  levels  and  to  increase 
the  Medium-Term 
national  savings, 
Macroeconomic  Stabilization  Program  and 
the 
implementation of structural reforms. These steps will be crucial to re-invigorate growth and 
strengthen  economic  resilience.  Keeping  this  in  perspective,  the  Government’s  broader 
economic strategy for the next few years will need to include: 
i. 
the  new  Government  will  need 
front 
Increasing domestic resource mobilization to raise revenue/GDP ratio by at least 5 
percentage points of GDP. This is possible given the scope for enlargement of tax 
base,  removal  of  exemptions  and  further  strengthening  of  tax  administration.  The 
existing tax regime collects almost 68% of taxes from manufacturing and corporate 
sector,  while  agriculture  and  services  sectors  (aside  from  banks)  are  exempt  and 
some segments of the economy are outside the tax net.  
to  strengthen 
load 
it,  while  accelerating 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 5
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
the  recurrent  expenditures 
through  a  major  overhauling  of 
Restricting large proportion of new resource mobilized for public investment, while 
prioritizing 
the 
Government machinery. 
Restoring  the  momentum  of  privatization  of  state-owned  enterprises,  which  has 
been one of the most successful in Asia. The Government has sold off cumulatively 
almost  $7  billion  of  assets  over  FY2000-FY2008  and  there  are  around  61  state 
entities in the pipeline.  
Providing  more  autonomy  to  public  sector  organizations,  with  effective  leadership 
and  management, 
financial  efficiencies 
accompanied by a program to strengthen their balance sheets which should allow 
them to graduate from budgetary allocations to seeking funding from the market.  
And  raising  private  investment/GDP  from  23%  to  at  least  28%  which  involves 
significant  tapping  of  additional  resources  both  from  domestic  and  international 
financial markets. 
their  operational  and 
improve 
to 
To address the structural weaknesses that are inhibiting Pakistan’s long term growth there is 
need for: 
(i) 
Exploiting  agriculture  sector,  a  key  driver  for  economy,  to  regain  food  self 
sufficiency.  Conserving  agriculture  land  and  dealing  with  land  holding  and 
entitlement  issues  so  that  area  under  cultivation  can  be  expanded,  removing 
infrastructural  bottlenecks  (such  as  inconsistent  water  availability)  and  promoting 
right technology as well as research and development, and strengthening wholesale 
and  retail  markets  will  help  improve  food  availability  at  a  time  when  global  food 
scenario is worrisome. Greater food production will help cater for rising demand both 
within  Pakistan  due  to  the  growing  population  and  its  prosperity  and  outside 
particularly in the Middle Eastern bloc, India and China.  
Development  of  a  diversified  industrial  sector  is  now  urgent  to  cater  for  both 
domestic and external demand. Private sector has to be provided the right incentive 
and environment for promoting the required diversification. For promoting industry, 
there is need to broaden and deepen private equity and debt markets – this will help 
diversify financial sector too which is exclusively dependent on the banking system 
that carries its own attendant risks. Closely held companies should be encouraged 
to move more and more to capital markets and to examine opportunities for mergers 
and acquisition and to attract foreign investment to achieve scale and efficiencies.  
Instead of focusing on ad hoc subsidies that reach largely the profitable industry, it is 
best to design incentives to focus on ensuring adequate supply of infrastructure. All 
new funding, be it taxes or proceeds mobilized from the privatization of infrastructure 
should  henceforth  be  kept  in  a  separate  account  and  this  funding  should  be 
exclusively dedicated for developing infrastructure in dedicated industrial sites. For 
modernization  of  the  industry,  SBP  and  the  Government  is  already  focusing  on 
provision of right incentives for import of plant and machinery. These measures will 
help industrial the sector’s ability to compete effectively and achieve an organic and 
natural growth. Scope for exports is significant only if the industry achieves scale, 
value  addition,  diversity,  and  develops  information  technology  and  outsourced 
businesses from the West. 
Foreign investment would receive a further impetus if the legal system is overhauled 
to ensure elimination of cumbersome procedures, effective enforcement of property 
rights and business contracts and availability of timely justice.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
In conclusion, Pakistan has an opportunity to draw lessons from past. Among others listed 
above, a key lesson is need for effective implementation of reform agenda, though there is a 
case for launching second generation reforms to strengthen the governance of country and 
institutions  which  matter  in  implementation,  but  cannot  be  achieved  without  further 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2008
institutional reforms. Commitment in addressing the issues and focusing on reforms can go a 
long  way  in  creating  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to  productive  economic  activity, 
business friendly environment, and social cohesion. 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 7
