Lim Hng Kiang: Issues, challenges and opportunities presented by 
commodities 
Speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and 
Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  Global  Financial  Market  Summit,  Singapore, 
9 July 2008. 
 Introduction 
I  am  very  honoured  to  be  invited  to  participate  in  this  Conference  on  Global  Financial 
Markets and in particular on the commodity markets. High food and fuel prices continue to 
hog the headlines nowadays. I am sure the proceedings of this Conference will attract strong 
interest. 
The commodities world 
The  importance  of  commodities  cannot  be  over-emphasised.  Commodities  are  the  critical 
raw materials that feed our peoples and our factories, and power our economies. In countries 
where Governments have had to reduce fuel subsidies, this has sparked heated protests by 
consumers and workers, from farmers to fisherman to truck drivers, causing economic and 
social disruptions. Some have also likened the oil rally to the dot.com bubble and are wary of 
a third oil shock since the 1970s and 80s. 
Boom in commodity prices 
What has led to the boom in commodity prices? The global increase in commodity prices has 
been  widely  attributed  to  the  mismatch  between  physical  demand  and  supply.  On  the 
demand side, there has been a significant increase in consumption of fuel and grain. In Asia, 
demand for oil has been driven by tremendous growth in emerging markets such as India 
and  China.  Globally,  rising  household  income  due  to  economic  expansion  has  also  led  to 
higher  consumption  levels.  Increased  demand  for  meat  consumption  as  a  result  of  rising 
affluence  means  more  grains  are  channeled  from  humans  to  animal  feed  while  biofuels 
diverted food from people to petrol tanks. 
On the supply side, underinvestment in oil and gas exploration has caused output growth to 
lag  behind  demand  gains.  Disruptions  in  Nigeria,  Iraq,  and  declining  production  in  Russia 
have added to supply woes. Political tensions in the Middle East further threaten to reduce oil 
taps. Climate change has also led to poor harvests of corn, soya bean and wheat. Regions 
such  as  the  US  suffered  from  excessive  rain  while  Australia  underwent  severe  drought. 
Soaring prices for fertilizer and diesel have also made it costly for farmers to plant, reducing 
farm output. 
Besides the economics of demand and supply, financial market dynamics might also have 
played  a  part  in  fuelling  the  commodity  price  boom.  Commodities  have  been  found  to  be 
uncorrelated  or  negatively  correlated  to  traditional  asset  classes  of  equities  and  bonds, 
therefore holding commodities in investment portfolios can reduce risk and enhance potential 
returns. More recently, following the sub-prime fallout and relatively less attractive debt and 
equity  markets,  some  investors  could  have  switched  to  commodities  as  an  alternative 
investment  class,  pushing  up  their  prices  further.  As  commodities  prices  rise,  they  in  turn 
attract non-traditional players to the market, adding to trading volume. According to BIS data, 
global turnover in commodity derivatives (measured in number of contracts) grew from 420 
million to 489 million in the first quarter of 2008. On a year-on-year basis, turnover grew 52%, 
led by agricultural and energy products. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 1
Others  have  pointed  the  finger  at  speculators  for  the  historically  high  commodity  prices 
although  the  extent  of  this  has  not  been  well  established.  There  are  concerns  over 
speculative activities giving rise to a disconnect between the physical and futures markets. In 
the US where commodities are actively traded, there are claims that speculators’ interest in 
crude oil now account for about 70% of all trading in West Texas intermediate crude on the 
New York Mercantile Exchange ("NYMEX"), compared with 37% in 2000. On the other hand, 
some have attempted to make a distinction between speculative trading (which at the core, 
means  taking  positions  based  on  one’s  view  of  the  market)  and  market  manipulation  (or 
collusive  trading  that  interferes  with  the  free  play  of  demand  and  supply,  and  has  an  illicit 
element). They argue that speculators play a vital role in providing liquidity and take the risk 
that hedgers want to avoid. Without speculation, consumers would likely pay more for energy 
and  other  commodities.  Whatever  the  causes,  whether  physical  demand  and  supply  or 
speculation, the world now has to grapple with higher commodity prices. 
What are the implications and effects of the commodities boom? Clearly the hike in oil prices, 
for instance has crimped the real incomes of households. This would hold back consumption 
spending, and hence GDP growth, in the oil importing countries. Not surprisingly, the world 
economy is expected to slow in 2008, led by the US and other developed economies, amidst 
falling asset prices and tighter credit conditions as well. The US is weighed down by falling 
house  prices,  weak  consumer  spending  and  continued  credit  market  distress.  Domestic 
demand in Europe is expected to be subdued while softer external demand and the strong 
Euro could constrain export growth. 
Some  slowdown  is  to  be  expected  in  Asia,  although  firmer  domestic  demand  conditions 
should  offset  some  of  the  weakness  in  exports.  The  region  would  also  be  buoyed  by 
continued strong growth expected of China, India and the Middle East, which would help to 
mitigate the impact of the softer G3 economies. Indeed, inflation has emerged as a bigger 
concern  in  Asia,  particularly  among  the  faster  growing  economies  I  have  just  mentioned, 
including Vietnam. Thus, governments and central banks in the region not only have to deal 
with slower growth prospects, but also guard against rising inflationary pressures arising from 
strong domestic monetary expansion as well as higher commodity prices. 
High commodity prices would shape manufacturing decisions and define future trade flows. 
Higher shipping costs from fuel hikes have eroded the wage advantage of low cost producers 
such  as  China  and  Vietnam  especially  in  inexpensive  items  that  have  high  freight  cost 
relative to final sale price. For instance, it has become cheaper to manufacture steel in the 
US, instead of importing them from China where steelmakers have to transport iron ore from 
Brazil and Australia to the mills, and then ship the manufactured steel to the US. China has 
also recently agreed to pay close to 100% more for its iron ore. The costs are likely to be 
passed on to steel buyers and this could fuel inflation. 
Rising commodity prices have also increased the prominence of commodities in the financial 
markets. Commodity markets have in fact, become more financial market like. Traditionally, 
financial  activity  in  commodity  markets  focused  on  exploiting  arbitrage  opportunities,  with 
investors hedging their production or consumption in the futures market. The entry of new 
market  players  such  as  banks  and  hedge  funds,  with  their  different  risk  appetite  and 
investment horizon, has given rise to varied trading strategies. They have also given birth to 
a wider variety of financial instruments in the likes of index and exchange traded funds, as 
well as structured commodity products. These new players also demand the sophistication 
that  they  are  used  to  in  financial  markets.  As  a  result,  commodity  markets  have  moved 
towards  electronic  trading,  high  speed  communication  links  and  greater  efficiency  in  trade 
processing.  There  is  also  an  increasing  need  for  infrastructure  such  as  commodity 
exchanges and clearing facilities to facilitate trading. 
While  market  development  is  generally  welcomed,  the  risks  have  to  be  managed.  As 
commodities  become  the  flavour  of  the  day,  market  participants  should  ensure  that  they 
understand the risks as they participate more actively in the markets. In their eagerness to 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2008
ride the commodities wave, banks and other intermediaries should put in place appropriate 
risk management systems and processes, ensure they have adequate resources including 
qualified  staff,  and  uphold  proper  market  conduct.  Investors  too,  should  carefully  evaluate 
complex structures as they seek attractive returns. 
Singapore as a commodities hub 
Singapore  has  historically  played  an  important  role  to  connect  importers  and  exporters. 
Besides  being  strategically  located,  Singapore  offers  a  high  level  of  connectivity  with  its 
efficient infrastructure and business friendly environment. Today, Singapore is a key aviation 
and shipping hub, and an international financial centre. In the area of commodities, over 230 
global trading companies have their offshore trading, marketing and procurement operations 
in  Singapore.  We  enjoy  the  reputation  as  the  top  energy  trading  hub  in  Asia,  and  is 
increasingly  a  location  of  choice  for  other  sectors  including  agri-commodities,  metals  and 
minerals. 
Singapore  continues  to  be  the  hub  for  over  the  counter  ("OTC")  commodities  derivatives 
trading in the region, capturing more than 10% of global OTC commodities. In May 2006, the 
SGX  launched  a  central  counterparty  clearing  facility  or  SGX  AsiaClear,  for  OTC 
commodities  trading  to  mitigate  counterparty  risks  and  create  efficiencies  for  the  market 
place.  Today,  SGX  AsiaClear  has  seen  growth  in  energy,  freight  and  petrochemical 
derivatives and potentially agriculture commodities. 
We welcome further development of the breadth and depth of the commodities market and 
infrastructure  in  Singapore.  To  strengthen  our  position  as  Asia’s  leading  commodity 
derivatives trading centre, we have taken measures to encourage the growth of the futures 
market  which  would  facilitate  the  price  discovery  process.  Since  February  2008,  the 
regulation of financial and commodity futures has been consolidated under MAS to facilitate 
Singapore’s  growth  as  a  futures  trading  hub.  MAS  has  also  reviewed  the  capital 
requirements for brokers trading only in commodity futures contracts to ensure the relevance 
of  our  capital  requirements  in  light  of  developments  in  the  commodity  futures  market.  We 
would  continue  to  engage  the  industry  as  the  market  evolves  to  ensure  our  regulatory 
framework  remains  robust,  while  offering  a  business  friendly  environment  for  commodities 
trading. 
Conclusion 
The  surge  in  commodities  prices  presents  a  challenge  for  the  global  community.  The 
Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  sees  agricultural  commodity 
prices retreating from peaks but rising up to 50% higher in the next decade. The UN Food 
and  Agriculture  Organisation  says  food  production  must  rise  by  50%  by  2030  to  meet 
demand  and  has  warned  that  close  to  one  billion  people  faced  the  prospect  of  hunger. 
Commodities  form  the  heart  of  a  man’s  basic  needs.  World  demand  and  supply  of 
commodities would find a balance in due course. Proper functioning markets, both physical 
and  financial,  can  help  to  make  this  adjustment  and  transition  more  efficient  and  less 
disruptive. Towards this objective, we welcome a healthy development of the commodities 
market in Singapore. 
On  this  note,  I  wish  you  a  fruitful  discussion  on  the  issues,  challenges  and  opportunities 
presented by commodities. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 3
