Glenn Stevens: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House 
on  Economics,  Melbourne, 
8 September 2008. 
of  Representatives  Standing  Committee 
 Mr  Chairman,  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  meet  again  with  the  House  Economics 
Committee. 
It might be helpful for our discussion if I begin by reviewing how things stood at the time of 
our last meeting, and what has changed in the interim. 
When the Committee met in April, monetary policy had been tightened in response to very 
strong growth in demand and a significant pick-up in inflation during 2007. The cash rate had 
been lifted by 100 basis points and financial intermediaries were facing additional increases 
in the cost of their funds, which they passed on to borrowers. 
This amounted to a significant tightening in financial conditions. That was necessary under 
the circumstances: if inflation was to decline over time to be consistent with the 2-3 per cent 
medium-term  target,  a  precondition  was  to  contain  demand,  which  had  run  too  far  ahead 
relative to productive capacity. The fact that inflation picked up noticeably at the end of 2007, 
with  a  strong  likelihood  that  we  were  in  for  several  quarters  of  faster  price  rises,  only 
reinforced the need for a credible and prompt response by monetary policy. 
In  April,  there  was  considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the  outlook  given  the  powerful 
forces  at  work  pulling  in  opposite  directions.  On  the  one  hand,  the  tightening  of  financial 
conditions, including some tightening of credit standards for more risky borrowers, was acting 
to  dampen  spending.  In  addition,  developments  in  the  global  credit  system  were  a  likely 
dampener for the international and domestic outlooks. 
On the other hand, the rise in Australia’s terms of trade that was in train was the biggest such 
event  for  many  years.  It  was  starting  to  deliver  a  very  large  further  boost  to  income  and, 
potentially, to spending. 
So while there were signs in April that a slowing in demand had begun, it was unclear what 
the extent and duration of that slowing would be. But overall, the judgement we had reached 
at  that  time,  and  subsequently  spelled  out  in  the  May  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  was 
that growth in demand and GDP during 2008 would turn out to be considerably lower than 
had been recorded for 2007. This forecast was at the lower end of the range of private-sector 
forecasts made at that time. That in turn led us to believe that pressure would be taken off 
productive  capacity  and  that  inflation  would,  in  time,  abate.  It  was  on  the  basis  of  that 
judgement that the Board held the cash rate steady for six months, even though inflation on 
both  a  headline  and  underlying  basis  continued  to  increase  in  the  subsequent  two  CPI 
releases. 
The  picture  of  moderating  demand,  at  least  on  the  part  of  households,  has  continued  to 
emerge.  Consumption  spending  grew  modestly  in  the  March  quarter,  then  paused  in  the 
June  quarter.  This  came  after  a  very  strong  run  up  in  the  second  half  of  2007,  when 
consumption had grown at an annualised pace of almost 5 per cent, well above what was 
sustainable. Household demand for credit has slowed, and turnover in the market for existing 
homes and house prices have softened, though spending on the construction of new homes 
and renovations has thus far continued to rise modestly. Overall, households are at present 
much  more  cautious  about  spending  and  borrowing,  after  a  number  of  years  in  which 
confidence levels were very high and there had been strong rates of growth in borrowing and 
spending. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 1
Clearly,  tight  financial  conditions  have  played  an  important  role  in  slowing  household 
demand. An additional factor, around the middle of the year, was a surge in global oil prices. 
Of course oil prices had risen a great deal over several years – from about US$30 per barrel 
in 2003 to around US$100 per barrel in early 2008. This was a large increase, but it took 
place  over  a  fairly  long  period  and  against  a  backdrop  of  strong  global  growth,  and  most 
economies had taken it more or less in their stride. But the surge from US$100 per barrel to 
nearly US$150 per barrel over a matter of weeks was a very sharp increase from an already 
high  level.  Accompanied  as  it  was  by  forecasts  in  some  quarters  that  the  price  could  rise 
much further, this affected both purchasing power and sentiment among households in many 
countries, including Australia. It also made business conditions more difficult for many firms, 
and  this  –  together  with  the  effects  of  the  increases  in  other  costs,  slowing  household 
demand and tighter credit conditions – has been reflected in the various business surveys 
over recent months. 
Confidence  in  international  credit  markets  has  continued  to  wax  and  wane.  Following  the 
takeover of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase in mid March, sentiment improved for some 
weeks. But that improvement, unfortunately, did not last. Concerns about major international 
financial institutions re-emerged, as asset write-downs and losses related to the problems in 
structured  products  based  on  mortgages  continued.  A  significant  tightening  of  credit 
standards has ensued in some major countries, due to the need for banks to conserve their 
own – suddenly scarce – capital resources. The soundness of the two large quasi-public US 
mortgage  agencies,  which  carry  rather  little  capital,  has  also  came  into  question, 
necessitating support from the US Government. 
Meanwhile the US has seen house prices falling and house construction is at its lowest for 
many  years.  The  US  economy  continued  to  expand  in  the  first  half  of  2008  due  to  solid 
business  investment  spending,  the  impact  of  the  fiscal  stimulus,  and  strong  export 
performance, helped by the lower US dollar. In fact, the US was the strongest performing G7 
economy  in  the  June  quarter,  with  other  major  developed  countries  showing  a  significant 
weakening. But most forecasters continue to be fairly cautious about prospects for the US 
economy in the second half of the year and are now also concerned about the sorts of credit 
losses that are routinely associated with a period of weak macroeconomic conditions. 
Some  fairly  significant  changes  of  a  financial  nature  are  also  occurring  in  Australia.  Share 
prices  rose  in  April  and  May,  but  gave  back  all  those  gains  in  subsequent  months  and  at 
present are down by about 30 per cent since the peak in late 2007. Corporate boards are 
taking a more cautious approach to debt and there has been a marked reduction in business 
credit  growth.  This  seems  to  have  been  more  pronounced  in  the  case  of  loans  to  large 
companies,  though  growth  in  credit  to  smaller  enterprises  has  also  slowed.  Entities  with 
complex financial structures and/or high leverage have come under pressure and are looking 
to de-leverage their balance sheets. 
But  overall,  what  we  see  in  the  Australian  financial  scene  is  an  order  of  magnitude  less 
troubling than what we see abroad. This, Mr Chairman, is an important point to emphasise. 
The  balance  sheets  of  the  bulk  of  corporate  Australia  are  not  over-geared.  Australian 
financial institutions continue to present a contrasting picture to their peers in the US, Europe 
and the UK. They have adequate access to offshore funding – albeit at higher prices than a 
year  ago.  They  have  tightened  credit  standards  for  some  borrowers,  particularly  those 
associated with property development, and are holding a higher proportion of their balance 
sheets in liquid form. Some have had to make provisions for unwise exposures that had been 
accumulated earlier. But even in these cases, capital, asset quality and profitability remain 
very sound. The money market is functioning more smoothly than it was six months ago, with 
short-term  interbank  spreads  relative  to  official  interest  rates  down  a  little.  There  are  also 
signs that the securitisation market, which effectively closed late last year, is moving closer to 
re-opening. In summary, the Australian financial system is weathering the storm well. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2008
Furthermore, while growth in credit to business has slowed quite sharply, and surveys say 
that  business  conditions  have  softened  to  the  weaker  side  of  average,  overall  profitability 
remains  pretty  strong.  Businesses  still  are  maintaining  high  levels  of  fixed  investment 
spending. Indeed, according to the most recent data released about 10 days ago, firms plan 
a significant further expansion of investment spending in the year ahead, at a pace as fast as 
anything seen in a generation. Strength in mining is exceptional, but other areas actually look 
robust as well. I have spoken in the past of the rise in the terms of trade adding to income 
and  spending  power.  These  actual  and  intended  investments  are  evidence  of  that  effect. 
Whether  all  of  the  planned  investment  will  come  to  pass  –  or  whether  it  is  economically 
feasible for it to come to pass – is a question open to debate. Nonetheless, the strength of 
those intentions at this stage – a year into the global credit problems, and many months into 
the more conservative financial environment in Australia – is remarkable. In addition, State 
governments continue to look to needed infrastructure upgrades. So these areas, on the best 
available  recent  evidence,  remain  likely  to  be  sources  of  demand  growth  in  the  Australian 
economy in the period ahead. 
This  highlights  again  a  theme  that  I  have  noted  before,  namely  the  contrast  between 
household  demand  and  other  types  of  spending.  Even  with  a  pretty  significant  slowing  in 
household spending, total domestic demand in the economy rose at an annualised pace of 
about 4 per cent in the first half of 2008. This was down from about 5½ per cent during 2007, 
but  is  still  quite  strong.  This  same  picture  has  been  pretty  consistent  from  the  liaison  the 
Bank  does  with  its  fairly  extensive  list  of  contacts,  numbering  about  1,500,  around  the 
country. Those exposed to household spending are finding conditions subdued, while those 
exposed to the infrastructure and mining build-up are often struggling to keep pace.  
Some of that demand has, of course, been supplied from abroad. So at the bottom line, we 
come  to  production  and  capacity  utilisation.  At  this  time  of  the  year,  with  two  quarters  of 
national  accounts  available,  growth  in  the  economy  is  running  at  a  pace  slower  than  last 
year, and slower than trend. Growth in real GDP in the June quarter slowed, though this was 
affected  by  a  large  decline  in  farm  production  because  of  drought,  and  which  most 
forecasters  expect  to  be  reversed  in  the  coming  quarters.  Abstracting  from  those  swings, 
non-farm  product  rose  by  0.5  per  cent,  down  a  little  from  0.7  per  cent  in  the  preceding 
quarters. There was nothing in those figures to cause us to revise significantly the forecasts 
we published in the August Statement on Monetary Policy. 
The international context is one of more subdued global growth than we expected six months 
ago. The world economy actually expanded a little faster than we had expected into the early 
part  of  2008,  but  recent  data  for  a  number  of  countries  have  been  weaker,  and  we  are 
assuming  that  weakish  performance  will  continue  in  the  near  term.  Growth  in  China  has 
slowed a little, but still looks strong. Some of our other Asian trading partners, though, are 
facing more difficult circumstances now. 
Turning to the outlook for inflation, with pressures going through the system as a result of the 
rise  in  raw  materials  prices  and  strong  demand  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  headline 
inflation figures will remain uncomfortably high for a little while yet. It is expected that annual 
CPI inflation will reach a peak in the September quarter of about 5 per cent, and be similar in 
the December quarter. This is higher than expected six months ago. But with international oil 
prices  below  their  mid-year  peaks  and  signs  that  the  pace  of  food  price  increases  are 
abating,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  CPI  inflation  will  thereafter  start  to  fall  back.  With 
demand growth slower, capacity utilisation, while still high, is tending to decline. Trends such 
as this usually dampen underlying price pressures over time, and those effects should start 
to become apparent during 2009 and continue into 2010. 
This assessment hinges to no small extent on growth in overall labour costs not picking up 
further.  Relative  wages  have  been  shifting,  as  would  be  expected  given  the  nature  of  the 
forces  affecting  the  economy,  but  overall  the  pace  of  growth  in  labour  costs,  to  date,  has 
been fairly contained given the tightness of the labour market. With pressure coming off the 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 3
labour market, an assumption that this behaviour will continue appears to be a reasonable 
one  at  this  point,  but  it  is  a  critical  one.  The  outlook  also  hinges  on  the  expectation  that 
demand growth will remain quite moderate in the near term, so that pressure continues to 
come  off  productive  capacity.  On  that  basis,  Mr  Chairman,  we  believe  that  prospects  for 
inflation  gradually  returning  to  the  2-3  per  cent  target  over  the  next  couple  of  years  are 
improving. 
An outlook like that is, of course, what the Board has been seeking to achieve with monetary 
policy.  As  that  picture  has  gradually  emerged  over  the  past  few  months,  the  question  has 
then arisen as to when the stance of monetary policy should be recalibrated as well. At its 
August meeting the Board believed, and stated, that conditions were evolving in a way that 
was increasing the scope to move towards a less restrictive policy setting – one that presses 
less firmly on the brake. At the September meeting the Board took a step in that direction. 
The  logic  of  this  decision  was  the  same  as  the  one  that,  some  years  earlier,  had  led  the 
Board to begin raising rates from unusually low levels: the setting of policy designed to get 
the economy to change course probably will not be the right one once the change of course 
has  occurred,  and  it  will  need  to  be  adjusted.  A  further  consideration  was  that  conditions 
recently had actually tightened marginally as a result of rises in lenders’ interest rates, which 
from a macroeconomic point of view was not needed. 
Accordingly, the cash rate was reduced by 25 basis points last week. The decision was quite 
widely anticipated, and less restrictive conditions in the money market had already been in 
place for about a month before the Board’s decision. Since the end of July, key benchmark 
interest rates have fallen quite noticeably. The rate on 90-day bank bills has fallen by almost 
60 basis points, while the three-year swap rate has fallen by about 80 basis points. Various 
rates  for  fixed-rate  loans  had  already  declined  before  the  Board’s  decision,  while  variable 
mortgage rates have quickly reflected the decline in the cash rate. The exchange rate has 
also declined. While some of this change is really a US dollar story rather than an Australian 
dollar story, our currency has declined somewhat against other currencies and on a trade-
weighted basis. 
Admittedly, we are probably six months away from seeing clear evidence that inflation has 
begun  to  fall,  and  even  then  it  has  to  fall  quite  some  distance  before  it  is  back  to  rates 
consistent with achieving 2-3 per cent on average. A somewhat larger fall in inflation overall 
is  required  on  this  occasion  than  was  the  case  in  either  2001  or  1995,  which  were  the 
comparable previous episodes, since the peak inflation rate this time is higher. Rather than 
trying  to  achieve  that  larger  fall  in  inflation  by  pushing  it  down  more  quickly,  the  Board’s 
strategy is to seek a gradual fall, but over a longer period. This carries less risk of a sharp 
slump in economic activity, though it does require a longer period of restraint on demand. On 
the  other  hand,  this  carries  the  risk  that  a  long  period  of  high  inflation  could  lead  to 
expectations  of  inflation  rising  to  the  point  where  it  becomes  both  more  difficult  and  more 
costly to reduce it.  
Monetary policy has to balance these risks, which is why the flexible, medium-term inflation 
targeting  system  that  we  have  been  operating  for  15  years  now,  and  which  has  enjoyed 
strong bipartisan support in the Parliament, is so important. That framework will continue to 
guide the Board’s decision making. 
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2008
