Yves Mersch: Financial stability – quo vadis? 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the Seminar on 
Financial Stability, Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Ankara, 21 October 2008. 
 Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  for  having  provided  the 
opportunity to present my views on financial stability, likely the most discussed policy 
issue  these  days.  I  shall  not  dwell  on  the  description  of  where  financial  markets  and 
economies stand today as this is well known by this audience. Instead, I shall discuss the 
evolution  of  financial  stability  frameworks  in  general  –  and  in  the  EU  in  particular  –  and, 
profiting from the ongoing financial markets crisis, I shall draw lessons that could guide us in 
enhancing the EU framework of financial stability.  Noblesse oblige, I will stress the crucial 
role  played  by  central  banks  in  that  endeavor  given  the  accrued  importance  of  liquidity  in 
preserving financial stability in the modern world of structured finance. The bottom line is that 
we  will  have  to  go  well  beyond  implementing  changes  in  accounting  rules,  in  the  modus 
operandi of rating agencies and in the risk management procedures of financial institutions. 
This is hardly a time to herald the joy of central banking! At the time of writing, news of 
financial  instability  and  ample  central  bank-coordinated  increases  in  liquidity  fill  up  our 
screens.  Lehman  Brothers  Holdings  filed  for  Chapter  11  bankruptcy  protection  a  seminal 
event in the intensification and broadening of financial turmoil. Bank of America purchased 
Merrill  Lynch  for  $50bn;  in  an  unprecedented  action,  the  Fed  agreed  to  provide  an  $85bn 
loan to AIG in exchange for an 80 percent stake in the troubled insurer; Fortis was bailed out, 
with the Benelux governments agreeing to inject €11.2bn and taking a 49 percent stake in 
the  group  as  a  result;  the  U.K.  government  took  over  Bradford  &  Bingley,  nationalizing  its 
loan book and selling its branches and savings operations to Spain’s Santander; Iceland’s 
financial  system  collapsed;  Belgian  bank  Dexia  received  a  €6.4bn  capital  injection  from 
Belgian, French and Luxembourgish governments. Huge public sector interventions were set 
in  motion  in  the  United  Kingdom,  France,  Germany,  Ireland,  Denmark,  Austria  and 
Switzerland among others either in form of guaranties, recapitalizations or distressed assets 
relief.  In  the  U.S.,  the  Treasury  obtained  Congressional  approval  for  sweeping  powers  to 
purchase $700bn worth of illiquid U.S. mortgage-related assets created prior to September 
17, 2008. In addition, a $50bn U.S. state guarantee became necessary to stop institutional 
investors  withdrawing  funds  from  U.S.  money  markets  funds.  Hedge  funds  and  money 
market  funds  are  facing  intense  redemption  pressures  and  several  emerging  markets  are 
experiencing financial difficulties and calls for IMF support are suddenly back on the agenda. 
Interest rates have been further cut in several countries and deposit guarantees increased. In 
fine, leaders from 15 nations committed to a coordinated effort to bolster financial systems 
with rescue packages totaling nearly 1.9tn euros and central banks offered unlimited dollar 
funding to banks in short-and medium-term maturities at fixed rates and longer maturities. 
Financial stability and liquidity, and the evolution of the supervision paradigm  
It is noteworthy that there is neither a widely agreed definition of financial stability nor 
of liquidity. Definitions of financial stability and liquidity vary significantly in academic papers 
and  among  policy  makers.  Definitions  are  more  than  amusing  conceptual  constructs;  they 
are useful tools to discuss the evolution of financial frameworks and the role of central banks 
in financial stability. I suggest as definition of financial stability a dynamic one: I view financial 
stability as a range of states in which the financial system facilitates the performance of the 
monetary  economy,  and  is  able  to  dissipate  financial  imbalances  originated  either 
endogenously  or  as  a  result  of  adverse  unanticipated  events.  The  key  elements  of  the 
definition are that financial stability is best viewed as a process and as such, it is uncertain, it 
has intertemporal and evolutionary features. In addition, this process occurs in a monetary 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 1
economy,  one  based  on  fiat  money,  where  resources  and  risks  are  mobilized  efficiently. 
Finally, the process has self-equilibrating mechanisms that preclude that arising imbalances 
trigger a crisis. 
“Liquidity  is  an  elusive  concept”.  That  is  the  first  sentence  of  the  Banque  de  France’s 
February  2008  Financial  Stability  Review.  As  with  financial  stability,  I  suggest  as  working 
definition of liquidity a dynamic one: I view liquidity as the ability of market participants to take 
risks on each other as they seek to fund asset purchases and meet obligations, both over 
normal and stressful environments. As it was the case with the definition of financial stability, 
this definition of liquidity stresses its dynamic aspects. The endogeneity of liquidity indicates 
that it is best viewed as the outcome of confidence among market participants on the risk 
distribution  of  the  decisions  they  make,  and  thus  the  monetary  price  they  pay  or  receive. 
Liquidity is not an intrinsic, static, feature of financial instruments or markets. This definition 
of liquidity is compatible with the evidence that modern financial markets may be subject to 
instability due to liquidity rapidly drying up in interbank markets. One should also disentangle 
concepts like systemic liquidity, market liquidity and instrument liquidity. 
Liquidity and financial stability are therefore intimately linked in a monetary economy. 
When central banks were created, partly to protect the economy from recurrent episodes of 
financial  instability,  their  monopoly  power  to  issue  the  generally  accepted  means  of 
settlement and their role as bankers’ bank made of them the natural guarantors of financial 
stability.  Central  banks  in  Europe,  in  contrast  to  the  Fed  in  the  U.S.,  were  not  explicitly 
mandated to regulate and supervise financial markets; this was viewed as part of their role in 
preserving financial stability. 
Over time, technological events and the interplay of ideas and experiences modified 
the role of central banks in financial stability. The Great Depression brought, like major 
crises  normally  do,  a  shift  toward  increased  regulation  and  the  introduction  in  the  U.S.  of 
deposit insurance. In the 1970s, pushed by developments in academia and the limitations of 
the  functioning  of  deposit  insurance,  the  pendulum  turned  back  toward  a  more  market 
friendly  regulation.  Administrative  restrictions  on  banking  were  increasingly  replaced  by 
prudential  standards.  The  main  issue  at  stake  was  the  inherent  vulnerability  of  banks  as 
transformers of short-term liabilities into long-term illiquid assets, and the moral hazard that 
resulted from the safety net put in place to preserve financial stability via deposit insurance 
and the lender of last resort. With the advent of big conglomerates and the interrelationships 
between  banking  and  insurance,  growing  concerns  about  the  concentration  of  supervisory 
powers  and  monetary  policy  responsibilities  started  a  trend  toward  removing  supervision 
from central banks’ responsibilities. 
The trend toward the elimination of supervision from central banks’ role was naturally 
accompanied  by  a  trend  toward 
integrated  supervision.1  The  development  of 
conglomerates blurred the distinction between financial institutions and markets. In addition, 
the liberalization of capital flows fostered mergers and acquisitions and the appearance of 
large and complex financial institutions. The experience with the Latin American crisis, and 
closer to home, with the Finish and Swedish crises, stressed the importance of enhancing 
risk  diversification.  Structured  finance  became  the  response  to  that  need  as  it  allowed 
financial institutions to transfer and diversify risk. By pooling together assets such as loans, 
mortgages  or  commercial  paper,  techniques  such  as  securitization  made  it  possible  to 
transfer risk, and separate the underlying assets from the original seller. In addition, central 
banks’  core  competence  became  more  structured  via  monetary  policy  frameworks  with  an 
explicit  mandate  for  price  stability  and  a  high  degree  of  technical  independence.  Central 
banks’  involvement  in  financial  stability  was  justified  by  the  need  to  preserve  the  well 
                                                 
1   A fully integrated supervisory agency is responsible for the supervision of banking, insurance, and securities 
markets (e.g., Germany). In contrast, a partially integrated one is responsible for at least two of those markets 
(e.g., Luxembourg). 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2008
functioning  of  the  clearing  and  settlement  payment  systems  as  well  as  by  their  role  as 
ultimate providers of emergency liquidity and participation in crisis management. 
Financial innovation has brought new vulnerabilities and is forcing again a change in 
the  financial  stability  paradigm  toward  a  greater  involvement  of  central  banks.  The 
reversal of Glass-Steagall in 1999 set off a leverage race outside the banking system, largely 
unregulated. As capital markets developed in depth and scope, structured complex products 
further blurred the distinction between banks, insurance and security firms. Property and risk 
were transferred from the banks’ balance sheets to investors, while insurers provided liquidity 
lines  linking  thereby,  in  an  inextricable  manner,  banks,  insurance  firms  and  non-bank 
financial  institutions.  The  expansion  of  banks’  funding  sources  beyond  deposits  came, 
however, at the expense of a more complex assessment of risks. And the spreading of risk 
expanded the possible sources of instability in ways not always transparent. As a result, the 
sources of financial instability changed once more: financial instability could also result from 
market instability (the recent suspensions of short-selling in several countries acknowledge 
it), from non-bank financial institutions and from ever larger, private clearing and settlement 
systems. Moreover, liquidity itself could become a contagion channel by triggering discreet 
changes  in  asset  prices,  in  the  capital  base  of  financial  institutions,  and  thus  by  feedback 
onto banks’ funding capacity. As a result, interbank markets have now become a source of 
crisis, or even aggravate a crisis, as fundamental uncertainty makes it too costly for banks to 
assess counterparty risk. This eventuality, observed in the current crisis, constitutes a clear 
example of the endogeneity of liquidity.2 As the role of liquidity and contagion has become 
more  important,  central  banks’  special  role  in  financial  stability  has  been  reinforced. 
Regarding financial institutions, their next generation models of risk management will have to 
incorporate the non-linearities and discontinuities of modern financial markets. 
We  may  have  already  moved  toward  some  form  of  a  new  international  monetary 
framework. To conclude this section, I remark that the wide range of coordinated responses 
to  the  crisis  that  we  are  witnessing,  a  characteristic  feature  of  which  has  been  the 
predominant role played by central banks, has perhaps sawn the seeds of a global monetary 
framework.  I  think  of  massive  recapitalizations  of  systemically-large  institutions  and  cross-
border financial firms and the boosting of deposit insurance limits. At monetary policy level 
we have witnessed not only concerted action in lowering the policy rate but also narrowing 
the policy corridor and through asset swaps, provision of cross-border liquidity in US$ and € 
in  unlimited  amounts  as  well  as  a  lengthening  of  the  term  funding.  This  coordination  has 
been accompanied by the enlargement of counterparties either directly or indirectly and we 
have  also  seen  a  broadening  of  eligible  collateral.  This  new  emerging  monetary  policy 
framework adjusted in emergency times was required by large cross-border and globalized 
financial institutions and products. The more flexible and diversified framework of the ECB 
has, in this respect, proven its benchmark capacity in times of duress even if itself has been 
enhanced since. The world has moved toward a much more significant coordinated role of 
central banks in preserving world financial stability. After the times of duress we are living, it 
is  likely  that  this  de  facto  framework  might  evolve  toward  a  more  institutionalized  set  with 
some  ingredients  of  a world  system  of  information  sharing,  with  world  collateral and  world 
monetary policy. 
From a system of national regulators and supervisors to an EU stability framework  
Financial stability frameworks in the EU are largely national. Each country’s supervisory 
authorities  drive  their  legitimacy  from  national  parliaments,  are  subject  to  national 
accountability  mechanisms,  and  are  financed  nationally.  Each  country’s  authority  is 
                                                 
2   These features of crises were already present in the case of Continental Illinois (1984), and more recently in 
the Barings’ crisis (1995) and LTCM collapse (1998). 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 3
responsible for the consolidated supervision of financial institutions domiciled in that country 
for  which  it  is  the  home  supervisor.  Host  supervisors  are  responsible  for  subsidiaries  of 
institutions  from  other  countries  operating  in  their  territories.  National  authorities  are 
organized differently in the EU, e.g., as a single authority, or according to a sectoral model. 
Their mandates also differ with some including financial stability, the protection of investors 
and  creditors,  or  depositors.  Additional  tasks  such  as  responsibility  over  market  conduct, 
consumer protection and market competition are unified to a larger or smaller extent. Each 
national central bank is responsible for ELA to financial institutions domiciled in its territory 
with the obligation of informing the ECB. Beyond national banks, the ECB also manages the 
overall  liquidity  of  the  euro  area  according  to  market  needs.  But  the  ECB  does  not  have 
direct  supervisory  authority,  and  many  central  banks  have  few  prudential  supervisory 
responsibilities. 
An EU umbrella superstructure seeks to facilitate cooperation across national stability 
frameworks. Many MOUs have been signed to obtain a regular exchange of information and 
cooperation,  and  some  MOUs  have  been  signed  to  deal  with  banks  of  regional  systemic 
importance.  Colleges  of  supervisors  are  responsible  for  monitoring  insurance  groups  and 
some banks. Lamfalussy committees have been established to promote financial integration 
and  make  proposals  for  the  coordination  of  regulation  and  supervision  in  the  EU.  Level  3 
committees, for instance, develop guidelines for the functioning of supervisory colleges and 
the assessment of financial sector vulnerabilities that are reported to the Financial Stability 
Table of ECOFIN. EU regulations are applicable to all EU countries (e.g., CRD, MiFID, and 
Solvency II), but countries can choose the form and methods to implement those regulations 
nationally.  Sometimes  national  options  are  numerous:  in  the  CRD  more  than  100  options 
were  exercised!  The  EU  Commission  has  enforcement  powers  in  matters  related  to  the 
completion  of  the  common  market,  and  thus  on  mergers  and  acquisitions  of  financial 
institutions and injections of state capital. Finally, international organizations and international 
standard  setters  such  as  the  BIS,  the  IMF,  the  FSF,  IAIS  and  IOSCO  also  affect  EU 
legislation. 
The current EU financial stability framework is a rational outcome of a long evolution, 
but  the  current  financial  crisis,  by  highlighting  its  limits,  suggests  a  rethinking  is 
timely. The attribution of responsibilities at the lowest level that can effectively meet them, 
the  principle  of  subsidiarity,  has  served  the  EU  well.  Yet,  it  is  a  principle,  and  as  such  it 
requires  that  the  EU  financial  stability  framework  that  it  has  delivered  so  far  evolves  in 
tandem  with  financial  innovation.  But  proximity  of  supervision  is  also  reflecting  the 
fragmentation of the banking landscape with more than 7.000 banks and only 40 large cross 
border banks. The EU financial stability framework should ideally deal with the full spectrum 
of  risks,  including  cross-border  risks,  at  a  minimum  cost  to  the  taxpayer  who  remains 
national. This requires rapid decision-making and quick implementation of remedial actions. 
Outside observers assert that the operation of large committees and reliance on consensus 
may  slow  decision-making  while  financial  innovation  keeps  accelerating;  disparate  current 
national  practices  hinder  integration  and  competition,  as  well  as  increase  the  regulatory 
burden; the complexity of regulations and arrangements risks favoring national interests and 
limiting  the  exchange  of  information  among  supervisors.  As  the  current  crisis  shows,  the 
outside observer’s view might however be clouded by his prejudice. 
At  political  level,  decision  making  in  Europe  was  nimble  and  decisive  at  all  levels  – 
Eurogroup,  ECOFIN,  Euro  area  Summit,  European  Union  Summit,  European  Commission 
and European Parliament – within a short time frame. They delivered a more powerful and 
clearer message in shorter time than other constituencies. 
The same goes for the monetary policy level. The decentralized operational modus operandi 
of  the  Eurosystem  was  no  hinderness  to  swift  adjustment.  During  the  last  month,  the 
Governing  Council  had  13  non  physical  decision-making  gatherings,  outside  its  2  physical 
meetings in Frankfurt, in order to take several dozens of decisions, all implemented since. 
Overcentralization  is  no  panacea  for  optimal  decision-making  as  it  might  hamper  collegial 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2008
wisdom  and  creative  thinking.  Each  EU  Member  State  has  to  be  concerned  by  the 
soundness  of  financial  institutions  in  other  Member  States.  In  this  respect,  the  decision  to 
include a European mandate for national supervisors could increase the speed of decision-
taking, reduce the regulatory burden and favor EU integration. 
The main lesson from the current crisis is that EU financial stability benefits from a 
commonly shared philosophy. This commonly shared philosophy appears in Europe in the 
area  of  Government  intervention.  The  increased  need  for  cross-border  cooperation  was 
initiated  in  a  first  Memorandum  of  Understanding  in  2005  and  has  been  reinforced  with  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  signed  by  all  Treasuries,  Supervisors  and  Central  Banks 
during last summer, to be implemented by the end of the year. A sense of urgency is instilled 
in  the  task  of  developing  a  stability  framework  with  an  explicit  ex-ante,  EU-wide,  crisis 
prevention mechanism that increases confidence among national authorities that necessary 
actions will be taken; that information will flow; that there will be adequate representation of 
their interests in decision10 making and implementation; and that authorities at all levels (i.e., 
EU,  national,  institutional)  will  be  accountable  for  the  stability  aspects  they  control.  This 
Memorandum of Understanding covers crisis prevention, management and resolution. 
Importantly,  at  the  national  level,  stability  frameworks  should  develop  institutional 
mechanisms  that  ensure  the  ex-ante  compatibility  between  microprudential  and 
financial stability objectives. While there has been significant progress in setting standards 
(e.g.,  via  the  CRD),  there  is  no  agreement  yet  on  a  common  set  of  procedures  for  early 
action.  For  example,  there  is  an  array  of  national  triggers  for  remedial  action,  different 
degrees of discretion in the use of sanctions across countries as well as a wide degree of 
central banks’ involvement in the supervision of national market liquidity and in the evaluation 
of  market  operators’  liquidity  risk  management.  The  current  crisis  has  shown  that  central 
banks’ role in supervising liquidity management must become proactive and forward looking 
so as to be compatible with the dynamic nature of liquidity. In addition, cooperation between 
central  banks  and  authorities  responsible  for  microprudential  supervision  needs  to  be 
enhanced in several EU countries. 
The  mismatch  between  responsibilities  and  accountability  in  crisis  management 
should be alleviated. Crisis management remains a national responsibility, but streamlined 
in  the  2008  Memorandum  of  Understanding  which  has  set  the  direction  toward  more 
information  sharing  and  better  allocation  of  responsibilities  in  case  of  crisis.  However,  the 
current crisis has shown that rapid, and low cost decision-making is possible. In the case of 
existing  ELA  arrangements,  the  same  misguided  outside  observer  reflects  that  it  will  be 
necessary to correct the current situation whereby host countries are responsible for ELA for 
subsidiaries  and  branches,  but  do  not  have  access  to  supervisory  information  about 
branches, and thus, have no way of assessing the risks involved in the ELA operations they 
undertake. As a result, the distinction between liquidity and solvency, and the ensuing impact 
on the sharing of the costs of the operation, would remain opaque. Moreover, host country 
supervisors  would  not  have  the  incentive  to  provide  liquidity  support  because  funds  could 
flow back from a troubled branch to the parent company due to EU ring-fencing prohibitions. 
On  the  other  hand,  home-country  authorities  might  delay  providing  information  or  taking 
crisis-management  actions 
losses,  reputational  effects  or  political 
backlashes.  So  the  home  authority  would  not  always  have  the  incentive  to  keep  small-
country  host  authorities  informed  in  an  acceptable  way.  In  turn,  host  country  authorities 
would seek to retain as much intervention authority as possible. I beg to disagree. 
Fact  is  that  the  broadening  of  the  operational  and  instrumental  framework  of  the  ECB, 
especially  concerning  eligible  collateral  and  broad  institutional  access  to  central  bank 
liquidity, has created a kind of informal euro area liquidity assistance. Furthermore national 
ELA  operations  need  to  be  flagged  by  the  Governing  Council  and  allow  for  extensive 
information sharing reinforced by bilateral contacts on a “know as you need” basis. Cross-
border institutions benefited from nationally coordinated ELA, not only in the Benelux case of 
Fortis, but involved in other cases extensive cooperation between 2 or even 3 countries. 
to  avoid  capital 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 5
An  EU-level  crisis  resolution  framework,  especially  for  systemic  banks,  is  however 
pending.  Like  crisis  prevention  and  management,  crisis  resolution  was  fundamentally 
national  up  to  this  crisis.  Differences  across  countries’  approach  to  financial  institutions’ 
failure vary enormously. Even for banks, there is little harmonization. Some countries have 
only a few bank-specific regulations; general commerce bankruptcy laws apply despite the 
winding  up  directive  after  BCCI.  As  shown  again  during  the  current  crisis,  banks  have  a 
liquidation value that is well below their value as going concerns. So, recapitalization is less 
expensive than liquidation. In the case of a large cross-border banks (LCBB), the problem is 
even  worse  as  the  focus  of  bankruptcy  law  is  on  the  right  of  creditors  in  some  countries, 
protecting debtors in some others. 
Yet, the disparate history of legal regimes in the EU suggests that institutional changes will 
be  slow.  Also,  despite  moves  in  deposit  insurance  toward  harmonization,  notably  via  the 
Deposit  Insurance  Directive,  there  are  glaring  differences  across  countries  regarding  the 
definition  of  deposits,  co-insurance,  risk-based  premia,  and  funding.  This  situation  creates 
perverse incentives, uncertainty, and regulatory arbitrage opportunities. 
Since the crisis, however, change seems to be faster. The provision of recapitalization funds 
and  guarantees  for  bank  debt,  though  nationally  implemented,  will  follow  common  rules. 
Yesterday  the  Eurosystem  agreed  on  10  recommendations  sent  to  national  Governments 
covering pricing modalities, timing, eligibility criteria, etc.. At a cross-border level, as no EU 
agreement exists on the financing of insolvent institutions, home country authorities may be 
reluctant to spend resources that will benefit host countries, or will be faced with situations in 
which they will not be able to save financial institutions because they are “too big to save”. 
On the other hand, host countries may not be able to restore the bank as a going concern 
because  the  subsidiary  may  not  be  viable.  An  EU-level  framework  with  ex-ante  fiscal  cost 
sharing mechanisms should move national authorities’ incentives away from a sole regard for 
the costs for the country. The recent approval by ECOFIN of a uniform EU deposit insurance 
limit  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.3  Finally,  an  EU  framework  would  reduce  the  costs  of 
dealing  with  troubled  LCBB  by  making  transparent  the  conditions  under  which  solvency 
support to a failing financial institution implies state aid and becomes incompatible with EU 
competition rules. The Commission has to this end empowered one Commissioner for rapid 
decision-making. 
I  wish  to  finish  on  a  hopeful  note  reminiscent  of  Schumpeter’s  celebrated  “creative 
destruction”  concept.  Technological  developments,  by  changing  economic  agents’ 
constraints,  modify  their  actions  and  prompt  a  new  equilibrium.  Institutional  changes  also 
become  necessary  to  preserve  a  level  playing  field  given  that  asymmetric  information, 
herding behavior, and the notorious difficulties of economic agents to measure the evolution 
of  risk  over  time,  make  financial  markets  incomplete.  Effective  institutions  should  affect 
behavior  and  will,  in  turn,  suggest  the  need  for  a  new  equilibrium.  Therefore,  the  current 
crisis, by having sent the financial system way far from an old equilibrium, may end up being 
useful in bringing forward necessary changes to the EU financial stability framework. It may 
do so by moving discussions from a nearly exclusive focus on what can be delivered under 
the existing framework to what a framework of financial stability should deliver. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
3   The scheme increases the coverage of deposit protection to 100.000 Euros, removes all co-insurance, and is 
applicable to branches and subsidiaries. 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2008
