Erkki Liikanen: The euro at 10 – the next global currency? 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the joint conference “The 
euro at ten: the next global currency?”, sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International 
Economics  and  Bruegel,  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics,  Washington  DC, 
10 October 2008. 
 When Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) was launched nearly a decade ago, 
the  euro  was  seen  as  having  the  potential  to  challenge  the  role  of  the  dollar  as  a  global 
currency.  Views  differed  a  lot,  however,  and  the  debate  was  lively.  Some  argued  that  the 
euro could become a major counterpart to the US dollar within relatively short period of time. 
Others argued that it would take a long time. And some even predicted that the EMU would 
not be sustainable.  
Those who highlighted the potential role of the euro stressed the relative and increasing size 
of  the  euro  area  economy,  its  growth  and  low  inflation.  Moreover,  there  was  a  strong 
conviction  that  the  creation  of  the  EMU  would  eventually  enhance  the  deepening  and 
integration  of  euro  area  financial  markets.  All  this  was  seen  necessary  for  the  euro  to 
become an international currency in its own right. In addition, many pointed to opportunities 
and needs for portfolio diversification.  
The launch of the euro took place in the wake of rapidly surging globalization. This beyond 
doubt facilitated the euro’s role in international foreign exchange and capital markets. Over 
the  past  decade  international  trade  has  continued  to  grow.  Perhaps  more  importantly, 
international capital flows have grown dramatically and the foreign exchange market turnover 
has  continued  to  increase  at  an  unpredictable  pace.  All  this  has  coincided  with  large  and 
persistent  global  imbalances,  soaring  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  rapidly  growing 
Sovereign Wealth Funds.  
Now ten years later, it is time to sit down and try to make an initial assessment of the role of 
the  euro  as  an  international  currency.  For  those  who  argued  that  the  euro  would  become 
quickly  a  major  international  currency,  developments  have  fallen  somewhat  short  of 
expectations.  Likewise  those  who  expressed  skepticism  towards  the  historic  decision  to 
launch the euro were clearly misguided. The answer lies somewhere in between.  
In my view, the euro is a success and, on balance, the euro has firmly established itself as 
an international currency with a wide acceptance outside the euro area. It gradually emerged 
as the second most important currency after the US dollar. As the number of countries that 
share  the  euro  is  set  to  increase  one  might  expect  that  euro’s  role  as  an  international 
currency continues to strengthen.  
Widespread acceptability of the euro has of course been beneficial to euro area countries. 
Countries running current account deficits which previously needed foreign currency can now 
be financed with Europe’s own currency. A situation that was previously prevailing only in the 
United States.  
The  dollar’s  dominance  is  very  visible  in  commodities  markets.  A  good  example  is  of 
course oil but many other commodities, in fact most, are currently invoiced in dollars. It is 
difficult to foresee what could change the situation in the near-term due to inertia. But some 
observers  have  pointed  out  that  the  euro  might  become  an  invoicing  currency  in  a  fast 
developing natural gas market. Be it as it may, Russia is the world’s largest gas exporter and 
an  important  gas  supplier  for  Europe.  The  EU  is  currently  world’s  second  largest  energy 
market and will remain Russia’s most important energy export market.  
As  regards  foreign  exchange  reserves,  it  is  well  known  that  the  choice  of  the  currency 
composition  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  depends  on  several  factors  such  as  market 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 1
liquidity, country’s exchange rate regime and diversification strategies. The recent ECB study 
and data from the IMF suggest that the share of the euro in global foreign exchange reserves 
have  reached  over  25  per  cent.  The  share  has  gradually  increased  over  the  years,  but 
recently stabilized.  
When  interpreting  these  results  one  has  to  keep  in  mind  that  full  data  on  the  currency 
breakdown of reserves is not available. There are still many countries that do not disclose 
such data to the IMF. Therefore as regards foreign reserves the picture is somewhat blurred 
which  is  a  fruitful  ground  for  many  kinds  of  speculative  assessments.  This  is  clearly  an 
unsatisfactory situation and more transparency is urgently needed.  
There  is  evidence  that  some  large  Asian  reserve  holders  with  tightly  managed  exchange 
rates against the US dollar do not report their currency composition to the IMF. Because of 
the anchor currency (the US dollar) there are good reasons to expect that these countries 
have a certain bias towards the dollar.  
The euro’s international role is geographically concentrated in regions that are close to the 
euro  area.  Most  EU  neighboring  countries  that  disclose  the  currency  composition  of  their 
foreign  exchange  reserves  predominantly  hold  euro.  Also in  this context  it  is  interesting  to 
note  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Russia  recently  increased  the  euro  weight  in  their  currency 
basket to 45%.  
When  discussing  the  role  of  the  international  currencies,  we  should  not  underestimate  the 
importance of Sovereign Wealth Funds. These funds have recently markedly changed the 
landscape of international finance. These funds are by no means small. Currently the total 
assets of SWFs are estimated to be 2-3 trillion US dollars which compares roughly to around 
5 trillion US dollars accumulated as traditional international reserves. SWFs are an important 
and growing “player” in the international monetary and financial system. The potential growth 
of SWFs is significant. Their aggregate size could reach 10 – 15 trillion US dollars by 2015.  
SWFs  typically  employ  a  set  of  investment  strategies  which  include  investing  in  foreign 
assets.  Is  this  a  problem?  Many  believe  that  such  funds  could  create  new  risks  for  the 
international  financial  system.  In  their  view,  the  sheer  size  and  potential  growth  of  these 
funds is a concern. They consider that a major portfolio shift from dollar-denominated assets 
to those denominated in the euro or in other currencies could significantly affect exchange 
rates and risk market stability. Perhaps more worrying still, the growth of these funds may 
give rise to protectionist pressures. To counterbalance these worries the SWFs can be very 
beneficial in times of financial market turmoil. The ability to ride out business cycles with a 
long-term view of their investments (no leverage) brings diversity to global markets.  
It  goes  without  saying  that  we  do  not  know  much  of  SWFs  investment  strategies  to  say 
nothing  of  their  currency  distribution.  However,  Norwegian  Government  Pension  Fund  has 
been a front-runner as regards the transparency of the Fund’s investment strategy. Last year 
(Sept.) their assets denominated in euro accounted for almost 40% of the Fund’s total assets 
whereas the share of US dollar-denominated assets was just above 30%.  
As regards international debt markets, the euro accounted for a substantial share of the 
outstanding stock of international debt securities, both in bonds and notes as well as money 
market instruments. In fact, euro-denominated debt was roughly one third of total debt issued 
outside euro area.  
Based on a recent BIS survey (2007) the euro was the second most traded currency in the 
foreign exchange markets after the US dollar and ahead of Japanese yen. The euro was 
on one side in 37% of all foreign exchange transactions worldwide. Euro/dollar currency pair 
represented 74% of all transactions involving the euro.  
Also in the international loan and deposit market the euro plays an important role. While 
the share of the euro in the international loan markets has stabilized to around 21%, their 
volume has increased markedly. In particular, emerging Europe is playing an increasing role 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2008
in  attracting  euro-denominated  loans.  Euro’s  share  in  international  deposits  has  declined 
somewhat since mid-2005 and the share stood at 20% in 2007 (Sept).  
As regards of the euro role in international trade, the euro is used extensively to invoice and 
settle trade transactions. For instance, in most of the euro-area countries the share of euro-
denominated  merchandise  exports  stood  above  55%.  The  euro  share  in  the  euro  area’s 
trade with countries outside the EU is slightly lower than its share in trade with EU countries 
outside  euro-area.  The  US  dollar  remains  the  major  currency  of  denomination  of  trade 
between third countries.  
That was the past – what about the present and the future?  
In the last few weeks, we have been witnessing an unprecedented unraveling of the global 
financial system. The storm has been worldwide, but its eye has been in the US, where it 
looks now  obvious  that,  once  the  storm  has  finally  passed,  it  leaves  a  financial landscape 
that looks very different from what there was still a year ago.  
The role of the US dollar as the world's no. 1 global currency is being thoroughly tested. And 
curiously  enough,  it  looks  like  the  dollar  is  so  far  holding  its  own.  Even  when  the  US 
economy and its financial markets are being thoroughly battered, and there seem to be very 
few safe US assets available, the dollar keeps appreciating. The dollar still remains a safe 
haven of last resort.  
Finally the future. Regarding the international role of the euro, the eurosystem is a bystander. 
It has no particular policy goals in this regard. It is nevertheless interesting to speculate what 
might happen once the dust has settled and global financial markets will start function once 
again, as they undoubtedly will.  
We  can  conclude  that  the  US  dollar  has  retained  its  dominance  as  a  foreign  reserve 
currency. However, if and when countries with tightly managed exchange rates adopt more 
flexible  currency  regimes  this  picture  may  change.  Moreover,  credit  risk  concerns  with 
growing US liabilities and ongoing deepening and integration of euro area financial markets 
may at some point trigger a further diversification away from dollar to other currencies such 
as the euro.  
There are a number of factors that come into play in determining the future international role 
of currencies. I will go through some of them.  
First, and obvious, is size. Being a global currency requires sufficient size to back it up. That 
limits the list of potential contenders to a handful, at most. In this regard, the euro is clearly 
very well positioned.  
Second, size is not enough, there needs to be some dynamism in the economy, some trust 
in the capability of the economy to sustain a strong currency for the long term. Also in this 
regard, the euro has progressed quite well. The strategic goals set in Lisbon in March 2000 
served to focus attention on structural rigidities. Although the Lisbon project is not finished, 
there has been a tangible change to the better.  
The third precondition is a credible monetary policy to underpin the stability of the currency. 
In last summer's celebrations of the tenth anniversary of the euro the general assessment of 
the  single  monetary  policy  was  overwhelmingly  positive.  I'd  like  to  think  the  praise  was 
sincere,  and  not  just  out  of  politeness.  The  future  of  this  aspect  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
Governing Council of the ECB. The honeymoon for the single monetary policy is clearly over, 
and the ECB, as other central banks, is today facing the most challenging times for monetary 
policy  in  the  history  of  its  existence.  Yet,  the  determination  of  the  Governing  Council  to 
safeguard the purchasing power of the euro is strong and very well accepted throughout the 
euro area. So I think we can safely tick the third box as well.  
The forth precondition for a global currency is a deep and well-developed financial system, 
capable of generating high-quality assets. Now I'm aware that, spoken today, that sentence 
risks sounding completely out of touch with reality. Out there, what certainly was the deepest 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 3
and looked like the best-developed financial system in the world is coming apart in a fairly 
spectacular manner. But storms pass, and so will this one. And after this storm has passed, 
there will still be countries with a surplus and those with a deficit, and there will be wealth 
looking  for  assets  with  a  good  combination  of  safety  and  return.  This  is  not  the  end  of 
financial globalization.  
So  when  fear  and  paranoia  eventually  subside,  the  industry  of  financial  intermediation  will 
rebound. It will likely look different but it will grow and prosper again. And when that happens, 
the  financial  system  that  is  best  positioned  to  respond  to  the  emerging  opportunities  will 
benefit and provide strong support for the global role of its currency.  
In this respect, the euro area financial industry has some way to go. Despite progress over 
the last ten years, the euro area financial industry remains fragmented, and to a large extent 
along national borders. To reap the benefits of a single market in financial services, barriers 
must be removed. Mainly, this consists of a great deal of harmonization.  
The current crisis also demonstrates the importance what the IMF has been underlining for 
quite a while: that regulatory and supervisory structures must follow the reality of the financial 
markets.  As  national  financial  institutions  merge  into  multinationals,  financial  supervision 
must follow. There is a lot of work ongoing in this regard, and the financial crisis has given 
this work new impetus.  
As I said, the eurosystem is agnostic about the international role of the euro. Global usage of 
the  euro  is  not  policy  goal.  That  said,  the  euro  does  have  several  strengths  as  an 
international currency. There is also work under way, aimed at improving the single market, 
that should, as a byproduct, make it an even stronger contender.  
The US dollar is not likely to lose its dominating role any time soon. But partly because of the 
ongoing crisis, partly due to progress in financial integration and structural reform in the euro 
area, it looks likely that the no. 2 position of the euro could well be growing stronger in the 
coming years.  
4 
 BIS Review 124/2008
