Randall S Kroszner: The Community Reinvestment Act and the recent 
mortgage crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Confronting Concentrated Poverty Policy Forum, Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, Washington DC, 3 December 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  Board  and  even  more  pleased  to 
introduce  today's  discussion  of  the  study  conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  System's 
Community  Affairs  program  in  partnership  with  The  Brookings  Institution,  The  Enduring 
Challenge of Concentrated Poverty in America: Case Studies from Communities across the 
U.S.1  
As you have heard, this report represents an extraordinary and comprehensive effort by staff 
in  all  12  Reserve  Banks  and  at  the  Board  of  Governors  to  explore  the  problem  of 
concentrated  poverty.  The  16  case  studies  in  the  report  represent  urban  and  rural  areas, 
immigrant  and  Native  American  communities,  as  well  as  older  "weak"  market  cities  and 
newer  "strong"  market  areas.  By  covering  a  wide  variety  of  communities,  the  report  adds 
depth and texture to the existing literature on poverty and offers important insights regarding 
the relationship between public services and private investment.  
For  those  who  may  not  be  familiar  with  the  Federal  Reserve  System's  Community  Affairs 
function,  this  report  illustrates  one  of  the  many  ways  in  which  it  supports  the  System's 
objectives for economic growth by promoting community development and fair and impartial 
access to credit. The System's strength in research, together with its unique structure, makes 
it particularly well suited to pursue this kind of work.  
The Community Affairs program takes advantage of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks located 
in  different  regions  of  the  country  to  gather  information  on  local  conditions  and to conduct 
outreach and education efforts through regular contact with financial institutions and market 
intermediaries.  The  System's  network  of  Community  Affairs  staff  works  with  lenders, 
community organizations, and local governments to identify trends and issues affecting low- 
and moderate-income neighborhoods. This communication with both financial markets and 
communities allows the Federal Reserve to act as a bridge between the private and public 
sectors.  
The  System's  reputation  for  high-quality  research,  outreach,  and  analysis  and  its  regional 
presence  made  these  16  case  studies  and  the  comparative  analysis  possible.  This  report 
makes  an  important  contribution  to  the  literature  on  the  dynamics  of  poor  people  living  in 
poor communities by recognizing the existence and persistence of concentrations of poverty 
beyond the urban areas where it has been well documented. Indeed, the study confirms that 
poverty persists in places, such as rural and suburban communities, where it is not so easily 
seen.  
The report also identifies the existing avenues for bringing poor people and communities into 
the  economic  mainstream.  This  topic  is  at  the  center  of  today's  discussions.  The  Federal 
Reserve,  together  with  the  other  federal  financial  regulatory  agencies,  has  had  some 
                                                 
1   Federal Reserve System, Community Affairs Offices; and Brookings Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program 
(2008), The Enduring Challenge of Concentrated Poverty in America: Case Studies from Communities across 
the U.S. (Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond). 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 1
experience  in  addressing  the  credit  needs  of  underserved  communities,  using  the 
Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) as our guide. CRA encourages financial institutions not 
only  to  extend  mortgage,  small  business,  and  other  types  of  credit  to  lower-income 
neighborhoods  and  households,  but  also  to  provide  investments  and  services  to  lower-
income areas and people as part of an overall effort to build the capacity necessary for these 
places to thrive.  
Some critics of the CRA contend that by encouraging banking institutions to help meet the 
credit  needs  of  lower-income  borrowers  and  areas,  the  law  pushed  banking  institutions  to 
undertake high-risk mortgage lending. We have not yet seen empirical evidence to support 
these claims, nor has it been our experience in implementing the law over the past 30 years 
that  the  CRA  has  contributed  to  the  erosion  of  safe  and  sound  lending  practices.  In  the 
remainder of my remarks, I will discuss some of our experiences with the CRA. I will also 
discuss the findings of a recent analysis of mortgage-related data by Federal Reserve staff 
that runs counter to the charge that the CRA was at the root of, or otherwise contributed in 
any substantive way, to the current subprime crisis.  
Regulatory efforts to meet credit needs in underserved markets 
In the 1970s, when banking was still a local enterprise, the Congress enacted the CRA. The 
act  required  the  banking  regulators  to  encourage  insured  depository  institutions  –  that  is, 
commercial  banks  and  thrifts  –  to  help  meet  the  credit  needs  of  their  entire  community, 
including low- and moderate-income areas. The CRA does not stipulate minimum targets or 
goals for lending, investments, or services. Rather, the law provides incentives for financial 
institutions to help meet the credit needs of lower-income people and areas, consistent with 
safe  and  sound  banking  practices,  and  commensurately  provides  them  favorable  CRA 
consideration for those activities. By requiring regulators to make CRA performance ratings 
and  evaluations  public  and  to  consider  those  ratings  when  reviewing  applications  for 
mergers, acquisitions, and branches, the Congress created an unusual set of incentives to 
promote interaction between lenders and community organizations.  
Given the incentives of the CRA, bankers have pursued lines of business that had not been 
previously  tapped  by  forming  partnerships  with  community  organizations  and  other 
stakeholders  to  identify  and  help  meet  the  credit  needs  of  underserved  communities.  This 
experimentation  in  lending,  often  combined  with  financial  education  and  counseling  and 
consideration of nontraditional measures of creditworthiness, expanded the markets for safe 
lending in underserved communities and demonstrated its viability; as a result, these actions 
attracted  competition  from  other  financial  services  providers,  many  of  whom  were  not 
covered by the CRA. There are many fine examples of community development lending and 
investment activities designed to address needs in the poorest of areas, including many of 
those highlighted by the case studies in this report.  
During trips to the regional Federal Reserve Banks and Branches, I have spent a lot of time 
visiting  areas  with  high  concentrations  of  poverty.  For  many  years,  the  Fed  has  promoted 
community banking services for the unbanked and underbanked population. It was gratifying 
for  me  to  find  that  financial  services  were  accessible  in,  for  example,  central  Cleveland, 
thanks to the efforts of one local bank that offers check-cashing services at much lower rates 
than competing nonbank check cashers. Similarly, in the Little Haiti neighborhood in Miami, 
another  case-study  community  that  I  had  the  opportunity  to  visit  last  year,  one  banking 
institution has committed to serving the neighborhood's unbanked residents by hiring Creole-
speaking staff to promote a prosperity campaign built around the Earned Income Tax Credit.  
I  am  sure  that  today's  luncheon  speaker,  Tom  Barrett,  mayor  of  Milwaukee,  could  share 
similar observations about a local financial institution serving that case-study neighborhood 
by providing low-income residents complimentary electronic income tax filing combined with 
financial  education  seminars,  innovative  credit  repair  programs,  and  low-cost  banking 
services.  These  services  benefit  lower-income  customers  by  providing  a  simple  means  of 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2008
accessing  Earned  Income  and  Homestead  Tax  Credits  and  the  services  necessary  to 
maximize the benefits of these programs. 
In addition to providing financial services to lower-income people, banks also provide critical 
community development loans and investments to address affordable housing and economic 
development  needs.  These  activities  are  particularly  effective  because  they  leverage  the 
resources available to communities from public subsidies and tax credit programs that are 
targeted  to  lower-income  people.  In  just  the  past  two  years,  banks  have  reported  making 
over $120 billion in community development loans nationwide.2 This figure does not capture 
the  full  extent  of  such  lending,  because  smaller  institutions  are  not  required  to  report 
community development loans to their regulators.  
Evidence on CRA and the subprime crisis 
Over the years, the Federal Reserve has prepared two reports for the Congress that provide 
information  on  the  performance  of  lending  to  lower-income  borrowers  or  neighborhoods  – 
populations that are the focus of the CRA.3 These studies found that lending to lower-income 
individuals and communities has been nearly as profitable and performed similarly to other 
types of lending done by CRA-covered institutions. Thus, the long-term evidence shows that 
the  CRA  has  not  pushed  banks  into  extending  loans  that  perform  out  of  line  with  their 
traditional  businesses.  Rather,  the  law  has  encouraged  banks  to  be  aware  of  lending 
opportunities in all segments of their local communities as well as to learn how to undertake 
such lending in a safe and sound manner. 
Recently,  Federal  Reserve  staff  has  undertaken  more  specific  analysis  focusing  on  the 
potential relationship between the  CRA and the current subprime crisis. This analysis was 
performed  for  the  purpose  of  assessing  claims  that  the  CRA  was  a  principal  cause  of  the 
current  mortgage  market  difficulties.  For  this  analysis,  the  staff  examined  lending  activity 
covering the period that corresponds to the height of the subprime boom.4
The research focused on two basic questions. First, we asked what share of originations for 
subprime loans is related to the CRA. The potential role of the CRA in the subprime crisis 
could either be large or small, depending on the answer to this question. We found that the 
loans that are the focus of the CRA represent a very small portion of the subprime lending 
market,  casting  considerable  doubt  on  the  potential  contribution  that  the  law  could  have 
made to the subprime mortgage crisis.  
Second, we asked how CRA-related subprime loans performed relative to other loans. Once 
again, the potential role of the CRA could be large or small, depending on the answer to this 
question. We found that delinquency rates were high in all neighborhood income groups, and 
that  CRA-related  subprime  loans  performed  in  a  comparable  manner  to  other  subprime 
loans; as such, differences in performance between CRA-related subprime lending and other 
subprime lending cannot lie at the root of recent market turmoil.  
In analyzing the available data, we focused on two distinct metrics: loan origination activity 
and  loan  performance.  With  respect  to  the  first  question  concerning  loan  originations,  we 
wanted to know which types of lending institutions made higher-priced loans, to whom those 
                                                 
2   Data  are  from  filings  made  by  larger  banking  institutions  to  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination 
Council  on  CRA-related  small  business,  small  farm,  and  community  development  lending;  for  more 
information, see FFIEC website. 
3   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (1993),  Report  to  the  Congress  on  Community 
Development Lending by Depository Institutions (Washington: Board of Governors), pp. 1-69; and Board of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2000),  The  Performance  and  Profitability  of  CRA-Related 
Lending (147 KB PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, July), pp. 1-99. 
4   The staff analysis focused on loans originated in 2005 and 2006.  
BIS Review 150/2008 
 3
loans  were  made,  and  in  what  types  of  neighborhoods  the  loans  were  extended.5  This 
analysis allowed us to determine what fraction of subprime lending could be related to the 
CRA.  
Our analysis of the loan data found that about 60 percent of higher-priced loan originations 
went to middle- or higher-income borrowers or neighborhoods. Such borrowers are not the 
populations  targeted  by  the  CRA.  In  addition,  more  than  20  percent  of  the  higher-priced 
loans  were  extended  to  lower-income  borrowers  or  borrowers  in  lower-income  areas  by 
independent nonbank institutions – that is, institutions not covered by the CRA.6  
Putting together these facts provides a striking result: Only 6 percent of all the higher-priced 
loans were extended by CRA-covered lenders to lower-income borrowers or neighborhoods 
in  their  CRA  assessment  areas,  the  local  geographies  that  are  the  primary  focus  for  CRA 
evaluation  purposes.  This  result  undermines  the  assertion  by  critics  of  the  potential  for  a 
substantial role for the CRA in the subprime crisis. In other words, the very small share of all 
higher-priced loan originations that can reasonably be attributed to the CRA makes it hard to 
imagine how this law could have contributed in any meaningful way to the current subprime 
crisis. 
Of  course,  loan  originations  are  only  one  path  that  banking  institutions  can  follow  to  meet 
their CRA obligations. They can also purchase loans from lenders not covered by the CRA, 
and  in  this  way  encourage  more  of  this  type  of  lending.  The  data  also  suggest  that  these 
types of transactions have not been a significant factor in the current crisis. Specifically, less 
than  2  percent  of  the  higher-priced  and  CRA-credit-eligible  mortgage  originations  sold  by 
independent mortgage companies were purchased by CRA-covered institutions.  
I  now  want  to  turn  to  the  second  question  concerning  how  CRA-related  subprime  lending 
performed  relative  to  other  types  of  lending.  To  address  this  issue,  we  looked  at  data  on 
subprime and alt-A mortgage delinquencies in lower-income neighborhoods and compared 
them with those in middle- and higher-income neighborhoods to see how CRA-related loans 
performed.7 An overall comparison revealed that the rates for all subprime and alt-A loans 
delinquent 90  days  or  more  is  high  regardless  of  neighborhood  income.8  This  result  casts 
                                                 
5   Loan origination data are from information reported pursuant to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). 
The HMDA data do not identify subprime loans directly, in part because there is not a single definition of which 
loans fall into this category.  Rather, the HMDA data indicate  which loans are categorized as higher priced, 
including subprime loans and some alt-A loans. The analysis of data includes first-lien conventional loans for 
home purchase or refinance related to site-built homes. It excludes business-related loans to the extent they 
could  be  identified.  For  more  information  on  HMDA  data  and  higher-priced  lending,  see  Robert  B.  Avery, 
Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2007), "The 2006 HMDA Data," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 93. 
6   About 17 percent of the higher-priced loan originations were made by CRA-covered lenders or their affiliates 
to lower-income populations in areas outside the banking institutions' local communities. Such lending is not 
the focus of the CRA and is frequently not considered in CRA performance evaluations.  
7   Data  are  from  First  American  Loan  Performance  (LP).  For  the  analysis,  Zip  code  delinquency  data  were 
classified by relative income in two different ways. First, the data were classified using information published 
by the U. S. Census Bureau on income at the Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) level of geography. Because 
the ZCTA data provide an income estimate for each Zip code, delinquency rates can be calculated directly 
from the LP data based on the Zip code location of the properties securing the loans. Second, delinquency 
rates  for  each  relative  income  group  (lower,  middle,  and  higher)  were  calculated  as  the  weighted  sum  of 
delinquencies divided by the weighted sum of mortgages, where the weights equal each Zip code's share of 
the population in census tracts of the particular relative income group. Relative income is based on the 2000 
decennial census and is calculated as the median family income of the census tract divided by the median 
family income of its metropolitan statistical area or nonmetropolitan portion of the state. Both approaches yield 
virtually identical results. 
8   The analysis focused on loans originated from January 2006 through April 2008 with performance measured 
as  of  August  2008. However,  a  virtually  identical  relationship  in  loan  performance  across  neighborhood 
income  groups  is  found  if  the  pool  of  loans  evaluated  is  expanded  to  cover  those  originated  in  2004  or 
2005. The  only  material  difference  is  that  the  levels  of  delinquency  are  lower  for  the  loans  covering  longer 
periods. Loans  that  are  90  days  or  more  delinquent  include  those  that  end  in  foreclosure  or  as  real  estate 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2008
further doubt on the view that the CRA could have contributed in any meaningful way to the 
current subprime crisis.  
Unfortunately, the available data on loan performance do not let us distinguish which specific 
loans  in  lower-income  areas  were  related  to  the  CRA.  As  noted  earlier,  institutions  not 
covered by the CRA extended many loans to borrowers in lower-income areas. Also, some 
lower-income lending by institutions subject to the law was outside their local communities 
and unlikely to have been motivated by the CRA. 
To learn more about the relative performance of CRA-related lending, we conducted more-
detailed  analyses  to  try  to  focus  on  performance  differences  that  might  truly  arise  as  a 
consequence of the rule as opposed to other factors. Attempting to adjust for other relevant 
factors  is  challenging  but  worthwhile  to  try  to  assess  the  performance  of  CRA-related 
lending.  In  one  such  analysis,  we  compared  loan  delinquency  rates  in  neighborhoods  that 
are right above and right below the CRA neighborhood income eligibility threshold. In other 
words,  we  compared  loan  performance  by  borrowers  in  two  groups  of  neighborhoods  that 
should not be very different except for the fact that the lending in one group received special 
attention under the CRA.  
When we conducted this analysis, we found essentially no difference in the performance of 
subprime loans in Zip codes that were just below or just above the income threshold for the 
CRA.9 The results of this analysis are not consistent with the contention that the CRA is at 
the root of the subprime crisis, because delinquency rates for subprime and alt-A loans in 
neighborhoods just below the CRA-eligibility threshold are very similar to delinquency rates 
on loans just above the threshold, hence not the subject of CRA lending. 
To  gain  further  insight  into  the  potential  relationship  between  the  CRA  and  the  subprime 
crisis,  we  also  compared  the  recent  performance  of  subprime  loans  with  mortgages 
originated  and  held  in  portfolio  under  the  affordable  lending  programs  operated  by 
NeighborWorks America (NWA). As a member of the board of directors of the NWA, I am 
quite  familiar  with  its  lending  activities.  The  NWA  has  partnered  with  many  CRA-covered 
banking  institutions  to  originate  and  hold  mortgages  made  predominantly  to  lower-income 
borrowers and neighborhoods. So, to the extent that such loans are representative of CRA-
lending programs in general, the performance of these loans is helpful in understanding the 
relationship between the CRA and the subprime crisis. We found that loans originated under 
the  NWA  program  had  a  lower  delinquency  rate  than  subprime  loans.10  Furthermore,  the 
loans  in  the  NWA  affordable  lending  portfolio  had  a  lower  rate  of  foreclosure  than  prime 
loans. The result that the loans in the NWA portfolio performed better than subprime loans 
again casts doubt on the contention that the CRA has been a significant contributor to the 
subprime crisis. 
The final analysis we undertook to investigate the likely effects of the CRA on the subprime 
crisis  was  to  examine  foreclosure  activity  across  neighborhoods  grouped  by  income.  We 
found  that  most  foreclosure  filings  have  taken  place  in  middle-  or  higher-income 
                                                                                                                                                      
owned.Delinquency rates were somewhat higher in the lower-income areas. However, the somewhat higher 
delinquency rates in lower-income areas is not a surprising result because lower-income borrowers tend to be 
more sensitive to economic  shocks  given that, among  other things, they  have fewer financial resources on 
which to draw in emergencies. 
9   The CRA neighborhood income threshold is where the neighborhood median family income is 80 percent of 
the  median  family  income  of  the  broader  area,  such  as  a  metropolitan  statistical  area  or  nonmetropolitan 
portion of a state, depending on the specific location of the neighborhood. 
10   No  information  was  available  on  the  geographic  distribution  of  the  NeighborWorks  America  loans.  The 
geographic pattern of lending can matter, as certain areas of the country are experiencing much more difficult 
conditions in their housing market than other areas. 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 5
neighborhoods;  in  fact,  foreclosure  filings  have  increased  at  a  faster  pace  in  middle-  or 
higher-income areas than in lower-income areas that are the focus of the CRA.11
Two  key  points  emerge  from  all  of  our  analysis  of  the  available  data.  First,  only  a  small 
portion  of  subprime  mortgage  originations  are  related  to  the  CRA.  Second,  CRA-  related 
loans appear to perform comparably to other types of subprime loans. Taken together, as I 
stated earlier, we believe that the available evidence runs counter to the contention that the 
CRA contributed in any substantive way to the current mortgage crisis. 
Conclusions 
Our  findings  are  important  because  neighborhoods  and  communities  affected  by  the 
economic downturn will require the active participation of financial institutions. Considering 
the situation today, many neighborhoods that are not currently the focus of the CRA are also 
experiencing  great  difficulties.  Our  recent  review  of  foreclosure  data  suggested  that  many 
middle-income areas currently have elevated rates of foreclosure filings and could face the 
prospect  of  falling  into  low-to-moderate  income  status.  In  fact,  13  percent  of  the  middle-
income Zip codes have had foreclosure-rate filings that are above the overall rate for lower-
income areas.  
Helping  to  stabilize  such  areas  not  only  benefits  families  in  these  areas  but  also  provides 
spillover benefits to adjacent lower-income areas that are the traditional target of the CRA. 
Recognizing  this,  the  Congress  recently  underscored  the  need  for  states  and  localities  to 
undertake a comprehensive approach to stabilizing neighborhoods hard-hit by foreclosures 
through  the  enactment  of  the  new  Neighborhood  Stabilization  Program  (NSP).  The  NSP 
permits targeting of federal funds to benefit families up to 120 percent of area median income 
in those areas experiencing rising foreclosures and falling home values.  
In conclusion, I believe the CRA is an important model for designing incentives that motivate 
private-sector  involvement  to  help  meet  community  needs.  The  CRA  has,  in  fact,  been 
helpful in alleviating the financial isolation of many areas of concentrated poverty, but as our 
report illustrates, there is much more that could be done in these communities. Contrary to 
the assertions of critics, the evidence does not support the view that the CRA contributed in 
any substantial way to the crisis in the subprime mortgage market. Today's discussion is an 
important  first  step  in  the  process  of  identifying  other  initiatives  and  areas  of  cooperation 
between  government  and  the  private  sector  that  will  effectively  address  the  continuing 
challenge of poverty in the United States.  
                                                 
11   Data  are  from  RealtyTrac,  covering  foreclosures  from  January  2006  through  August  2008.  These  data  are 
reported at the Zip code level. Foreclosure filings have been consolidated at the property level, so separate 
filings on first- and subordinate-lien loans on the same property are counted as a single filing. 
6 
 BIS Review 150/2008
