Ric Battellino: An update on household finances 
Speech by Mr Ric Battelino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the 7th 
ITSA Bankruptcy Congress, Sydney, 30 October 2008. 
 The extraordinary developments in global financial markets over the past couple of months 
have,  understandably,  undermined  households’  confidence  in  their  finances.  This  has 
occurred around the world. 
• 
Households  have  seen  incredible  volatility  in  financial  prices.  Daily  movements  in 
share prices of several percentage points have become the norm.  
Share prices have fallen sharply around the globe. In Australia, the share market is 
down  about  40 per  cent  in  2008,  resulting  in  negative  returns  in  most  individuals’ 
superannuation funds.  
The  difficulties  in  global  interbank  markets  which  had  existed  since  August  2007 
took a dramatic turn for the worse last month. The crisis, which had until then been 
largely confined to wholesale markets, spilled over into a severe loss of confidence 
among retail investors in financial institutions. Governments around the world have 
been forced to offer wide-ranging guarantees on banks’ liabilities.  
And, to top it off, some commentators are predicting sharp falls in house prices here 
in Australia.  
   Given the daily barrage of gloom and doom, it is easy for households to lose perspective, so 
I thought it would be useful to take an objective look at the state of household finances. In 
doing so, I will focus on three key areas: 
• 
• 
• 
household income;  
household balance sheets; and  
the housing market – in particular, is the Australian housing market going to go the 
same way as the US market?  
Household income 
The  first  thing  to  say  about  household  income  is  that  the  past  five  years  have  been  an 
extraordinarily favourable period. Real disposable income of the household sector grew on 
average by 6.1 per cent per year, resulting in a cumulative increase over the five years of 
more than 30 per cent. One has to go back more than thirty years to find a bigger increase 
over a five-year period.  
BIS Review 130/2008 
 1
 Table 1: Real Household Disposable Income 
Average annual percentage change 
 Before interest 
After interest 
1963-1968 
1968-1973 
1973-1978 
1978-1983 
1983-1988 
1988-1993 
1993-1998 
1998-2003 
2003-2008 
4.6 
5.8 
3.1 
2.6 
2 
1.7 
3.1 
3.2 
6.1 
4.5 
5.6 
2.7 
2.2 
1.8 
2.1 
3 
2.9 
4.8 
  Deflated using the household consumption deflator; dates refer to financial 
years. 
Source: ABS 
Periods of strong income growth tend to be periods of strong spending and it is the job of 
central banks to try to keep a lid on this, to prevent excessive inflation. The past five years 
were  therefore  also  a  period  of  rising  interest  rates.  Some  commentators  would  have  us 
believe that this had a crippling effect on the finances of the household sector. While some 
households were no doubt severely affected, the facts show that this was not the case for the 
sector  as  a  whole.  Even  after  allowing  for  higher  interest  payments,  real  household 
disposable  income  over  the  five  years  still  increased  by  more  than  25 per  cent.  This 
increase,  too,  was  the  largest  since  the  early  1970s.  Put  another  way,  over  the  past  five 
years, the amount of money that Australian households had left over to spend, after paying 
taxes and interest on all their loans, grew in real terms at the fastest rate in over 30 years. 
What contributed to this surge in incomes? As usual, there were a number of factors at work: 
• 
wage and salary income grew strongly, at about 7½ per cent per annum on average;  
income from investments grew by 17 per cent per annum on average. This was due 
• 
to high dividends on shares and interest on deposits. This figure does not include 
the very strong capital gains on shares, which I will come to later;  
taxes payable grew less than income because we were given a series of tax cuts. 
This meant that disposable income grew more quickly than gross income (8.3 per 
cent per annum on average); and  
 2 
 BIS Review 130/2008
 inflation (as measured by the consumption deflator) ate up 2.2 per cent per annum 
of  this  income  growth,  leaving  growth  in  real  disposable  income  at  the  figure  of 
6.1 per cent mentioned earlier.  
This growth in household incomes in Australia greatly exceeded that in any other developed 
economy.  In  the  US,  for  example,  growth  in  real  household  disposable  income  was  only 
about half that in Australia. 
It is also interesting to note that the growth in income in Australia was fairly evenly distributed 
through  the  household  sector.  The  percentage  increase  in  real  income  was  very  similar 
across all the income quintiles. 
In  short,  the  boom  in  income  in  Australia  was  very  strong  by  world  standards  and  a  high 
proportion of Australian households shared it. 
These  facts  help  us  to  understand  how  we  got  to  where  we  are,  but  the  more  relevant 
question for households is: where are we heading over the coming five years? 
I think it is now widely accepted that growth in real incomes over the next year or two will be 
more subdued than over the past five years. How subdued will depend importantly on the 
effects of the financial turmoil. Nobody knows how significant they will turn out to be but it 
would  be  reasonable  to  assume  that  income  growth  for  the  household  sector  will  be 
noticeably below average over the next year or two. 
Beyond the next couple of years, the future is harder to predict, but there is no reason at this 
stage to doubt that past patterns will be repeated and that growth will pick up again. Australia 
remains, after all, a very dynamic economy. 
The  outcomes  in  Australia  will,  as  usual,  be  influenced  to  some  degree  by  global 
developments.  At  present,  the  major  developed  economies  seem  to  be  moving  into 
recession, as they tend to do every seven to ten years. The last such recession was in 2001, 
so the one that is emerging at present seems to be pretty much on cue. 
The Bank has been factoring weaker global economic growth into its policy assessment for 
much of this year. Throughout this period, we have been forecasting lower growth than the 
major  international  forecasters.  Even  so,  the  events  of  the  past  couple  of  months  have 
caused us to revise our forecasts down further. 
Australia managed to sidestep the 2001 global recession. Can it do that again? 
That is certainly what we are aiming for, and there is nothing in the data to date to suggest 
that  we  are  off  track.  But  the  economy  is  being  affected  by  powerful  forces  from  different 
directions, and it is unclear what the net effect will be. The impact of global developments is 
particularly uncertain. 
We  also  have  to  recognise  that  the  task  of  managing  the  economy  this  time  will  be  more 
difficult than in 2001 because we are starting with a bigger inflation overhang. The Bank has 
for  some  time  thought  that  inflation  would  peak  in  the  second  half  of  2008  and  then  fall; 
accordingly,  we  have  acted  pre-emptively  in  reducing  interest  rates.  Nonetheless,  there  is 
still  a  big  task  ahead  to  bring  inflation  down  and  this  could  limit  room  for  manoeuvre  on 
monetary policy. 
Many  people  will  be  disappointed  and  unhappy  with  a  year  or  two  of  below-average 
economic performance. But the truth is that the economy cannot always grow above average 
and it certainly cannot maintain the pace of the past five years. If we attempted to make it do 
so, we would be repeating the mistakes of our predecessors in the 1960s, whose attempts to 
maintain  a  never-ending  boom  laid  the  foundations  for  the  subsequent  two  decades  of 
severe economic difficulties. 
One of the factors that helped keep Australia from following the developed economies into 
recession in 2001 was our increasing links to Asia, and China in particular. These links have 
strengthened further since 2001, with China now Australia’s largest trading partner. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 3
It would be naïve to assume that China will not experience an economic cycle, so we should 
expect its demand for our resources to fluctuate. However, China’s strong long-term growth 
potential must be a source of optimism about our own long-term prosperity, given our role as 
one of its most important suppliers of raw materials. 
Household balance sheets 
I would like to turn now to household balance sheets. 
Australian households have much bigger holdings of financial assets than financial liabilities. 
Financial  assets  at  30 June  averaged  around  $275,000  per  household  while  liabilities 
averaged $150,000 per household. Since then, we estimate that average assets have fallen 
to around $245,000 per household, though this is still quite a strong position.  
Graph 1 
  
The composition of assets and liabilities is very different. 
• 
The liabilities consist mainly of borrowings from banks and other lenders where the 
value is fixed and on which regular interest has to be paid.  
Household financial assets, however, consist mainly of market-linked investments.  
• 
This balance sheet structure is very favourable in terms of maximising long-run accumulation 
of wealth, because the return on these assets over long terms exceeds the cost of debt by a 
substantial margin. The returns do not, however, accumulate evenly from year to year. Some 
years produce very strong returns while others produce negative returns. 
We are currently going through one of those periods of negative returns. As I mentioned, the 
Australian  share  market  has  fallen  sharply  this  year.  Largely  because  of  this,  the  typical 
balanced  superannuation  fund  experienced  a  negative  return  of  about  8 per  cent  last 
financial year. Returns are again negative so far this financial year. 
Naturally, people find this very distressing. But it is not the first time this has happened. Over 
the past 100 years, the share market on average has had negative returns every 5 years.  
4 
 BIS Review 130/2008
 Graph 2 
 
While the sharp fall in share prices since late last year is confronting, the thing that needs to 
be kept in mind is that it was preceded by four years of extremely strong returns. As such, 
even after this year’s fall, anybody who has held shares over the past five years would still 
have earned 8 per cent a year on average. That is still more than the return on government 
bonds or bank deposits over the period. 
 Graph 3 
 
The  uneven  pattern  in  share  market  returns  partly  reflects  the  economic  cycle  and  partly 
reflects the influence of human behaviour. As investors, we find it difficult to distinguish the 
cycle from the trend. In particular, after a few years, a cyclical upswing starts to look like a 
trend and more of us try to jump aboard. Eventually this pushes asset prices to levels that 
 BIS Review 130/2008 
 5
are  higher  than  can  be  justified  by  the  income  produced  by  the  asset,  and  prices  correct 
down. 
Investments in shares tend to compensate the holder for the short-run volatility in returns by 
producing  higher  returns  over  the  long  run.  If  they  did  not,  nobody  would  invest  in  them. 
These higher returns can compound to very large amounts over time. 
Graph 4 
  
As an illustration of this, assume somebody had $100 (in today’s money) to invest 100 years 
ago: 
• 
If they put this in government bonds, and assuming all the interest was re-invested 
in bonds along the way, the investment would today be worth about $800. This is an 
annual real return of 2 per cent.  
If they put it in the Australian share market, and again assuming that all dividends 
were  re-invested  in  shares,  it  would  today  be  worth  about  $130,000.  This  is  an 
annual real return of 7 per cent.  
 The difference between these two rates of return – 5 percentage points per year – is the risk 
premium that investors have received for investing in the share market. 
At  present,  the  risk  premium  is  higher  than  this  because  investors  have  become  very 
nervous.  The  increase in  the  risk  premium  demanded  by  investors  has  been  an  important 
factor causing share prices to fall in recent months. The one-year forward earnings yield on 
Australian shares has risen to 11 per cent, well above the long-run average. This is a very 
attractive yield. When the yield has risen to these levels in the past, the return on shares over 
the subsequent 10 years has almost always been well above average. 
The housing market 
Finally, I would like to make a few comments about the housing market. 
Some  commentators  who  have  looked  at  the  US  housing  market  feel  they  have  seen  the 
future  for  the  Australian  market.  In  some  ways,  this  is  understandable  because  economic 
developments in Australia have in the past often mirrored those in the US. 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2008
As you know, the ratio of housing costs to income has been unusually high in recent years 
and it is not unreasonable to expect that it will decline over time. But this ratio can adjust in 
several ways: lower house prices, rising incomes or falling interest rates. In the US, falls in 
house prices have been a big part of the adjustment. I think there are reasons, however, to 
believe that the Australian housing market will not follow the US market to the same degree. 
Let me run through some of these reasons. 
First, the cycle in the Australian housing market, rather than following the US market, is in 
fact at a more advanced stage; it is probably leading the US market by three years or so. The 
Australian  housing  market  was  at  its  hottest  in  2003,  whereas  the  US  market  peaked  in 
2006. 
To understand how this came about, it is necessary to look back to the second half of the 
1990s.  The  tremendous  shift  in  the  global  savings/investment  balance  that  followed  the 
Asian  crisis  generated  a  surplus  of  funds  in  global  markets.  The  financial  sectors  in  the 
English-speaking  countries,  being  more  dynamic  and  responsive  than  in  many  other 
countries,  were  quick  to  take  advantage  of  this.  In  the  US,  the  early  part  of  this  period 
coincided  with  a  surge  in  technological  innovation,  and  the  initial  wave  of  money  in  that 
country went to the technology sector. This resulted in the “tech” bubble, which eventually 
collapsed in 2000. 
Australia  did  not  have  much  of  a  technology-producing  sector  so  our  financial  institutions 
sought  out  other  investment  opportunities.  What  Australia  did  have  was  a  conservative 
household sector with relatively low gearing. As such, the financial sector saw opportunities 
for  financial  innovation  aimed  at  encouraging  households  to  make  greater  use  of  their 
borrowing capacity. Most of this was focused on housing lending. 
The result was that the boom in housing in Australia got underway well before that in the US 
the latter did not really get going until after the tech bubble collapsed. 
A second difference relates to the dynamics of the housing markets in the two countries. In 
the US, the rise in house prices elicited a very strong supply response so that, by the end of 
2007,  there  was  almost  one-year’s  supply  of  newly  built  unsold  houses  overhanging  the 
market. US house prices stopped rising essentially because the supply of houses overtook 
demand. 
Graph 5 
 BIS Review 130/2008 
  7
Here in Australia the rise in house prices did not elicit such a strong supply response. There 
were  pockets  of  overdevelopment  in  apartments  in  2003/04  but,  by  and  large,  there  was 
never a serious oversupply of unsold new houses in Australia. In fact, the consensus is that 
there is currently a shortage of dwellings. 
The Australian housing boom ended because prices rose to levels that severely strained the 
financial capacity of buyers to pay higher prices, not because too many houses were built, as 
in the US. 
The overhang of unsold houses in the US has created downward pressure on house prices 
as builders and developers have been forced to sell. This is absent in Australia. Rather, the 
shortage of housing here means that there are buyers waiting for better circumstances – e.g. 
lower  interest  rates  or  rising  incomes –  to  facilitate  their  entry  to  the  market.  This  latent 
underlying demand for housing is a factor that will support the market. 
A third important difference between Australia and the US is in the groups that the lenders 
targeted, and in the loan terms on offer. In Australia, the lending boom was concentrated on 
existing  home  owners  who  traded  up  to  bigger  and  better  houses  and  bought  investment 
properties. Many of these were people in their 40s and 50s who previously had low levels of 
debt. At the end of the boom, the home ownership rate in Australia was no different to that at 
the start; in both cases about 70 per cent. 
While  one  could  argue  that  no  socially  productive  purpose  was  served  by  this  increased 
lending  to  middle-aged  existing  home  owners,  it  did  mean  that  the  loans  largely  went  to 
those who had a strong capacity to service and repay them. As a result, whereas most other 
countries  with  housing booms  have  experienced  a  strong  rise  in  arrears  on  housing  loans 
once the boom ended, in Australia the arrears rate is today no higher than it was at the start 
of the boom in the mid 1990s. And, of course, it is low by international standards.  
Graph 6 
 
In  the  US,  in  contrast,  a  lot  of  the  lending  found  its  way  to  more  marginal  borrowers  who 
previously could not afford a loan, or it took the form of aggressively structured mortgages 
which allowed people to borrow much more than they previously could. The home ownership 
rate in the US continued to rise during the first years of the boom. One could argue that this 
was a good thing, but one consequence was that a significant proportion of this group ended 
8 
 BIS Review 130/2008
up  having  trouble  servicing  their  loans;  hence,  the  sharp  rise  we  have  seen  in  US  loan 
delinquencies. 
In  setting  out  these  differences,  I  don’t  want  to  leave  the  impression  that  the  Australian 
housing market is without its problems. There is no denying that there is a significant number 
of  people  who  are  facing  difficulties  with  housing  loan  repayments,  especially  in  western 
Sydney where arrears rates are significantly higher than in other parts of Australia. 
While lending standards in Australia did not deteriorate to anywhere near the same extent as 
in the US, loans sourced from new, non-traditional lenders have ended up with higher rates 
of arrears than those of traditional lenders. The arrears, even on prime, full-doc loans made 
by this new group of lenders are three times higher than those on similar loans sourced from 
the major banks. In addition, a higher proportion of loans granted by these lenders were low-
doc  or  non-conforming,  the  arrears  rates  on  which  are  significantly  higher  than  those  on 
prime  loans.  One  can  only  conclude  that  these  lenders  had  lower  credit  standards  than 
traditional  lenders,  and  while  this  may  have  benefited  some  borrowers,  it  has  ended  up 
causing significant hardship for others.  
Graph 7 
  
One of the issues that has been highlighted by events in the US is the importance of having 
adequate regulation of lending and loan brokers. In Australia, all lenders were covered by the 
Uniform Consumer Credit Code but loan brokers were much more lightly regulated, until very 
recently. The Council of Australian Governments earlier this year recognised that regulation 
needed  to  be  strengthened  and  agreed  to  transfer  responsibility  for  the  regulation  of  all 
consumer credit to the Commonwealth. This is due to take effect by the middle of next year 
and should ensure that regulation of this very important financial activity is put on an even 
sounder footing. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 9
Conclusion 
We are going through some uncertain financial times at present, which is leading some to 
question whether the period of prosperity that has been running for almost two decades has 
come to an end. 
While  nobody  can  predict  accurately  all  that  lies  ahead,  it  is  important  not  to  become  too 
pessimistic  because,  fundamentally,  household  finances  and  the  economy  more  generally 
remain in good shape. The main problem that had built up – inflation – is manageable and is 
being dealt with. 
The next couple of years will be noticeably more subdued than the past five. We should not 
be  surprised  by  this  as  the  income  and  wealth  generated  over  the  past  five  years  were 
simply extraordinary. 
By definition, the economy must grow at a below-average pace for some of the time. These 
periods provide the economy with the breathing space to sustain the expansion. There is no 
reason to assume that the next year or two will not do the same. 
10 
 BIS Review 130/2008
