Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Bahrain develops its financial centre in 
the Gulf region  
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the BNP Paribas – Inauguration of new premises at the Bahrain Financial Harbor, 
Manama, 9 November 2008. 
 Monsieur de Courscel, Monsieur Durand, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to join you today to celebrate the formal opening of the 
BNP Paribas premises at the Bahrain Financial Harbor. 
May I welcome M. de Courscel and his colleagues who have travelled from Paris to be with 
us  today.  Their  presence  is  indicative  of  the  importance  that  BNP  Paribas  places  on  the 
development  of  its  business  in  the  Gulf  region  and  an  acknowledgement  of  the  role  of 
Bahrain as the leading financial centre of the region, can play in that development. 
The  bank’s  relationship  with  Bahrain  goes  back  nearly  35  years  and  this  relationship  has 
been  rather  special.  With  the  granting  of  a  Full  Commercial  Banking  licence  in  February 
1975, the bank became the first European mainland banking institution to conduct business 
in Bahrain. Later in the same year, the bank was one of the first international institutions to 
be granted an Offshore Banking Unit licence. 
Therefore, from an historical perspective alone, the bank has been closely involved in, and 
has become an integral part of, Bahrain’s development as an international financial centre. 
The professional competence of its staff, the commitment of local management to maintain 
and  enhance  its  operational  base  in  Bahrain,  and  the  support  given  to  this  concept  by  its 
regional and head office directors, have been foundations upon which a success story has 
been built. 
At the beginning of this decade, Bahrain was officially appointed as the hub for the bank’s 
regional operations. The opening of these splendid premises at the Bahrain Financial Harbor 
are a physical expression of the success that BNP Paribas has subsequently enjoyed in the 
region. 
These  are,  of  course,  challenging  times  for  the  global  financial  system.  There  now  seems 
little doubt that, in the short term at least, this region will not remain unaffected by the global 
economic downturn. However, it is important to look beyond the immediate picture and focus 
instead  on  the  long-run  prospects  for  global  and  regional  economic  growth.  The  fact  that 
BNP Paribas is now strengthening its commitment to this region, is testament to its view that 
many good business opportunities are still to be found here. 
I  am  confident  that  the  success  that  BNP  Paribas  has  enjoyed  in  Bahrain  for  the  past  35 
years will continue into the future. That success will be underpinned by the same principles 
as  in  the  past:  adherence  to  sound  business  practice,  enlightened  staff  policies  and  good 
customer  relations,  all  of  which  have  been  the  framework  within  which  the  bank  has 
prospered. 
Honoured  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  with  great  pleasure  I  declare  open  the  BNP 
Paribas  office  in  the  Bahrain  Financial  Harbor.  May  I  wish  the  bank  a  successful  and 
prosperous  evolution  and  continued  close  association  with  the  development  of  Bahrain  as 
the leading international financial centre of the Gulf region. 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 1
