Denny H Kalyalya: Effective banking supervision – a risk based approach 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Denny  H  Kalyalya,  Deputy  Governor-Operations  of  the  Bank 
of  Zambia;  at 
risk  based 
approach”,  Livingstone, 1 December 2008. 
“Effective  banking  supervision:  a 
the  workshop  on 
 • The Chairperson
• Resource Persons
• Distinguished Workshop Participants
• Ladies and Gentlemen
On  behalf  of  Crown  Agents  and  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  I  wish  to  welcome  you  all  to  this 
important  workshop  on  Effective  Banking  Supervision:  A  Risk  Based  Approach  and  to 
Zambia’s  Tourist  Capital,  Livingstone.  In  particular,  I  welcome  our  resource  persons  from 
Crown Agents and participants from the region. 
Looking at the programme, it is obvious that you will have a tight schedule. However, I urge 
all of you to find time in your busy schedule to visit some interesting places that our Tourist 
City of Livingstone has to offer, especially the mighty Victoria Falls, which although not at its 
best at this time of the year, still presents a spectacle to behold. 
The  ongoing  global  financial  crisis  has  brought  tremendous  and  unexpected  challenges  to 
regulatory and supervisory authorities. As you are all well aware, in any economy, more so in 
market-driven economy, financial institutions play a critical role in the allocation of resources 
through intermediating between those with surplus resources (depositors) and those in need 
of  resources  (investors).  Effective  and  efficient  supervision  is  therefore,  crucial  to  manage 
risk and avert possible loss to depositors/investors and hence maintain public confidence in 
the financial system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
This  workshop  is  being  held  at  a  time  when  the  global  economy  has  come  under  serious 
strain caused by the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the US. Appetite for profit and poor credit 
risk underwriting standards led to a surge in sub-prime mortgages. This brought about a real 
estate price bubble as demand for residential properties grew. The situation culminated into 
a liquidity and credit crunch in financial markets. 
The financial crisis has spread to other countries directly through financial market linkages 
and  indirectly  through  trade.  Recent  projections  indicate  that  the  global  financial  crisis  will 
lead to global contraction in economic output with a corresponding reduction in incomes, a 
rise in unemployment and decline in volumes of trade. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The current state our financial sector calls for a new approach to the supervision of banks 
and  other  financial  institutions.  Risk  Based  Supervision  (RBS)  represents  a  paradigm  shift 
from the traditional rules based, historical, standardised and point-in-time assessments to a 
process-oriented, forward looking, continuous and risk profile driven approach to supervision 
and regulation of the financial sector. 
RBS  is  a  structured  and  forward  looking  process  designed  to  identify  risk  factors  to  which 
individual banks and other financial institutions and the entire financial industry are exposed. 
This  approach  enables  supervisors 
to  critically  assess  various  risks  and  the  risk 
management  systems  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  in  order  to  assess  the  risk 
profile of these institutions. It also enables the regulator to focus supervisory attention on the 
areas and institutions that pose the greatest risk to financial system stability. 
BIS Review 159/2008 
1
Thus, the supervisory authorities are in a position to identify systemic risk factors and devise 
intervention measures aimed at forestalling systemic failures. The added advantage of this 
approach is that it brings about optimal utilisation of supervisory resources. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am happy to inform you that following our initial efforts dating back to 1999 to introduce risk 
based  supervision,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  this  year  fully  adopted  RBS.  As  a  result  it  is 
expected that there will be enhanced supervision of banks and other financial institutions. 
Let me also state that the BoZ is committed to implementing the Basel II Capital Accord but 
stands ready to review this stance in the face of the ongoing global financial crisis. As you 
know Basel II is intended to make banks operate at capital levels which are commensurate 
with their risk profiles. To this end, the BoZ just issued risk management guidelines. 
Distinguished Workshop Participants 
As  I  conclude,  I  wish  to  urge  the  workshop  participants  to  participate  actively  in  the 
deliberations and use this opportunity to tap knowledge and skills from the vast experience of 
the  resource  persons.  This  workshop  provides  us  with  a  unique  opportunity  to  share  our 
respective country experiences and challenges. 
It is my hope that we will develop the supervisory systems in the region to a level where they 
will be able to interact effectively. This uniformity in the supervisory systems will prepare us 
to respond better to regional and global financial challenges. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my honour and privilege to declare 
this important regional workshop on Effective Banking Supervision: A Risk Based Approach 
officially open. 
I thank you!!! 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2008
