Elizabeth A Duke: Foreclosure prevention efforts and market stability 
Testimony of Ms Elizabeth A Duke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 23 October 2008. 
 Chairman  Dodd,  Senator  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  this 
opportunity  to  discuss  recent  actions  taken  to  stabilize  financial  markets  and  foreclosure 
prevention efforts.  
Financial  markets  have  been  strained  for  more  than  a  year,  as  house  prices  declined, 
economic  activity  slowed,  and  investors  pulled  back  from  risk-taking.  These  strains 
intensified in recent weeks. Lending to banks and other financial institutions beyond a few 
days virtually shut down. Withdrawals from money market mutual funds and prospects that 
net asset values would fall further severely disrupted commercial paper and other short-term 
funding  markets.  Longer-term  credit  also  became  much  more  costly  as  credit  spreads  for 
bonds  jumped  and  interest  rates  rose.  The  problems  in  credit  markets  and  increasing 
concerns about the state of the economy caused equity prices to swing sharply and decline 
notably. 
Policymakers  here  and  in  other  countries  have  taken  a  series  of  extraordinary  actions  in 
recent  weeks  to  restore  market  functioning  and  improve  investor  confidence,  with  the  aim 
ultimately to increase the availability of credit and the value of savings. The Federal Reserve 
has continued to address ongoing problems in interbank funding markets by expanding its 
existing  lending  facilities,  and  recently  increased  the  quantity  of  term  funds  it  auctions  to 
banks and accommodated greater  demand for funds from banks and primary dealers. We 
also increased our currency swap lines with foreign central banks. To alleviate pressures on 
money  market  mutual  funds  and  commercial  paper  issuers,  we  implemented  several 
important temporary facilities, including one to provide financing to banks to purchase high-
quality  asset-backed  commercial  paper  from  money  funds,  and  another  to  provide  a 
backstop to commercial paper markets by purchasing highly rated commercial paper directly 
from businesses at a term of three months. On Tuesday of this week, we announced another 
program in which we will provide senior secured financing to conduits that purchase certain 
highly rated commercial paper and certificates of deposit from money market mutual funds. 
The  financial  rescue  package  recently  enacted  by  Congress,  the  Emergency  Economic 
Stabilization Act (EESA), provides critically important new tools to address financial market 
problems.  EESA  authorized  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program  (TARP),  which  allows  the 
Treasury to buy troubled assets, to provide guarantees, and to inject capital to strengthen the 
balance sheets of financial institutions. As provided in the Act, the Federal Reserve Board 
and  its  staff  are  consulting  with  the  Treasury  regarding  the  TARP.  In  addition,  Chairman 
Bernanke  serves  as  the  Chairman  of  the  oversight  board  for  TARP  that  will,  among  other 
things, review the policies that are implemented and make recommendations, as appropriate, 
regarding the use of authorities under TARP. EESA also temporarily raised the limit on the 
deposit insurance coverage provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
from $100,000 to $250,000 per account. 
Last  week,  the  first  use  of  TARP  funds  was  announced.  In  particular,  the  Treasury 
announced a voluntary capital purchase program, and nine of the nation’s largest financial 
institutions  have  agreed  to  participate.  The  program  is  open  to  financial  institutions  of  all 
sizes.  Under  the  program,  the  Treasury  would  acquire  capital  of  financial  institutions  on 
terms that are attractive to the institutions and with features that protect the taxpayer. At the 
same  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  the  FDIC,  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  in 
consultation with the President, determined that there were significant risks to the stability of 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 1
the  financial  system.  With  this  determination,  the  FDIC  used  its  authority  to  expand  for  a 
specified  period,  insurance  to  non-interest-bearing  transactions  accounts,  such  as  payroll 
accounts,  and  a  guarantee  for  newly  issued  senior  unsecured  debt  of  FDIC-insured 
depository institutions, including their associated holding companies. 
A  second,  complementary,  use  of  TARP  funds  will  be  to  purchase  mortgage  assets, 
including  mortgage-backed  securities  and  whole  loans.  These  purchases  are  designed  to 
remove uncertainty from lenders’ balance sheets and to restore confidence in their viability. 
Another objective is to improve the modification efforts of servicers on these loans to more 
effectively prevent avoidable foreclosures. 
The  Federal  Reserve  System  is  also  working  to  develop  solutions  to  rising  foreclosures. 
Preventing avoidable foreclosures is good for borrowers, communities, and the economy. 
A number of efforts are underway. The Federal Reserve has worked with other agencies to 
put  in  place  the  standards  and  procedures  for  the  new  Hope  for  Homeowners  (H4H) 
program, and I serve on the Oversight Board. These loans can help borrowers who might 
otherwise  face  foreclosure  because  the  new  loan  payments  are  more  affordable  and  the 
homeowners  get  some  equity  in  their  homes.  Lenders  and  servicers  are  analyzing  their 
borrowers for good candidates for the H4H program, and the FHA and its authorized lenders 
are  poised  to  process  applications.  We  appreciate  the  additional  flexibility  provided  to  the 
program by Congress in EESA, in particular allowing up-front payments to junior lien holders 
that agree to release their claims. 
For some time, we have called upon lenders, investors, and servicers to aggressively pursue 
sustainable  loss  mitigation  activities.  For  example,  last  year  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
other  banking  agencies  issued  supervisory  guidance  to  encourage  mortgage  lenders  and 
servicers  to  pursue  prudent  loan  workouts.  We  continue  to  support  industry-led  efforts, 
especially  those  of  HOPE  NOW,  in  pursuing  flexible  approaches  to  stem  the  rise  in 
foreclosures and to deal with their effects. Earlier this year, we embarked on a joint effort with 
NeighborWorks  America  on  neighborhood  stabilization  to  help  communities  develop 
strategies for addressing increases in foreclosures and vacant properties. 
The Federal Reserve System is strategically utilizing its presence around the country through 
its regional Federal Reserve Banks and their branches to address foreclosures. Our history 
of  working  closely  at  the  local  level  with  communities  enables  us  to  tailor  activities  to  the 
specific  needs  of  that  area.  Our  efforts  have  taken  a  variety  of  forms.  We  have  employed 
economic research and analysis to target scarce resources to the communities most in need 
of  assistance.  We  have  provided  community  leaders  with  detailed  analyses  identifying 
neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures. This information is helping local groups to better 
focus their borrower outreach and counseling efforts.  
In addition, we have sponsored or supported a wide range of activities in local communities. 
For example, the Federal Reserve System has sponsored a series of “Recovery, Renewal, 
Rebuilding”  forums  in  cities  around  the  country  in  which  key  experts  discussed  the 
challenges related to real-estate owned inventories and vacant properties in strong and weak 
housing  markets,  and  explored  effective  neighborhood  stabilization  policies.  Four  events 
were held in various parts of the country earlier this year, and the series concluded with a 
fifth meeting of experts this past Monday in Washington. This series is just an example of 
many  events.  All  told,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  has  sponsored  or  co-sponsored  more 
than  80  events  related  to  foreclosures  since  last  summer,  reaching  more  than  6,000 
attendees 
lenders,  counselors,  community  development  specialists,  and 
policymakers.  
We also have supported events that bring together borrowers with counselors, lenders, and 
servicers. In August, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston partnered with the HOPE NOW 
Alliance, NeighborWorks America, the Kraft family, and the New England Patriots Charitable 
Foundation,  among  many  others,  and  held  an  event  at  Gillette  Stadium.  More  than  2,100 
borrowers  seeking  help  attended.  Twenty  servicers  and  twenty  non-profit  counseling 
including 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2008
agencies took part, with staff at the event and on dedicated phone lines. Although we do not 
yet  know  the  outcomes  for  these  homeowners,  we  are  monitoring  the  results  and  other 
Federal Reserve Banks are considering holding similar events. 
In conclusion, the Federal Reserve has taken a range of actions to stabilize financial markets 
and to help borrowers and communities. Taken together, these measures should help rebuild 
confidence in the financial system, increase the liquidity of financial markets, and improve the 
ability of financial institutions to raise capital from private sources. Efforts to stem avoidable 
foreclosure and help borrowers through H4H and more aggressive modifications, as well as 
to develop effective strategies for dealing with foreclosed-upon properties, I believe, will also 
help homeowners and communities. These steps are important to help stabilize our financial 
institutions and the housing market, and will facilitate a return to more-normal functioning and 
extension of credit. 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 3
