Amando M Tetangco, Jr: A comprehensive financial education program 
for Filipinos 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  launching  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Learning 
Center, Manila, 3 October 2008. 
 Members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  our  partners  in  the  financial  and  business  communities, 
special guests, fellow central bankers, good afternoon.  
We thank you for being here with us at the launching of the Bangko Sentral’s Economic and 
Financial  Learning  Center  which  includes  the  BSP  Library  as  well  as  the  Statistical  and 
Learning Center.  
This center, which we call EFLC, symbolizes Bangko Sentral’s commitment to institutionalize 
and  sustain  a  comprehensive  financial  education  program  for  Filipinos  –  our  primary 
stakeholders.  
We believe that persons literate in basic economic and financial concepts… stand to benefit 
more  from  opportunities  that  development  brings.  They  also  become  better  partners  in 
ensuring that we have a sound banking system and a more efficient transmission mechanism 
for our monetary policy actions. In the process, they help sustain balanced economic growth. 
This is the philosophy that underpins our economic and financial education program. 
It is in this context that today, we are implementing a comprehensive economic and financial 
education program that covers children, teenagers, and adults. I will discuss its components 
briefly.  
For  Filipino  children,  we  have  Bangko  Sentral’s  joint  program  with  the  Department  of 
Education and the banking community, where lessons on saving and money  management 
are now being taught as part of the curriculum for 12 million public elementary pupils. 
For  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  dependents  here  and  abroad  we  conduct  lectures  and 
dialogues,  to  help  them  make  sound  financial  decisions  and  investments  to  grow  their 
money.  
For  our  entrepreneurial  poor,  we  continue  to  preach  the  gospel  of  microfinance  that  has 
helped improve the quality of life of millions of Filipinos.  
For  small  and  medium-scale  entrepreneurs,  we  guide  them  on  how  and  where  to  access 
credit.  
For banks, we teach them how to align with and benefit from our technological innovations 
such as the award-winning electronic rediscounting.  
For those engaged in the remittance business, we let them know how they can benefit from 
using our real-time gross settlement system or PhilPass.  
For bank customers, we empower them by educating them on their rights and responsibilities 
in dealing with banks.  
For  maintaining  the  quality  of  our  policies,  we  have  professorial  chairs  in  top  academic 
institutions to improve economic policy formulation and education.  
For the general public, we conduct lectures and seminars for them to understand the role of 
the  Bangko  Sentral  in  the  Philippine  economy;  we  also  teach  them  how  to  recognize 
counterfeit currency; and through the highly successful “Tulong Barya Para sa Eskwela” we 
teach our public the value of small things, including the barya, as the start of wealth creation.  
BIS Review 121/2008 
 1
And of course, we respond to requests for information and resource persons from schools, 
institutions, and civic groups.  
With  our  EFLC,  we  have  created  a  one-stop  center  where  researchers,  students,  visitors, 
and  BSP  staff  may  access  data  and  information  produced  and  acquired  by  the  Bangko 
Sentral  in  the  areas  of  central  banking,  economics  and  finance.  We  have  a  briefing  room 
here where we can host various visitor groups.  
Incorporating  today’s  technology,  the  EFLC  will  provide  information  not  only  through 
conventional  books  and  magazines,  but  also  in  various  electronic  formats  such  as  CDs, 
digitized  books,  and  interactive  learning  modules.  EFLC  will  coordinate  with  other  sectors 
and  departments  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  to  consolidate  materials  for  our  economic  and 
financial education program under this one-stop center. This will include digital archives of 
BSP video materials to make them accessible to the public.  
Visitors  may  also  buy  Bangko  Sentral  publications  and  commemorative  items  here  at  the 
EFLC.  
Through the interactive modes of learning, including computer-based games and multi-media 
learning tools, EFLC should inspire and excite visitors to learn more about economics and 
finance. It is possible, some of our visitors may even decide to become central bankers.  
But  beyond  the  books  and  multi-media  resources  here,  we  envision  EFLC  to  serve  as  a 
regular  forum  for  intellectual  discourse  that  will  inspire  higher  learning  in  the  field  of 
economics and finance.  
Ladies and gentlemen. I am pleased to inform you that this EFLC is just the first of a series; 
our plan is to set up EFLC’s at Bangko Sentral’s regional offices and branches. This is to 
provide equal opportunity for our people in the countryside equal access to our material and 
resources.  
Actually, work has already started in operating the regional centers but we will expand their 
scope and services in the form of traveling exhibits and operation of regional hubs to ensure 
that  our  electronic  resources  are  accessible  to  our  visitors  in  the  regions.  Expanding  our 
network  and  enhancing  regional  facilities  will  ensure  that  timely  economic  and  financial 
learning benefit those in the countryside as well.  
Ladies and gentlemen. I cannot overemphasize the importance of ensuring the success and 
sustainability of our economic and financial education program.  
If we are effective in teaching saving and money management to our 12 million public school 
pupils, we would be on track to raise a new generation of financially-independent Filipinos 
who will lift our country from its traditional deficit-spending mode. 
If  we  are  able  to  educate  our  public  to  recognize  legitimate  investment  vehicles  from 
pyramiding scams, then we can truly harness public savings to finance productive ventures.  
If we are able to inspire Filipinos to save, invest more, or to become entrepreneurs, then we 
have done our country a great service in terms of sustaining its growth and development.  
I  hope  therefore  that  we  will  continue  to  work  together  on  our  economic  and  financial 
education program.  
Finally, I congratulate the EISG headed by Marah Angka and her staff for finally getting the 
EFLC off the ground. Let us give them our full support and cooperation.  
And so, ladies and gentlemen, let us now begin our tour of the EFLC.  
Mabuhay ang EFLC! Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! 
Thank you all and enjoy the rest of the day. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2008
