L Wilson Kamit: New commemorative banknotes and coins in Papua New 
Guinea 
Speech  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
Launch  of  the  banknotes  and  coins  to  commemorate  the  35th  Anniversary  of  the  Bank  of 
Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby, 7 November 2008.  
 Thank  you  for  accepting  the  invitation  to  join  us  at  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  to 
celebrate  this  important  occasion.  There  are  two  important  dates  on  our  calendar  we 
acknowledge each year. 
On  1st  November  1973,  soon  after  self-Government  and  almost  2  years  before 
independence, the Bank of Papua New Guinea was established as the Central Bank of the 
emerging nation and a young Mr Henry ToRobert (now Sir Henry ToRobert) was appointed 
the first Governor. The new Secretary for finance then was Mr Mekere Morauta (Sir Mekere 
Morauta).  The  tasks  before  the  two  former  Governors  and  particularly  the  Bank  was  to 
develop  and  pursue  appropriate  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  adopt  best  practices  in 
supervision of an infant financial system and introduce our own national currency. Such were 
the challenges. 
The Bank continues to face challenges and at times is compelled to undertake tasks outside 
of  its  core  functions  and  these  have  been  most  satisfying.  For  instance,  we  were  equity 
partners in starting up 2 commercial banks in the 1980s. In the 1990s, we were involved in 
the  establishment  of  the  Port  Moresby  Stock  Exchange  and  the  Governor  was  a  Director 
from its inception till June 2008. Our role was to nurture the financial institutions from their 
establishment and once they were operational the Bank would exit. 
We have also been averse to readily accepting new responsibilities not because we cannot 
or do not want to but because we should limit ourselves to achieving the best in our core 
functions rather than the “next best” in undertaking too many roles and tasks. 
The Bank’s independence is as far as making monetary Policy and Supervision decisions but 
any independent central bank must necessarily work with its stakeholders. 
The  Bank  could  not  have  progressed  thus  far  on  its  own  and  we  must  acknowledge  the 
contributions from the Board of Directors of the Bank, different Government officials we work 
with  –  Minister  Patrick  Pruaitch  MP,  Secretary  Tosali  and  Executives  and  officers  of  the 
financial  system  we  interact  with  on  a  daily  basis.  We  have  auditors,  accountants,  and 
lawyers  who  have  assisted  us  reach  many  of  our  goals.  Out  dedicated  staff  and  their 
supportive families are also commended. 
The other important date on our calendar is 19 April of each year. This day in 19975, Papua 
New Guinea introduced its own currency, Kina and Toea. The then Minister for Finance Mr 
Julius Chan (Now Sir Julius) named his son Toea, at the launching of the Kina and Toea. 
The Kina and Toea is a strong partnership that has traveled the trek and withstood its own 
challenges.  On  the  physical  and  domestic  front,  our  banknotes  issue  began  with  paper 
substrate  in  1973  but  since  1991  we  have  moved  on  to  introducing  polymer  notes,  the 
second country outside Australia to adopt the new technology. As we have seen the benefits 
of polymer: Cost Effectiveness, Durability and great ability to withstand counterfeiting accrue 
to the Bank and the community; we have steadily increased the number of denominations 
issued on polymer substrate. 
We have retained the traditional and cultural designs on the K2, K5, K10, K20 and K50 to 
notes to continue to remind us of our rich cultures and traditions. The K100 note depicts our 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 1
the 
transition 
technological 
resources  and 
in  economic  growth  and 
rich  natural 
developments. 
The front of the notes depict the national crest – the styled bird of paradise sitting atop the 
kundu and spears and the National Parliament depicting nation building and nationhood. 
Our coins depict the rich fauna of the country (except for the 50t which we have issued to 
commemorate  special  events).  The  turtle  on  the  5  toea,  the  cuscus  on  the  10  toea,  the 
muruk on the 20t and the 2 crocodiles on the K1.00 were especially coined to depict the rich 
and unique animal world of Papua New Guinea. Of the 2 crocodiles on the Kina coin, one is 
said to be a fresh water crocodile and the other salt water. 
This family of coins will now for the first time be joined by a K2.00 commemorative circulation 
coin which will circulate concurrently with the K2.00 banknote. 
It  is  the  Bank’s  role  to  ensure  public  acceptability  and  confidence  in  our  currency  is 
maintained  by  ensuring  the  design  and  appearance  are  acceptable  and  longitivity  and 
sufficient stocks of the notes and coins are maintained for our public needs. 
On the exchange rate front, the Kina has endured its own challenges. It was introduced in 
1975, it has been pegged, it has been placed in the basket of currencies and it was floated in 
1994, all before it reached the age of 21 years. It is still going strong. What a journey!!! 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  introduce  to  you  for  the  first  time  in  our  history  the  35th 
anniversary commemorative K2.00 circulation coin. Alongside it is the commemorative K2.00 
note  which  will  circulate  concurrently.  Another  historical  introduction  is  the  new  35th 
Anniversary 50t circulation commemorative circulation coin which has the Bank logo in red 
on the back. 
A new look K50.00 banknote is also launched. It has new security and design features which 
now standardizes the features with the other banknotes. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2008
