Denny H Kalyalya: Expansion of Zambia’s banking sector 
Remarks by Dr Denny H Kalyalya, Deputy Governor-Operations of the Bank of Zambia; 
at the official opening of Bank of China’s new premises, Lusaka, 9 December 2008. 
 • Honourable Minister of Finance and National Planning, Dr. Situmbeko Musokotwane, MP;
• His Excellency – the Chinese Ambassador to the Republic of Zambia; Mr. Li Qiangmin;
• Managing Director of the Bank of China (Zambia) Limited; Mr Du Qiang;
• Distinguished Invited Guests;
• Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am greatly honoured for having been invited to speak on the occasion of the official opening 
ceremony of Bank of China’s new premises. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
As part of the on-going Zambia-Chinese relationship, the Bank of China was established in 
1997. Since then the Bank has recorded tremendous progress. 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
During the past 8 years, the overall financial performance and condition of the banking sector 
has  been  satisfactory.  The  sector  has  continued  to  expand  and  we  anticipate  increased 
economic  and  investment  activity  in  the  period  ahead.  Banks  are  expected  to  continue  to 
provide the required level of finance to consolidate the economic gains registered so far. 
The  Bank  has  achieved  tremendous  growth  since  its  inception  in  1997.  During  the  last 
eleven years, total assets have increased by 325% to K507.9 billion in October 2008 from 
K13.8  billion  in  December  1997.  Regulatory  capital  increased  by  about  1,000%  to  K41.9 
billion in October 2008 from K3.8 billion December 1997. Similarly, the bank’s profitability has 
steadily increased over the years. 
The  Bank  has  been  a  good  supporter  of  a  number  of  economic  activities  in  Zambia, 
especially  in  the  mining,  textile,  construction,  banking  and  agriculture  sectors.  However, 
going forward, we wish to encourage the Bank to invest more in loans and advances, which 
have remained low at 4% of total assets as at end of October 2008 compared to the industry 
average of 45%. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The new offices being commissioned today should enhance the Bank’s service delivery to its 
customers.  We  therefore  wish  to  encourage  the  Bank  to  continue  playing  an  active  and 
effective role in stimulating economic activity through the provision of well structured financial 
products  and  services.  Thus,  boost  growth  in  key  sectors  of  the  economy  as  well  as 
enhancing  access  to  finance  and  encourage  more  indigenous  Zambians  to  establish 
relationships with the Bank. 
It  is  our  expectation  also  that  the  Bank  will  expand  beyond  one  branch  and  broaden  its 
customer  base  and  operations  swiftly  in  order  to  consolidate  the  gains  that  have  been 
achieved over the last 11 years. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
1
