Savenaca Narube: Credit unions in Fiji 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
Pacific Credit Union Technical Congress, Nadi, 30 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
Mr Raduva, President of the Fiji Savings & Credit Union League 
Mr Brian Branch, the Chief Operations Officer and Vice-President of the World Council of 
Credit Unions  
Mr Peter Mason, the Chief Executive Officer of the Credit Union Federation of Australia  
Delegates 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Morning! A special bula vinaka to our visitors and welcome to Fiji. I am told that there 
are 11 countries and 17 credit unions participating in this Congress. 
I think that the World Council of Credit Unions (WOCCU) and the Credit Union Foundation of 
Australia  (CUFA)  has  made  an  excellent  choice  to  bring  this  important  Congress  to  the 
Pacific and in particular to Fiji. It is a pleasure to be your host. We hope that you will enjoy 
the warm Fijian hospitality. 
Before I proceed any further, I would like to make a few confessions. First, I do not know too 
much about credit unions. Second, I have not been a member of a credit union. Third, we in 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  do  not  supervise  credit  unions.  So,  we  do  not  have  data  on  the 
operations  of  credit  union  in  Fiji.  Therefore,  please  excuse  me  if  I  say  things  that  may  be 
obvious to many of you or more seriously say something incorrect about your operations. 
Global financial turbulence 
Let me start at the global level. Three months ago virtually everyone including myself were 
unanimous  that  the  worst  of  the  sub  prime  crisis  was  over.  There  was  a  general 
understanding  that  the  global  financial  system  will  recover  but  it  will  take  some  time.  How 
terribly wrong we all were! As we have seen, the events of the last few weeks took the global 
financial  system  to  the  brink  of  a  major  disaster  of  a  magnitude  that  we  had  never  seen 
before. Historically strong institutions that we thought were safe are falling over.  
This brings home three issues – transparency, liquidity and regulation. 
First, transparency. The risks of financial instruments need to be more transparent. Safety 
now needs to be redefined. We cannot rely on the traditional measurement of safety. They 
are  clearly  inadequate.  There  are  serious  risks  in  investments  that  are  not  fully  disclosed. 
They are hidden below the balance sheet and even if there were above the line, the valuation 
of the securities that back then up are not clear and therefore difficult to value. We cannot 
entirely rely on rating agencies and their objectivity is being questioned. 
The second issue is that of liquidity. Central banks are scrambling to pump liquidity into the 
market. This is very much uncharted waters to many central banks. The numbers are mind 
boggling. The US is now talking of a rescue package of 700 billion dollars – the largest in 
history!  We  central  bankers  now  have  to  think  and  operate  well  outside  the  box.  The  US 
Federal Reserve is now supporting institutions that it does not regulate! The fear is that this 
rescue package in the US may not be enough. 
Lastly, there is the issue of regulation. How much should we regulate given the lessons that 
we have learnt. Some are advocating that we look at more regulation. I do not subscribe to 
this view. What we need is perhaps a new set of rules for disclosures and transparency. The 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 1
US  financial  market  is  the  key  to  global  financial  stability.  Whatever  happens  there  send 
ripples across the world. To me the fundamental problem is that the financial markets in the 
US and Europe to a lesser extent seems to have an artificial life of their own. I would like to 
think that the financial system is simply a conduit for real economic activity.  
Up to now I think that the Asian and particularly the Pacific financial markets are somewhat 
insulated  from  these  developments  and  thank  God  for  that.  But  this  may  not  be  true 
anymore. Most of our commercial banks are branches of Australian and New Zealand banks. 
A  few  weeks  ago,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  had  to  make  a  public  statement 
reassuring the people that its financial markets are safe and sound. While we will need to talk 
more  with  the  commercial  banks  in  Fiji,  I  agree  with  Governor  Bollard  that  the  financial 
markets in the Pacific are safe and sound. I would like to reassure the people of Fiji that our 
financial system is sound.  
Now,  while  we  are  somewhat  insulated  from  the  direct  effects  of  the  global  financial 
turbulence, we will not be so lucky in facing its indirect effects. The financial turbulence has 
come  at  a  time  when  the  US  economy  was  already  weak.  So  its  economic  backlash  will 
further slow the economy. As the US economy slows it has flow on effects to the rest of the 
world including Asia and the Pacific. 
Worse  still,  the  crisis  has  come  at  a  time  the  price  of  food  and  oil  has  risen  and  inflation 
across  the  globe  is  a  concern.  The  slowdown  in  growth  and  higher  inflation  is  a  lethal 
combination one that was experienced in the great depression. Is the world going down that 
road? I don’t believe so. While we have had our share of financial crises in the past like the 
Mexican  and  Asian  crises,  I  believe  that  the  global  financial  system  is  flexible  enough  to 
adjust and recover. But it will take more time than we may think. So we must be prepared for 
some tough three years ahead of us. 
Credit unions 
You  may  be  asking  what  has  this international  financial  market  turbulence  worry  you  as  a 
credit union. You operate in your own domestic market. 
Let me therefore stress that credit unions are part of the country’s financial system. The three 
issues that I raised before of transparency, liquidity and regulation are very relevant to credit 
unions. 
How transparent is your credit unions to your members and the general public? How do you 
manage liquidity? Do credit unions need more supervision?  
Commercial  banks  are  at  the  forefront  of  the  financial  system.  Finance  companies  and 
perhaps insurance companies follow close behind. But Credit Unions are somewhat in the 
background at least in Fiji. Why? 
It is not because of the number of the credit unions. I do not think it is also because of the 
size of your assets nor of its lack of growth. The 2007 WOCCU Statistical Report indicated 
that credit unions have experienced significant growth. For 2007, they reported 49,134 credit 
unions  with  over  177  million  members  from  96  different  countries.  With  a  significant  asset 
base of over a trillion dollars, it is evident that credit unions are relatively sizeable, dynamic 
and continue to grow. 
In Fiji the sector consists of approximately 15,000 members and $25 million in assets. 15,000 
members represent 2 percent of the total population. 
I  have  the  view  that  credit  unions  have  stayed  with  the  time  tested  products  of  consumer 
lending to its members. Unlike say commercial banks that offer diversity of deposit, loan and 
investment  advisories,  my  limited  understanding  of  credit  unions  shows  that  you  basically 
collect dues and provide cash loan to members. It is a very narrow product.  
2 
 BIS Review 136/2008
Credit  Unions  definitely  have  a  role  to  play.  If  we  go  back  in  history,  credit  unions  sprang 
from  the  need  to  fulfill  basic  human  needs  in  the  great  depression.  Amidst  escalating 
unemployment, poverty and starvation and high levels of household debt, I am told that the 
first credit union was born in a small German village in the 1840s. The villager pooled their 
funds from which they were allowed to borrow money from at a very low interest rate. This 
arrangement proved to be a very effective solution for members with high debt levels who 
individually were unable to borrow, but were able to do so through the credit union solution.  
Therefore  since  its  conception  credit  unions  have  been  synonymous  with  meeting  basic 
needs  and  improving  the  livelihood  of  its  members.  I  believe  that  this  continues  to  be  the 
case. And there is nothing wrong with this. It is still very relevant today. What have changed 
would be the greater diversification in living standards of your membership and the greater 
diversification of financial services and products. 
The challenge therefore in my view is – should the credit union still play this basic role given 
the diversity of its memberships and the dramatic development of the financial services and 
products. We now have more specialized financial services. The customers now have a lot of 
choices of where to get services from. In such an environment what comparative advantage 
does credit union offer? What is the credit Union doing to address this challenge? I have the 
view that there is a lot of work to be done. 
Some have pointed out to me that out to me that the most unique feature of the credit union 
is the “common bond” that links its members. My knowledge of credit union in Fiji is that they 
are established along employment or religious lines. Are they still relevant now? I am sure 
they are! But you pool a lot of very hard earned savings. What returns are you giving to these 
hard earned savings? What security do you provide to these savings? 
This  brings  me  to  a  fundamental  question  –  Do  members  join  a  credit  union  to  save  or 
borrow? I note that the credit union league in Fiji has added the word “Savings” to its name. It 
will  be  interesting  to  see  how  many  of  your  members  retire  on  a  credit  side  of  the  ledger 
rather than a debit. My suggestion is that you should push equally from both sides. Savings 
must  also  be  emphasised  and  perhaps  you  are  doing  that  already.  Is  there  possibility  to 
package your savings in different products to encourage long term savings? 
On the lending side, my understanding is that your loans are for short term and basically for 
consumption. I always see a lot of people in credit union offices at certain times of the year 
like Christmas or before the start of the school year. So you tend to satisfy short term cash 
flow needs. This is fine. But is there scope for lending for loans for more productive purposes 
like to start small businesses?  
Financial literacy 
That’s brings me to the important issue of financial literacy. My view is that we in Fiji have not 
done enough to promote financial literacy. I have just recently begun a campaign on financial 
literacy at the Reserve Bank of Fiji because I believe that it lies at the heart of many things 
that we do like savings, spending, investment, microfinance, remittances and so forth. I know 
that there are many of these educations programs already happening. What we need to do is 
better coordinate these efforts. I hope we can bring in donor support for this national financial 
education program which should ideally start with our children. I would think that the credit 
unions are doing their bit to educate your members on savings, budgeting and living within 
their means. You will be surprised that budgeting is not practiced even by the educated and 
middle income people. If I were to ask you in this room if you do your budget I wonder how 
many would say yes. Literacy is therefore extremely important.  
BIS Review 136/2008 
 3
Transparency 
Let  me  get  back  to  the  issue  of  transparency.  We  hear  a  lot  being  preached  about  good 
governance nowadays which is excellent. As I have said, we at the Reserve Bank of Fiji do 
not  supervise  credit  unions.  I  have  always  wondered  –  who  then  supervises  them  in  Fiji? 
Perhaps it is the Registrar of Credit Unions on paper anyway? But whether they actually do 
any supervision is another matter. 
In  our  supervision  of  commercial  banks  and  insurance  companies  we  require  them  to  be 
transparent. We require them to disclose their fees and charges. They also need to publish 
their audited accounts. Directors and management have to pass the test of a fit and proper 
person. I am not sure whether this is being done to the credit unions. For instance do you 
publish  your  audited  accounts?  Or  if  we  apply  the  test  of  proper  and  fit  person  on  credit 
unions  today  how  many  people  will  qualify?  It  appears  to  me  that  the  problems  that  have 
arisen in the credit unions in Fiji over the years have a lot to do with good governance.  
Liquidity 
The  other  issue  is  liquidity.  I  again  do  not  know  the  repayment  ratio  of  credit  unions.  Is  it 
high?  I  know  that  the  collateral  are  the  members’  savings.  As  a  central  bank  we  provide 
liquidity to commercial banks. But where do the credit unions go to when they need liquidity? 
Is it to commercial banks? Liquidity management is in my view the most critical issue with 
financial institutions whether you are a commercial bank, finance companies or credit unions. 
Regulation 
The  last  issue  is  regulation.  My  view  is  that  someone  should  effectively  supervise  credit 
unions. But the question is who. The Reserve of Fiji has been asked a few times whether we 
should supervise credit unions. Some central banks already do this. At this time, we do not 
have the capacity to supervise the credit unions in Fiji. Government is thinking of setting up a 
Financial Services Commission and we are suggesting that this Commission be tasked with 
the supervision of financial institutions that currently are not supervised by the Reserve Bank 
of Fiji which would include credit unions. 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Fiji voluntarily undertook what is called a Financial System Assessment Program or FSAP for 
short. I am sure a few countries represented here have also done that. This FSAP is a very 
comprehensive assessment by the IMF and the World Bank on the safety and strength of a 
country’s  financial  system  including  credit  unions.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  general 
conclusion was that Fiji’s financial system is sound. By the way the biggest country USA has 
not agreed to undertake a FSAP. Perhaps with the recent crisis an FSAP for the US should 
now be taken urgently.  
Let me quote you what the FSAP said about Fiji credit unions. 
“Fiji  has  long  had  an  established  credit  union  movement  although  the  number  of  credit 
unions  has declined  from  approximately  180  in  the  early  1990s  to  approximately  45  credit 
unions currently. The legal and regulatory framework for  credit unions is outdated and the 
oversight by the Registrar of Credit Unions is weak due to lack of staff and appropriate skills. 
There is dearth of information since no regular statistics are maintained but data collected in 
2002 reveal a sector consisting of approximately 15,000 members and $25 million in assets. 
In light of the inadequate data on the size and structure of the sector, the RBF has recently 
initiated an effort to collect information on the membership base and financial performance of 
credit unions.”  
4 
 BIS Review 136/2008
The  FSAP  report  clearly  emphasised  that  the  oversight  of  credit  unions  needs  to  be 
strengthened in Fiji. We therefore need to start collecting data on the operation of the credit 
unions. Unfortunately, we have not been very successful in collecting statistics which again 
reflects the issue of transparency and accountability of credit unions.  
We should really be updating the laws that governed credit unions. The legal and regulatory 
framework for credit unions is outdated. In updating these laws we should place emphasis on 
transparency, accountability and good governance.  
Lastly  where  is  the  credit  union  heading  in  the  future?  Are  you  going  to  continue  with  the 
tradition of consumer lending? Should you be thinking more broadly on diversifying products 
and services to members? I believe that these are some of the key issues that you would 
need to deliberate on in your own credit union.  
Conclusion 
As  you  know,  one  of  the  key  objectives  of  holding  conferences  like  this  is  to  network  and 
share knowledge and experiences. Speeches are fine. But it is the networking that many of 
us  tend  to  take  away  from  these  conferences.  I  am  sure  that  a  lot  of  networking  will  be 
happening here in the next two days. 
On a country level, I know that different countries will have a different level of development 
and performance in their credit unions. Some would have a better story to tell than others. Fiji 
like  everyone  else  can  do  better.  The  Pacific  also  offers  different  challenges  in  terms  of 
culture  and  economic  development.  I  am  sure  that  you  are  all  looking  forward  to  this 
Congress to learn global best practices and how we can improve our performance. 
I wish your conference every success. Take some time off to see the country. I wish you all 
an enjoyable stay in Fiji. 
I now have much pleasure in declaring the Congress open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 5
