Martín Redrado: Financial risk management in emerging countries 
Remarks  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  the  12th 
annual  conference  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  “Financial  stability,  monetary  policy  and 
central banking”, Santiago, 7 November 2008. 
 The global economy is going through its worst stage in decades. The fall of Lehman Brothers 
undoubtedly  marked  a  turning  point  in  this  process  of  historical  destruction  of  value  of 
financial assets. The juncture of liquidity and solvency risks led to a period of significant and 
persistent  deterioration  in  credit  markets  that  rapidly  started  to  hinder  economic  growth 
worldwide.  Since  then,  central  bankers  and  economic  authorities  have  been  focusing  their 
efforts on defusing the threat of financial disintermediation due to the severe consequences 
that  this  implies  both  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  the  health  of  the  real 
economy.  
Within this context, the international financial crisis finds developing countries in a position 
that considerably differs from other episodes in the past: instead of causing the crisis, they 
are the ones suffering its impact at this time.  
And this point is not a minor one given our history of macroeconomic volatility and instability. 
We  have  quite  an  experience  in  dealing  with  crises  and  we  perfectly  acknowledge  the 
economic and social pain that they entail. In fact, financial crises in emerging economies – 
and in Latin America, in particular – have yielded low economic growth together with sizable 
fiscal  costs  that  placed  heavy  burdens  on  both  the  private  and  public  sectors.  Not  only 
financial crises deeply affected key macroeconomic variables in the short-term, but they also 
sow the seeds for limited economic and social development in the long-run. Many times the 
collapse  of  the  credit  markets  resulted  in  a  breakdown  of  monetary  and  fiscal  institutions, 
including  the  meltdown  of  the  payments  system  with  second-round  effects  on  economic 
activity.  Bank  bailouts  typically  entailed  high  ﬁscal  costs,  thereby  raising  public  debt,  debt 
service requirements and the cost of financing for the overall economy. Compared with other 
regions,  Latin  America  ranks  the  highest  in  terms  of  the  average  number  of  episodes  per 
country, as well as for recurrence over the last 30 years. About 35% of our countries have 
experienced  recurrent  crises;  a  figure  almost  three  times  higher  than  in  any  other  region. 
Systemic crises have been costly throughout the world, but particularly so in Latin America: 
on average ﬁscal costs have been greater than 20% of GDP, almost twice as high as in the 
average  OECD  country.  Fiscal  and  quasi-fiscal  costs  to  rebuild  the  banking  system 
accounted  for  12%  of  GDP  in  developed  countries  and  almost  18%  of  GDP  in  emerging 
market  countries.  Moreover,  banking  crises  have  caused  significant  output  losses,  with 
estimates ranging from 12% to 14% in medium – and low-income countries. 
Given the associated costs, as the problems are being addressed in the developed world, it 
is  therefore,  I  would  say,  a  first  order  condition  to  minimize  the  impact  on  the  rest  of  the 
world. Not only for the benefit of emerging markets – victims of contagious in this case – but 
also for the much-needed smooth ride of the global economy. We must recall that 75% of 
global  economic  growth  between  2003  and  2007  (measured  at  PPP)  is  explained  by 
developing economies, which grew at a remarkable average rate of almost 7% during that 
period.  On  top  of  that  and  with  a  longer-term  perspective,  the  need  to  revisit  the  way  the 
international  financial  architecture  is  evolving  to  avoid  the  recurrence  of  these  episodes 
(something that we know very well in the emerging world) becomes a priority.  
In the first part of my remarks, I describe how the emerging world is dealing with the crises. 
In  particular,  economic  policy  responses  will  be  assessed  with  special  emphasis  on  the 
challenges  faced  and  the  financial  risk  management  strategies  pursued  by  developing 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 1
2) 
countries. Then, I provide my view on how the developed world is handling the crisis with a 
few ideas on the role that international financial institutions must play. 
As reflected by historically high and sustained economic growth and inflation rate differentials 
compared  to  developed  economies  at  record-low,  emerging  markets  are,  in  general, 
reasonably well-suited to face the current crisis.  
Latin  America  in  particular  is,  for  the  first  time  in  decades,  managed  under  stronger 
macroeconomic  principles.  Most  of  the  economies  are  experiencing  sustained  growth, 
underpinned  by  a  buoyant  domestic  demand.  They  show  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies  together  with  well-regulated  financial  systems.  The  region  is  finally  leaving  behind 
the  “original  sin”  as  the  form  of  currency  mismatches  that  characterized  the  recent  past, 
significantly reducing our exposure to foreign currency debt. 
This performance has been achieved by a combination of a favorable international context 
and sound macroeconomic policies consistent with the goal of reducing the macroeconomic 
volatility so typical of the emerging world. This outcome, I would say, has been based upon 
several pillars with anti-cyclical components: 
1) 
Fiscal  solvency.  Today  fiscal  responsibility  in most  of  the  emerging world  is  not  a 
feature from the left or the right: it is just common sense. 
Monetary robustness with well-regulated financial systems. All over Latin America, 
financial  systems  are  well  capitalized  and  less  exposed  to  public  sector  debt, 
another sin from the past. Not long ago, we used to have not only central banks but 
also the financial system financing the treasury with no limits whatsoever.  
This  scenario  in  which  the  international  financial  system  faces  extreme  difficulties 
resulting  from  imprudent  lending  policies,  assets  of  dubious  quality,  a  permissive 
regulatory framework and an excessive degree of leverage, contrasts with the reality 
of the domestic monetary and financial system in most of the emerging world. And 
here the progress of Latin America compared to other emerging market regions is 
remarkable.  While  financial  systems  in  emerging  Europe  are  relatively  more 
vulnerable  to  a  reversal  in  capital  flows,  more  dependent  on  external  resources 
(mainly, because of large current account and fiscal deficit), with a credit cycle more 
exposed  to  the  real  estate  sector  and  where  transnational  banks  have  the  lion’s 
share of the market, Latin American financial systems are less risky as they have 
maintained  high  levels  of  liquidity,  solvency  and  capitalization.  Also,  with  more 
traditional credit products they have been offering to the public in recent years, Latin 
American financial systems record almost no direct exposure to toxic assets.  
Argentina, with a still small banking system, in this field exhibits strength on all these 
fronts due to the efforts the central bank has been carrying out in recent years. In 
fact, the health of the domestic system has been strengthened, as it has an ample 
stock  of  liquidity,  with  liquid  asset  accounting  for  slightly  more  than  40%  of  total 
deposits  if  central  banks  bills  and  notes  are  considered  and  with  almost  no 
assistance from rediscounts. Respecting solvency, financial institutions (contrary to 
the situation in developed economies) have doubled their equity during the past five 
years  and  exhibit  a  very  low  level  of  non-performing  loans  (3%).  Likewise,  as  a 
consequence  of  the  prudential  regulation,  the  exposure  to  the  public  sector  has 
been drastically reduced, and at present only accounts for 13% of the assets (the 
government has switched from being a net debtor to become a net creditor of the 
banking system). At present only 11% of the deposits are in foreign currency, and 
they are only used to fund those who have repayment capacity in foreign currency. 
This  is  the  main  source  of  dollars  that  the  financial  institutions  have,  as  foreign 
funding is only 4% of liabilities. Also, a very stable and broad deposits base is the 
key financing source of the domestic financial system. The banking sector went from 
being a source of instability in the past to become a source of strength to the real 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2008
towards 
financial 
instability 
economy as it has been buffering the impact of the international crises on economic 
activity.  
In Latin America potential sources of contagion are limited to a reduction in lending 
by  subsidiaries  of  international  banks  and  the  impact  of  higher  risk  aversion  and 
slower  growth  on  capital  flows  (portfolio,  FDI  and  remittances).  A  related  issue  of 
concern is the ability of less sophisticated investors exposed to emerging markets to 
properly understand that those capital outflows from global institutions were just the 
reflex  of  margin  calls  or  the  answer  to  capital  adequacy  in  developed  countries 
(instead of outflows as a result of fundamentals deterioration in the emerging world). 
This flight to supposed “safer heavens” could be very costly as it could trigger a run 
against  the  domestic  banking  system  or  the  local  currency,  given  the  natural 
tendency 
in  emerging  economies.  Medium-term 
challenges  remain  the  same:  reducing  existing  inequality  in  access  to  financial 
services in both geographical and socio-economic terms while keeping an adequate 
balance of risks and deepening the markets, especially, in local currency. 
More flexible foreign exchange regimes. They provide additional degrees of freedom 
to  deal  with  highly  volatile  financial  flows  and  increased  risk  aversion.  The  recent 
episode proved that there is no “one-size fits all” exchange rate arrangement. In my 
country, the managed floating exchange rate has proved to be the most adequate 
foreign  exchange  regime  at  this  time  in  our  economic  history.  A  country  with 
decades  of  macroeconomic  volatility  and  dollarization  which  during  the  past  25 
years  has  spent  more  than  a  third  of  its  time  outside  its  dynamic  stability  path  (a 
range  within  two  standard  deviations  of  the  long  term  trend)  is  a  good  reason  to 
believe  that  we  are  not  yet  ready  to  let  the  exchange  rate  floating  like  it  does  in 
neighboring countries. 
Better  liability  management  with  a  reduction  of  net  foreign  debt  and  currency 
mismatches.  The  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio  in  the  region  decreased  almost  30 
percentage  points  over  the  last  five  years.  This  reflects,  in  part,  better  liability 
management,  which  also  shows  up  in  the  enormous  reduction  in  the  exposure  to 
foreign currency debt, providing solid grounds for developing a domestic yield curve 
in local currency. 
External  strength  due  to  mainly  trade  dynamism  (diversifying  destinations  and 
products).  Just  as  an  example,  the  share  of  exports  to  the  US,  one  of  the  major 
destinations of foreign sales, from 2002 to 2006 dropped from 33% to 27% of total 
Latin American exports and from 21% to 18% of emerging Asia’s foreign sales.  
Accumulation  of  international  reserves.  The  later  has  been,  in  my  opinion,  the 
common pattern all across the emerging world. Today, there is no good substitute 
for  a  sound  external  liquidity  policy  at  the  country  level.  We  have  been  highly 
criticized for the costs associated with the FX accumulation policies but clearly the 
net  benefit  was  a  very  positive  one  given  the  current  need  to  use  the  resources 
when  pressure  on  domestic  financial  markets  increased  mainly  due  to  exogenous 
factors. 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
Despite the progress made, the magnitude of this crisis affected significantly our countries. 
Everything revealed short when matured financial markets are under stress. In the financial 
arena, a combination of greater uncertainty, no credit availability and wealth destruction due 
to  lower  asset  prices  started  to  affect  investment  and  consumption  decisions  with  the 
consequent  impact  on  economic  growth.  In  this  context,  emerging  markets  with  current 
account  deficits  and  fiscal  deficits  were  hit  the  most  as  they  became  more  vulnerable  to 
foreign capital outflows.  
In  Latin  America  and  emerging  Asia  the  key  impact  of  the  crisis  comes  from  the  trade 
channel. Here we can distinguish to effects. The direct one: less trade due to lower income in 
the developed world means less economic activity in emerging economies (let’s recall that, 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 3
even  though  in  a  diminishing  trend,  51%  of  emerging  markets  exports  are  directed  to  the 
developed world). The indirect effect has to do with commodity prices.  
From the records reached at mid year, commodity prices fallen significantly in recent months. 
Last month our commodity price index suffered the largest contraction since the beginning of 
the series in 1996 (by more than 25%), dropping back to levels similar to June 2007. 
Although all commodities exhibited sharp falls in their prices, of the different products those 
most affected were metals (whose prices fell 30% in the past month), followed by crude oil 
(that was 27% cheaper) and agricultural commodities (with a 24% decline during October). 
The weakening of oil was accompanied by falling prices for main cereals and oilseeds that 
are used to make bio-fuels, like maize for ethanol and oilseeds for bio-diesel. Furthermore, 
during  October  climate  conditions  improved  which  was  reflected  by  higher  output  and 
inventories estimates, while the cheaper oil was reflected by lower transport costs and (to a 
lesser  extent)  grain  production  costs.  In  the  soy  complex,  adding  to  the  influence  of  the 
financial crisis and the large fall of crude oil prices were the estimates of larger world stocks 
from  the  2008/2009  harvest,  mainly  in  the  united  states  and  Latin  America.  For  maize,  in 
October the climate improved significantly in the US Corn belt, which generated expectations 
of higher yields, while the USDA increased its estimates of world stocks for the 2008/2009 
crop  cycle.  Although  maize  prices  have  suffered  a  sharp  fall  from  their  maximum  in  June 
2008, they are still 58% above the average for the past decade. Wheat prices mainly fell due 
to  the  expectations  of a  larger  global  supply. In  fact,  both  the  USDA  and  the  International 
Grains Council (ICG) estimated more abundant harvests in United States, Canada, Russia 
and Ukraine, which would compensate for the smaller output in Argentina and Australia due 
to  the  drought  that  affected  their  crops.  Larger  supply  expectations  have  also  led  to  a 
relaxation on some of the restrictions on foreign trade imposed during the past year by the 
major  exporting  countries  in  order  to  supply  their  respective  domestic  markets.  Offsetting 
this, during recent months the demand for the cereal for use as forage has grown due to the 
falling prices, so the stock/consumption ratio is still low. 
In  my  opinion,  as  the  world  economy  slows  down  further  it  will  drive  prices  of  primary 
products  down,  even  though  structural  factors  like  the  demand  for  food  by  the  emerging 
regions  and  the  development  of  bio-fuels,  added  to  the  demand  to  rebuild  the  reduced 
current inventory levels, will provide price support. I therefore feel that although volatility may 
continue the prices of commodities have already experienced most of their adjustment to the 
new international economic scenario. 
This  implies  a  more  hostile  international  environment  for  emerging  economies,  where 
recession risk is on the up-side. At the same time the probability of second-round effects are 
increasing through the trade channel, via slower growth in developed economies, or by the 
financial channel. In this respect, BIS data shows that 74% of banking cross border financing 
to emerging markets is originated in western Europe (the US 11% and Japan 4%). Besides, 
91% of eastern European exposure is concentrated on Europe. In the case of Latin America 
the  main  banking  creditor  is  Spain  with  proximately  32%  of  regions  banking  cross  border 
credit.  
In  this  context,  emerging  economies  has  a  narrower  capability  to  embrace  monetary  and 
fiscal  policy  when  compared  to  developed  nations.  It’s  difficult  to  think  about  an  emerging 
economy increasing base money in a 35% in less than two month or even reducing target 
interest  rates  close  to  zero,  as  the  US  done,  with  no  adverse  consequences  on  agents 
expectations  about  inflation  or  the  sustainability  of  the  exchange  rate  regime.  It  is  also 
difficult to imagine en emerging economy launching a financial rescue package equivalent to 
7% of GDP financed by tax payers, as the US did, with no impact on the perception about 
the inter-temporal fiscal consistency. 
Emerging countries are also more prone to suffer the contagion to different markets. In most 
of the episodes financial crisis are accompanied by balance of payment distress (given the 
tendency of agents to withdraw deposits and use the proceedings to buy FX) and/or fiscal 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2008
Sustaining liquidity  
Reducing volatility in FX rate 
Allowing capital inflows 
Keeping domestic and external financing available 
constraints (because of the potential impact on government accounts of financial bail out, or 
an FX depreciation in a context of currency mismatches on public debt). And this is way the 
current  situation  of  financial  crisis  living  together  with  a  growing  demand  for  domestic 
currency and public bonds as in the US is unknown for the developing world, allowing the 
policy makers to provide liquidity to the financial system and fund the banking bailout with 
fiscal resources avoiding a twin crisis. 
In  this  sense  is  understood  the  use  of  a  broad  set  of  policy  measures  in  developing 
economies to try to limit the impact to the financial markets in an attempt to avoid contagion. 
Those measures where directed to several features: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
A  difference  seen  for  some  time  in  current  events  was  a  divergence  on  the  stance  of 
monetary policy between developed and emerging countries. The inflation fear seemed to be 
more  profound  in  our  countries,  leading  to  a  tighter  bias.  However,  as  prices  and 
expectations began to show signs of deceleration, central banks all across emerging regions 
started to ease policy somewhat, and devoted special attention to FX markets evolution. One 
of  the  reasons  is  the  significant  exposure  of  the  corporate  sector  to  FX  risk  (particularly 
important in the trade sector where debt and many contracts are dollar denominated) thus 
avoiding any eventual inflationary pass-through.  
We  witnessed  aggressive  responses  from  policy  makers  in  benchmark  countries  as  Brazil 
and  Russia.  In  Latin  America  central  banks  from  Brazil  and  Mexico  provided  liquidity  in 
foreign  currencies  that  amounted  to  around  10%  of  foreign  reserves  in  just  one  month, 
however some distinctions should be made in terms of the way in which those intervention 
were carried on. Brazil used just 20% in spot markets and the majority of the operations were 
through FX swaps and to a lesser extent repo operations. 
Historically Latin American central banks were used to intervene in a direct way (with interest 
rate  cups,  credit  quotas,  reserve  requirements  and  lending  through  discount  window)  in  a 
context of highly segmented and shallow money markets. Notwithstanding, we are seeing a 
turn towards indirect intervention in the way of modifying monetary and credit conditions by 
liquidity supply and demand operations. 
This is the appropriate way given that it aims to reduce uncertainty and to facilitate an orderly 
unwinding of FX positions. At the same time, these policies are taken in the context of high 
international  reserves  levels.  Although  these  measures  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  it 
remains to be seen their sustainability in a context of persistent capital outflows. In such an 
environment,  they  need  to  facilitate  corporate  debt  restructuring,  bank  consolidation, 
increase transparency in corporate FX positions, and eventually to promote the inclusion of 
OTC trades to some form of stock market system become evident. 
In my view, to put in place a broader than ever set of policy tools both in the emerging and 
the  developed  worlds  is  the  way  to  go.  When  it  comes  to  divergent  policy  objectives  as 
inflation was on the upside, financial stability on the downside and the real economy on the 
side line, letting just one policy tool – the interest rate – do the whole job clearly falls short. 
As an emerging market policy maker, the use of the whole central banks balance sheet is not 
an unusual response to financial markets distress, and even on normal times given that the 
existence  of  shallow  credit  markets  reduces  the  impact  of  the  credit  channel  for  monetary 
policy. 
In  the  case  of  Argentina,  the  central  bank  has  been  able  to  ensure  two  essential  public 
goods:  monetary  stability  and  financial  stability.  With  this  aim  we  have  patiently  and 
persistently  built  up  the  monetary  and  financial  instruments  to  moderate  different  kinds  of 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 5
shocks.  This  strategy  includes  elements  like  a  keeping  the  balance  between  supply  and 
demand  for  money,  the  prudential  accumulation  of  international  reserves  in  a  context  of  a 
managed  floating  exchange  rate  framework,  a  solid  financial  regulation  and  supervision, 
together with different mechanisms to provide and absorb liquidity.  
However, the solidness of any structure is only put to test at turbulent times. In slightly more 
than a year the prudential layout of monetary and financial policies has thus been successful 
in two stress episodes and at the beginning of the third continues exhibiting robust indicators. 
The first episode was related to the beginning of the subprime crisis (July-October 2007), the 
second was the abrupt misalignment of monetary demand (April-June 2008), and the third 
episode  is  associated  with  the  severe  worsening  of  the  international  crisis  (as  from  mid 
September  2008).  In  order  to  overcome  them,  we  adopted  a  series  of  measures  in 
sequence.  We  first  restored  the  demand  for  money  and  normalized  the  foreign  exchange 
market  and  later  ensured  the  adequate  supply  of  liquidity  in  order  to  guarantee  systemic 
financial stability. This enables Argentina to face one of the worst financial crises in decades. 
This situation is ratified when the degree of coverage of the financial system’s consolidated 
assets  is  analyzed.  The  current  levels  of  international  reserves  are  very  high  in  historical 
terms and cover 62% of private sector M3 compared to less than 40% coverage before the 
2001 crisis. The current levels are also 10 percentage points higher than these indicators at 
the end of 2004. This also happens when the coverage ratio is compared to the central bank 
liabilities. This strength makes it easier to act in a context of a weaker demand for money. 
Therefore, the normalization of the domestic money market is underway and private sector 
deposits and loans are recovering their long-term growing trend in a framework of solid bank 
liquidity conditions. 
The  combination  of  prudential  and  countercyclical  policies  that  the  central  bank  has 
developed on the monetary and financial level, added to the fiscal and external surplus, will 
therefore allow for the impacts of the international disruptions on domestic macroeconomic 
performance  to  be  cushioned.  Although  the  reversal  of  the  capital  movements  seen  in 
Argentina since the second half of last year is significantly larger than what happened during 
the “tequila effect”, the impact on real variables has been so far limited. Aggregate activity 
has  maintained  a  rising  trend,  although  not  as  steep  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  current 
expansive cycle. On the other hand, together with the moderation of growth of the level of 
activity and the recent correction of international commodity prices, in a stable exchange rate 
regime less pressure on domestic prices is foreseen. 
Notwithstanding, the limitations faced by emerging economies to deal with extreme externals 
shocks  makes  a  strong  case  for  global  mechanism  of  liquidity  provision  in  an  timely  way. 
Other way, countries might be tempted to try to address the shocks in an uncoordinated way 
probably by taking measures to close the economy thus hampering the progress made for 
the last decades on globalization. The backfire could be seen either on financial integration 
(by controlling capital outflows to preserve international reserves or a strong depreciation of 
the  currency),  or  it  can  be  seen  on  trade  policy  (rising  barriers  on  imports  to  protect  local 
producers). It is also worth noting that self-insurance via international reserve accumulation 
or  counter  cyclical  funds  seems  not  to  be  enough  when  confronted  to  the  magnitude  of 
current event. 
As a consequence actual situation stress the need for a global resolution and a compromise 
from the developed world to help reducing the impact of the adverse financial shock that is 
hitting the emerging economies. 
As I see it, the appropriate response should materialize on short run and long term solutions. 
So it is important to characterize two tasks: the urgent ones and the fundamental ones. The 
former  is  to  take  quick  and  definite  actions  to  avoid  the  crisis  continues  to  propagate  to 
developing nations recurring to actual resources and the set of institutions that are already in 
place. 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2008
failure  of 
to  prevent 
As  pointed  earlier,  a  global  liquidity  provider  is  a  must  to  limit  the  contagion  effect  on 
emerging  economies  and 
institutions  with  global  systemic 
consequences. This way, both the FED and IMF recent actions are very welcome.  
In  the  first  case,  the  currency  swap  mechanism  recently  launched  by  the  FED  could  be 
permanently  in  effect  (not  just  during  moments  of  crisis)  for  countries  that  show  a  high 
volume  of  cross-border  operations.  Alternatively,  solutions  that  require  less  public-sector 
involvement  through  regulatory  incentives  for  the  private  sector  participating  in  such 
transactions, where they can acquire adequate coverage for episodes of volatility could be 
explored. 
In  the  latter  case,  the  more  efficient  process  for  accessing  the  liquidity  window  is  a  step 
forward in the right direction. However the fund is letting aside most vulnerable economies, a 
situation  that  should  be  taken  into  account  because  other  way  those  economies  could  be 
putted in the front line of speculative actions. Taking a look at which countries knocked the 
IMF  door  we  can  see  that  it  was  a  last  resort  measure,  and  was  made  after  exhausting 
available source of funds and even seeking for aid from other sovereign countries. 
So  in  the  long  run  we  must  take  steps  towards  two  situations:  1)  institutionalize  global 
mechanisms  for  liquidity  provision  and  coordinated  actions  to  address  global  crisis;  2)  a 
global  regulatory  framework  for  financial  markets  particularly  to  work  on  avoiding  further 
asset bubbles. 
Although the authorities in the United States and Europe are placing increased emphasis on 
solvency problems at aggregate level, for adequate management of the current crisis there is 
still  need  for  progress  on  mortgage  restructuring  (for  example  by  means  of  a  holc-type 
scheme  for  the  purchase  of  mortgages  at  a  discount  for  re-financing).  Only  once  the  real 
estate market is stabilized it would be possible to find a real floor for the crises. Other short-
term  actions  may  include:  interrupting  marking-to-market  (at  least  temporarily)  as  on 
distressed  markets  proved  to  be  more  harmful  than  helpful,  an  even  more  coordinated 
approach by the leading economies (to reduce US$/euro volatility) and progress towards the 
setting up of a clearing house for CDS. 
In addition, the current crisis has shown the need to strengthen and partly redesign financial 
system regulation and supervision, to complement the traditional micro-prudential approach 
with a greater weighting for macro-prudential measures. The principal objective of these tools 
is  to  be  able  to  monitor  in  an  aggregate  manner  the  systemic  risks  faced  by  financial 
systems,  evaluating  their  potential  impact  on  the  real  sector  and  adopting  preventive 
measures. Furthermore, this approach could be reformed by means of the implementation of 
countercyclical  measures  that  act  on  the  financial  system,  some  of  which  could  be 
adjustable,  such  as  dynamic  provisioning  over  the  course  of  the  economic  cycle,  or  the 
setting of capital requirements in accordance with the stage of the cycle.  
The main methodological techniques for such a system may include: stress test development 
at  aggregate  level,  systemic  early-warning  systems  providing  alerts  at  a  macroeconomic 
level  and  warnings  of  situations  endangering  financial  stability.  Another  of  the  leading 
objectives of the macro-prudential approach is to mitigate the pro-cyclical nature of financial 
systems.  Proposals  such  as  the  ones  put  forward  by  Goodhart  (time-varying  capital 
requirements on the basis of credit growth) or Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (capital insurance 
mechanism) as additional elements in the capital-regulation toolkit are welcomed. In addition, 
in  times  of  hardship,  it  proved  very  useful  to  have  in  hand  criterions  to  temporarily  apply 
“reduction  ratios”  to  adjust  capital  requirements  for  the  instruments  most  affected  by  the 
crisis  resolution  mechanisms.  This  is  based  on  systemic  factors,  which  are  somehow 
involuntary for institutions operating under these conditions. This approach buys the system 
some time (a relatively less scarce resource in times of crisis) and minimizes the need for a 
government capitalization. Also, some central banks and regulatory authorities have begun 
to  define  as  a  priority  for  both  banks  and  non-banking  financial  institutions  the  making  of 
additional  efforts  to  “save”  some  of  the  profits  in  boom  periods  to  generate  liquidity  and 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 7
capital cushions for use during crisis periods. Compliance with such requirements could send 
out positive signals as to the health of the financial sector, enabling a gradual rebuilding of 
confidence. 
In addition, there is a need to promote strong liquidity buffers to ensure that core financial 
institutions  can  withstand  prolonged  periods  of  market  and  funding  illiquidity  affecting  both 
secured  and  unsecured  funding.  Recent  work  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  (BCBS)  is  welcomed  but  questions  remain.  For  instance:  what  benchmarks 
supervisors will use to gauge the robustness and adequacy of banks’ liquidity buffers when 
competitive pressures reassert themselves. Also, the principles underscore the importance of 
establishing  a  robust  liquidity  risk  management  framework  that  is  well  integrated  into  the 
bank-wide  risk  management  process.  In  the  case  of  many  emerging  countries,  given  our 
history  of  macroeconomic  volatility  and  recurrent  crises,  the  “old-fashioned”  liquidity 
requirements  keep  having  a  crucial  role  as  a  both  prudential  and  monetary  tool,  which 
proved to be very effective in turbulent times to keep the banking system up and running. It 
also serves as a complement to the capital requirement framework. 
In  a  nutshell,  countries  in  the  world  face  significant  challenges,  which,  for  us,  emerging 
markets,  are  magnified  as  we  have  to  catch  up  with  growth  and,  most  importantly,  build 
institutions and credibility at the same time. In fact, it is more a synchronic than a sequential 
two-fold challenge. To implement these policies effectively, the only possible way is to keep a 
consistent  (I  mean  consistent  with  the  history  and  idiosyncrasies  of  each  economy)  and 
gradualist approach. 
8 
 BIS Review 134/2008
