Philipp M Hildebrand: Is Basel II enough? The benefits of a leverage ratio 
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  M  Hildebrand,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Financial  Markets  Group  Lecture,  London  School  of  Economics, 
London, 15 December 2008. 
 Introduction 
1. 
It is a pleasure to be at the London School of Economics this evening. I am very grateful to 
Professor Goodhart for his generous invitation. As many of you know, Charles is a kind of 
godfather to an entire generation of central bankers. His 1988 book, The Evolution of Central 
Banks,  remains  a  classic  and  is  still  required  reading  for  aspiring  central  bankers.  Let  me 
take this opportunity to thank Charles for tonight’s wonderful platform and, more importantly, 
for his long-standing contributions to the art, science, and craft of central banking.  
Recurring financial crises have become a hallmark of the modern financial system. It would 
seem that, every five years or so, a 100-year event destabilises the system. Moreover, each 
crisis appears more violent than the previous one. With the current crisis as my showcase, I 
will  argue  that  excessively  high  leverage  has  been  a  key  factor  in  making  banks  and 
ultimately  the  financial  system  much  more  fragile  and  vulnerable  than  most  observers, 
regulators,  or  market  participants  ever  imagined.  Based  on  this  diagnosis,  I  will  argue  in 
favour of restricting the leverage of core financial institutions, i.e., banks. Needless to say, 
banks  have  a  tendency  to  oppose  regulation.  I  will  therefore  discuss  in  some  detail  why 
regulating banks’ capital is necessary and why it promotes financial stability. 
High leverage as a main cause of financial fragility 
2.  
The Swiss economy is far from the epicentre of the current financial crisis. Yet, the two big 
Swiss banks have been hit particularly hard by recent events. This is to a large extent the 
consequence  of  their  extraordinarily  high  leverage.  For  some  years  now,  we  have  argued 
that  their  high  leverage  makes  them  particularly  vulnerable  to  extreme  financial  shocks.1 
Looking  at  risk-based  capital  measures,  the  two  large  Swiss  banks  were  among  the  best-
capitalised large international banks in the world. Looking at simple leverage, however, these 
institutions were among the worst-capitalised banks. With the benefit of hindsight, we clearly 
should have put even greater emphasis on the risks of excessive leverage.  
Excessive leverage is by no means a problem uniquely associated with the two big Swiss 
banks.  There  is  increasing  international  recognition  that  excessive  leverage  has  been  a 
crucial contributing factor to the current crisis. In April, the Chairman of the Financial Stability 
Forum (FSF), Governor Mario Draghi, summarised the view of the FSF when he said: “Our 
conviction  is  that  […]  institutions  have  accumulated  a  level  of  leverage  that  was  both 
misperceived  and  excessive.”2  Gerald  Corrigan  argues  that  “leverage,  in  its  many  forms 
clearly was a driving force in creating the market conditions that would trigger the crisis, just 
as  the  inevitable  de-leveraging  on  the  downside  of  the  cycle  would  severely  amplify  the 
magnitude of the crisis.”3 In a similar vein, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) stresses 
that the dramatic deleveraging of financial institutions is exacerbating the downward spiral so 
                                                 
1   See every issue of the Swiss National Bank’s Financial Stability Reports since 2003. 
2   Mario  Draghi,  chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, in his  address  to the G7 ministers and governors, 
April 2008. 
3   E.  Gerald  Corrigan,  The  Credit  Crisis.  The  Quest  for  Stability  and  Reform,  The  William  Taylor  Memorial 
Lecture, Group of Thirty, Washington DC, 2008, p. 8. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 1
prevalent in the current crisis.4 Hence, by implication, the high starting levels of leverage are 
a major source of the severe and ongoing adjustment problems. Finally, the leaders of the 
G20 declared only last month that “excessive leverage” was a root cause of “vulnerabilities in 
the system”.5
Moreover, the problem of excessive leverage is not limited to the current crisis. It has been a 
pivotal feature of most previous financial crises. John Galbraith, for instance, has carefully 
documented  the  role  of  debt  and  leverage  in  crises  going  back  to  the  17th  century.6  More 
recently, the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets concluded in 1999 that, “The 
principal policy issue arising out of the events surrounding the near collapse of Long-Term 
Capital Management is how to constrain excessive leverage.”7
Is there a need for better regulation? 
3. 
Assuming there is agreement that excessive leverage has been a major factor in past crises, 
what ought to be done about it? An obvious response is to limit leverage. But is it really that 
obvious?  After  all,  some  people  would  argue  that  regulation  is  at  least  partly  to  blame  for 
past crises. 
Before I go any further, I want to clarify where I stand in the debate on regulation vs. free 
markets  –  my  ideological  baggage,  so  to  speak.  I  believe  that  free  markets  are  the  best 
available  mechanism  to  allocate  resources  and  that  they  are  ultimately  the  best  way  to 
promote  welfare  and  economic  growth.  Fundamentally,  I  am  therefore  wary  of  elaborate 
efforts to interfere with the functioning of free, competitive markets. At the same time, it is 
obvious  to  me  that,  under  certain  conditions,  free  markets  produce  inefficient  outcomes.  If 
these  market  failures  are  apparent  and  important  enough,  they  justify  and  indeed  require 
interference  in  the  market  mechanism.  As  Joseph  Stiglitz  put  it,  “Whenever  there  are 
“externalities”– where the actions of an individual have impacts on others for which they do 
not pay or for which they are not compensated – markets will not work well.”8
In the real world of banking, potential market failures are particularly relevant. An important 
market  failure  stems  from  the  fact  that  banks  enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  safety  net.  Many 
countries have explicit deposit insurance schemes, which limit depositors’ losses. Moreover, 
in  almost  every  country  there  is  some  degree  of  implicit  government  protection  for  large 
banks. In the current crisis, government protection has become manifest and explicit in the 
form  of  the  recent  G7  and  G20  communiqués.  Most  notably,  in  October  the  G7  finance 
ministers  and  central  bank  governors  declared  unambiguously  that  they  “agree  to  take 
decisive  action  and  use  all  available  tools  to  support  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  and  prevent  their  failure.”9  In  other  words,  governments  imply  that  large  banks 
are simply “too big to fail”.  
Clearly, there are benefits to banks having safety nets. But there are also serious costs. It is 
a  fact  that  the  presence  of  insurance  leads  to  less  careful  behaviour,  otherwise  known  as 
moral  hazard.  If  you  rent  a  fully  insured  car,  you  will  likely  exercise  less  care  driving  it. 
                                                 
4   See  the  October  2008  issue  of  the  IMF‘s  Global  Financial  Stability  Report,  entitled  ”Financial  Stress  and 
Deleveraging“. 
5   Declaration of the Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy, G20, 15 November 2008. 
6   See John Galbraith (1990): A Short History of Financial Euphoria. 
7   “Hedge  Funds,  Leverage,  and  the  Lessons  of  Long-Term  Capital  Management”,  Report  of  The  President’s 
Working Group on Financial Markets, April 1999. 
8   Q  &  A  with  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Columbia  University  and  The  International  Herald  Tribune,  11  October  2006. 
http://blogs.iht.com/tribtalk/business/globalization/?p=177 
9   G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Plan of Action, 10 October 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2008
Naturally,  therefore,  rental  cars  have  a  much  shorter  life  span  than  non-rental  cars.  The 
same  reasoning  applies  to  banks.  No  sane  banker  will  intentionally  manage  his  bank  into 
insolvency.  But  he  or  she  has  a  lower  incentive  to  avoid  insolvency  than  if  he  were  not 
insured. 
This sub-optimal level of caution is immediately apparent in banks’ balance sheets: Banks 
tend  to  hold  very  low  levels  of  capital.  In  a  cross-sectional  comparison,  banks  have  much 
lower  capital  cushions  than  uninsured  firms.  On  average,  listed  non-financial  firms  have 
capital-to-asset ratios of 30 to 40 percent.10 In stark contrast, before the onset of the current 
crisis, all of the world’s top 50 banking institutions held, on average, only 4 percent of capital. 
None of them held more than 8 percent.11
In  short,  banks  have  a  preference  for  very  high  leverage.  This  highlights  a  fundamental 
dilemma  of  capital  regulation:  Banks  don’t  like  it.  Bankers  will  typically  argue  that  high 
leverage  is  beneficial  or  even  necessary.  Therefore,  banks  will  naturally  oppose  any 
regulation  aimed  at  restricting  leverage.  I  find  this  neither  upsetting  nor  surprising.  If 
regulation is to be effective, we must expect it to impact on behaviour and restrict action. This 
will solicit complaints. If it doesn’t, regulation would, by definition, be superfluous.  
From Basel I to Basel II 
4.  
For all these reasons, I strongly support bank capital regulation that puts a meaningful limit 
on  banks’  leverage.  But  what  is  the  best  way  to  restrict  leverage?  In  an  ideal  world,  we 
would,  of  course,  also  want  to  take  into  account  the  riskiness  of  banks’  assets.12  As  you 
know,  banks  can  increase  their  risk  not  only  by  increasing  their  leverage  but  also  by 
increasing the riskiness of their assets. To compensate for differences in banks’ assets, we 
would ideally require banks with riskier assets to hold more capital. The Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision  has  embraced  precisely  such  a  risk-weighted  approach.  More  risk, 
more capital. If we lived in an ideal world, this simple principle would work well. By “ideal”, I 
mean a world in which risks can be observed by everybody and assessed precisely. 
What has become abundantly clear in recent months is that we do not live in an ideal world. 
Banks  and  the  risks  they  incur  are  far  from  transparent.  In  fact,  banks  exist  because  of 
asymmetries  of  information.13  A  core  function  of  banks  is  to  “produce  information”.  For 
instance,  banks  screen  potential  borrowers.  Furthermore,  banks  monitor  ongoing  lending 
relationships. Without any asymmetries of information, banks would not be necessary, since 
households  could  invest  their  savings  directly  or  through  mutual  funds.  Therefore,  by 
definition we cannot have banking with full transparency.14  
Fortunately, banks are not totally opaque either. Some risks can be assessed more or less 
readily.  A  US  Treasury  bill  is  clearly  less  risky  than  an  unsecured  loan  to  an  obscure 
software  company.  Therefore,  capital  requirements  can  at  least  partially  be  based  on  the 
relative riskiness of various types of assets, even in our non-ideal world. “Basel I”, the first 
Basel Accord of 1988, introduced “risk buckets” for this purpose. For instance, loans received 
a risk weight of 100%, government bonds a risk weight of 0%. “Basel II” – the revision of the 
                                                 
10   Raghuram  Rajan  and  Luigi  Zingales  (1995):  “What  Do  We  Know  about  Capital  Structure?  Some  Evidence 
from International Data”, Journal of Finance. 
11   Tier 1 capital to total assets. Source: The Banker, July 2007. 
12   See,  e.g.,  Jean-Charles  Rochet  (1992):  ”Capital  Requirements  and  the  Behavior  of  Commercial  Banks”, 
European Economic Review. 
13   See, e.g., the classic article by Douglas Diamond (1984): ”Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”, 
Review of Economic Studies. 
14   See Charles Goodhart (1988): The Evolution of Central Banks, p. 63. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 3
first  Basel  Accord  –  which  is  currently  being  implemented,  tries  to  go  beyond  what  were 
perceived  to  be  rather  crude  risk  buckets.  Under  Basel  II,  risks  are  differentiated  in  more 
detail. For example, a loan to a large, international AAA rated firm is typically not as risky as 
a loan to a local restaurant. 
While  sensible,  the  higher  risk  sensitivity  of  Basel  II  comes  at  a  price.  First,  banks  and 
supervisors  alike  incur  significant  operational  costs  to  implement  the  new,  highly  complex 
regulation. Second, but in my view more importantly, Basel II creates new risks: Risks about 
risk assessments. I am tempted to call them the unknowable unknowns. Under Basel II, we 
increase our dependence on risk models. What if we didn’t pick the correct models? What if 
the data used to calibrate these models turn out to be of poor quality? What if the models 
were correct in the past, but the future is different? What if certain tail events simply cannot 
be modelled? These are all important considerations that we have to keep in mind when we 
interpret the risk figures from complex models. As it turns out, to view the model outputs as a 
true representation of reality has proven to be a grave mistake. Furthermore, the increased 
reliance  on  banks’  internal  models  has  rendered  the  job  of  supervisors  extraordinarily 
difficult. First, supervisors have to examine banks’ exposures. Second, they have to evaluate 
highly complex models. Third, they have to gauge the quality of the data that goes into the 
computation of these models. To put it diplomatically, this constitutes a formidable task for 
outsiders with limited resources.15
Strengthening Basel II: introducing a leverage ratio 
5.  
So  where  does  that  leave  us?  Based  on  what  we  know  and  understand  today,  I  would 
suggest  that  risk-weighted  capital  requirements,  broadly  as  proposed  under  Basel  II, 
probably remain the most rigorous way to address banks’ tendencies to incur excessive risks 
and,  ultimately,  to  ensure  adequate  capital  levels.  However,  we  must  address  the  serious 
short-comings  of  the  risk-weighted  approach,  which  have  become  so  powerfully  manifest 
during  this  crisis.  What  Basel  II  needs,  therefore,  is  a  safeguard  to  provide  the  financial 
system with additional protection against the negative consequences of these short-comings. 
I want to stress that a safeguard of this kind is needed in addition to the improvements to 
Basel II that are currently under way as a result of the recent FSF Report to the G7 ministers 
and  governors.16  Which  brings  me  back  to  the  obvious  and  simple  response  to  excessive 
leverage: The imposition of a limit on banks’ leverage as a complement to the risk-weighted 
approach reflected in the current Basel framework. 
The regulation of banks’ leverage is usually referred to as a “leverage ratio”. Specifically, the 
idea is to set a lower limit to the capital-to-assets ratio of banks. Let me stress again that this 
instrument is not meant to and should not replace Basel II. There is no reason to eliminate 
the benefits of risk-weighted capital requirements. The leverage ratio should be applied as a 
complement to the risk-weighted approach as reflected in the current Basel framework. That 
means  we  would  have  two  independent  measures  of  capital  adequacy.  And  banks  would 
have to meet a minimum requirement for both measures. 
To  some  extent,  such  a  capital  regulatory  framework  is  old  news.  Historically,  capital 
requirements  in  most  countries  took  the  form  of  simple  leverage  ratios.  Risk-weighted 
requirements  were  only  introduced  following  the  first  Basel  Accord  of  1988.  The  “old-
fashioned”  leverage  ratios  were  replaced  by  “modern”  risk-sensitive  requirements.  Some 
                                                 
15   For  a  discussion  of  potential  short-comings  of  Basel  II,  see  Robert  Bichsel  and  Jürg  Blum  (2005):  “Capital 
Regulation  of  Banks:  Where  Do  We  Stand  and  Where  Are  We  Going?”,  Swiss  National  Bank  Quarterly 
Bulletin. 
16   “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, Financial Stability 
Forum, 7 April 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2008
countries,  however,  have  maintained  leverage  ratios  as  essential  elements  of  banking 
regulation. Notable examples are the US and Canada. Despite being somewhat old news, I 
am  convinced  that  the  introduction  of  a  leverage  ratio  is  fully  compatible  with  the  ongoing 
efforts  to  strengthen  banks’  capital.  We  must  not  forget  that  Basel  II  aims  to  secure  a 
minimum level of capital. It’s up to every bank and every national supervisor to exceed this 
minimum. As the G20 has put it, “regulation is first and foremost the responsibility of national 
regulators”.17
fully 
that  risk-weighted  capital  ratios  and 
The pros and cons of a leverage ratio 
6.  
Let me now highlight the most important benefits of a leverage ratio. Equally, I would like to 
address the most commonly expressed concerns about a leverage ratio. 
Having  a  leverage  ratio  to  complement  risk-weighted  capital  requirements  has  many 
advantages. Some of them I have already alluded to. Most significantly, a leverage ratio can 
operate 
independently  of  any  complex  modelling  assumptions  and  calibration 
procedures. As such, it serves as a complementary instrument to risk-weighted requirements 
when  assessing  banks’  capital  adequacy.  This  is  of  considerable  value.  During  the  recent 
crisis  those  banks  and  supervisors,  which  took  several  instruments  into  account,  including 
volume  limits  and  restrictions  on  asset  growth,  clearly  performed  better.18  More  generally, 
research  has  shown 
leverage  ratios  contain 
complementary information about banks’ condition.19 Hence, by looking at both risk-weighted 
capital  ratios  and  leverage  ratios,  supervisors  and  banks  can  be  expected  to  make  better 
judgments  in  a  systematic  way.  Moreover,  it  is  much  more  difficult  for  banks  to  arbitrage 
around two capital ratios than around just one. 
Can  we  say  anything  about  the  role  of  leverage  ratios  in  the  recent  credit  crisis?  While  a 
rigorous analysis would reach beyond the scope of my comments today, it seems clear that 
the  leverage  ratio  has  helped  protect  the  US  banking  system  from  even  greater  calamity. 
This is not necessarily because the leverage ratio encourages more prudent behaviour, but 
because the leverage ratio ensures a minimal buffer to absorb the negative consequences of 
imprudent  behaviour.  I  leave  it  to  your  imagination  what  would  have  happened  if  the  US 
banks  had  entered  the  current  crisis  with  leverage  ratios  of  only  2  percent  instead  of  well 
over  5  percent.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Mark  Carney,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Canada, is convinced that Canadian banks, which are also subject to a leverage ratio, are 
“healthier than their international peers” because “their leverage is markedly lower”.20
Given  these  positive  effects  of  a  leverage  ratio,  what  are  the  arguments  against  it?  In  my 
view,  there  are  three  potential  short-comings.  They  are  the  treatment  of  off-balance-sheet 
exposures, pro-cyclicality, and banks’ profitability. Let me briefly address these in turn. 
• 
Off-balance-sheet exposures: To obtain the leverage ratio, capital is divided by total 
assets. Obviously, such a simple calculation fails to take into account off-balance-
sheet items. The introduction of a leverage ratio could therefore encourage banks to 
build  up  large  off-balance-sheet  exposures.  There  are  two  responses  to  this 
potential problem. First, this is precisely why it is important that a leverage ratio only 
                                                 
17   G20, “Declaration of the Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy”, 15 November 2008. 
18   See “Observations on Risk Management Practices During the Recent Market Turbulence”, Senior Supervisors 
Group, March 2008. 
19   See, e.g., Arturo Estrella, Sangkyun Park, and Stavros Peristiani (2000): “Capital Ratios as Predictors of Bank 
Failure”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review. 
20   Mark  Carney,  “Building  Continuous  Markets”,  Remarks  to  the  Canada  –  United  Kingdom  Chamber  of 
Commerce, London, 19 November 2008. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 5
  be used as a supplement to Basel II. To the extent that a move to off-balance-sheet 
activities  raises  banks’  risk,  Basel  II  will  result  in  higher  capital  charges  –  and 
thereby  reduce  banks’  incentives  and  possibilities  to  arbitrage  around  a  leverage 
ratio. More importantly, the Basel Committee is now in the process of improving the 
treatment  of  off-balance-sheet  items  under  Basel  II.  Second,  if  we  conclude  that 
despite  the  ongoing  reforms  of  Basel  II,  off-balance-sheet  exposures  continue  to 
undermine adequate capital provisioning, the leverage ratio can easily be enhanced 
to include such exposures. In Canada, for instance, some off-balance-sheet items 
are added to banks’ total assets when calculating the leverage ratio. Alternatively, 
we could go further and consider defining a “managed leverage ratio” as proposed 
by  Professor  Joseph  Mason  of  Louisiana  State  University,  “which  takes  all  the 
securitisations and puts them back on the balance sheet”.21 
Pro-cyclicality:  There  are  valid  concerns  that  a  leverage  ratio  may  amplify  the 
financial cycle. First, the imposition of a leverage ratio in the middle of the current 
crisis would put additional de-leveraging pressure on banks. Second, in the long run 
it would make the availability of credit more volatile. Banks would be forced to cut 
down  on  lending  in  a  downturn  in  order  to  comply  with  the  leverage  ratio 
requirements. Unfortunately, this so-called pro-cyclicality is inherent to all forms of 
capital  regulation.  The  problem  stems  from  the  fact  that  in  most  cases,  specific 
capital minima have to be respected throughout the cycle. In Switzerland, in a recent 
reform  of  the  large  banks’  capital  requirements,  the  Federal  Banking  Commission 
embarked  upon  a  pragmatic  approach  to  address  this  dilemma.  In  normal  times, 
banks will be required to hold capital significantly in excess of the regulatory minima. 
Conversely, when the cycle turns, they will be allowed to dip into the capital cushion. 
Naturally,  the  Swiss  authorities  are  acutely  aware  that  imposing  tighter  capital 
requirements  right  now  would  be  pro-cyclical.  Under  the  new  regime,  the  capital 
requirements have to be met by 2013. If necessary, this implementation window will 
be extended further.  
Finally, let me address the question of banks’ profitability: This is a tricky question, 
which requires a two-part answer. 
o 
First, capital requirements effectively reduce the value of a bank’s explicit 
or  implicit  government  safety  net.  If  we  think  of  the  safety  net  as  a  put 
option for the owner of the bank, capital requirements effectively reduce the 
price of that put option. In other words, banks have to bear a larger share of 
their  potential  losses  themselves.  This,  of  course,  is  bad  news  for  the 
banks.  Distortions  due  to  the  safety  net  are  the  main  rationale  for  capital 
regulation.  Capital  requirements  aim  to  correct  these  distortions  and 
strengthen  the  motivation  of  banks  to  avoid  excessive  risks.  While  this 
comes  at  a  cost  to  banks,  it  increases  overall  efficiency  and  economic 
welfare. 
Second,  capital  requirements  reduce  the  tax  shield  of  debt.  Debt  has  an 
advantage over equity capital in the sense that payments to debt holders 
are  deducted  from  profits.  In  contrast,  payments  to  shareholders,  i.e., 
dividends, are made out of profits and hence are subject to corporate taxes. 
Forcing  banks  to  hold  more  capital  reduces  their  tax  shield  and  thereby 
diminishes banks’ market value. What are the orders of magnitude we are 
talking  about  here?  Let  me  offer  you  a  very  rough  back-of-the-envelope 
calculation using publicly available data in Switzerland. Assume that a bank 
has to increase its leverage ratio from 1% to 5%. If this bank is subject to 
o 
                                                 
21 ”Capital Ratios Helped Mask Looming Crisis”, The Wall Street Journal Europe, 11 November 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 158/2008
an effective tax rate of 20%, the increase in capital will reduce the bank’s 
total market value by less than 1%.  
However,  these  costs  notwithstanding,  banks  and  shareholders  may  also  benefit  from 
holding more capital. For instance, banks that were more conservatively capitalised before 
the outset of the current crisis have now benefited from their relative strength. In the area of 
wealth management, for instance, stronger banks have been successful in attracting clients 
from weaker banks. Moreover, looking at the poor performance of thinly capitalised banks’ 
stocks  over  the  last  decade  or  so,  low  leverage  ratios  do  not  seem  very  attractive.  Our 
empirical  analysis  suggests  that  risk-adjusted  stock  returns  of  banks  do  not  increase  with 
leverage. A cross-sectional comparison of risk-adjusted returns with other industries is also 
sobering.  The  performance  of  the  relatively  low-capitalised  banking  sector  has  been 
devastating during the last decade. 
Conclusion 
7.  
To  conclude,  leverage  has  been  a  major  contributing  factor  in  the  current  financial  crisis. 
Excessive  leverage  has  amplified  the  shocks  to  the  financial  system.  Moreover,  the  now 
inevitable  de-leveraging  is  imposing  further  stress  on  the  system.  To  enhance  the  longer-
term  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  effective  regulation  to  curtail  banks’  leverage  is 
required. 
In an attempt to put a lower bound on banks’ leverage, I strongly support enhancing current 
risk-weighted capital requirements with a simple leverage ratio. A leverage ratio effectively 
serves  as  a  safety  valve  against  the  weaknesses  and  shortcomings  of  risk-weighted 
requirements.  It  ensures  a  minimum  capital  buffer  that  protects  banks  against  unexpected 
losses and underestimation of risk. As we have learned from the current crisis, the failure of 
risk models may quickly turn banks that seem comfortably capitalised into poorly capitalised 
banks. Let me emphasise again that I don’t advocate replacing the current Basel II regime 
with a leverage ratio. This would be unwise, as we would forgo all the advantages of the risk-
weighted  requirements.  In  particular,  we  would  lose  valuable  indicators  of  banks’  levels  of 
risk. And, quite frankly, there is no real alternative in sight, at least not readily. 
In discussions with my central banking and regulatory colleagues I detect increasing interest 
and willingness to examine and consider the proposal of a leverage ratio as a complement to 
the risk-weighted capital regime under Basel II. Governor Nout Wellink, the Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, has recently said that the committee is currently 
considering  measures  to  strengthen  Basel  II  by  supplementing  it  “with  simple,  transparent 
gross measures of risk”.22 Last month, the German Council of Economic Experts advised the 
German government and parliament to introduce a leverage ratio as a robust supplement to 
Basel  II.23  Other  countries  may  also  find  it  worthwhile  to  consider  introducing  a  leverage 
ratio, even if any formal international agreement should fail to materialise. In doing so they 
would  not  only  enhance  financial  stability  in  their  own  banking  systems,  but  would  also 
contribute to a more stable international financial system. Finally, it is encouraging to note 
that a number of banks have made voluntary commitments not to exceed certain predefined 
leverage limits. 
Adding  a  leverage  ratio  to  Basel  II  will  reinforce  banks’  capital  and  strengthen  capital 
regulation.  However,  we  must  remain  realistic.  Introducing  a  leverage  ratio  doesn’t  solve 
everything. A leverage ratio addresses excessive leverage in the banking system. It does not 
                                                 
22   Nout Wellink, “The Importance of Banking Supervision in Financial Stability”, speech given on 17 November 
2008. 
23   German Council of Economic Experts, “Mastering the Financial Crisis – Strengthening the Forces for Growth”, 
12 November 2008. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 7
address  credit  concentration,  excessive  maturity  mismatch  or  undue  reliance  on  asset 
market liquidity. Financial crises, let alone financial cycles will never be eliminated. Our aim 
must be to ensure that the negative consequences, both to banks and to the real economy, 
remain  manageable.  Putting  in  place  a  shock-absorbing  leverage  ratio  to  complement  the 
risk-weighted framework of Basel II will help us get one step closer to this goal.  
8 
 BIS Review 158/2008
