European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
2 October 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On  the  basis  of  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  at  today’s  meeting  the 
Governing Council decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. We discussed 
extensively the recent intensification of the financial market turmoil and its possible impact on 
economic  activity  and  inflation,  recognising  the  extraordinarily  high  level  of  uncertainty 
stemming  from  latest  developments.  In  this  context,  we  stressed  the  crucial  importance  of 
keeping inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with our objective. Price stability fosters 
an efficient allocation of resources, contains inflation risk premia and longer-term financing 
costs,  and  preserves  the  purchasing  power  of  our  currency.  In  so  doing,  it  supports 
sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributes  to  financial  stability.  The  most  recent 
data  clearly  confirm  that  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  is  weakening,  with  contracting 
domestic demand and tighter financing conditions. At the same time, annual inflation rates 
are likely to remain well above levels consistent with price stability for some time. With the 
weakening  of  demand,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  have  diminished  somewhat,  but  they 
have not disappeared. While the still strong underlying pace of monetary expansion points to 
upside risks to price stability over the medium term, the growth of broad money and credit 
aggregates  is  showing  some  further  signs  of  moderation.  It  is  imperative  to  avoid  broad-
based second-round effects in price and wage-setting. All parties concerned face exceptional 
challenges and are called upon to meet their responsibilities. Accordingly, we confirm that we 
remain determined to secure price stability in the medium term and will continue to monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
When analysing current developments in economic activity, it needs to be stressed that we 
face  an  extraordinarily  high  degree  of  uncertainty,  in  large  part  stemming  from  the  recent 
intensification of the financial market turmoil. This complicates any assessment of the near to 
medium-term economic prospects. As the world economy as a whole is feeling the adverse 
effects of the intensified and prolonged financial market turmoil, the most recent data clearly 
confirm  that  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  is  weakening,  with  contracting  domestic 
demand  and  tighter  financing  conditions.  The  fall  in  oil  prices  from  their  peak  in  July  and 
ongoing  growth  in  emerging  market  economies  might  support  a  gradual  recovery  in  the 
course of 2009.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the economic outlook is subject to increased downside 
risks, mainly stemming from a scenario of ongoing financial market tensions affecting the real 
economy  more  adversely  than  currently  foreseen.  Other  downside  risks  relate  to  the 
possibility  of  renewed  increases  in  highly  volatile  energy  and  food  prices,  disorderly 
developments owing to global imbalances and rising protectionist pressures. 
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has remained considerably above 
the  level  consistent  with  price  stability  since  last  autumn,  standing  at  3.6%  in  September 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  after  3.8%  in  August.  This  still  worrying  level  of 
inflation is largely the consequence of both the direct and indirect effects of past surges in 
energy  and  food  prices  at  the  global  level.  Moreover,  wage  growth  has  been  picking  up 
rather strongly in recent quarters, in spite of a weaker growth momentum and at a time when 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 1
labour productivity growth has decelerated. This resulted in a sharp increase in the year-on-
year unit labour cost – to 3.4% – in the second quarter of this year, after several years of 
more moderate increases in the order of 1-1½%.  
Looking ahead, on the basis of current commodity futures prices, annual HICP inflation rates 
are likely to remain well above levels consistent with price stability for some time, moderating 
gradually during the course of 2009. At the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, taking into 
account the weakening in demand, upside risks to price stability have diminished somewhat, 
but they have not disappeared. They include the possibility of previous commodity price rises 
having  further  and  stronger  indirect  effects  on  consumer  prices,  as  well  as  a  renewed 
increase  in  commodity  prices.  In  particular,  there  is  a  very  strong  concern  that  the 
emergence of broad-based second-round effects in price and wage-setting behaviour could 
add significantly to inflationary pressures. Moreover, unexpected rises in indirect taxes and 
administered prices could occur.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  to  ensure  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored at levels in line with price stability. This is all the more 
the  case  in  an  environment  of  very  high  uncertainty.  Broad-based  second-round  effects 
stemming from the impact of past energy and food price increases on price and wage-setting 
behaviour must be avoided. The Governing Council is monitoring price-setting behaviour and 
wage negotiations in the euro area with particular attention. We have repeatedly expressed 
our  concern  about  the  existence  of  schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to 
consumer prices. Such schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a 
wage-price  spiral,  which  would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the 
countries concerned. The Governing Council calls for these schemes to be abolished. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, we need to recognise that the latest monetary data refer 
to the end of August and thus do not yet embody the impact of the recent intensification of 
the  financial  market  turmoil.  Further  data  on  this  impact  will  be  carefully  evaluated.  As  a 
general  observation,  previous  episodes  suggest  that  financial  market  tensions  can  have  a 
relatively limited impact on monetary developments, but they have also been associated with 
large portfolio shifts and thus have exerted significant influence on monetary data.  
While the still strong underlying pace of monetary expansion points to upside risks to price 
stability over the medium term, data up to August show that the growth of broad money and 
credit  aggregates  moderated  over  the  past  few  months,  reflecting  the  monetary  policy 
decisions taken since 2005 to address risks to price stability. As a more detailed examination 
shows, the flat yield curve and the structure of bank deposit rates have led to a number of 
substitution effects. First, there has been a substitution from longer-term maturity assets into 
instruments  covered  by  M3,  which  offer  similar  remuneration  but  greater  liquidity  and  less 
risk.  As  a  consequence,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  probably  overstates  the  underlying 
pace  of  monetary  expansion.  Second,  there  have  been  substitution  effects  within  M3.  In 
contrast to the dynamic developments in M3, annual M1 growth has fallen to very low levels. 
This  reflects  relatively  attractive  interest  rates  for  time  deposits,  which  have  increased  the 
opportunity cost of holding cash or overnight deposits.  
Although, at the level of the euro area as a whole, the availability of bank credit has, as yet, 
not been significantly affected by the ongoing financial tensions, the gradual moderation of 
growth  in  loans  continued  in  the  August  data,  as  previously  anticipated,  with  corporate 
demand for credit slowing. At the same time, the growth of loans to households continues to 
follow the downward trend observed over the past few years, as a result of higher short-term 
interest rates and housing market weakness in several parts of the euro area.  
To sum up, we discussed extensively the recent intensification of the financial market turmoil 
and its possible impact on economic activity and inflation, recognising the extraordinarily high 
level  of  uncertainty  stemming  from  latest  developments.  In  this  context,  we  stressed  how 
crucial it is for monetary policy to keep inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with our 
objective.  Price  stability  fosters  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  contains  inflation  risk 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2008
premia  and  longer-term  financing  costs,  and  preserves  the  purchasing  power  of  our 
currency.  In  so  doing,  it  supports  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributes  to 
financial stability. The most recent data clearly confirm that economic activity in the euro area 
is weakening, with contracting domestic demand and tighter financing conditions. The cross-
check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  clearly 
confirms that annual inflation rates are likely to remain well above levels consistent with price 
stability for some time and, when taking into account the weakening of demand, that upside 
risks to price stability have diminished somewhat, but they have not disappeared. While the 
still  strong  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability 
over the medium term, the growth of broad money and credit aggregates is showing some 
further  signs  of  moderation.  It  is  imperative  to  avoid  broad-based  second-round  effects  in 
price  and  wage-setting.  All  parties  concerned  face  exceptional  challenges  and  are  called 
upon  to  meet  their  responsibilities.  Accordingly,  we  confirm  that  we  remain  determined  to 
secure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments over the period ahead.  
Regarding  fiscal  policy,  in  the  current  situation  of  continuing  economic  uncertainty,  it  is 
essential that governments abide by the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and ensure 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances.  Maintaining  sound  public  finances  will  enable 
governments to let automatic stabilisers operate freely and thus contribute to smoothing the 
economic cycle and to supporting private sector confidence. 
Turning to structural policies, measures that foster competition and flexibility and promote 
moderate  unit  labour  cost  growth  are  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  current  economic 
circumstances. While moderate unit labour cost growth is crucial in all euro area countries, it 
is  particularly  pressing  in  those  that  have  experienced  a  significant  loss  of  cost  and  price 
competitiveness  over  recent  years  and  where  unemployment  has  already  started  to  rise. 
Moreover, labour market reforms fostering employment and investment and promoting skills, 
innovation and efficiency remain essential to support growth and real incomes in the longer 
term. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 3
