Nout Wellink: The importance of banking supervision in financial 
stability 
Keynote address by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the High Level Meeting “The Role of Banking 
and Banking Supervision in Financial Stability”, Beijing, 17 November 2008.  
 Introduction 
I would like to begin by thanking the FSI and EMEAP for organising this very timely event as 
well as the People’s Bank of China for their warm hospitality. I am grateful for the opportunity 
to  discuss  the  Basel  Committee’s  response  to  the  financial  market  crisis.  This  morning  I 
would like to present our strategy for addressing the fundamental weaknesses with respect 
to the regulation, supervision and risk management of internationally-active banks that have 
been  revealed  by  the  rapidly  evolving  crisis.  Our  work  programme  is  well  advanced  and 
provides  practical  responses  to  the  financial  stability  concerns  raised  by  policy  makers 
related to the banking sector, which is at the core of the global credit intermediation process. 
Successful  implementation  of  this  strategy  requires  a  global  effort  and  the  Committee  will 
reach out to countries that are critical to this process. 
Background on crisis and emerging lessons 
Before I talk about the Committee’s response, I think it is important to provide some context 
as to how we have arrived at where we are today. From a supervisory perspective, the main 
contributing factors that came together to form a perfect storm include: 
• 
a  large  amount  of  pre-crisis,  system-wide  liquidity,  which  led  to  excessive  risk 
taking; 
inadequate measures to contain leverage, maturity mismatches, risk concentrations 
and the erosion of liquidity buffers over the credit cycle; 
regulatory  gaps,  which  left  important  segments  of  the  financial  system  under 
regulated; 
poor incentives in regulatory frameworks; 
poor underwriting standards; 
outsourcing of the due diligence process to the rating agencies; and 
fundamental shortcomings in financial institution’s governance, of which the current 
risk management shortcomings are just a symptom.  
   The  crisis,  which  has  re-concentrated  risk  in  the  banking  sector,  has  resulted  in  financial 
market stress and massive deleveraging of historic proportions, with increasing spillover to 
the real economy. The speed and scale of these developments have been nothing short of 
astonishing.  
The response by the official sector also has been unprecedented, covering a wide range of 
measures. These are now helping to stabilise the banking sector and financial markets. But it 
is clear that we continue to face significant challenges as real economic activity slows. The 
official sector, including supervisory authorities, continues to work nationally and collectively 
to promote an orderly deleveraging process. 
We  also  need  to  develop  a  coordinated  strategy  to  put  the  banking  system  on  a  sound 
footing over the longer term. Such efforts will further reinforce near term confidence-building 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 1
measures  and  provide  a  long  term  target  around  which  national  and  global  policy  making 
efforts can converge. They also will provide the basis for an exit strategy from the increased 
official sector engagement in the banking sector. I would like to focus the remainder of my 
remarks on how we can go about achieving this longer term strategy. 
The Basel Committee’s response 
The primary objective of the Committee’s strategy is to strengthen capital and liquidity buffers 
and  help  contain  leverage  in  the  system  arising  from  both  on-  and  off-balance  sheet 
activities. It also will promote stronger risk management and governance practices and limit 
risk  concentrations  within  and  across  banking 
institutions,  and  strengthen  market 
transparency.  Ultimately,  our  goal  is  to  help  ensure  that  the  banking  sector  serves  its 
traditional role as a shock absorber to the financial system, rather than an amplifier of risk 
between the financial sector and the real economy. The Committee will promote multiple and 
reinforcing  lines  of  defence  in  supervisory  and  risk  management  frameworks  to  enhance 
bank resilience. 
Let me discuss in more depth the key building blocks of our strategy.  
Strengthening capital buffers 
I will start with the Committee’s initiatives to strengthen the regulatory capital framework. I 
would note up front that regulators need to be extremely cautious about adding to the already 
severe procyclical behaviour in the market place. As such, we do not propose to raise global 
minimum capital ratios during a crisis. However, banks need to ensure they have adequate 
buffers above the current regulatory  minimum  that reflect the nature of their portfolios and 
their exposure to a plausibly severe economic downturn scenario.    
With  that  background,  I  will  now  provide  you  with  more  clarity  about  the  Committee’s 
approach  to  strengthen  the  capital  regime,  building  on  the  three  pillars  of  the  Basel  II 
framework. Any enhancements will be introduced in a manner that promotes the near term 
resilience of the banking sector and its ability to provide credit to the economy. Moreover, we 
cannot set long term capital requirements on the basis of market reactions in the midst of the 
most  severe  deleveraging  process  we  have  seen  in  our  lifetime.  This  effort  needs  to  be 
carried  out  as  part  of  a  considered  process  that  balances  the  objective  of  maintaining  a 
vibrant, competitive banking sector in good times against the need to enhance the sector’s 
resilience in future periods of financial and economic stress.  
Risk capture 
Let me begin with the issue of the risk capture of the Basel II framework. The move to Basel 
II addresses many of the risks that were not captured under the Basel I framework and helps 
reduce a number of the perverse incentives that contributed to the crisis. The three pillars of 
Basel II will help ensure that capital regulation is better positioned to handle periods of rapid 
innovation and the new products that such periods produce. Moreover, Basel II will ensure 
that all contractual exposures to off-balance-sheet vehicles are subject to regulatory capital 
requirements.  Non-contractual  exposures  and  implicit  support  will  be  addressed  through 
enhancements to the Pillar 2 framework. 
Last April, the Committee announced a number of steps to enhance the risk capture of the 
Basel II capital framework. These measures are an important part of the Financial Stability 
Forum’s response to the crisis that was set out in its April 2008 Report on Enhancing Market 
and  Institutional  Resilience.  For  example,  the  Basel  Committee’s  efforts  strengthen  the 
capital  treatment  for  off-balance  sheet  exposures  and  securitisations.  The  Committee 
expects to issue proposals for the capital treatment of these exposures in early 2009. The 
proposals  are  subject  to  public  consultation  and  we  will  carefully  consider  all  comments 
received.  
2 
 BIS Review 138/2008
We also have issued a proposal to strengthen the capital framework for the trading book. In 
particular, we will address the risks of less liquid credit products, which have produced the 
majority of losses in the banking sector to date. While the proposals reflect the inherent risks 
already embedded in banks’ trading books, they will be phased in over an appropriate period 
to give the banking sector time to adjust to the new requirements.    
We  are  strengthening  the  disclosure  requirements  for  banks’  risk  exposures  and  the 
adequacy  of  capital  to  support  these  exposures.  We  are  focusing  in  particular  on  trading, 
securitisation and off-balance sheet activities.  
Finally, we will review the role of external ratings in the Basel II framework. I should point out 
that the use of external ratings is limited to the simple Standardised Approach for credit risk 
and 
include  how  any  unintended 
consequences could be mitigated.  
the  Securitisation  Framework.  Our  review  will 
Quality of capital  
Let me now turn to the issue of the quality of capital. The Committee has been reviewing the 
key elements of Tier 1 capital and the importance of ensuring strong core capital. A strong, 
high quality capital base is critical for banks to be able to absorb losses and maintain lending 
during  periods  of  severe  economic  and  financial  stress.  The  Committee  will  continue  to 
provide  global  leadership  on  what  the  key  elements  of  a  strong  capital  base  should  be, 
reflecting the lessons of recent developments. Such an effort will ensure that both prudential 
and competitive equity objectives are maintained in the future. 
Procyclicality 
The crisis shows that banks need to build strong capital buffers and provisions in good times 
so that they can be drawn upon in periods of stress. This in turn dampens the risk of spillover 
from the financial sector to the real economy. Reflecting the lessons of the crisis, there are a 
number of steps the Committee is considering to dampen the potential procyclicality of the 
Basel II framework. It is important to note that the crisis built up under the Basel I regime, 
while Basel II only became effective in most countries at the beginning of this year.  
We will explore promoting strong capital buffers above the minimum levels and how those 
can  be  used  during  a downturn  to  dampen  shocks  and  encourage  continued  lending.  The 
Committee also is assessing ways to strengthen prudential filters, promote through-the-cycle 
provisioning,  and  contribute  to  efforts  to  strengthen  accounting  standards  for  financial 
instruments. Finally, the introduction of the incremental risk charge in the trading book should 
help dampen the cyclicality of trading book capital. 
the  need 
Supplemental measures 
Supervisors  are  reviewing 
to  supplement  risk-based  prudential  and  risk 
management  approaches  with  simple,  transparent  gross  measures  of  risk.  In  combination, 
such risk-based and gross measures may provide a further check on the build-up of leverage 
at financial institutions and the underestimation of risk during rapid periods of credit growth or 
in new business lines that have not experienced a downturn. Moreover, in periods of stress a 
large  gap  may  open  between  what  the  risk-based  metric  requires,  and  what  the  market 
expects through simpler metrics. I hasten to add that simple metrics alone can and will be 
gamed, as the recent experience under Basel I has shown, particularly related to the growth 
of exposures to off-balance sheet vehicles. Both risk-based and simple measures therefore 
may be needed going forward.  
Strengthen liquidity risk management and buffers 
A second key building block of our strategy is raising the bar on liquidity risk management 
and supervision. 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 3
The  Committee  recently  issued  Principles  for  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and 
Supervision. This guidance sets a higher soundness standard for banks and supervisors to 
meet. We will put in place a process to ensure that the principles set out in the paper are 
implemented  in  practice.  However,  we  also  need  to  redouble  our  efforts  to  develop  more 
consistent  benchmarks  for  sound  liquidity  at  global  banks.  This  includes  benchmarks  for 
liquidity cushions, maturity mismatch, funding liquidity diversification, and resilience to stress. 
The  mandate  of  the  Committee’s  Working  Group  on  Liquidity  has  been  expanded  to  deal 
with this next set of issues. 
Strengthening risk management practices 
A  third  area  of  high  priority  focus  is  on  strengthening  governance  and  risk  management 
practices.  Most  of  the  risk  management  shortcomings  revealed  by  the  crisis  related  to  the 
failure to implement the basics of firm-wide risk management. This points to weaknesses in 
governance at the top of the firm. What can we do differently in the future? 
First  and  foremost,  it  remains  the  responsibility  of  the  private  sector  to  take  the  lead  in 
strengthening firm-wide governance and risk management frameworks. As far as supervisors 
are  concerned,  we  are  enhancing  our  supervisory  tools  and  standards  to  reflect  recent 
lessons,  especially  in  areas  like  securitisations;  management  of  contractual  and  non-
contractual exposures to off balance sheet vehicles; stress testing and the management of 
firm-wide  concentration;  and  sound  valuations.  We  will  be  issuing  additional  guidance  on 
these topics around the new year. We also need to do a much better job following up on our 
guidance in a coordinated global manner. 
Finally, we can use the leverage of Pillar 2 – the supervisory review process – to promote 
improvements  in  firm-wide  governance,  risk  management,  and  controls,  and  to  establish 
clear links to the assessment of capital adequacy. Pillar 2 also can be used to promote better 
alignment  between  long  term  risk  management  and  control  objectives  and  the  incentives 
created  by  compensation  schemes.  Such  coordinated  supervisory  follow  up  efforts  will  be 
critical  to  ensure  that  industry  and  supervisory  sound  principles  are  sustained  when 
competitive pressures reassert themselves. 
Strengthening counterparty credit risk 
Another building block of the Committee’s strategy is strengthening counterparty credit risk 
practices. The Committee will review the treatment of this risk under the three pillars of Basel 
II  to  strengthen  minimum  capital,  risk  management,  and  transparency  inside  and  outside 
banks.  This  effort  can  help  individual  banks  and  the  system  better  withstand  the  failure  of 
one  or  more  major  counterparties.  It  also  can  help  contain  leverage  outside  the  banking 
sector,  and  it  can  reinforce  efforts  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  for  OTC  derivatives, 
possibly using Pillars 1 and 2 as inducements. This forms part of a broader effort to assess 
the scope of regulation and oversight beyond the core banking sector. 
Strengthening bank resolution and the supervision of cross-border banks 
Let me also say a few words on our work to strengthen bank resolution practices and the 
supervision of cross border banks. The Committee’s Cross-border Bank Resolution Group is 
assessing key issues and global incompatibilities in the resolutions of global banking groups.  
This  effort  should  strengthen  supervisory  understanding  of  the  challenges  that  can  arise 
when resolving a global banking institution and possible ways to manage through them more 
effectively.  
We also need to deepen the work of the Committee to promote effective supervisory colleges 
at cross-border banks, building on the extensive work of the Accord Implementation Group in 
this area. In practice, this means dealing with concrete issues like capital, liquidity and the 
division of responsibilities between home and host supervisors in good times and in stress. 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2008
Strengthening the system-wide approach to supervision 
Finally,  we  need  to  strengthen  the  system-wide  approach  to  supervision,  another  building 
block for our strategy. It is important that we move to embed institutional level supervision 
into  a  broader  context  that  seeks  to  make  the  overall  financial  system  more  resilient  to 
stress. The Committee, through its central bank and supervisory membership and outreach 
efforts, is in a unique position to translate broader concerns of central banks, supervisors, 
and others into concrete, coordinated bank supervisory and regulatory responses at both the 
national  and  global  level.  Focusing  resources  in  this  way  can  help  make  the  regulatory, 
supervisory and risk management infrastructure more resilient to emerging pockets of stress 
in an environment of rapid innovation and change. 
There are a number of practical ways we can make this link.  
• 
One  approach  –  that  I  talked  about  earlier  –  is  the  establishment  of  a  capital 
framework that promotes strong buffers in good times and ways to dip into them in 
bad times. 
Another  is  through  coordinated  global  reviews  to  contain  deterioration  in  global 
underwriting  standards  and  to  address  imbalances  in  risk  controls  and  business 
growth in competitive environments. 
An assessment of gaps in global regulations and ways to correct them is a third way 
to strengthen a system-wide approach to supervision. 
Assessing different ways to promote better risk management of participants in major 
payment systems, derivative markets, and clearing houses is another. 
And  finally,  establishing  stronger  links  between  the  objectives  of  central  bank 
liquidity  operations  and  liquidity  regulation  and  supervision  is  another  way  to 
strengthen system-wide supervision.  
    Conclusion 
Financial  markets,  individual  firms  and  supervisors  have  all  been  severely  tested  by  this 
financial crisis. We have put in place a comprehensive strategy to address the lessons as 
they relate to the banking sector, and we are well along in executing on it. Our efforts will 
strengthen  capital  and  liquidity  buffers;  improve  risk  management  practices;  enhance 
transparency;  and  strengthen  the  supervision  of  banks  and  the  system-wide  approach  to 
supervision. It is important to note that this is a longer term strategy. Some elements need to 
be tackled now while others will take more time. The Committee is mindful of the need to 
introduce  these  enhancements  in  a  manner  that  promotes  both  near  term  confidence  and 
longer term financial stability. 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 5
