Jean-Pierre Landau: Extreme events in finance – some reflexions 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Landau,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the 
conference  on  extreme  events  jointly  organised  by  the  Bank  of  France  and  the  Toulouse 
School of Economics (TSE), Paris, 3 September 2008. 
Updated on 23 November 2008. I want to thank Benoit Coeuré and my colleagues Laurent Clerc, Sylvie Mathérat, 
Imène  Rahmouni,  Anne-Marie  Rieu  and  Pierre-François  Weber  for  their  comments  and  suggestions  on  earlier 
versions. 
 The current crisis is a strong reminder, if needed, that extreme events can occur inside the 
financial system. Over the last year, we have witnessed many episodes (1) whose outcome 
can reasonably be defined as "catastrophic" and, (2) which could not have been predicted 
according to probability based on past experience. 
Here, I would like to develop four points: are financial systems prone to extreme events? Is 
this propensity aggravated by modern finance, as it evolved during the last decade? Does 
this  problematic  help  us  understand  the  current  crisis?  And,  finally,  what  are  the  possible 
policy responses? 
Are financial systems prone to extreme events ? 
I can see at least two reasons why this may be the case. 
1. 
Financial  systems  are  complex  systems.  They  are  based  on  interdependence 
between multiple actors and counterparties. Transmissions occur through networks 
whose  structure  and  architecture  is  constantly  transformed  by  financial  innovation 
and regulatory arbitrage. This potentially creates numerous feedback loops. It is well 
known  that  such  systems  can  exhibit  the  following  features:  non  linearity  and 
discontinuities (a good example being liquidity freezes); path dependency; sensitivity 
to  initial  conditions.  All  this  accounts  for  truly  unpredictable  behaviour.  It  creates 
uncertainty in the Knigthian sense: even with full knowledge of the "fundamentals" it 
may be impossible to associate a probability distribution to future states of nature. 
However,  complexity  creates  the  possibility  of  extreme  events.  It  does  not  make 
them happen necessarily. Other factors may also contribute: one of them is human 
behaviour. 
Financial  systems  are  "human"  systems.  Their  dynamic  is  shaped  by  the  way 
human beings react to changes in their environment. Those reactions can help and 
amplify initial shocks to a point that a real "catastrophe" may occur. Herd behaviour 
has long been known as an essential feature of financial markets. 
More subtly, individual reactions, by themselves rational, can, by the virtue of their 
mutual  interaction,  produce  strong  amplification  effects.  This  has  been  luminously 
shown by Danielsson and Shin in their seminal article on "endogenous risk", based 
on the now famous parable of the Millennium Bridge. 
2. 
Extreme events and modern finance 
With  slight  exaggeration,  a  case  can  be  made  that  modern  finance  has  been  built,  in 
practice, if not in theory, on implicit tolerance and widespread ignorance of extreme events. 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 1
The use of models 
Models are extensively used to assess risks and price assets. Nearly all models are based 
on  the  prevalence  of  "normal"  (Gaussian)  distribution  as  the  basic  tool.  This  means  that 
abrupt changes in prices or risk have a very low probability. The fallacy of this assumption 
has been clearly shown by Mandelbrot for stock prices, and it has been further demonstrated 
in many recent (and non recent) episodes for other asset prices and risk premia. 
Examples of the use of normal distribution in financial modelling would include the following: 
• 
The  most  frequently  used  tool  for  risk  measurement  (VaR)  frequently  ignores  "fat 
tail" risks. Many VaR measures are calibrated according to the expected loss of a 
portfolio  under  normal  circumstances.  Models  with  "fat  tail"  distributions  are 
available, but seldom used, due to lack of reliable data over a sufficient period of 
time. 
Implied  volatilities  are  usually  extracted  from  option  pricing,  based  on  normal 
distribution. They are then used as inputs into trading strategies and models. As a 
result, the assumption of normal distribution widely "contaminates" the pricing, risk 
assessment  and  investment  strategies  across  a  whole  range  of  markets  and 
instruments. 
Finally,  the  pricing  of  many  structured  products  is  based  on  historical  correlations 
among asset prices, with the assumption that those correlations are stable and do 
represent the ordinary state of nature. On the contrary, experience has shown that 
those correlations can change radically during a crisis, frequently collapsing to one, 
and take price movements to the extreme ends of the probability distribution. 
  Procyclicality 
Many  changes  have  been  introduced  in  recent  years  to  accounting and  capital regimes  in 
order to make them more risk sensitive. The benefits in terms of increased transparency and 
better risk management are very significant. Those same changes, however, may contribute 
to create new amplification mechanisms inside the financial system. 
This  is  referred  to  as  a  "procyclicality"  issue,  by  which  we  usually  mean  the  tendency  of 
financial system to accentuate fluctuations in real and financial variables around their trend. 
But amplification can also create persistence if the system is path dependant. We may thus 
have to broaden our definition of procyclicality, looking not only at fluctuations around a trend 
but  also  at  changes  in  the  trend  itself,  which  would  move  the  equilibrium  of  markets  and 
prices  and  potentially  create  extreme  events.  A  very  subtle  question  arises,  which  would 
deserve  both  theoretical  and  empirical  investigation  in  this  context:  when  do  cyclical 
fluctuations degenerate into a more fundamental and permanent deviation and what could be 
done to prevent it? 
Rating 
By  essence,  the  rating  process  is  discontinuous.  Changes  in  ratings  therefore  create  non 
linear effects in the dynamics of financial markets. Those effects are stronger when there are 
a  limited  number  of  rating  agencies  with  the  same  behaviour  and  methodologies.  For  that 
reason, we need to consider whether both our supervisory processes and market practices 
do not rely too much on rating. Such "hardwiring" of ratings in our financial infrastructure may 
amplify  small  and  localised  discontinuities,  thus  creating  the  possibility  for  more  extreme 
events. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2008
Understanding the current crisis 
Arguably, one major problem underpinning the current crisis is the pricing of risk. For some 
years before the turmoil erupted, we have been puzzled by how low risk was priced in most 
credit markets. Again, with slight exaggeration, the case can be made that mispricing of risk 
occurred because extreme events – i.e. tail risks – were systematically ignored. 
At  a  general  level,  complexity  and  opacity  in  the  originate  and  distribute  model  made  it 
difficult  to  understand  the  "true  "  nature  of  risk  i.e.  the  probability  distribution  attached  to 
specific instruments. 
More  subtly,  I  wonder  whether  the  slicing  and  tranching  process  –  which  gave  rise  to 
structured products – has, intentionally or not, both created additional tail risk and contributed 
to conceal it. 
Most managers, for instance, have been caught by surprise by the fast downgrading of AAA 
CDO  tranches,  which  triggered  massive  write  downs.  With  hindsight,  we  know  that  those 
tranches had lower average probability of default than the underlying loans – which provided 
the rationale for the AAA rating – but also possessed a much higher exposure to tail risk. 
That latest characteristic was not apparent from the rating. As a consequence, tail risk was 
clearly not priced in, which made those securities both very attractive and absolutely lethal. 
Tail  risk  was  not  only  deeply  concealed  in  the  complex  structure  of  the  instrument.  It  was 
also, to some extent, "created" by the instrument itself. As a result of the tranching process, 
an  underlying  portfolio  with  normal  risk  distribution  was  transformed  into  a  different  set  of 
instruments. Some (equity tranches) had a with very high average default probability. Others 
(super seniors) had a low average default but proved extremely sensitive to tail risk. In that 
specific  case,  financial  innovation  produced  extreme  events  inside  the  system,  far  beyond 
what the fundamentals would normally imply. 
Policy responses 
The standard prescription for preventing extreme  events is to develop stress tests. This is 
certainly  a  prerequisite.  But  success  will  ultimately  depend  on  our  ability  (1)  to  define  the 
proper set of assumptions according to the whole range of possible extreme events; and (2) 
to act upon the results of those tests when there are very little incentives to do so. Typically 
this may involve keeping buffers for capital and/or liquidity well in excess of what appears 
necessary 95% of the time. Except in times of crisis, this approach is likely to be strongly 
challenged when it appears that its cost/benefit ratio is extremely high. It is not clear which 
institutional system could deliver such a result over the long run. 
One should ask, therefore, whether insurance against extreme events has to be taken and 
organized at the level of each individual financial entity (with the costs associated); or should 
it be spread over the whole economy, which raises well known issues of moral hazard? 
Implicitly the second approach has prevailed over the last decade: the financial system was 
allowed  to  take  a  huge  amount  of  tail  risk  and,  when  those  risks  materialized,  significant 
infusions of public money took place. 
Looking forward, in trying to find the right balance, policy makers will face a number of trade-
offs. 
The  first,  and  most  obvious  one,  is  between  the  robustness  and  resilience  of  the  financial 
system,  on  the  one  hand,  and  its  profitability,  on  the  other.  With  hindsight,  it  may  be  that 
parts of the returns achieved by the financial industry in the last decade have resulted from 
too  big  a  tolerance  of  tail  risk.  Conversely,  one  can  theoretically  increase,  almost  to  a 
maximum, the resilience of the financial system to extreme events by piling up strong liquidity 
and capital cushions in all its components. Of course, since capital and liquidity are costly, 
the economic viability of such a system would be open to question. 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 3
A  second  trade-off  appears  between  risk  sensitiveness  and  financial  volatility.  We  are 
increasingly  expecting  our  prudential  and  accounting  regimes  to  reflect  precisely,  at  any 
moment  in  time,  the  level  of  risk  embedded  in  every  financial instrument.  This  does  make 
sense:  prudential  requirements,  in  particular,  should  be  tailored  to  the  risk  attached  to 
specific activities. But financial systems are naturally procyclical. Risk – and risk appetite – 
move up and down with the economic cycle. It is an open question then, whether financial 
regulation does or not contribute to creating additional feedback loops in an already complex 
system, thus reinforcing the probability of extreme events. 
Finally a trade-off appears between financial innovation and product standardization. Many 
economic  activities  are  exposed  to  extreme  risk,  which  (almost)  never  materialise.  One 
striking example is the pharmaceutical industry, where very innovative, but also potentially 
dangerous, products are put on the market with (almost) no accident. The reason, of course, 
is that those products themselves are subject to strict, and costly, testing and approbation 
procedures.  This  cannot  be  transposed  to  the  financial  industry,  where  innovation  takes 
place  under  a  different  regime  (with  no  protection  for  intellectual  property).  Nevertheless, 
some  product  control  or  standardization  may  contribute  to  reducing  extreme  risk.  For 
instance, those countries where loan to value ratios were strictly enforced tend to experience 
less credit accidents than others. 
Those trade-offs may not be stable in time. For that reason, it is important that regulation and 
supervision become more responsive to changes in circumstances and the macro economic 
environment. This is the essence of the so  called "macro prudential" approach to financial 
supervision. Implementing such an approach may prove very challenging. Early detection of 
incipient disequilibrium inside the financial system is conceptually difficult: no crisis looks like 
the  previous  one  and  the  search  for  "early  warning"  indicators  has  not  yielded  fully 
convincing  results.  There  is  also  an  institutional  challenge  in  bringing  together  different 
authorities with different mandates and approaches to financial stability. In the words of C. 
Borio  "there  is  still  considerable  reluctance  to  calibrate  prudential  instruments  more 
systematically from a macro prudential perspective". 
Nevertheless,  macro  prudential  supervision  may  represent  our  best  chance  to  reduce  the 
frequency  of  extreme  events  in  the  future  and,  more  generally,  to  allow  the  authorities  to 
choose between the often conflicting objectives of financial efficiency and stability. 
References 
• 
BORIO  (Claudio):  “The  macro  prudential  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision: 
where do we stand?” (forthcoming). 
DANIELSSON (Jon) and SHIN (Hyun Song): “Endogenous Risk”, London School of 
Economics, September 2002. 
FEDERAL  RESERVE  BANK  OF  NEW  YORK:  “New  Directions  for  Understanding 
Systemic Risk”, Economic Policy Review, November 2007. 
MANDELBROT (Benoit) and HUDSON (Richard): “The (mis)behaviour of markets”, 
Basic Books, 2004. 
UBIDE  (Angel).  “Anatomy  of  a  Modern  Financial  crisis”,  Bank  of  Spain:  Financial 
Stability Review, No 14, April 2008. 
    4 
 BIS Review 151/2008
