Ardian Fullani: Albania – optimistic, flexible and adaptive to challenges 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Opening of “Klik Ekspo 
Group” Fair, Tirana, 25 November 2008. 
 Honourable Prime Minister, 
Honourable Ministers, 
Honourable Ambassadors, 
Dear Mr. Uldedaj! 
Dear entrepreneurs! 
Dear ladies and gentlemen! 
I feel privileged to be here with you tonight and at the same time, be a friend to the Albanian 
entrepreneurship. 
The  times  we  are  living  through  require  the  special  attention  of  economic  and  financial 
forums,  in  particular  when  the  latter  bring  together  the  governmental  bodies,  the  banking 
system and the private entrepreneurship. The global table of discussions on macro-finance 
and future policies is the present focus; hence, I consider this forum as a follow-up of this 
prevailing philosophy of the time we are living in.  
Set  in  a  comprehensive  context,  the  economic  developments  in  the  recent  months  have 
been  characterized  by  the  vague  situation  the  monetary  and  financial  markets  and 
institutions have been going through – which in the last couple of weeks has been followed 
by  other  developments.  The  most  recent  data  show  that  the  economies  of  developed 
countries – the USA, Euro area, England and Japan – have recorded decline in economic 
growth.  
However,  most emerging economies have shown higher immunity to the consequences of 
the global crisis. Economic activity has been buttressed by domestic factors, which is 
the main reason to justify the immunity in addition to the incomplete financial integration with 
the developed countries.  
Although Albania has been “a net importer” of global developments, its economy has 
shown high level of resistance and absorption. In the third quarter the present year, the 
Albanian economy continued to maintain its previous course. The available data on the first 
nine-month  period  show  that  the  economic  growth  has  been  in  line  with  the  projections. 
Macroeconomic  balances  remain  stable  and  the  banking  system  continues  to  be  sound. 
Economic growth at home has maintained its upward tendency. Services and trade sector in 
particular have provided the main contribution to the economic growth.  
CPI  inflation  continued  to  fall  in  October  to  2.7  percent.  Developments  in  core  inflation 
indicate that the macroeconomic balances at home and the monetary conditions have been 
adequate  to  ensure  an  inflation  rate  close  to  the  Bank  of  Albania  target.  The  achieved 
stability has been also prompted by the inflationary expectations of economic agents which 
have  been  anchored  at  around  3  percent.  These  developments  attest  to  the  fact  that  the 
central  bank’s  measures  have  been  effective  in  terms  of  containing  the  inflationary 
pressures. The fiscal policy pursued during the entire year 2008 has observed the targets set 
in the Medium-term Budget Programme for 2008-2010; consequently, it has not yielded any 
repressions in economy and performance of prices.  
The Albanian banking system continues to operate under optimal parameters, in line with the 
standards  of  prudent  banking  supervision.  The  latest  data  indicate  that  the  domino  effect 
induced  by  the  developments  in  the  international  financial  market  has  been  handled  with 
satisfactorily.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  supplied  and  continues  to  supply  the 
interbank market with the required amount of liquidity.  
BIS Review 148/2008 
 1
As I have mentioned in my previous statements: There’s no such thing as a free lunch! 
Meaning that emphasis should be put on the far-sighted perspective characterizing the Bank 
of  Albania  in  the  recent  years.  I  do  not  refer  here  only  to  price  stability,  but  also  to  the 
greatest  challenge:  banking  system  stability.  The  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania has constantly amended the regulatory basis creating incentives for more qualitative 
lending, while other decisions have aimed at providing more banking system transparency to 
the public, more efficient internal control and better management and governing structures. 
Regardless of what has been stated above, the future is of prime importance. For many 
reasons that I have also mentioned in my previous statements, end-year 2008 and almost 
the entire year 2009 will in a global context be hard, full of challenges and we will be walking 
through  unknown  paths.  Overcoming  this  economic  crisis  requires  time.  Its  solution  will 
materialize through the resetting of a number of internal and external economic balances, the 
re-arrangement  of  many  supervisory  institutions  and  the  re-design  of  the  regulatory 
framework on many financial market segments.  
Put  in  this  general  setting,  the  idea  that  our  small  economy  would  resist  this  global 
economic  tsunami  with  no  consequences  at  all  sounds  as  unrealistic.  However,  this 
issue  is  even  more  intricate.  Detecting  the  risks  we  may  plausibly  be  faced  with  is  not 
enough. I think our top priority is the design and implementation of preventive and remedial 
measures, which would reduce the materialization level of these risks. When I say “our”, I 
mean the state with its entirety of institutions and mechanisms.  
Our main challenge – involving the central bank, the banking system, the government, other 
decision-making and executive authorities, business community and the public in general – 
is  to  maintain  the  aggregate  demand,  the  production  potentials  and  the  financial 
resources in economy at unchanged levels. These are our top national priorities.  
Put differently: keep the real economy going; make sure economic growth does not shrink; 
ensure  your  business  maintains  the  same  rates  and  that  employment  grows  instead  of 
reducing.  This,  dear  participants,  is  may  otherwise  be  referred  to  as  ensuring  the 
stability of the country’s economic growth. On behalf of the institution I represent, I would 
like to assure you that the Bank of Albania – being one of the main economic and financial 
decision-making authorities at home – remains entirely committed in this context.  
The times we are going through require all the development strategies, economic policies, 
measures  and  rules  to  undergo  a  strict  cost/benefit  analysis.  In  this  context,  although  the 
crisis is not outlined yet, we have already drawn the first lessons from it. Public and private 
authorities  need  to  consider  these  lectures  as  future  opportunities.  Mistakes  can  teach  us 
how to better serve the future. We should have an optimistic view of the future and at the 
same time make sure our stance is realistic and consistent. 
Time  is  ripe  for  Albania  to  start  producing  more  goods  and  services  than  before. 
Despite the admirable progress in this context, the gap is still wide. Agriculture and industry 
remain  two  important  branches  of  the  economy  operating  far  from  their  potential. 
Additionally,  other  sectors  that  have  revitalized  during  the  transition  years  require  more 
orientation  and  tuning.  These  measures  will  enable  better  diversification  of  the  Albanian 
economy, augmenting its stability with the passing of time. Other challenges I believe relate 
to  the  country’s  external  position,  implying  the  reduction  of  current  account  deficit  and  the 
provision of alternative resources of foreign currency inflows.  
Therefore, I think that the role of the state needs to be more pronounced, not only in terms of 
completing  the  legal  and  regulatory  basis  but  also  of  concluding  a  number  of  important 
structural reforms, in particular those related to the land, ownership titles, pensions, to the 
support  of  the  small  and  medium-size  business,  to  the  further  improvement  of  business 
environment and the ongoing upgrade of national infrastructure. The further strengthening 
of safety nets, in the context of a stable fiscal and financial position, is an obligation whose 
accomplishment  would  reduce  both  the  real  and  perceived  risk  of  the  Albanian  economy, 
hence creating incentives for the growth of domestic and foreign investments. Time is 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2008
ripe  for  the  state  budget  to  involve  the  participation  of  private  entrepreneurs  in  strategic 
investment projects through joint financing programmes. 
The  banking  system  plays  a  vital  role.  Banking  loan  has  played  a  key  role  in  Albania’s 
economic development. It has been a source of profit in your business and it has to remain 
so in the future as well. In my recent communications with my counterparts and in the various 
meetings with senior officials of foreign banks’ main headquarters I have truthfully presented 
our country’s economic situation and I have required from them to keep their interest in the 
Albanian economy unchanged.  
I avail myself of this opportunity to address to the Albanian entrepreneurship. You have to 
keep being active and focused on formulating and implementing your future business plans. 
This would be the only way for you to remain well-capitalized, lucrative and credible to the 
banking  system.  In  the  current  economic  conditions,  private  entrepreneurship  should  be  a 
supporter and promoter in the formulation of domestic strategies at home, in the region and 
broader,  and  in  their  implementation  process.  All  conditions  are  in  place  for  the  Albanian 
business to go beyond the official regional borders, hence, becoming a factor in ensuring a 
stable regional activity. This also means a real integration into the targeted standards.  
Concluding, I would like to highlight that the small countries like Albania, should be optimistic, 
flexible and adaptive to challenges. Only in this way, they may find themselves able to sail 
into the international waters. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 3
