Heng Swee Keat: Ensuring stability – international perspectives on 
creating an effective regulatory framework 
Remarks by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the Inaugural Plenary Session, World Islamic Banking Conference, Bahrain, 24 November 
2008. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
I  am  honoured  to  speak  at  this  opening  plenary,  following  the  keynote  remarks  by  His 
Excellency, Governor Rasheed Al-Maraj. 
I am also delighted to be in Bahrain, recognised globally as one of the leading centres for 
Islamic Finance. Besides having a core of active Islamic financial institutions, Bahrain also 
plays  host  to  a  number  of  organisations  central  to  the  development  of  Islamic  Finance, 
including AAOIFI, the LMC, IIFM and the IIRA, and of course, this WIBC.1 The Central Bank 
of Bahrain ["CBB"], a highly regarded regulator, has played a key role in spearheading the 
development of Islamic Finance. The CBB has scored many “firsts”, including the first central 
bank  sukuk  in  20012  and  being  the  first  country  to  develop  and  implement  regulations 
specific  to  the  Islamic  banking  industry.  The  CBB  has  also  established  the  Waqf  Fund  to 
finance research, education and training in Islamic Finance. There is much that the MAS can 
learn from the CBB. 
The current global crisis – some root causes 
The theme of this session – having an effective regulatory framework – is of great relevance 
given the on-going financial crisis. The current financial crisis is unprecedented in terms of its 
scale,  complexity,  and  speed  of  transmission.  While  the  series  of  coordinated  actions  by 
financial  authorities  and  Governments  have  helped  to  stabilise  the  markets  somewhat, 
sentiments remain fragile, and many of the underlying problems remain. 
Many  reasons  have  been  offered  about  the  root  causes  of  the  current  crisis.  Let  me  just 
highlight a few of these. 
The  first  is  the  unprecedented  levels  of  leverage  taken  on  by  global  financial  institutions 
coupled with very loose lending standards in the credit markets. Consumers in the US were 
also highly leveraged. The high leverage enabled asset values and consumption to be raised 
to unsustainable levels. When sentiments finally turned, there was massive deleveraging. 
The  second  is  that  complexity  magnifies  risks.  The  proliferation  of  complex  securities  and 
derivatives  had  not  diversified  risk  amongst  different  counterparties  as  was  originally 
intended, but instead increased aggregate systemic risk throughout the financial system. Not 
only banks and investment banks were affected but a whole range of players including credit 
insurers, hedge funds and investors in asset-backed commercial paper have also suffered 
major losses. 
                                                 
1   Source:  CBB  website,  http://www.cbb.gov.bh.  AAOIFI  -  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic 
Financial Institutions; LMC - Liquidity Management Centre; IIFM - International Islamic Financial Market; IIRA - 
Islamic International Rating Agency; WIBC – World Islamic Banking Congress. 
2   CBB was then known as the Bahrain Monetary Agency. 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 1
The  third  is  the  inadequate  assessment  of  risks  and  compression  of  yields.  Many  of  the 
assessments were based on complex modeling and did not give sufficient regard to the tail 
risks in these financial products including the illiquidity risk. In some instances, there may not 
have  been  sufficient  diversity  of  views  of  the  risks  and  pricing  of  structured  credit,  with  a 
heavy reliance on rating agencies.  
Against these key causes, we must include the backdrop of unsustainable macro-economic 
imbalances  that  were  building  up  in  the  global  economy,  and  policy  responses  which 
effectively allowed yields to fall to very low levels. The aggressive search for returns also led 
to severe compression of yields which distorted investor behaviour and long-term valuations.  
The interaction of high leverage, excessive complexity and compression of yields meant that 
when sentiments turned, the magnitude of price falls across asset classes have been sharp, 
and  the  dynamics  of  the  deleveraging  process  unpredictable.  Financial  institutions  and 
markets  have  also  become  so  highly  interconnected  that  an  event  in  one  area  sets  off  a 
chain of events that magnify and exacerbate the initial shocks.  
The shocks in the financial markets have now been transmitted to the real economy in the 
developed  countries.  Through  both  the  financial  as  well  as  the  trade  and  investment 
channels, these shocks are also propagated to emerging economies. The negative feedback 
loop  between  the  deterioration  in  the  real  economy  and  sell-offs  in  financial  assets  have 
added to the uncertainty. It will take some time before the crisis runs its course. 
Policy agenda 
Our immediate focus must be to limit the damage of the financial crisis on the real economy, 
and stop the downward spiral created by the negative feedback loop. Policy measures must 
include  not  just  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stimulus,  but  also  an  acceleration  of  structural 
changes  to  correct  the  underlying  imbalances,  to  put  the  global  economy  on  a  sounder 
footing for renewed growth. 
There  has  also  been  much  discussion  about  regulatory  reform.  Reform  is  certainly 
necessary, but we must avoid swinging the regulatory pendulum to the other extreme. While 
the  present  system  has  major  flaws,  it  is  not  fundamentally  broken.  Fixing  these  flaws 
demands thoughtful and pragmatic changes at the global level. Piecemeal quick fixes, which 
may be logical and perhaps even headline grabbing, may end up creating unforeseen and 
unintended  consequences.  It  would  be  a  mistake,  for  instance,  to  swing  towards  overly 
prescriptive rules, or to severely restrict all forms of securitisation and financial innovation. As 
financial markets are at different stages of development in various countries, we must also 
avoid a “one-size-fits-all” approach. Certainly, we will need greater international cooperation, 
and  the  work  of  bodies  such  as  the  IMF,  FSF,  BCBS,  IOSCO,  IAIS,3  and  initiatives 
sponsored by groupings such as the G20 will be important in this reform effort. 
An effective regulatory framework for Islamic finance 
The current global crisis has posed a series of extreme stress tests on financial systems and 
our  regulatory  approaches,  and  offers  many  important  pointers  for  the  development  of 
Islamic Finance. Allow me to highlight a few. 
                                                 
3  
IMF – International Monetary Fund; FSF – Financial Stability Forum; BCBS – Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision; IOSCO - International Organisation of Securities Commissions; IAIS - International Association of 
Insurance Supervisors. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2008
First,  one  of  the  most  significant  lessons  about  the  crisis  is  also  the  most  basic,  that  is, 
finance needs to return to its basic function of allocating scarce capital to the most productive 
uses, with the capital earning an appropriate risk-adjusted return.  
In  this  regard,  the  underlying  Shariah  precept  in  Islamic  Finance  of  not  using  capital  for 
speculation,  but  to  build  productive  capacity  and  generate  sustainable  economic  growth, 
takes  on  great  relevance.  By  adhering  to  this  basic  precept,  I  am  confident  that  Islamic 
Finance will assume a more prominent role in the coming years.  
Second,  whatever  the  forms  of  intermediation,  we  must  remain  focused  on  the  types  and 
nature of risks, and how these risks are distributed among the players. Before this crisis, the 
main focus was on risks posed by hedge funds. As it turns out, a large part of the risks were 
sitting  in  the  core  banking  system,  in  the  form  of  off-balance  sheet  items  held  in  SIVs. 
Mortgage lenders which originated subprime mortgages were outside the regulatory ambit. 
The main lesson here is that we have to examine risks holistically, across the value chain of 
activities and across different asset classes and markets, and not be blinkered in pre-judging 
where risks sit. For tail risks in particular, the dark corner where we shine the light may not 
necessarily be the place where those risks reside. 
Many  of  the  risks  inherent  in  Islamic  Finance  are  similar  to  those  of  conventional  finance, 
including credit risks, market risks, market conduct risks, operational and reputational risks. 
However, the exposure to those risks could differ between conventional and Islamic finance. 
For  instance,  Islamic  banks  are  generally  exposed  to  substantially  more  liquidity  risk  than 
their conventional counterparts, as the range of liquid instruments and hedging instruments 
are  more  limited.  Islamic  banks  tend  also  to  be  more  exposed  to  the  property  and 
infrastructure sectors, in part because these are the prevalent asset classes in the Gulf and 
also in part because Islamic finance has to be based on physical assets. Given the “large 
and  lumpy”  nature  of  such  transactions  and  the  tendency  for  asset  bubbles  to  build  up 
quickly, it is a risk that merits special attention.  
In addition, there are also risks unique to Islamic Finance such as Shariah-compliance risk. If 
products  are  later  found  to  be  non-Shariah  compliant,  the  institutions  not  only  face 
reputational  damage,  but  also  costly  unwinding  of  such  structures,  with  possible  losses  to 
investors. 
The third point is that to achieve a good outcome, an effective regulatory approach needs to 
embrace a tripartite approach. Regulators, financial institutions and investors all have a role 
to play. 
Allow me to share briefly the approach that MAS takes. As a regulator, MAS looks at both the 
micro-prudential  aspects,  looking  at  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  financial 
institutions,  as  well  as  macro-prudential  aspects,  looking  to  see  if  system-wide  risks  have 
been built up in the aggregate.  
In doing this, we adopt a risk-based approach towards supervision and regulation, in order to 
promote sustainable development of the sector. For example, we set appropriate limits and 
capital charges to address the credit, market and other risks. The standards of governance 
and risk management are set at levels commensurate with the activities and the risks being 
taken.  Sometimes  we  are  accused  of  being  overly  conservative,  but  this  prudence  has 
served us well. 
In  all  instances,  we  seek  to  find  the  right  balance  between  “principles-based”  and  “rules-
based”  regulation;  to  avoid  being  over-prescriptive  in  rule-making  or  being  over-reliant  on 
market  discipline  alone  to  curb  excessive  risk-taking.  Similarly,  market  conduct  measures 
focus  on  upholding  principles  of 
for 
through 
requirements on disclosure to investors and a fair-dealing sales process.  
The second leg of the tripartite approach is to put the primary responsibility for sound risk 
management and oversight of each institution on the board and senior management, which 
must  set  the  right  tone  and  culture.  The  third  leg  is  to  promote  greater  awareness  among 
transparency, 
fairness  and 
instance, 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 3
investors  of  their  financial  needs,  encourage  financial  planning  and  promote  deeper 
understanding of the risks and returns of different products, through educational programmes 
such as MoneySENSE.4
The fourth pointer from the current crisis is the importance of preventing regulatory arbitrage, 
and ensuring a level playing field. With regards to Islamic Finance, in particular, MAS seeks 
to ensure a level playing field between the conventional and Islamic financial players. Where 
the  economic  substance  and  risks  are  similar,  the  same  regulatory  treatment  is  accorded, 
regardless  of  whether  the  product  is  a  “conventional”  or  “Islamic”  product.  For  example, 
Singapore-based banks treat murabaha-based5 asset financing as a credit risk exposure to 
the customer for the purpose of maintaining regulatory capital. As Islamic Finance grows, our 
regulatory  framework  must  continue  to  evolve  to  maintain  regulatory  consistency  in 
managing the underlying substance of the risks. 
International collaboration 
The  fifth  and  very  crucial  point  that  emerges  from  the  current  crisis  is  the  importance  of 
international collaboration. As Islamic Finance grows, cross border transactions will multiply. 
We  must  therefore  take  an  international  perspective  in  preventing  and  resolving  problems 
right at the outset. Allow me to suggest three areas where regulators can work closely. 
The first area is that legal, regulatory and supervisory frameworks that are developed should 
be  based  on  internationally  recognised  principles  and  standards.  The  work  done  by 
international standard-setting bodies such as the IFSB, IDB, AAOIFI and IIFM6 is instructive 
in  this  regard.  For  example,  “The  Ten  Year  Framework  and  Strategies”  co-issued  by  the 
IFSB and IDB is a thoughtful blueprint. AAOIFI has also produced standards in areas such 
as accounting, auditing, ethics, Shariah compliance and governance. Today, the applications 
of Shariah precepts differ somewhat in certain areas. It will eventually be desirable to have 
some standardisation to enhance consistency and to remove one source of regulatory risk.  
However,  our  goal  should  be  to  achieve  a  gradual  harmonisation  of  standards  and 
approaches to regulation, rather than immediate convergence. Even in conventional finance, 
regulatory  approaches  and  standards  differ  across  different  jurisdictions.  A  flexible,  risk-
based  approach  will  also  allow  continued  innovation  to  take  place,  while  ensuring  the 
resultant risks are appropriately managed. 
Second,  we  need  to  develop  a  wider  range  of  tools  to  detect  and  mitigate  risks.  In 
conventional finance, work is underway in reviewing shortcomings in capital adequacy and 
liquidity  management  in  the  Basel  II  framework,  as  well  as  the  provision  of  clearing  and 
settlement infrastructure for derivatives. For Islamic Finance, we need to continue to develop 
instruments  that  help  to  mitigate  risks.  Bahrain’s  initiative  in  developing  the  Liquidity 
Management Centre7 is an excellent example of such an effort.  
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the Monetary Authority of Singapore is now in 
the final stages of setting up a sukuk issuance facility. I had announced, at this May's Islamic 
                                                 
4   MoneySENSE is a national financial education program in Singapore covering three tiers of financial literacy – 
basic  money  management;  financial  planning;  and  investment  know-how.  Details  on  MoneySENSE  are 
available at www.moneysense.gov.sg. 
5   Murabaha-based asset financing refers to mark-up asset financing, commonly used in home financing and car 
financing. In such a transaction, banks generally purchase the asset to be financed, and then sells it to the 
customer at a mark-up, to be paid on a deferred basis. 
IFSB - Islamic Financial Services Board; IDB – Islamic Development Bank; AAOIFI - Accounting and Auditing 
Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions; IIFM - International Islamic Financial Market. 
6  
7   The Bahrain Monetary Agency was the primary sponsor in establishing the Liquidity Management Centre. 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2008
Financial  Services  Board  Summit,  Singapore's  plan  to  set  up  a  facility  to  provide  Shariah-
compliant regulatory assets to these financial institutions as part of our efforts to promote the 
growth of Islamic Finance in Singapore. 
The sukuk structure is based broadly on the Al-Ijarah structure, or the sale-and-leaseback of 
an underlying property. Sukuk issued by the facility will be given equal regulatory treatment 
as Singapore Government Securities, or SGS, and returns will be tied to the risk-free yield of 
SGS  of  equivalent  tenor.  The  facility  is  open  to  all  financial  institutions  that  plan  to  or  are 
currently carrying on Shariah-compliant financial services in Singapore. We are issuing on a 
reverse  enquiry  basis,  which  means  we  can  size  and  time  the  issuance  according  to  the 
needs of the financial institutions. A number of financial institutions have already expressed 
interest and we expect the first issue to take place at the start of next year. We invite eligible 
and interested financial institutions to approach MAS as we work towards a formal launch. 
Last but not least, efforts to further international collaboration will need to be supported by a 
solid  platform  for  co-operation  and  information  sharing  amongst  regulators.  Formal 
agreements between regulators on the scope of cooperation and information sharing will be 
helpful in this regard. Singapore, as a full member of the IFSB, and a signatory to MOUs with 
various GCC countries, is keen to explore further avenues for cooperation and collaboration.  
Underpinning all these, of course, is the need to continue to broaden and deepen knowledge 
and  expertise  on  Islamic  Finance  among  regulators  and  industry  players.  An  investors' 
education platform to promote risk awareness of Shariah compliant products will also serve 
to reinforce market discipline by raising awareness of the characteristics and risks of Shariah 
products, as well as boosting demand for such products. 
Conclusion – opportunities for Islamic finance 
I would like to end on an optimistic note by reiterating the opportunities available in Islamic 
Finance.  While  we  must  expect  the  global  economy  and  financial  activities  to  slow  in  the 
coming  months,  the  long-term  structural  improvements  in  Asia  and  the  GCC  will  continue. 
Between Asia and the GCC, for instance, total trade grew by 17% annually since 2000 to 
exceed US$328 billion in 2006.8 Total cross-border capital flows between Asia and the GCC 
are also predicted to increase from US$15 billion at end 2006 to US$300 billion by 2020.9 
Even if only half of these projections are realised, growth is still sizeable. It is thus crucial that 
we remain focused on enabling long term growth and development even as we tackle the 
current crisis.  
There are many productive areas for the private sector to work in close partnership. I look 
forward  to  working  closely  with  our  colleagues  in  the  Middle  East  to  further  promote 
cooperation  in  financial  services  and  Islamic  Finance,  which  will  serve  as  key  pillars  for 
promoting long-term, sustained economic development and cooperation in our two dynamic 
regions. 
On  that  note,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  all  for  your  kind  attention  this  morning,  and  I  wish 
everyone a fruitful conference. 
                                                 
8   Based on IMF and CEIC statistics. 
9   Source: http://archive.gulfnews.com/articles/08/05/25/10216034.html. 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 5
