Tarisa Watanagase: What determines the future of the Thai economy? 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the British Chamber 
of Commerce Luncheon Talk, Bangkok, 17 September 2008. 
 the  current 
to  be  business-as-usual.  Nevertheless, 
Chairman Bain,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  Chairman  Bain  for  inviting  me  once  again  to  join  this  gathering  of 
distinguished members and guests of the British Chamber of Commerce. I look forward to 
our  annual  get-together  in  this  warm  and  friendly  atmosphere  and  especially  welcome  the 
opportunity to update and exchange views on the Thai economy and its outlook. 
My talk today will cover three parts. First, I would like to focus on recent developments and 
prospects of the Thai economy in the near term. In the second part, I will share with you my 
perspectives  on  the  important  factors  that  I  believe  will  determine  the  future  of  the  Thai 
economy. To close, I will touch on the preparations that we should be making for the future of 
the Thai economy, focusing particularly on the central bank’s role in achieving price stability 
to support long-term growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Notwithstanding news headlines, most of us are aware that the overall economic atmosphere 
continues 
tension  and  ongoing 
uncertainty  on  the  Thai  political  scene  has  posed  worries  for  some  investors  on  the 
prospects  of  the  Thai  economy  for  the  rest  of  2008  and  2009.  Confidence  has  already 
weakened  somewhat  on  both  consumer  and  business  ends.  Evidently,  the  Business 
Sentiment Index or BSI, surveyed by the Bank of Thailand, which has lingered below the 50 
benchmark,  slid  further  in  the  past  few  months.  In  addition,  tourism  has  been  adversely 
impacted by travel warnings as the Thai political developments made global news. 
This latest dent on confidence has added to the list of challenges facing the economy since 
the end of last year, including inflationary pressure from volatile oil and commodity prices, 
tightening  domestic  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  potentially  more  downside  risks  to  global 
economic growth in light of recent US economic developments.  
The headline and core inflation in July rose at decade-high rates of 9.2 and 3.7 percent from 
a year ago, respectively. The rising inflation largely stemmed from soaring oil prices. At their 
worst, oil prices set new records almost on a daily basis, led by a combination of growing 
demand  for  fuel  of  emerging  markets,  geopolitics  of  the  oil-exporting  countries,  and  the 
depreciation  of  the  US  dollars.  Even  though,  in  August,  headline  and  core  inflation  went 
down to 6.4 and 2.7 percent, respectively, due to moderating commodity prices as well as 
government measures, the risk on inflation from high and volatile commodity and oil prices 
remains, particularly given the constraint in supply adjustment.  
In the meantime, the risk of global economic downturn seems to have accumulated as the 
bottom-out of US subprime problem is still uncertain. This has, in turn, affected the outlook 
for  Thai  exports  as  the  economic  prospects  of  Thailand’s  major  trading  partners,  such  as 
European  Union  and  Japan,  became  less  positive.  Overall,  the  impact  of  bleaker  global 
economic outlook depends on the degree of decoupling from developed economies and the 
consensus among central bankers over the world is that it is perhaps unrealistic to assume 
that emerging economies in general will be able to decouple. Therefore, it is more an issue of 
a time lag and at the present time we must wait and see when this moment of truth arrives 
and what the impact will be. I believe that unless the global economy dips below what we 
anticipated, the impact on the Thai economy will be manageable. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 1
At this juncture, let me emphasize that Thailand’s underlying economic fundamentals remain 
sound  and  growth  momentum  on  track.  During  the  first  half  of  2008,  the  Thai  economy 
achieved a favourable growth rate of 5.7 percent, improving from the growth of 5.3 percent in 
the second half of last year. Even though three of the four main engines of economic growth, 
namely  consumption,  investment,  and  public  expenditure,  remained  mostly  subdued,  the 
performance of net exports was notably better-than-expected. This reflected export sector’s 
substantial  efforts  to  adjust  to  slowing  global  demand  by  diversifying  into  new  markets. 
Meanwhile, on the supply side, agricultural production was the key growth contributor, due 
mainly to an increase in crop production in response to higher market prices.  
In fact, economic indicators for July showed the continued expansion on both production and 
demand sides. Farm income from major crops was up by 69.5 percent from the same period 
last year, due to expansion of both production and prices of paddy rice, rubber, and oil palm. 
Manufacturing production also registered a satisfactory growth of 11.3 percent during the first 
seven months.  
On  the  demand  side,  private  investment  and  consumption  continued  its  recovery  trend. 
Exports  also  expanded  well  in  line  with  production  expansion.  Meanwhile,  imports 
accelerated,  partly  in  response  to  improvement  in  domestic  demand.  Even  though  this 
resulted in a current account deficit, strong external stability has been reflected by high level 
of international reserves and low external debt. 
For the entire 2008, the central bank’s July Inflation Report has projected a growth rate of 
4.8-5.8  percent  with  a  more  moderate  growth  in  the  second  half,  in  line  with  the  global 
economy. While this forecast has already taken into account a number of key risk factors, 
potentially  prolonged  political  tension  and  uncertainty  remain  a  prominent  one,  with  little 
known about when and how it will unwind. This is reflected in the recent plunge in consumer 
confidence index. In a pessimistic extreme scenario, the government budget disbursement 
may  delay  if  the  upcoming  budget  process  in  parliament  is  disrupted  and  mega-project 
investment could fall behind schedule. Prolonged disagreement could also soften domestic 
demand  and  tourism,  which  would  be  unfortunate  given  that  the  tourism  high-season  is 
approaching.  
Having said this, I must also highlight that, by historical records, political developments had 
dented confidence in the economy only in the short run. Therefore, I am optimistic that with 
Thailand’s  economic  fundamentals  remaining  sound,  the  economy  will  be  able  to maintain 
growth  momentum  and  overcome  these  short-run  dips.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  add  that 
political development, which sometimes breeds strain and uncertainty within the society and 
economy, is not a unique phenomenon only to Thailand. Rather, it is a necessary process of 
growing up for most economies.  
For the past thirty years, the Thai economy has taken a good lead in development progress 
building on lessons learnt from crises, while political advancement trailing behind. From 1977 
to 2007, the economy in real term has grown at an average rate of 7.0 percent (excluding 
1997  and  1998),  facing  phases  of  reforms  and  restructuring,  from  import  substitution  to 
export promotion and to liberalization after the Asian financial crisis.  
In the meanwhile, Thai politics has evolved more gradually than the economy. And now, it 
may be time for catching up. And hopefully, out of this growing-up process, the gap between 
economic  and  political  developments  will  narrow  and  a  stronger  economy  under  a  more 
matured politics will emerge.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  turn  now  to  the  second  part  of  my  talk.  In  the  face  of  possible  short-term  dent  on 
confidence, it is prudent that we do not lose sight of what importantly determines the future of 
the Thai economy. Sound economic fundamentals continue to provide support for favourable 
growth and collective efforts should be focused on raising the economy’s potential output in 
order to achieve price stability and sustainable growth in the long run.  
2 
 BIS Review 119/2008
By  old  book,  growth  comes  from  utilization  of  the  country’s  resource  endowment  with 
available technology. However, with the advent of global economic and financial integration, 
growth is no longer constrained by endowment. In today’s world economy, outsourcing for 
inputs  abundant  in  other  countries  and  exchange  of  technology  and  skills  allow  for  lower 
production costs and greater potential to grow. Potential output in this era is thus free from 
conventional hindrance.  
From the Bank of Thailand’s latest research, the Thai economy has a potential output growth 
rate  of  around  5.5  to  6.0  percent  per  year  from  2008  to  2015.  This  is  based  on  an 
assumption that investment can grow at the same rate as the economy, and therefore, the 
ratio  of  real  gross  investment  to  real  GDP  needs  to  increase  from  22  percent  today  to  28 
percent within the next 8 years.  
Prior to 1997, Thai economy grew satisfactorily on the back of high level of investment as 
well as increasing utilization of labor. During this period, sufficient capital formation allowed 
for an increase in labor productivity. However, in the post crisis era, potential output gradually 
declined as real investment did not fully resume its pre-crisis level, which was 31 percent of 
real GDP. Meanwhile, labor productivity has been dwarfed by the lack of capital and lagged 
behind the regional standard. On the overall picture of employment, Thailand has had very 
low  unemployment  but  room  to  increase  productivity  remains  in  the  area  of  reducing 
underemployment.  
Let me discuss an example of the agricultural sector. This sector has seen a steady decline 
of  its share in  GDP  from  1980  to  2007.  In  contrast,  its  share  in  the country’s  employment 
remained high, though reducing from 65 to just about 40 percent of total labor force during 
the  same  period.  Meanwhile,  yield  of  major  crops  per  unit  area  is  significantly  lower  than 
yields in other agriculture exporting countries. In fact, Foreign Agricultural Service of USDA, 
estimated that Thailand produces rice yield about 430 kilos per rai compared with the world 
average rice yield of 653 kilos per rai. There is thus ample room to increase productivity in 
this sector through better land and water management as well as a more systematic farming.  
Going forward, the problem of labor scarcity, though not unique to Thailand, will also become 
more of our concern as we are moving into aging society, while population growth remains 
low.  Increasing  productivity  is  therefore  the  solution  to  sustain  potential  growth  as  well  as 
competitiveness. And, to do so, it is crucial that we increase investment, such that there is 
sufficient capital formation to facilitate productivity growth.  
On this note, I am pleased to say that collective effort to increase the level of investment has 
already taken place. The government campaign – “Thailand Investment Year 2008/2009” is a 
spearhead  project  to  make  Thailand  stand  out  as  the  investment  destination  for  foreign 
investors.  The  campaign’s  key  missions  include  restoring  investor’s  confidence  with  more 
proactive marketing activities, strengthening infrastructure to accommodate for expansions, 
channeling  investment  into  strategic  industries  for  the  future,  as  well  as  improving 
investment-related services.  
Recently, a good feedback on the international level has been reported by the media. In the 
“Doing Business 2009” survey of 181 countries by the World Bank, Thailand just ascends 6 
ranks  to  the  13th  place where  investors  are  provided  with  convenience  in  doing  business. 
Thailand  made  key  improvements  in  areas  such  as  protecting  investors,  ease  of  paying 
taxes,  and  trading  across  borders.  Apart  from  these  efforts  to  induce  external  capital,  it  is 
also  necessary  to  support  investment  through  domestic  saving  promotion  scheme  in  an 
anticipation  of  narrowing  investment-saving  gap  in  the  future.  Furthermore,  the  ease  and 
coverage of financial access can also be enhanced further to facilitate efficient flow of funds.  
Outside  the  realm  of  government  policy,  we  stand  to  gain  from  a  greater  role  of  private 
sector.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  BCC’s  effort  throughout  the  years.  A 
programme  like  “Thailand  Means  Business  2008”  which  BCC  will  hold  in  both  Thailand 
hotspots  like  Bangkok  and  Chiang  Mai,  as  well  as  abroad  like  England,  Hong  Kong,  and 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 3
Singapore,  is  a  great  help  for  attracting  foreign  investment  into  Thailand  and  enhance  the 
country’s capacity and potential.  
Ladies and Gentleman, 
For Thailand to achieve the goal of long-term sustainable growth, commitments have to be 
made today. And, this leads to the final part of my talk. 
As  Governor  of  the  central  bank,  I  am  committed  to  pursuing  price  stability  and  financial 
stability  to  foster  medium  and  long-term  economic  growth.  On  the  financial  stability  side,  I 
see that the Thai banking sector has decoupled from the direct impact of the global credit 
crisis. In fact, the banking sector’s exposure to CDOs was only 0.3 percent of its total assets 
in 2007, which was completely sold off.  
On  non-performing  loans,  the  net  NPL  level  will  be  one  of  the  issues  that  we  will  be 
addressing through second-phased financial sector master plan. As of end June 2008, net 
NPL of the banking sector in relation to its total credit is 3.4 percent, not a terribly high level. 
In  addition,  since  the  potential  losses  of  these  NPLs  have  already  been  provided  for 
according to IAS39, the international accounting standard, the financial implication of NPLs 
on  the  banking  sector’s  financial  standing  is  very  small.  However,  reducing  NPLs  further 
should improve the banking sector’s credit rating.  
The master plan will also focus on improving competition and efficiency of banks, while also 
broadening financial access to a bigger base of clientele. After the industry-hearing, we will 
announce the FSMP so that market players have a clear picture of the banking sector going 
forward. 
On the pursuit of price stability, I wish to emphasize two points: 
First, most central banks, both inflation targeter and non-inflation targeter, have their main 
objective on price stability, which is well-accepted as a necessary condition for sustainable 
growth.  Studies  show  that  “too  loose”  monetary  policy  for  “too  long”  could  potentially  fuel 
severe inflation and fail us in the pursuit of long-term growth. More importantly, it will take a 
bitter-than-necessary pill to bring down inflation once its expectation persists. As an inflation 
targeter,  therefore,  it  is  important  that  central  bank  can  anchor  inflation  expectations  such 
that everyone believes that central bank will not tolerate high inflation which, in the long run, 
can undermine economic growth.  
In Thailand’s case, our studies have confirmed that during the first half of 2008, actual growth 
is close to potential growth, which could add on to inflationary pressure, with the real policy 
rate  becoming  mostly  negative  in  July  2008.  Moreover,  another  piece  of  central  bank 
research also points out that Thailand’s inflation dynamics has exhibited greater persistence. 
In part, this has been because food and fuel prices, though are cost-push factors, change as 
a result of structural shifts in supply and or demand. These are the rationale for the Monetary 
Policy Committee to raise the policy rates by a total of 50 basis points during the past two 
meetings in order to gradually withdraw the demand stimulus. 
Second,  monetary  policy  aims  to  create  a  conducive  environment  for  consumption  and 
investment  decisions.  Through  price  stability  and  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and 
finance, the economy will be able to achieve its potential growth. In this regard, it is crucial to 
establish  an  understanding  between  the  central  bank  and  the  government  of  the  lagged-
nature  of  monetary  policy  transmission,  and  the  need  for  targeting  stability  to  effectively 
anchor long-term inflation expectations.  
To  this  end,  coordinating  with  the  fiscal  authorities  in  setting  a  target  aims  to  ensure  that 
monetary policy is aligned with the country’s overall economic policy direction. By the end of 
this  year,  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  jointly  with  the  Minister  of 
Finance,  will  be  required  to  set  an  annual  target  for  monetary  policy  for  2009.  More 
importantly, this understanding must also be shared with the public at large – that the only 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2008
long-term role for monetary policy is in creating an environment of price stability which would 
help support sustainable economic growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In raising the economy’s potential output, it requires that we pay attention to our capacity. I 
would  like  to  raise  two  important  areas  of  commitments  that  all  economic  participants 
together  can  help  the  economy  build  strong  capacity.  These  are  greater  energy  efficiency 
and advancement in education. 
On  the  commitment  to  improve  energy  efficiency,  we  must  reduce  our  dependence  on 
imported oil from the present net oil imports ratio to GDP of about 8 percent, which is the 
highest  in  Asia.  This  can  be  done  through  investment  to  modernize  new  energy-efficient 
machinery  and  technology  used  for  production.  Importantly,  price  and  tax  mechanisms 
should foster energy saving. 
As for the commitment to help upgrade education to increase labour productivity, reform in 
the education system should focus on raising the standard and quality of education for future 
generation of labor force. Skill specialization must be shaped to complement for Thailand’s 
competitiveness in the world market. Indeed, better education would also improve financial 
literacy  and  access,  which  will,  in  turn,  allow  more  efficient  allocation  of  consumption  and 
investment.  
In sum, no matter how fast the economy manages to grow, at the end it is merely numbers. 
The  development  makes  a  real  difference  only  when  we  are  committed  to  building  strong 
fundamentals to support long-term growth to ensure that the people are really better off on a 
sustained  basis.  Moreover,  as  we  move  toward  an  ageing  society,  fiscal  policy  is  able  to 
ensure a sound social safety net system to accommodate for an increase of elder population 
in the future. Meanwhile, the monetary policy takes care of price and financial stability.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
After a rather heavy presentation, I would like to end my talk on a lighter note. I trust that 
during your years in Thailand, you may have come across some fortuneteller stalls packed 
with  worried-looking  customers.  In  finding  out  what  lies  ahead,  these  customers  hope  that 
the right thing can be done today to secure a brighter future. I believe that all of us at this 
gathering  are  not  dissimilar  in  trying  to  do  the  right  things  today  for  a  better  tomorrow. 
Indeed,  the  pursuit  to  become  a  higher  income  economy  is  not  a  lone  man  or  lone 
organization journey. This ambitious goal calls for coordination and synergy of all participants 
in  the  economy.  And,  with  everyone’s  support,  including  all  of  us  here  in  this  room, 
Thailand’s fortune should be as bright and promising as ever.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 5
