W A Wijewardena: Scientific research – what researchers should do and 
should not  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka,  at  the  3rd  International  Research  Conference,  organized  by  the  Faculty  of 
Management & Finance, University of Colombo, Colombo, 11 December 2008. 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and should not be construed as those of the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka. 
 A  Master  Debater  has  once  boasted  that  he  normally  employs  three  ploys  to  subdue  his 
difficult  customers.  “When  I  find  that  my  opponent  is  not  easily  surmountable,  I  use 
to  subdue  him”.  He  has  confessed. 
mathematics,  philosophy  and  religion 
“Mathematical  equations  frighten  him,  philosophical  expressions  confuse  him  and 
religious  sayings  make  him  feel  guilty.  After  that,  he  is  an  easy  prey  for  the  final 
onslaught”. He has further elaborated triumphantly. The superior property of mathematical 
equations in frightening intellectual opponents is not without precedent. An example in this 
connection has been presented by Astro-physicist Carl Sagan in his Broca’s Brain (p. 151). 
According  to  the  story,  the  French  encyclopaedist  Diderot,  being  an  atheist  himself,  had 
challenged  anyone  to  prove  the  existence  of  God  during  a  visit  to  Russian  Empress 
Catherine’s  court.  When  he  became  an  embarrassment  to  everyone,  Euler,  the  master 
mathematician  and  also  a  temporary  visitor  to  the  Court,  is  said  to  have  accepted  the 
challenge.  Euler  has  said,  “Sir,  (a  +  bn)/n  =  x,  therefore  God  exists.  Disprove”.  The 
mathematics-phobic Diderot, being unable to respond, is said to have fled the Court! These 
examples suggest that people can sometimes use gimmicks to confuse opponents and win 
arguments.  Such  winnings  do  not  prove  or  disprove  any  proposition.  They  do  not  add 
knowledge  to  the  extant  body  of  knowledge.  They  simply  help  a  crafty  person  to  make  a 
temporary escape from an existing difficult situation.  
Scientific  research  is  different  from  the  employment  of  gimmicks  to  gain  temporary 
winnings. It is the method of using human intellect to discover new knowledge and add that 
wisdom to the existing body of knowledge until it is disproved by a new discovery. Hence, 
those who are engaged in scientific research have to conform to a set of accepted principles, 
guidelines and a code of ethics and morality. To follow such a set of rules when playing the 
game called scientific inquiry is not an easy task. Yet, one has to do so in order to separate 
science from what is sometimes known as pseudo-science. 
Why scientific research? 
Human knowledge is as old as the history of human beings. Human beings have attempted 
to  understand  Nature,  by  using  human  intellect  and  experience,  so  that  they  could  find 
answers to questions that had been puzzling them constantly. Some of these questions have 
been  beyond  direct  observation  such  as  “who  created  the  world?”  or  “what  caused 
rains?”. Hence, it is quite natural for them to hypothesise answers by using both intellect 
and experience. When they do so, it is also inevitable for them to base their conclusions on 
personal  biases,  fears  and  prejudices  they  have  been  harbouring  in  their  minds.  Such 
conclusions  are  tainted  by  biased  or  prejudiced  views  held  by  the  person  making  the 
conclusions. Hence, such findings are simply an imposition of personal views on the society 
and, therefore, fail to explain reality and Nature. Therefore, discoveries made in that manner 
do not enhance the human knowledge. 
In this background, it is necessary to build the knowledge base of mankind free from biases, 
fears and prejudices. This could be attained by pursuing scientific inquiry which bases itself 
on  a  set  of  principles,  guidelines  and  an  ethical  and  moral  code  that  discipline  the 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 1
researchers.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  the  conclusions  derived  through  scientific 
inquiry are not static and permanent. The very nature of scientific inquiry is that conclusions 
derived from a given research study, as Karl Popper pointed out, should be capable of being 
refuted by a new inquiry. Hence, results produced by scientific research carry with them the 
property of refutability and are valid only until a new research study would replace them 
with  new  results.  In  this  sense,  the  knowledge  base  developed  through  scientific  inquiry 
could be equated to a reservoir from which water would flow out and fresh water would flow 
in  continuously.  But  the  core  knowledge,  just  like  the  permanently  stored  water  in  the 
reservoir, would remain intact. 
The mind of a researcher engaged in scientific inquiry 
There are certain qualities and prerequisites which a researcher engaged in scientific inquiry 
should possess. The most important of these is the open mind with which the researcher 
should commence his inquiry. The researcher is not a propagandist, nor is he a person bent 
on superimposing his views on others. He should be humble enough to reject even the views 
he would have held for long, if his inquiry does not support them. In other words, he should 
conduct his inquiry, not with the objective of establishing the views held by him, but with the 
objective  of  subjecting  them  to  a  free  inquiry.  This  is  known  as  rational  and  objective 
thinking. 
The Buddha, in a discourse He preached to members of Kalama clan, outlined the nature of 
rational  and  objective  thinking,  though  its  purpose  was  to  guide  them  to  distinguish  good 
from  bad.  “Oh,  Members  of  Kalama  clan…”  the  Buddha  said.  “…Do  not  rely  on  an 
opinion because you have heard it often and you are familiar with it. Do not accept it 
because it is in accord with tradition or found in the scriptures or logical or conforms 
to theory. Do not accept it because it is preached by your teachers or by a respected 
priest”  (Anguththara  Nikaya).  The  researcher  who  plans  to  engage  himself  in  scientific 
inquiry should be free from the influence of previous knowledge or the traditions and should 
not be guided by mere logical considerations. 
How could an individual understand the nature of the real world? There are two approaches 
suggested  for  this  purpose,  namely,  classicism  or  romanticism.  Classicism  shows  the 
world by means of its underlying form. It proceeds by reason or by laws governing Nature. If 
a  motor  car  engine  is  presented  to  a  classicist,  he  would  be  interested  in  finding  out  its 
underlying  mechanism  as  determined  by  mechanical  laws  governing  the  working  of  the 
engine. A romantic, on the other hand, would simply be interested only on the outer surface 
of the world. He would look at the world from the point of its immediate appearance. Hence, 
a  romantic  would  find  a  motor  car  engine  with  wires  and  cables  strewn  everywhere  in  a 
disorderly manner as a dull appearance.  
A  person  with  a  scientific  mind  would  get  himself  embroiled  in  classicism  and  not  in 
romanticism.  This  is  because  romanticism  is  concerned  about  emotions  –  feelings  like 
biases,  fears  or  prejudices  which  a  scientist  should  avoid  when  undertaking  a  scientific 
inquiry. 
What is scientific method? 
Robert M Pirsig, the philosopher-novelist, in his novel titled Zen and the Art of Motorcycle 
Maintenance, raises a very pertinent question regarding scientists and scientific inquiry. Is a 
sideway  motorcycle  mechanic  a  scientist?  The  answer  depends  on  how  the  motorcycle 
mechanic would apply himself to the problem at hand. 
According  to  Pirsig,  if  a  motorcycle  mechanic  does  a  lousy  job,  then  he  does  not  qualify 
himself  to  be  called  a  scientist.  There  are  many  mechanics  of  this  type.  When  a  faulty 
motorcycle  is  brought  to  a  mechanic,  he  may  simply  jump  to  conclusions  based  on  his 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2008
previous knowledge. Instead of subjecting the motorcycle to a thorough scientific inquiry, he 
may  conclude  that  the  fault  lies  in  a  certain  part  or  a  certain  mechanism.  To  reach  this 
conclusion, he has not gathered the relevant information. The chances are that he may be 
correct  or  may  not  be  correct.  If  he  is  correct,  the  repair  performed  on  the  basis  of  the 
diagnosis made with imperfect information will prove to be a success. But the mechanic in 
that  case  has  behaved  like  a  speculator  and  the  outcome  of  speculation  may  have  the 
chance of being a success or a failure. If it turns out to be a failure, the cost to the owner of 
the  motorcycle  would  be  enormous.  In  that  case,  since  the  correct  repair  has  not  been 
performed,  the  motorcycle  will  continue  to  remain  faulty.  Hence,  a  true  scientist  engaging 
himself in scientific inquiry should not be a speculator. Instead, he should be a person willing 
to follow the scientific method to arrive at conclusions. 
Decisions  could  be  made  by  a  mechanic  attending  to  a  faulty  motorcycle  by  resorting  to 
either inductivism or deductivism. The inductive approach requires the mechanic to look 
for evidence in the real world and come to conclusions. For instance, if we see crows that are 
black and if we continue to see black crows, we may conclude that all crows are black. A 
motorcycle mechanic may likewise see the faulty part and conclude that the fault lies in that 
part. The deductive approach, on the other hand, requires the mechanic to theorise in his 
mind  and  come  to  conclusions  based  on  empirical  findings  he  would  make  to  support  his 
theory. In the previous black crow example, we may theorise that crows are black and then 
look for black crows in the real world. When we find one black crow, our theory is proved. 
A  motorcycle  mechanic  becomes  a  scientist,  if  he  follows  the  scientific  method  in  the 
diagnosis of the fault and the subsequent repair of the motorcycle. It involves starting with an 
open  mind.  There  are  no  previously  made  conclusions  or  prejudgments.  The  approach  is 
simply  classical,  that  is,  guided  by  underlying  principles  and  not  by  the  immediate 
appearance.  There  are  several  steps  which  a  scientist  should  follow  when  he  adopts  the 
scientific method. A good motorcycle mechanic would also follow the same steps.  
The steps involved in a scientific inquiry are as follows.  
First, the identified problem has to be stated in clear terms. In the case of a motorcycle, the 
problem may be that the engine does not start. 
Second,  based  on  the  problem,  one  hypothesis  or  several  hypotheses  as  required 
regarding the cause of the problem should be made. The motorcycle engine does not start 
because there is no fuel in the tank. Or there is a blockage of the tube that distributes fuel to 
the  engine.  Or  the  electrical  system  may  have  failed.  Or  carburettor  would  have  been 
blocked. The mechanic would hypothesise all possible reasons for the failure of the engine. 
Third, experiments are designed to test each hypothesis made. The mechanic may open 
the fuel tank to see whether there is fuel. If there is no fuel, he will try to start the engine 
having filled the tank with fuel. If there is fuel in the tank, then he would examine the second 
hypothesis, that is, whether there is a blockage in the tube that distributes fuel to the engine. 
If there is a blockage, he will clean it and try to start the engine. If there is no blockage, then 
he  would  experiment  the  third  hypothesis,  namely,  the  working  of  the  electrical system.  In 
this manner, he would experiment all the hypotheses he has made one by one and make 
relevant conclusions. 
Fourth,  the  results  of  the  experiments  are  analysed  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  the 
hypothesis is proved. Or else, when several hypotheses have been made, to ascertain which 
hypothesis has been proved. 
Fifth, making final conclusions out of the observed results of the experiments.  
A disciplined motorcycle mechanic would follow these steps involved in the scientific method 
and  attend  to  the  required  repair  of  the  fault  in  the  motorcycle.  In  this  sense,  a  sideway 
motorcycle mechanic is not different from a trained scientist, since both follow the scientific 
method in reaching conclusions. 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 3
The use of techniques and technology 
It has been fashionable for scientists to make use of scientific techniques and technology 
to facilitate the decision making process, when undertaking scientific inquiries. Extreme care 
should be exercised by scientists in this instance. Every technique has its own methodology 
and  limitations  and  the  scientist  should  be  fully  aware  of  same  when  such  techniques  are 
used.  Inappropriate  use  of  the  techniques  or  wrong  conclusions  made  on  the  basis  of  the 
results derived amount to misuse of science by the researchers. It also paves way for crafty 
individuals to use the results to their advantage and gullible individuals to get victimised.  
The use of econometrics has been one of the techniques employed by scientists to prove or 
disprove  their  hypotheses.  This  has  also  been  one  of  the  sources  of  misuse  of  science, 
either because wrong calculations are made or wrong conclusions are arrived at, due to the 
failure  of  the  researcher  to  analyse  the  error  term  appropriately.  Wikipedia,  the  cyber-
encyclopaedia, is full of the instances of such misuse of econometric methods in research. It 
is noteworthy to refer to two studies done by Deirdre N McCloskey and Stephen T Ziliak of 
the University of Iowa on the status of econometric studies in research articles published in 
the  reputed  journal  American  Economic  Review  in  1980s.  They  have  found  fault  with 
authors for not analysing the error term properly and using the statistical term “significance” 
inappropriately.  One  of  their  papers  published  in  the  Journal  of  Economic  Literature  in 
March, 1996 under the title “The Standard Error of Regressions” has made the following eye-
opening comment: “Such misuses of statistical significance appear to depend in part 
on  a  vintage  effect,  measured  by  date  of  Ph.D.  conferral.  The  papers  authored  by 
Ph.D.s  conferred  between  1975  and  1979,  when  inexpensively  generated  t-tests  first 
reached the masses, were considerably worse than the papers of others at making a 
distinction  between  economic  and  statistical  significance.  They  used  the  word 
“significance” in ambiguous ways more often than did early or later Ph.D.s and they 
were less likely to separate statistical significance from other types of significance in 
the sections on scientific and policy implications” (p 111). 
The  other  findings  of  McCloskey  and  Ziliak  are  also  startling.  Of  the  182  articles  in  the 
American  Economic  Review  they  have  surveyed,  70  percent  had  not  distinguished 
statistical  significance  from  economic,  policy  or  scientific  significance.  While  they  had 
referred to largeness of the estimators, 72 percent had not asked “how large was large?” At 
the  same  time,  59  percent  had  used  the  word  “significance”  in  ambiguous  ways.  A  more 
pronounced failure has been the non-reporting of descriptive statistics such as the means of 
the regression variables by 69 percent of the authors. (p 106).  
The problem with econometric studies is that the computations made by authors remain as a 
“black box” to ordinary readers. It is the responsibility of the editors of journals to verify the 
black  box  and  assure  quality  on  behalf  the  general  public  who  consumes  the  outcome  of 
research  studies.  It  is,  therefore,  disheartening  that  learned  journals  have  published  such 
papers without due reference and consideration of the methodology adopted in conducting 
the  research  under  reference.  Today,  of  course,  with  advanced  statistical  packages 
available, it is possible for the editors of the journals to check on the appropriateness of the 
statistical  calculations  made  by  the  paper  writers.  Since  the  ordinary  readers  of  scientific 
papers are unable to gauge the wrongful way of handling econometrics by researchers, such 
studies by editors before papers are published become all the more important. In view of the 
gullibility of general readers, the misuse of econometrics in learned papers is akin to “mis-
selling” that one finds in the market place when a seller has not fully apprised a buyer of the 
risks  of  buying  a  product.  This  type  of  mis-selling  by  researchers  could  be  termed 
“econometric dishonesty” which they are not supposed to practise. 
Researchers find a truth and not the truth 
The real world is vast and complex. Hence, it cannot be mapped out by scientific research 
adequately, just like neurologists are unable to map out the human brain completely. What 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2008
the science does is to discover only a flint of the truth in the vast real world. As such, there 
is no dearth of hypotheses which scientists could make and a dearth of theories which they 
can formulate. That is good news for prospective scientists. However, one theory which is 
valid  today  could  be  disproved  by  another  theory  to  be  formulated  tomorrow.  Hence,  all 
theories are subject to the same property: the property of refutability. In fact, Karl Popper’s 
argument was that if a theory cannot be refuted, then it does not become a theory. 
Hence, any scientific research will discover only a truth and not the truth. This means that 
all scientific research studies undertaken in all the disciplines would produce only a relative 
truth  and  not  the  absolute  truth.  With  all  the  scientific  apparatuses,  techniques  and 
computing capacity available today, science still cannot reach out to the absolute truth. As 
such, the task of finding the absolute truth has been relegated to religion and mystics. 
This may be discouraging news for those who are engaged in scientific research. But, that 
has been the way of science throughout its history and such discovery of relative truth has 
been  adequate  for  the  purpose  of  building  the  human  knowledge  base  and  putting  it  to 
practical use by mankind. In the modern world, the discovery of absolute truth may therefore 
be irrelevant. 
Conclusions 
A  researcher  is  not  a  propagandist  or  a  dictator.  His  task  is  to  follow  an  accepted  set  of 
principles, guidelines and an ethical and moral code to discover a truth, and not the truth, 
and add it to the extant knowledge base. He should start his inquiry with an open mind and 
be ready to reject even the long held views if empirical studies do not support them. But to do 
so,  a  researcher  should  display  a  fair  degree  of  maturity  and  necessarily  cultivate  within 
himself self-discipline, wisdom, objectivity and equanimity. In this sense, a perfect researcher 
is like the Buddha who is not guided by biased or prejudiced emotions.  
Hence,  the  most  important  requirement  of  a  researcher  is  that  he  should  be  honest  to 
himself.  
BIS Review 161/2008 
 5
