Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  CBI,  Institute  of 
Directors,  Leeds  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Yorkshire  Forward  at  the  Royal  Armouries, 
Leeds, 21 October 2008. 
 My first memories of Leeds are from a wet summer in 1958. I was ten years old, we lived on 
the moors above Hebden Bridge, and my father took me to my first Test Match –England 
against  New  Zealand  at  Headingley.  It  rained  all  day  on  both  Thursday  and  Friday,  and, 
when  play  started  in  mid-afternoon  on  Saturday,  on  a  drying  wicket  New  Zealand  were 
bowled out by Laker and Lock for 67. So I became a slow bowler. I was taught to bowl – slow 
left  arm  –  at  Old  Town  primary  school  by  the  headmaster,  Alfred  Stephenson.  During  the 
morning break he would mark the wickets in chalk in the playground, and draw a small circle 
exactly on a length. If we could pitch the ball within that circle he would give us a farthing. As 
we improved, and the payout of farthings increased, the morning break became shorter and 
shorter  –  my  first  lesson  in  economic  incentives,  or  what  is  known  in  the  trade  as  “moral 
hazard”.  
So  let  me  move  forward  50  years  to  the  events  of  2008,  and  describe  the  nature  of  the 
financial crisis, the steps that governments and central banks have taken to deal with it, and, 
most important, the implications of recent events for the UK and world economies. 
Since  August  2007,  the  industrialised  world  has  been  engulfed  by  financial  turmoil.  And, 
following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  15  September,  an  extraordinary,  almost 
unimaginable,  sequence  of  events  began  which  culminated  a  week  or  so  ago  in  the 
announcements around the world of a recapitalisation of the banking system. It is difficult to 
exaggerate the severity and importance of those events. Not since the beginning of the First 
World  War  has  our  banking  system  been  so  close  to  collapse.  In  the  second  half  of 
September, companies and non-bank financial institutions accelerated their withdrawal from 
even  short-term  funding  of  banks,  and  banks  increasingly  lost  confidence  in  the  safety  of 
lending to each other. Funding costs rose sharply and for many institutions it was possible to 
borrow  only  overnight.  Credit  to  the  real  economy  almost  stopped  flowing.  In  financial 
markets,  confidence  in  others  fell  to  a  point  where  investors  sought  refuge  in  government 
instruments such as US Treasury Bills, which at one point yielded a negative return. Central 
banks  around  the  world  were  providing  enormous  amounts  of  liquidity  to  some  institutions 
while  at  the  same  time  taking  large  deposits  from  others.  Eventually,  on  6  and  7  October 
even overnight funding started to dry up. Radical action was necessary to ensure the survival 
of  the  banking  system.  And  on  the  morning  of  8  October  that  action  was  taken  when  the 
Prime Minister and Chancellor unveiled a UK plan for recapitalising the banking system on 
which the Bank, FSA and Treasury had been working for a while.  
Why  was  radical  action  necessary?  When  the  financial  turmoil  began  in  August  2007, 
markets  for  a  number  of  financial  instruments,  including  mortgage-backed  securities,  dried 
up. Most observers expected this closure to be short-lived, and the predominant view was 
that the crisis was one of (a lack of) liquidity. But, as time passed and markets did not re-
open, it became clear that the problem was deeper seated, and concerned the solvency of 
the  banking  system  and  the  sustainability  of  its  funding  model.  Attempts  to  deal  with  the 
problem  by  injections  of  liquidity  from  central  banks  led  to  temporary  alleviations  of  the 
symptoms, but, after an initial improvement, conditions would deteriorate again.  
The scale of central bank liquidity support during the crisis has been unprecedented, and all 
central  banks  have  increased  the  scale  of  their  lending  in  broadly  similar  ways.  The  UK 
taxpayer now has a larger claim on the assets of banks (in the form of collateral held by the 
Bank of England) than the total equity value of UK banks. Massive injections of central bank 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 1
liquidity have played a vital role in staving off an imminent collapse of the banking system. 
Such  lending  can  tide  a  bank  over  while  it  is  taking  steps  to  remove  the  cause  of  the 
concerns  that  generated  a  run  or  lack  of  confidence.  But  it  can  also  serve  to  conceal  the 
severity of the underlying problems, and put off the inevitable day of reckoning.  
I hope it is now understood that the provision of central bank liquidity, while essential to buy 
time, is not, and never  could be, the solution to the banking crisis, nor to the problems of 
individual  banks.  Central  bank  liquidity  is  sticking  plaster,  useful  and  important,  but  not  a 
substitute for proper treatment.  
Just  as  a  fever  is  itself  only  a  symptom  of  an  underlying  condition,  so  the  freezing  of 
interbank and money markets was the symptom of deeper structural problems in the banking 
sector. So let me explain why a major recapitalisation of the banking system was necessary, 
was  the  centrepiece  of  the  UK  plan  (alongside  a  temporary  guarantee  of  some  wholesale 
funding instruments and provision of central bank liquidity), and was in turn followed by other 
European countries and the United States.  
Securitised  mortgages  –  that  is  collections  of  mortgages  bundled  together  and  sold  as 
securities, including the now infamous US sub-prime mortgages – had been marketed during 
a period of rising house prices and low interest rates which had masked the riskiness of the 
underlying loans. By securitising mortgages on such a scale, banks transformed the liquidity 
of their lending book. They also financed it by short-term wholesale borrowing. But in the light 
of rising defaults and falling house prices – first in the United States and then elsewhere – 
investors reassessed the risks inherent in these securities. Perceived as riskier, their values 
fell  and  demand  for  securitisations  dwindled.  For  the  same  reason,  the  value  of  banks’ 
mortgage  books  declined.  Banks  saw  the  value  of  their  assets  fall  while  their  liabilities 
remained unchanged. The effect was magnified by the very high levels of borrowing relative 
to capital (or leverage) with which many banks were operating, and the fact that banks had 
purchased significant quantities of securitised and more complex financial instruments from 
each other. Not only were these assets difficult to value, but the distribution of losses across 
the financial system was uncertain. Banks’ share prices fell. Capital was squeezed.  
Markets were sending a clear message to banks around the world: they did not have enough 
capital. At the Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank in Washington ten days ago, the 
message  was  reinforced  by  our  colleagues  from  Japan,  Sweden  and  Finland,  who,  with 
eloquence and not a little passion, reminded those present of their experience in dealing with 
a  systemic  banking  failure  in  the  1990s.  Recapitalise  and  do  it  now  was  the  lesson. 
Recapitalisation requires a fiscal response, and that can be done only by governments.  
Confidence  in  the  banking  system  had  eroded  as  the  weakness  of  the  capital  position 
became  more  widely  appreciated.  But  it  took  a  crisis  caused  by  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers to trigger the coordinated government plan to recapitalise the system. It would be a 
mistake,  however,  to  think  that  had  Lehman  Brothers  not  failed,  a  crisis  would  have  been 
averted. The underlying cause of inadequate capital would eventually have provoked a crisis 
of one kind or another somewhere else.   
So  where  does  this  leave  us?  The  recapitalisation  plan  is  having  a  major  impact  on  the 
restoration  of  market  confidence  in  banks.  Perhaps  the  single  most  important  diagnostic 
statistic is the credit default swap premium – an indicator of market concerns about solvency 
of banks. These premia have fallen markedly since the announcement of the UK plan. From 
the close of business on 7 October to now the premia on the UK’s five largest banks have 
more  than  halved.  We  are  far  from  the  end  of  the  road  back  to  stability,  but  the  plan  to 
recapitalise our banking system, both here and abroad, will I believe come to be seen as the 
moment in the banking crisis of the past year when we turned the corner.  
As concerns about the viability of our banks recede, banks should regain the confidence of 
the market as recipients of funding. There are already some signs of greater activity. But the 
age of innocence – when banks lent to each other unsecured for three months or longer at 
only a small premium to expected policy rates – will not quickly, if ever, return. In itself that 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2008
does not affect the ability of banks to fund lending, but confidence has been badly shaken 
after the traumatic events of the past few weeks. New sources of funding will develop only 
slowly, although the temporary government guarantees of new lending to banks will help. So 
it will take time before the recapitalisation leads to a resumption of normal levels of lending 
by the banking system to the real economy. And we cannot assume that there will not be 
problems in other parts of the financial system and in some emerging market economies to 
be overcome before the crisis can truly be described as over. 
With the plan for recapitalisation in place, the focus of attention has moved to the outlook for 
the UK and world economies. Over the past month, the economic news has probably been 
the  worst  in  such  a  short  period  for  a  very  considerable  time.  The  most  recent  activity 
indicators for the second of half of the year have fallen sharply. In the UK, unemployment 
continues to rise and, over the past three months, has risen at the fastest rate for seventeen 
years,  albeit  from  a  relatively  low  level.  House  prices  declined  by  about  5%  in  the  third 
quarter and are 13% lower than a year ago. The recent weakness of the housing market is 
likely to continue. And if the news on the domestic front were not sufficiently discouraging, 
the rest of the world economy also appears to be slowing rapidly.  
Why has the outlook deteriorated so quickly? The banking crisis dealt a severe blow to the 
availability of credit. Growth in secured lending to households fell to an annualised rate of 
1.9%  in  the  three  months  to  August,  its  lowest  level  in  more  than  a  decade.  The  Bank  of 
England’s survey of credit conditions suggests that the terms on which banks provide credit 
to companies have tightened even further. And, on some estimates, the supply of finance to 
the UK corporate sector has ground to a halt. This credit shock has come on top of a fall in 
real disposable incomes resulting from the rise in energy and food prices earlier in the year. 
So, taken together, the combination of a squeeze on real take-home pay and a decline in the 
availability of credit poses the risk of a sharp and prolonged slowdown in domestic demand. 
Indeed, it now seems likely that the UK economy is entering a recession.  
At the same time, consumer price inflation, our target measure, has risen from around the 
2% target at the beginning of the year to a worryingly high rate of 5.2% in September. Oil and 
other commodity and food prices have all been rising very rapidly. In those circumstances, it 
was  sensible  to  allow  those  price  changes  to  be  absorbed  by  movements  in  consumer 
prices. The alternative would have been an even sharper slowdown in the economy. Central 
banks in other countries also find themselves in a similar position. Over the past year or so, 
CPI inflation rose from 2.0% to 5.6% in the United States and from 1.7% to 4.0% in the euro-
area.  
It  is  surely  probable  that  the  drama  of  the  banking  crisis,  which  is  unprecedented  in  the 
lifetime of almost all of us, will damage business and consumer confidence more generally. 
But  two  pieces  of  good  news  should  temper  the  gloom.  First,  the  banking  system  will  be 
recapitalised  and,  in  due  course,  the  banking  system  will  resume  more  normal  lending, 
although by normal I do not mean the conditions that prevailed prior to August 2007. Second, 
oil prices have now fallen from a peak of $147 a barrel only three months ago to around $70 
today. And wholesale gas prices have now also started to follow oil prices down. That will 
help to support the growth of real incomes as well as bringing down inflation.  
So, what should the Monetary Policy Committee do now? It must continue to set Bank Rate 
in order to meet the 2% inflation target, not next month or the month after, but further ahead 
when the impact of recent developments in both credit supply and world commodity prices 
will  have  worked  their  way  through  the  economy.  This  is  the  time  not  to  abandon  but  to 
reinforce  our  commitment  to  stability.  The  slowdown  in  demand,  and  the  recent  falls  in 
energy prices, will bring inflation back towards the target. The Committee must balance the 
risk that a prolonged slowdown in domestic demand pulls inflation materially below the target 
against the risk that today’s high inflation rate becomes embedded in inflation expectations. 
During the past month, the balance of risks to inflation in the medium term shifted decisively 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 3
to the downside. And the MPC – in an action co-ordinated with six other major central banks 
– cut Bank Rate by half a percentage point to 4.5%.  
Looking ahead, the outlook is obviously very uncertain – both for the world as well as our 
own economy. The MPC cannot simply extrapolate the past into the future. The prospects for 
oil and other commodity prices are difficult to assess. So too are the period over which bank 
lending  will  return  to  normal  and  the  extent  of  the  damage  to  business  and  consumer 
confidence. Moreover, the credit crunch affects not just demand but also the supply potential 
of  the  economy,  complicating  the  assessment  of  the  inflationary  impact  of  changes  in  the 
level of demand. The associated shift of resources away from those parts of the economy 
that have flourished in recent years towards other areas of economic activity will moderate 
the increase in potential output while that adjustment is taking place. The MPC must monitor 
carefully  all  the  available  evidence  about  fast-changing  patterns  of  spending,  supply  and 
prices. It will act promptly to ensure that inflation remains on track to meet our target.  
The downturn in the economy will affect not just monetary policy but fiscal policy too. That 
subject is for another occasion, but there is one point I do want to make tonight. The cost of 
supporting  the  banking  system  will  inevitably  raise  the  level  of  national  debt.  Managed 
properly, however, such a rise in national debt need not prove inflationary. Indeed, within a 
reasonable period it should be possible for the Government to reduce its stake in the banking 
system, for example by selling units in a Bank Reconstruction Fund, and repay the additional 
debt that had been issued. That is one difference between past increases in national debt in 
times of war and the increase now to pay for recapitalisation of the banking system which 
involves the acquisition of an asset.  
Let me take you back again to 1958. In the very first television interview given by a Governor 
of the Bank of England, Cameron Cobbold explained national debt to Robin Day on “Tell the 
People”,  the  highlight  of  ITN’s  Sunday  evening  schedule  fifty  years  ago.  Here  is  the 
exchange: 
Cobbold:  The  National  Debt  represents  the  sums  of  money  which  the  Government  have 
over  the  years  borrowed  from  the  public,  mainly  in  this  country  and,  to  some 
extent, abroad. That is really the amount of expenditure which they have failed 
over the period to cover by revenue. 
Have we paid for World War II? 
Have we paid for the Battle of Waterloo? 
I don’t think you can exactly say that. 
Day:   
Cobbold:   No. 
Day:   
Cobbold:   No. 
Day:   
Cobbold: 
On  this  occasion,  we  should  have  little  difficulty  in  evaluating  when  we  have  paid  for  the 
recapitalisation. There are, though, questions about the source of the funding and the level of 
borrowing  by  the  country  as  a  whole  from  overseas.  For  several  years,  the  UK  banking 
sector has been relying extensively on external capital flows, principally short-term wholesale 
funding, to finance its lending activities. Those external inflows have fallen sharply – a mild 
form  of  the  reversal  of  capital  inflows  experienced  by  a  number  of  emerging  market 
economies  in  the  1990s.  Unless  they  are  replaced  by  other  forms  of  external  finance,  the 
adjustments  in  the  trade  deficit  and  exchange  rate  will  need  to  be  larger  and  faster  than 
would  otherwise  have  occurred,  implying  a  larger  rise  in  domestic  saving  and  weaker 
domestic spending in the short run.  
With the bank recapitalisation plan in place, we now face a long, slow haul to restore lending 
to the real economy, and hence growth of our economy, to more normal conditions. The past 
few weeks have been somewhat too exciting. The actions that were taken were not designed 
Have we paid for World War I? 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2008
to save the banks as such, but to protect the rest of the economy from the banks. I hope 
banks  will  come  to  appreciate,  just  as  the  New  Zealanders  at  Headingley  in  1958,  the 
Yorkshire virtues of patience and sound defence when batting on a sticky wicket. I have said 
many times that successful monetary policy would appear rather boring. So let me extend an 
invitation to the banking industry to join me in promoting the idea that a little more boredom 
would be no bad thing. The long march back to boredom and stability starts tonight in Leeds.  
BIS Review 128/2008 
 5
