Lim Hng Kiang: Impact of current issues to Asia’s growth and the global 
environment ahead 
Ministerial statement by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore  and  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  on  Government  Guarantee  on  Deposits, 
Singapore, 21 October 2008. 
 Singapore remains stable and sound 
The global economy is slowing and the international financial system is still under significant 
stress.  Amidst  the  current  turmoil,  the  financial  system  in  Singapore  remains  stable  and 
robust. Financial institutions in Singapore continue to be sound and to operate normally. Our 
local  banks  and  finance  companies  are  financially  strong  and  well-capitalised.  They  meet 
capital  adequacy  ratios  in  excess  of  MAS’  requirements,  which  are  in  turn  higher  than 
international  standards.  Foreign  banks  in  Singapore  are  subject  to  strict  licensing  and 
admission  criteria,  and  are  required  to  maintain  assets  against  their  liabilities  by  an 
appropriate margin. Our financial markets remain stable and calm, and financial institutions 
in  Singapore  do  not  face  funding  difficulties  in  the  interbank  market.  Public  confidence 
remains high, and we have not had to take extraordinary measures. 
Why the need for Government guarantee 
Nevertheless,  the  Government  has  carefully  assessed  the  international  situation  and  its 
implications  for  Singapore.  The  actions  taken  by  governments  and  central  banks  over  the 
last  few  weeks  in  Europe  and  the  US  to  recapitalise  banks,  purchase  bad  assets  and 
guarantee  bank  borrowings  in  the  wholesale  markets  have  improved  confidence  in  the 
international financial system, even though there remain significant problems and stresses. 
However, the announcement in the past week by a few jurisdictions in our region of blanket 
government guarantees on all bank deposits could potentially have a more direct impact on 
Singapore. Last Thursday the Singapore Government announced a guarantee on deposits of 
individuals and non-bank customers with banks, finance companies and merchant banks in 
Singapore until 31 December 2010. We have decided that such a guarantee is necessary for 
the following reasons. 
First, the guarantee ensures a level international playing field for banks in Singapore. The 
recent announcements in the region of blanket government guarantees on deposits set off a 
dynamic that puts pressure on other jurisdictions to respond or else risk disadvantaging and 
potentially weakening their own financial institutions and financial sectors. If Singapore had 
not introduced a similar guarantee, there was a real risk that depositors would have shifted 
some  of  their  deposits  out  of  Singapore  banks,  to  banks  in  other  jurisdictions  which 
guarantee deposits. This would have weakened financial institutions here. The Government 
has therefore taken a precautionary step to pre-empt and avert any such possibility.  
Second, the guarantee bolsters the confidence that the public has in Singapore’s financial 
system. It provides certainty to Singaporeans during such challenging and uncertain times in 
the  international  environment,  notwithstanding  that  in  Singapore  our  institutions  are 
fundamentally sound. 
Third, financial services are an important pillar of Singapore’s economy, accounting for 12% 
of  GDP  and  5%  of  Singapore's  employment.  Beyond  this  substantial  direct  contribution  to 
GDP, the financial sector plays a critical role in intermediating credit for the economy, and in 
providing  other  critical  financial  services  to  companies  and  depositors  in  Singapore.  It  is 
therefore  important  for  the  whole  economy  that  the  financial  sector  continues  to  function 
normally.  Should  financial  institutions  in  Singapore  become  less  competitive  or  credit 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 1
become less readily available, it would hinder the financing of economic activities and raise 
the borrowing costs of businesses. This would aggravate the already challenging economic 
situation and thereby adversely affect our growth and jobs. 
Fourth,  this  financial  crisis  is  not  confined  to  any  country  or  region,  but  is  a  global  one. 
Singapore’s  guarantee  of  deposits  demonstrates  our  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  our 
financial  system,  and  helps  contribute  towards  restoring  confidence  in  the  international 
financial system. 
Why the guarantee is sufficient and prudent 
The  deposits  of  individuals  and  non-bank  customers  with  banks,  finance  companies  and 
merchant  banks  in  Singapore  amount  to  about  S$700  billion.  In  view  of  MAS’  stringent 
regulations  and  close  supervision  of  financial  institutions  in  Singapore,  their  strong  capital 
and asset positions, and the potential support that foreign institutions in Singapore can avail 
themselves of where necessary under the government guarantees provided by their home 
jurisdictions,  MAS  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  have  assessed  that  the  backing  of  S$150 
billion of the Government’s reserves provided to the guarantee would be more than sufficient.  
Let me explain. First, the likelihood of a bank failure as a result of problems in Singapore is 
small as our banking system is sound and closely supervised, even though it is possible that 
problems elsewhere will affect a bank’s operations in Singapore.  
Second, even if a bank were to fail here, it should still have substantial assets to meet its 
liabilities to depositors. Under the law non-bank depositors enjoy priority in being paid, ahead 
of  other  unsecured  creditors.  This  makes  it  more  likely  that  the  failed  institution  will  have 
sufficient assets to pay out to depositors. Hence, for the guarantee to be called, two things 
have to happen: a bank has to fail, and at the same time its assets must be worth so little 
that there is not even enough to repay its depositors. Even then the draw on the guarantee 
should only be for the shortfall, which should be a fraction of the deposits outstanding.  
Hence we have calculated that the S$150 billion backing is an amount that will be ample to 
meet any eventuality except the most remote. S$150 billion does not in any way reflect an 
estimate of the likely draw over the two years of the guarantee. On the contrary, we expect 
the  actual  draw  to  be  small  or  if  we  are  fortunate  even  zero.  Instead,  the  S$150  billion 
reflects  the  Government’s  confidence  in  the  banking  system,  and  its  intention  to  give  all 
depositors that same confidence. 
Singapore  is  in  a  good  financial  position  to  provide  this  guarantee  because  of  the  fiscal 
discipline of successive governments. We are in a strong fiscal position, having accumulated 
surpluses during good times for exigencies like this. In contemplating making this guarantee, 
the Government has carefully assessed that it is well within our means, does not impair our 
ability  to  meet  all  government  obligations  and  will  not  jeopardise  Singapore’s  financial 
standing. We are using our reserves to back this guarantee. In the event of a payout, past 
reserves  may  be  drawn  upon.  The  Minister  for  Finance  has  sought  and  obtained  the 
President’s concurrence to issue the guarantee, as required by the Constitution because of 
the President’s role in safeguarding our reserves.  
I should also make clear that this guarantee does not impact at all on MAS’ ability to defend 
the Singapore dollar. That is because even after giving this guarantee, the government still 
has  ample  means,  with  the  full  backing  of  our  not  insignificant  reserves,  to  safeguard  our 
currency if this should prove necessary. 
To prevent financial institutions abusing the guarantee by expanding aggressively and taking 
on excessive risks, MAS has emphasised to financial institutions in Singapore the need to 
remain  prudent  in  this  current  operating  environment.  MAS  will  continue  to  supervise 
financial institutions in Singapore closely. It will take the necessary actions to see to it that 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2008
they operate in a sound manner, and do not put at risk the stability of our financial system or 
the Government’s reserves.  
Conclusion 
Let me reiterate that Singapore’s financial system remains sound and we are well-placed to 
meet the challenges facing us. This global crisis is unprecedented, and requires Singapore to 
respond effectively, decisively but also prudently. The provision of a Government guarantee 
on deposits is a necessary temporary measure to protect the interests of Singaporeans and 
the economy, which are in turn dependent on a strong and competitive financial sector. The 
risk of drawing on the guarantee and potential impact on Singapore’s reserves are low. This 
is  a  measured,  precautionary  action  that  will  help  us  to  weather  the  global  economic 
slowdown and the ongoing financial crisis in international financial markets. 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 3
