Jürgen Stark: Monetary, fiscal and financial stability in Europe 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 11th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  
“Error  repeats  itself  endlessly  in  deeds.  Therefore,  we  must  repeat  the  truth  tirelessly  in 
words” 
(Johann Wolfgang von Goethe) 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers for having invited me here today to share with you my 
thoughts on the prerequisites for economic, financial and price stability in Europe. 
We are all aware that these are the most challenging times since the introduction of the euro 
nearly  ten  years  ago.  The  financial  crisis,  which  originated  in  the  United  States,  has  now 
spread  across  the  globe.  In  so  doing,  it  has  greatly  affected  the  outlook  for  short-term 
economic  growth  in  Europe  and  elsewhere.  Moreover,  the  need  to  address  past 
macroeconomic  imbalances  has  clouded  the  medium-term  outlook  for  potential  output 
growth  not  only  for  the  United  States  but  also  for  a  number  of  European  countries. 
Persistently high current account deficits and excessive increases in house prices have not 
been limited to the United States but have also been characteristic in some euro area and 
many non-euro area EU countries. These imbalances will need to be corrected, suggesting 
that a period of slower economic growth may lie ahead. 
The correction of macroeconomic imbalances will be orderly if, and only if, macroeconomic 
policy-makers retain a medium-term to long-term focus. In particular, the prevention of future 
crises  needs  to  receive  at  least  as  much  attention  as  short-term  crisis  management.  In 
addition,  all  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  need  to  remain  committed  to  their  respective 
medium-term objectives, i.e. price stability and sound public finances. This was, is and will 
remain the best contribution monetary and fiscal policies can make for financial stability. 
However,  although  sound  macroeconomic  policies  are  only  a  necessary  condition  for  a 
functioning market economy and for economic and financial stability, they are clearly not a 
sufficient  condition.  This  insight  is  hardly  new  but  seems  to  have  been  forgotten  to  some 
extent over time. It was most clearly expressed in Walter Eucken’s famous book Principles of 
Economic Policy (Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik), which laid the intellectual foundation of 
Germany’s  economic  model  after  the  Second  World  War.  This  book  has  been  a  constant 
source  of  inspiration  throughout  my  career.  Eucken’s  main  insight  was  that  a  market 
economy can only flourish in a sustainable manner if certain timeless principles are adhered 
to – and, importantly, all at the same time, because of what he called “the interdependence 
of orders”. Let me enumerate these principles:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
the primacy of price stability;  
the promotion of perfect competition on all markets;  
the protection of property rights;  
the freedom of contract;  
unlimited liability; and, finally,  
stability-oriented economic policies.  
BIS Review 142/2008 
 1
Moreover,  there  is  an  “interdependence  of  international  orders”,  suggesting  that  these 
principles  should  be  adhered  to  around  the  globe.  At  the  time  of  writing  his  book,  Eucken 
could  not  foresee  the  recent  wave  of  globalisation  and  rapid  financial  market  integration, 
which has reinforced the need to account for this international interdependence. 
Have  all  these  principles  been  adhered  to  properly  in  the  run  up  to  the  current  crisis?  My 
answer  is  a  clear  “no”.  Before  elaborating  on  this  answer,  let  me  briefly  mention  that  the 
school of thought Eucken belonged to – which has been called “ordoliberalism” by some and 
“German neoliberalism” by others (at a time when “neoliberalism” was not yet a swear word) 
– is very different from both state interventionism and laissez-faire capitalism. While Eucken 
recognised  that  activist  economic  policies  are  a  major  source  of  distortion  and  should 
therefore  be  avoided,  he  still  saw  an  urgent  need  for  government  action  in  the  field  of 
establishing the rules. In the absence of such rules, private agents would have the incentive 
to undermine the disciplining forces of free competition. 
I will now turn to the origins and causes of the financial crisis and I will show how valuable 
Eucken’s insights are for understanding the genesis of the crisis and for devising preventive 
measures. 
Diagnosis: the origins and underlying causes of the financial crisis 
2.  
As regards the origins and underlying causes of the current financial crisis, I will focus on 
three  aspects:  the  role  of  macroeconomic  policies,  the  role  of  microeconomic  policies 
including regulation and the role of financial market participants themselves. I can be brief 
because much has been said on these aspects over the past months. 
First,  turning  to  the  role  of  governments,  it  is  clear  that  expansionary  macroeconomic 
policies around the globe have contributed to the build-up of macroeconomic imbalances. 
These policies have facilitated the strong credit expansion, excessive house price increases 
and the build-up of large current account imbalances, in particular in the United States but 
also  in  other  regions,  including  some  euro  area  countries.  Although  the  degree  of  policy 
expansion was not the same across world regions, in sum excess liquidity emerged at the 
global level. The fact that global excess liquidity did not immediately show up in consumer 
price  inflation  gave  a  false  sense  of  security  to  financial  market  participants,  encouraging 
increased risk-taking. Moreover, while expansionary policies could not eliminate the need for 
an adjustment of macroeconomic imbalances, they were able to postpone the adjustment by 
several years, thereby encouraging the further growth of imbalances. 
Second,  inadequate  microeconomic  policies  including  lax  regulation  facilitated  the 
emergence  of  financial  market  excesses.  The  most  obvious  area  of  policy  failure  is  the 
setting  of  inadequate  incentives  in  housing  markets  in  some  countries.  A  policy  of 
maximising  the  number  of  houseowners,  irrespective  of  affordability,  is  simply  not 
sustainable.  In  addition,  the  absence  of  regulation  in  some  areas  of  the  mortgage  market 
together  with  the  emergence  of  the  originate-to-distribute  model  created  incentives  for  the 
provision  of  loans  beyond  sustainable  levels.  Also,  the  design  of  capital  adequacy 
requirements  and  accounting  standards  resulted  in  procyclical  lending  behaviour,  which 
acted as an automatic destabiliser of the financial system. Another aspect that will have to be 
carefully studied in the coming years is to what extent there is a causal relationship between 
financial  deregulation  and  subsequent  financial  crisis.  While  financial  deregulation  is 
intended to promote innovation and thereby economic growth, it can, if ill-designed, result in 
imprudent behaviour instead. 
Finally, financial market participants themselves have been an important factor driving the 
financial  excesses  of  the  past  few  years.  The  introduction  of  largely  unregulated  and 
intransparent  financial  instruments  together  with  the  rapid  increase  in  off-balance  sheet 
activities has undermined the trust in the financial sector. Some of the new activities have 
clearly not been undertaken with a view to making financial markets more complete and to 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2008
increasing risk-sharing opportunities. Instead, they helped to circumvent regulated areas and 
to maximise short-term profits. Ill-designed compensation schemes played an important role 
in  this  shortening  of  horizons  among  financial  market  agents.  The  incentives  provided  by 
these  compensation  schemes  were  such  that  short-term  benefits  translated  into  huge 
compensation  increases  while  there  was  no  liability  at  all  for  long-term  losses.  This 
asymmetry  created  incentives  for  the  excessive  risk-taking  that  we  have  witnessed  over 
recent years. In addition, deficiencies in financial institutions’ risk-management models and 
the sad role played by credit rating agencies, wrongly signalling decreasing risk during the 
boom, amplified the tendency towards excessive leverage and procyclical lending behaviour. 
As regards procyclical behaviour and the shortening of horizons, I see a clear analogy with 
the  area  of  fiscal  policy,  where  in  the  absence  of  appropriate  rules  there  is  also  a  strong 
incentive for procyclical behaviour, especially during economic booms. 
To  sum  up,  a  diagnosis  of  the  crisis  reveals  that  governments  have  played  a  role  in  two 
different  ways:  first,  by  pursuing  macroeconomic  policies  which  are  too  expansionary; 
second, by at least partly neglecting their rule-setting role. The financial sector has abused 
the loopholes in the regulatory framework. The interdependence among these factors should 
also be clear. For example, the lack of adequate regulation might at least be partly due to 
regulatory capture, i.e. the influence special-interest groups – here the financial sector – tend 
to  exert  on  the  regulator  to  their  own  benefit  but  at  the  expense  of  the  economy  at  large. 
Eucken’s  emphasis  on  interdependence  teaches  us  that  crisis  resolution  and  prevention 
have to tackle all these elements in a comprehensive and mutually consistent way. Neither 
laissez-faire nor blind trust are an option in terms of appropriate government action. 
Treatment I: crisis management – the response to the financial crisis 
3.  
Given the diagnosis, what is the appropriate treatment? It should be clear that the treatment 
needs to encompass the entire economic body. If we treat only certain infected organs, such 
as credit default swaps, we will have unintended side effects on the rest of the body. In the 
remainder of my remarks I will split the treatment into two stages, namely crisis management 
and  crisis  prevention,  noting  that  these  two  stages  are  interdependent.  Poor  crisis 
management  has  the  potential  to  undermine  any  preventive  measures  intended  to  avoid 
future crises. Policy-makers should always have this on their mind when addressing financial 
or other crises. 
As  regards  crisis  management,  let  me  first  turn  to  the  area  I  know  best,  i.e.  central  bank 
responses to the financial crisis. The ECB has stressed from the outset that it would make 
and  maintain  a  clear  distinction  between  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  provision  of 
liquidity to financial institutions. The mandate of the ECB is to maintain price stability over the 
medium term. This mandate must be adhered to both in normal times and in times of crisis. 
The  monetary  policy  stance  appropriate  to  fulfil  our  mandate  depends  exclusively  on  our 
assessment of the balance of risks to price stability, and nothing else. There is absolutely no 
reason  to  deviate  from  this  approach  during  times  of  crisis.  This  being  said,  the  ECB,  in 
cooperation  with  other  central  banks,  has  shown  remarkable  flexibility  in  terms  of  liquidity 
provision.  This  flexibility  was  necessary  in  order  to  avoid  the  breakdown  of  the  interbank 
market,  which  is  a  very  important  transmission  channel  for  monetary  policy.  Let  me  finally 
mention that our recent interest rate cuts were fully in line with our monetary policy strategy. 
With the intensification and broadening of the financial crisis it became increasingly clear that 
the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  were  diminishing  when  the  downside  risks  to  economic 
growth  in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere  were  materialising.  This  created  room  for  cuts  in 
interest rates, based on and fully in line with our monetary policy strategy. I can assure you 
that,  looking  ahead,  we  will  continue  to  base  our  assessment  and  our  actions  on  this 
strategy, which has served us very well over the past ten years. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  fiscal  policies,  an  area  that  is  of  the  utmost  importance  and  one  with 
which I am also familiar. Similar to monetary policy, it is important that fiscal policy-makers in 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 3
the euro area see the benefits of adhering to a kind of separation principle. Fiscal policies in 
the euro area need to be committed to the long-term sustainability of public finances, also in 
times of crisis. Does this mean that fiscal policies should remain inactive? No, but it gives 
guidance as to the kind of intervention that is appropriate for managing financial crises. The 
rescue packages recently enacted by euro area governments to stabilise the banking sector 
were  clearly  necessary,  timely  and  well-targeted.  The  design  of  the  rescue  measures 
ensures that taxpayers in the euro area will not be burdened in the long run. There are, of 
course, downside risks to government budgets but there are also upside risks, suggesting 
that  the  net  effect  on  the  long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances  could  be  very  limited. 
Short-term increases in government debt associated with these rescue measures are to be 
accepted. 
However,  the  more  recent  plans  of  euro  area  governments  to  set  up  discretionary 
expansionary  measures  to  stimulate  the  economy  at  large  are  totally  different  in  nature. 
There is a substantial risk that the mistakes of the 1970s will be repeated, which led to an 
unprecedented increase in government liabilities and ultimately in taxes, thereby hampering 
economic  growth.  I  really  cannot  see  why  discretionary  fiscal  policies,  which  have  been 
proven  to  be  ineffective  in  the  past,  should  work  this  time.  At  the  current  juncture,  fiscal 
policies in the euro area would be well-advised to let automatic stabilisers operate freely but 
to otherwise maintain a medium-term orientation. Let us not forget that the crisis originated 
from  the  shortening  of  horizons  in  financial  markets.  Macroeconomic  policies  would  be  ill-
advised if they followed suit and likewise adopted a short-term horizon. This would mark the 
return  to  a  mistaken  past  in  which  macroeconomic  policies  themselves  were  a  source  of 
instability and crises. 
Finally,  adjustments  in  financial  market  regulation  in  response  to  the  crisis  will  bear  fruit 
mainly over the medium term. Exceptions are changes in accounting standards regarding the 
valuation  of  instruments  in  inactive  markets,  which  are  geared  towards  stabilising  banks’ 
balance  sheets,  thereby  complementing  the  efforts  of  central  banks  and  fiscal  policies  to 
revive  financial  intermediation.  The  financial  crisis  has  exposed  deficiencies  in  financial 
regulation. Adapting financial regulation will be an important element of the second stage of 
the treatment: the prevention of future crises, to which I will now turn. 
4.  
Treatment II: crisis prevention – getting incentives right or “The need for a 
Global Financial Stability Pact” 
When I talk about crisis prevention it should be clear from the outset that I do not believe 
that,  regardless  of  the  measures  to  be  taken,  the  international  community  will  be  able  to 
eradicate  financial  crises  forever.  What  can  be  realistically  achieved  is  to  reduce  the 
likelihood of financial crises and to dampen the amplitude of financial cycles. Fifty years ago 
there was a consensus that discretionary monetary and fiscal policies geared towards fine-
tuning the economy would mark the end of the business cycle. This belief resulted in what 
we now call the great inflation of the 1970s, a period of significant instability. The lesson we 
learned  in  Europe  was  that  fine-tuning  policies  are  ineffective  and  produce  very  poor  and 
undesirable results.  
When the decision was taken in the early 1990s to introduce a common currency in Europe it 
was clear that this joint venture could succeed if, and only if, macroeconomic policies were 
permanently committed to price stability and sound public finances. This is reflected in the 
institutional set-up  of  EMU  with  an  independent  central  bank  and  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact. This marks a paradigm shift in economic policies in Europe. The commitment to price 
stability and sound public finances is the best contribution monetary and fiscal policies in the 
euro  area  can  make  to  financial  stability.  There  is  no  trade-off  between  price  stability  and 
financial stability and there is also no trade-off between sound public finances and financial 
stability. If monetary and fiscal policies became distracted from their medium-term objectives 
they would  themselves  become a source of volatility and would thereby destabilise, rather 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2008
than stabilise, financial markets. Stability orientation of macroeconomic policies is as crucial 
today as it was sixty years ago when Walter Eucken worked on his landmark study. 
So  much  for  macroeconomic  policies.  But  what  about  financial  markets  themselves?  How 
can we redesign the financial market architecture in such a way as to reduce the likelihood 
and cost of future financial crises? Even the most fervent champions of unregulated financial 
markets have been forced to recognise that there is a need for appropriate rules. Needless to 
say, there is a need for a realistic assessment of the costs and benefits of tighter regulation. 
But the current crisis has made it clear that the benefits of tighter regulation are larger than 
thought  in  some  quarters.  Still,  we  need  to  avoid  excesses  in  the  direction  of  excessive 
regulation. Moreover, new regulation needs to be in the spirit of Eucken, i.e. setting general 
principles  rather  than  drawing  up  long  lists  of  individual  measures,  which  are  necessarily 
incomplete and invite renewed regulatory arbitrage. 
Let  me  give  you  a  concrete  example  of  what  I  have  in  mind.  Some  financial  market 
participants  argued  before  the  crisis  that  the  enormous  rise  in  their  bonuses  during  the 
financial boom was justified because they had to be seen as financial entrepreneurs. Indeed, 
financial innovation shares many characteristics of innovation in other markets. Successful 
innovation in those markets means that the respective entrepreneur can become extremely 
rich,  possibly  even  in  a  very  short  period  of  time.  Yet,  the  analogy  ends  there.  An 
unsuccessful entrepreneur will lose his or her entire fortune. History has plenty of examples 
of  entrepreneur  bankruptcy,  including  one  of  the  world’s  most  famous  business  cycle 
theorists, Joseph A. Schumpeter, who provided one of the most convincing theories of the 
process of innovation and its importance for economic growth. Yet, this did not prevent him 
from bankruptcy in his personal commercial endeavours, nor should it have. 
So,  what  is  the  difference  between  these  entrepreneurs  and  the  self-proclaimed  financial 
“entrepreneurs”?  An  important  element  has  been  missing  in  financial  markets,  one  of  the 
core  principles  devised  by  Walter  Eucken  necessary  to  sustain  a  functioning  market 
economy: the concept of liability. I think that the CEOs of large financial institutions are right 
in seeing their role as one of entrepreneurs. However, this implies that they should assume 
unlimited liability for their decisions. Would this hamper financial innovation? I don’t think so. 
But  it  would  certainly  be  a  strong  safeguard  against  excessive  risk-taking  and  procyclical 
behaviour during financial booms. 
More  generally,  any  preventive  measures  that  will  be  decided  upon  in  the  coming  months 
should  be  guided  by  some  simple  principles.  First,  create  incentives  that  strengthen,  not 
weaken,  the  disciplining  forces  of  competition.  Second,  do  not  try  to  draw  up  a  list  of 
measures that seemingly cover all possible states of nature but rather devise general rules 
that  provide  automatic  stabilisers  for  the  financial  system.  Third,  do  not  forbid  certain 
financial activities but signal to those who engage in intransparent financial activities, e.g. by 
moving activities off-balance sheet, that they will be held liable if the risks associated with 
these activities materialise. 
You  will  have  noticed  the  similarities  with  fiscal  policies.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is 
designed  to  lengthen  the  time  horizon  of  policy-makers,  to  create  the  room  for  automatic 
stabilisers  to  operate  freely,  to  counteract  the  incentives  for  creative  accounting  and  to 
sanction governments that do not abide by the rules. These building blocks should also be 
an important part of the new financial architecture, which could quite naturally be named a 
“Global  Financial  Stability  Pact”.  Stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  would  be  one 
cornerstone of this Pact, enhanced regulation would be the other. 
Concluding remarks 
5.  
Let  me  conclude  on  a  positive  note.  There  is  strong  agreement  among  governments 
throughout  the  world  that  the  international  financial  system  needs  to  undergo  fundamental 
reform.  A  few  days  ago  the  G-20  Summit  on  Financial  Markets  and  the  World  Economy 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 5
agreed  on  a  number  of  important  orientations.  If  these  orientations,  after  having  been 
translated  into  concrete  measures,  fully  reflect  the  key  principles  I  have  outlined  in  this 
speech, then I am convinced that the world economy will come significantly strengthened out 
of the current crisis. While history is full of episodes of learning and unlearning of key lessons 
of the past, there are numerous institutions around the world that have been designed so that 
the lessons of the past are not forgotten: I am proud that the European Central Bank is one 
of those institutions. You can also be assured that we at the ECB will continue boring you 
with these lessons on numerous occasions in the future. As Johann Wolfgang Goethe said, 
“Error  repeats  itself  endlessly  in  deeds.  Therefore,  we  must  repeat  the  truth  tirelessly  in 
words.” 
I thank you for your attention and look forward to an interesting panel discussion. 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2008
