Tarisa Watanagase: Combating the global financial crisis – role of 
international cooperation 
Remarks  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  HKMA 
Distinguished Lecture, Hong Kong, 16 December 2008.  
 Governor Draghi, Governor Yam, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honored and delighted to be here among this gathering of distinguished policymakers, 
financial experts and academia, at this year’s HKMA Distinguished Lecture and would like to 
thank  Governor  Yam  for  the  kind  invitation.  This  lecture  truly  provides  an  excellent 
opportunity  for  us  to  share  our  views  on  the  topical  issues  that  are  at  the  center  of 
international financial community.  
Ten  years  ago,  we  had  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  In  Thailand,  there  were  plenty  of 
discussions about the causes and remedies of the crisis, some of which still continued until 
these days. 
To  me,  the  Thai  crisis  had  4  main  causes,  namely,  we  had  weaknesses  in  the 
macroeconomic management leading up to bubbles, lax supervision, excessive risk taking of 
both  the  financial  sector  and  the  private  sector  in  general,  and  the  inadequate  legal  and 
information infrastructure. The crisis we are facing now has many surprises as pointed out by 
Governor Draghi, but I also see plenty of similarities in the underlying root causes. Because 
of  the  crisis’s  global  scale  and its severity,  this  time  around  we  have  seen  unprecedented 
efforts taking at both the national, regional and international levels.  
Today, one decade after the Asian financial crisis, emerging markets look less vulnerable to 
financial  disturbances.  Emerging  markets,  in  particular  in  Asia,  are  learning  to  live  with 
heightened uncertainty in the world where the extent and the whereabouts of benefits from 
financial globalization to promote growth and development while ensuring our economic and 
financial  stability.  This,  of  course,  necessitates  that  we  have  to  be  very  focused  on  risk 
management. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Asian  economies  have  come  a  long  way  since  1997  in  promoting  economic  and  financial 
resiliency. We see a region-wide move toward a more flexible exchange rate regime, with a 
disciplined framework in the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. 
As for the financial sector, the framework of policy has moved toward risk-based supervision, 
to an adherence to international standards, and to the undertakings of formal financial sector 
assessments  under  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  of  FSAP.  The  macroeconomic 
policies  also  become  more  flexible,  yet  proactive,  in  dealing  with  changes  in  the  market 
conditions and practices. When necessary, a tradition fiscal-monetary  policy mix has been 
augmented by appropriate prudential measures of financial institutions. 
More  importantly,  legal  and  information  infrastructure,  including  credit  bureaus,  has  also 
been  put  in  place  to  strengthen  the  foundation  for  financial  system  capacity  for  crisis 
prevention and resolution.  
These  intensive  reforms  and  institution  building  during  the  past  decade  may  make  it  less 
likely  that  financial  turbulence  will  trigger  a  sharp  and  broad-based  dent  to  real  economic 
outcomes,  especially,  since  there  is  no  significant  build-up  of  sectoral  imbalances  in  the 
region. But, challenges remain as we have learnt that the key pressure points that can lead 
to difficulties for small-open economies can be externally-induced, particularly when we do 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 1
not know if we are still caught in the eye of the financial storm or whether the turbulence has 
ceased.  
Let me now turn the focus of my discussion to the need for closer cooperation as we all face 
challenges on how to combat the global financial crisis. 
The ongoing global financial crisis is not dissimilar to other crises as it is and will be followed 
by  intensive  reforms  at  international  level.  It  also  highlights  that  international  cooperation 
remains  important  and  necessary  in  maintaining  global  financial  stability.  In  fact,  it  has 
become  more  and  more  important  given  globalization  process,  which  makes  us  better 
interconnected.  
However, we might have taken it for granted that international cooperation is the first best 
solution and could solve global crisis. We have all learnt that in a number of occasions, when 
a solution is needed, good implementation comes too little too late.  
Taking  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  or  the  (IMF)  Short-term  Liquidity  Facility  as  an 
example,  this  new  facility  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  swap  lines  extended  among  central 
banks  to  fellow  members  that  do  not  call  for  typical  IMF-supported  adjustment  programs. 
Emerging markets have been proponents of this facility for several years, but the IMF has 
previously been reluctant to endorse it due to fear of moral hazard. It is ironic that only when 
problems  in  advanced  economies  led  to  contagion  elsewhere  and  large  number  of  central 
banks entered into such swap agreements with the Federal Reserve, did the IMF agree to 
such an instrument. 
This also reconfirms the need for greater voice and representation of emerging markets in 
important international financial institutions (IFIs) as highlighted in the recent G-20 Summit 
Declaration. While the reform is underway under the IMF, it is only with hope that other fora, 
including, the FSF will take the issue into consideration more seriously.  
Let me elaborate further on the importance of having emerging markets participated in the 
systemically important international fora.  
I  think  you  all  agree  at  this  advanced  economies  or  emerging  markets  are  all  prone  to 
sectoral imbalances, which, if left unchecked, can lead to a full-blown crisis, anywhere, any 
time, when the bubbles burst. The impact of a crisis in an advanced, systemically important 
country can be much broader and deeper, creating a larger scale of world-wide externality.  
Emerging markets, unlike others, have had our share of coping with new challenges brought 
on by this phenomenon as well as those created by us one decade ago. It is, therefore, not 
only the responsibility of advanced countries to be in charge of global surveillance but also 
the responsibility of emerging markets to share our views and experiences of how to reform 
ourselves to be better prepared for greater uncertainty.  
Against  this  background,  this  calls  into  question  whether  the  surveillance  mechanisms 
available  at  the  moment  and  the  role  played  by  emerging  markets  in  international 
cooperation  are  adequate  in  ensuring  international  financial  stability,  the  essence  of  the 
mission of IFIs.  
It is therefore in times of crisis that the value of the international cooperation be measured 
and  the  voice  and  representation  of  emerging  markets  be  heard  IFIs.  The  unprecedented 
events of the past months present a historic opportunity for the international bodies to rise to 
the challenge. The time has come for them to  be more proactive and become truly global 
institutions.  
Apart  from  strengthening  the  roles  of  IFIs,  I  believe  that  regional  cooperation  can  play  an 
important  role  in  supplementing  both  national  and  global  responses.  I’d  like  to  raise  two 
observations on this issue. First, the global financial crisis highlights the need to put in place 
an  effective  regional  surveillance  mechanism 
that  can  detect  weakness  early  on. 
International  financial  institutions  will  remain  useful  for  global  surveillance  and  financing 
balance  of  payments  need  when  necessary.  However,  waiting  for  the  global  community 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2008
through international financial institutions for regional surveillance may be too little too late for 
timely policy measures that can safeguard the region from contagion from other parts of the 
world.  
Indeed, it is very important for policymakers with common challenges to put greater efforts in 
having a clear and in depth understanding of one another’s policy and practices. This will, in 
turn, help raise the comfort level and can usefully avoid potential policy missteps and create 
policy synergies that eventually foster confidence of investors. This is the kind of trust that no 
amount of legal text, conditions precedent, or covenants can match, but is developed through 
the  friendship  and  goodwill  among  friends  within  the  region.  Countries  in  the  same  region 
tend to possess better understanding and coordination, and therefore, policies and initiatives 
at the regional level can be more effective and timely. 
Second, while the Asian financial crisis was a wake up call for Asia on the need for regional 
liquidity facility, Asian countries need to consider making such facility sufficiently large and 
effective with timely disbursement in light of the current global crisis.  
During the Asian financial crisis, more than 75% of the IMF’s financial package for Thailand 
came from the funding within the region. The present global situation has also reconfirmed 
the  vision  set  for  the  by  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  (CMI)  that  Asia  needs  to  have  its  own 
regional liquidity facility to protect itself from contagion, be it caused within the region or from 
outside.  
It  is  therefore  timely  that  coordination  and  cooperation  among  countries  be  further 
strengthened  to  ensure  that  prompt  remedial  actions  can  be  put  in  place  in  light  of  the 
ongoing global financial crisis.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  conclude,  I  wish  to  remind  you  that  the  present  situation  calls  for  the  need  to  greater 
international  cooperation,  which  requires  concerted  efforts  by  international  organizations, 
regional  cooperation  and  national  governments,  in  combating  the  global  financial  crisis. 
Regional  cooperation  must  be  coherent  with  national  policy  and  work  hand-in-hand  with 
international cooperation.  
The impact of crisis today and the effect of the unwinding of measures taken would not be a 
zero-sum game, and all players could potentially lose. Thus, going forward, finding the right 
balance and creating ties between these three, namely international, regional and national 
interests, will be an important task for national authorities. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 3
