Jean-Claude Trichet: Central banks and the public – the importance of 
communication 
Text  of  The  Lord  Roll  Memorial  Lecture  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  organised  by  the  Daiwa  Anglo-Japanese  Foundation,  London, 
18 November 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all let me express my gratitude for being invited today by the Daiwa Anglo-Japanese 
Foundation to give the Lord Roll Memorial Lecture in front of such a distinguished audience.  
Throughout his extraordinary life, Lord Roll embodied the classic virtues of an outstanding 
international  negotiator  and  a  sophisticated  economist.  He  held  many 
influential 
appointments at the heart of international affairs – both as a public servant and a merchant 
banker.  At  the  same  time,  Lord  Roll  was  also  a  remarkably  accomplished  thinker,  a 
philanthropist, and – not least – the author of an important book reflecting on two hundred 
years of economic thinking. No doubt, he was the rarest incarnation of an applied scientist 
who served his country and Europe – he himself was born in the Continent – with dedication 
and realism. I am convinced that the intense and far-ranging negotiations of the past days 
and  months  on  the  future  global  financial  architecture  would  have  undoubtedly  benefited 
from his exceptional intellectual skills and his experience. 
In introducing my remarks this evening, I would like to quote from a report which was drafted 
in 1993 by a panel of highly recognised and reputable economic experts – and chaired by the 
late Eric Roll – on the occasion of the debate on the political independence of the Bank of 
England.1  In  the  preface  of  this  report,  Lord  Roll  concludes  that  “[t]he  Bank  [of  England], 
specifically charged with the objective of stable money, independent in carrying out this task 
yet  accountable  within  our  democratic  system  for  its  action,  can,  we  believe,  make  an 
important contribution to the better ordering of our economic affairs”. Four years later – in line 
with the recommendations of this report – the Bank of England, like many of the world’s other 
central banks, has been granted full operational independence and nowadays it ranks among 
the most transparent central banks in the world.  
Why did central banks decide to become transparent? 
The Bank of England and virtually all its peers used to communicate very little and with great 
caution.  Prior  to  the  1990s,  a  long-standing  conviction  in  central  banking  circles  held  that 
monetary  policy  should  be  wrapped  in  mystery.2  The  theoretical  case  for  secrecy  was 
founded on two economic propositions:  
• 
• 
“successful monetary policy making acts by surprises”, and 
“central banks should try to achieve the benefits of an economy running above or 
close to its potential”.  
The first proposition has been subjected to thorough theoretical scrutiny over the last fifteen 
years and is now close to oblivion. The last has been fully discredited in theory and practice.  
                                                 
1   Roll, E. et al. (1993), “Independent and Accountable – A new mandate for the Bank of England”, A report of an 
independent panel chaired by Eric Roll, Centre of Economic Policy Research, 1993. 
2   This  characterisation  is  due  to  Karl  Brunner,  in  “The  art  of  central-banking”  (1981),  Center  for  Research  in 
Government Policy and Business, University of Rochester, WP GPB 81-6. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 1
The  old  belief  –  embodied  in  the  first  proposition  –  that  monetary  policy  is  made  of  a 
sequence of isolated steps, disconnected from one another and possibly randomised owed a 
great part of its theoretical appeal to the notion that rational agents do not suffer from money 
illusion. The logic went that if rational individuals effectively adjust their economic behaviours 
to  insure  against  money  illusion  –  as  indeed  they  are  likely  to  do  over  time  –  then  only  a 
central  bank  acting  by  unexpected  moves  can  claim  some  success  in  steering  economic 
conditions.3  
But how is “success” measured? Here is where the case for unanticipated policy actions – 
and the systematic retention of information that would support this policy – built critically on 
the second proposition: that a central bank would measure the effectiveness and success of 
its actions by the extent to which economic activity could be raised and maintained above 
potential.  
Indeed,  the  time-inconsistency  paradigm  articulated  by  Nobel-prize  winners  Finn  Kydland 
and  Edward  Prescott,  and  applied  to  central  banking  by  Robert  Barro  and  David  Gordon, 
offered  a  positive  theory  for  monetary  policy-making  by  surprises.4  Barro  and  Gordon 
showed that policy makers – under certain institutional conditions – might have an incentive 
to  exploit  the  short-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and  employment.  In  a  world  in  which 
money illusion cannot last for long, such a policy is only viable if the central bank releases no 
hints about its objectives, its intentions, and the timing of its actions. It is solely by deviating 
from  the  plan  that  agents  expect  to  be  followed  that  central  banks  of  this  sort  can  be 
successful in stimulating the economy above its limits.  
Kydland and Prescott and Barro and Gordon exposed the sub-optimality of such policies at 
the same time that they provided a positive theory for monetary surprises and obfuscation. 
Once  the  public  recognises  the  incentives  that  motivate  the  monetary  authority,  they  will 
adjust their expectations accordingly and unexpected monetary impulses will bear no lasting 
effects. In the long run, output will return to its natural level and the economy will suffer from 
a permanently higher inflation.  
The  recognition  of  the  time  consistency  problem  spelled  the  demise  of  activist  monetary 
policies  subordinated  to  short-term  objectives.  At  the  same  time,  it  lifted  one  necessary 
condition  for  considering  secrecy  the  defining  and  somehow  indispensable  style  of  central 
bankers.  
The  drive  toward  independence  provided  an  additional,  positive  encouragement  for 
openness  and  transparency.  In  the  quarter  of  a  century  since  the  start  of  the  time 
inconsistency  literature  an  overwhelming  majority  of  central  banks  across  the  globe  have 
been made independent. The political and functional independence of central banks – now 
made immune from political influence – has been an important milestone in the way towards 
separating the authority to tax and spend from the power to control credit conditions. This 
separation has been the critical factor behind the general decline in trend inflation that we 
have  observed  over  the  past  decades.5  At  the  same  time,  the  separation  has  imposed 
transparency  and  frequent  communications  on  the  side  of  the  monetary  authority  as  a 
manifestation of democratic accountability.  
                                                 
3   See Cukierman, A. and A. Meltzer (1986), 'A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility and Inflation under Discrection 
and Asymmetric information', Econometrica 54: 1099-128. 
4   See Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977), 'Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans', 
Journal of Political Economy 85, 473-90, and Barro, R. and D. Gordon (1983) ‘A positive theory of monetary 
policy in a natural rate model,’ Journal of Political Economy 91, 589-510. 
5   See,  for  example,  Alesina,  A.  and  L.  Summers  (1993),  'Central  bank  independence  and  macroeconomic 
performance: some comparative evidence', Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, No. 2, May. 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2008
As monetary policy has raised in stature vis-à-vis the fiscal authority – from the ancillary role 
to which it was relegated in earlier days – its obligations of democratic reporting have also 
increased.  But  many  central  banks  have  gone  well  beyond  strict  legal  requirements  with 
respect to both their communication and transparency duties. Why? 
Communication about the objective and strategy 
Transparency  is  not  only  the  price  monetary  authorities  had  to  pay  to  earn  an  enhanced 
constitutional  role  as  safeguards  of  macroeconomic  stability.  It  soon  became  clear  that 
communication  is  an  instrument  to  make  monetary  policy  itself  more  powerful.  Once  the 
inflation  bias  is  eradicated  from  central  bank  preferences,  wide  knowledge  of  those 
preferences can only serve as a coordination device for private beliefs. In a world in which 
policy-making by surprises has lost purpose, anchoring expectations around the objectives of 
policy help coordinate the reactions of economic behaviours to the macroeconomic shocks 
along the appropriate path of adjustment that the central bank wants the economy to follow.  
Many  central  banks  have  therefore  started  to  communicate  their  firm  commitment  to  a 
nominal anchor, through the announcement of a precise arithmetic definition of price stability. 
In many cases, central banks have gone further in their quest for openness and have spelled 
out a more general monetary policy strategy, and the analytical framework that is used by 
policy makers to assess the risks to the achievement of the central bank’s objectives.  
Communication about the objective helps nail down the steady state of the economy, the end 
point  to  which  the  economy  spontaneously  tends  after  shocks  fade.  Communication  about 
the strategy helps explain the way monetary policy behaves outside the steady state, how it 
responds to shocks and frictions to facilitate the economic convergence back to steady state. 
Communicating  about  the  principles  that  govern  the  strategy  makes  the  process  of 
adjustment more rapid and less painful.  
A growing body of empirical evidence supports the conjecture that transparent quantitative 
objectives  and  communication  about  the  strategy  reinforces  monetary  policy.  Empirical 
findings confirm that a precise definition of price stability, or the announcement of an inflation 
target,  lowers  inflation  expectations,  helps  to  anchor  them  at  levels  consistent  with  the 
central  bank’s  preferences  and  reduces  the  sensitivity  of  inflation  expectations  to  past 
inflation and other macroeconomic news.6  
The anchoring power of a quantitative objective is indeed remarkable. A recent ECB study 
has shown that, following the introduction of a quantitative definition of price stability, inflation 
persistence – defined as the tendency for inflation to deviate from its mean following a shock, 
rather  than  quickly  reverting  to  it  –  has  essentially  disappeared  in  the  euro  area,  in 
Switzerland and in five inflation-targeting countries.7 While a large component of the switch 
in expectations formation is due to the genuine regime change, the exceptional speed of the 
adjustment would not have been possible without extensive communication about the onset 
of a new regime.  
Financial  market  data  –  a  more  elastic,  if  sometimes  noisy  indicator  of  public  perceptions 
than  survey  data  –  confirms  the  existence  of  a  link  between  communication  about  the 
                                                 
6   Levin,  A.  T.,  F.  M.  Natalucci  and  J.  M.  Piger  (2004),  “Explicit  inflation  objectives  and  macroeconomic 
outcomes”, ECB Working Paper, No 383. See also Johnson, D. (2002), “The effect of inflation targeting on the 
behaviour of expected inflation: evidence from an 11 country panel”, Journal of Monetary Economics 49, pp. 
1521-1538. 
7   Benati,  L.  (2008),  “Investigating  inflation  persistence  across  monetary  regimes”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 123:3, August 2008, 1005 - 1060. For instance, estimates of the inflation persistence in the euro 
area  fell  by  around  two-thirds  from  the  period  before  (until  the  Bretton  Woods  arrangement)  and  after  the 
launch of EMU. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 3
ultimate objectives of policy and expectations. Both a Fed Board case study on the United 
Kingdom and Sweden, and an ECB study on the euro area show that market-based inflation 
expectations for these countries are generally unresponsive to macroeconomic news, a sign 
that they tend to remain unperturbed when the economic environment changes.8  
Communication about actions and prospects 
The  adoption  of  a  clear  and  deliberate  monetary  policy  strategy  has  added  two  further 
dimensions  to  communication:  the  announcement  and  explanation  of  monetary  policy 
decisions when these are made, and the regular exposition of the central bank’s assessment 
of the current economic situation and its most likely evolution.  
In  the  absence  of  frequent  disclosures  about  policy  and  the  economic  situation,  market 
participants may not be in a position to attribute fluctuations in inflation either to exogenous 
disturbances  outside  the  control  of  the  central  bank  or  to  changes  in  policy  intentions. 
Adverse  adjustments  in  expectations  could  lead  to  an  increase  in  inflation  today  and  to  a 
slower and more painful reversal later in the process.9  
A central bank has two instruments in these situations, which are not substitutes, but rather 
complement each other. It can react to misconceptions once they manifest themselves, by 
enacting  a  particularly  strong  response  to  the  threats  that  they  pose.  As  inflation  tends  to 
persist once it is set in motion, the policy response might need to be sizeable and disruptive. 
In  the  “old  world”  in  which  central  banks  minimised  their  pronouncements  and  made  no 
efforts to disclose their views on an ongoing basis, this reactive and demonstrative pattern of 
monetary policy response was indeed the only option open. It is difficult not to associate the 
systematic  disconnect  between  the  views  entertained  by  the  policy-makers  and  the 
information  set  accessible  to  the  public  that  prevailed  in  the  old  days  with  the  recurrent 
pattern of stop-go episodes that plagued the monetary policy history of the 1970s.  
In  the  new  regime,  in  which  policy-makers  are  dedicated  to  being  open  and  transparent, 
communication  channels  offer  some  more  lines  of  defence  in  the  face  of  such  situations. 
Providing the economic interpretation of the situation, the judgement and economic thinking 
around  it,  and  the  central  bank’s  assessment  of  future  directions  can  correct  faulty 
expectations  at  source.  This  can  minimise  the  risk  that  inaccurate  forecasts  might  induce 
misallocations of resources and derail the economic course.  
Communication does not substitute for action. But it can help fill the information gap on which 
the need for action is sometimes predicated. 
The ECB’s approach to communication and its efficacy 
Communication is a constituent part of the institutional design for monetary policy and needs 
to be styled according to the principles and constraints that shape those institutions. There 
are recognizable differences in the ways central banks communicate to their publics. These 
differences are not accidental: they can be traced to the economic, political and institutional 
factors that face individual central banks. 
                                                 
8   Gürkaynak,  R.,  A.  Levin,  and  E.  Swanson  (2006),  “Does  inflation  targeting  anchor  long-run  inflation 
expectations?  Evidence  from  long-term  bond  yields  in  the  US,  UK  and  Sweden”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
San  Francisco  Working  Paper  No  2006-09.  Ehrmann  et  al.  (2007),  “Convergence  and  Anchoring  of  Yield 
Curves in the Euro Area”, ECB Working Paper No 817. 
9   Orphanides A., and J. Williams (2005), “Imperfect knowledge, inflation expectations, and monetary policy”, in 
B. Bernanke and M. Woodford (eds.): The inflation targeting debate, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 
201-234. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2008
The ECB is no exception and it has elaborated its own communication framework. Since the 
very  start  in  October  1998,  the  ECB  has  announced  its  monetary  policy  strategy  –  a 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  and  a  two-pillar,  medium-term  orientated  analytical 
framework, comprising of an economic and monetary analysis for the assessment of risks to 
price  stability.  In  doing  so,  it  laid  the  foundations  for  a  high  degree  of  credibility  and 
emphasised its commitment to being open and transparent. In particular, by formulating and 
publishing a quantitative definition of price stability – below, but close to 2% – the ECB has 
provided the basis for the public to form expectations efficiently and to reduce the sensitivity 
of inflation expectations to short-term shocks.  
The  decision  has  paid  off.  Long-term  inflation  expectations  for  the  euro  area,  as  –  for 
example – compiled by Consensus Economics Forecast, have remained in a range between 
1.7  and  2  per  cent  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999.  Inflation  expectations  as 
derived from financial markets were more volatile over the same period and even though – at 
times – they showed weak signs of divergence from our definition of price stability – as for 
example  during  the  recent  period  of  strong  increases  in  food  and  energy  prices  –  we 
succeeded in rapidly regaining control over inflation expectations due to our open and strong 
commitment to the achievement of our primary objective. Similarly, recent empirical findings 
show  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  are  to  a  large  extent 
unresponsive  to  developments  in  actual  inflation  outcomes,  further  pointing  to  a  solid 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  at  levels  consistent  with  our  definition  of  price  stability. 
This  is  an  important  achievement,  in  particular  against  the  background  of  the  numerous 
adverse supply-side shocks that hit the euro area over the past years. At the same time, the 
quantitative definition provides a clear yardstick to be compared to the observed inflation by 
all observers and market participants and against which our fellow citizens can hold the ECB 
accountable.  
Despite the extraordinary role of the ECB’s strategic framework in our communication policy, 
in a world of uncertainty with incomplete information on the state of and prospects for the 
economy, genuine understanding of our strategy is a necessary, albeit insufficient, condition 
for the public to form pertinent expectations regarding the future course of monetary policy. 
Discrepancies between the expectations of the private sector and those of the central bank 
may emerge at any point in time because of differences in the interpretation and assessment 
of the state of the economy and the associated policy reactions. The ECB therefore makes 
considerable efforts to explain the economic rationale underlying monetary policy decisions 
by  providing  detailed  and  comprehensive  analyses  of  the  current  economic  and  monetary 
conditions and of the Governing Council’s assessment of the medium and longer-term risks 
to price stability on the basis of our strategy. The challenge in this type of communication is 
to  strike  the  right  balance  between  the  need  to  provide  guidance  to  the  markets  while 
preserving  the  flexibility  to  always  re-assess  the  appropriateness  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance  in  the  light  of  changing  circumstances  and  to  never  pre-commit  to  a  medium  term 
sequence of future interest rates.  
The introductory statement at the monthly press conference after the first Governing Council 
meeting  in  each  month  is  an  important  vehicle  of  our  communication  in  this  respect.  It 
explains in depth the monetary policy decisions taken, it is structured along the lines of our 
strategy and it conveys the collective view of the Governing Council on the monetary policy 
stance. The information conveyed in this way is therefore – in essence – similar to what other 
central banks publish in “summary minutes”. The ECB practice – however – has the two key 
advantages of offering better timeliness and more flexibility as compared to the disclosure of 
collegial  minutes,  while  –  at  the  same  time  –  we  reach  out  to  a  broader  audience.  In 
particular,  the  press  conference  not  only  provides  detailed  information  on  our  policy 
deliberations  at  a  much  earlier  time  than  minutes  –  the  press  conference  takes  place  45 
minutes after the decision on the key interest rates has been announced in a press release – 
but it also offers the media an opportunity to address a variety of issues in a direct, open and 
totally unfiltered manner. The extent of our press conference – that, at times, can last for an 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 5
hour or more – is a lucid reflection of the need and demand for an open and frank exchange 
of  views  between  policy-makers  on  the  one  side  and  representatives  of  the  media  on  the 
other.  
The decision of the Governing Council not to publish voting records has been made to stress 
the  collegial  nature  of  the  ECB’s  decision-making  process  and  the  specific  institutional 
circumstances  under  which  the  ECB  operates  as  a  supranational  institution.  Publishing 
information  on  the  individual  voting  behaviour  would  entail  the  risk  that  the  votes  of 
Governing Council members – and in particular of the Governors of National Central Banks – 
might  be  interpreted  from  a  “national”  perspective,  irrespective  of  their  genuine  underlying 
rationale. This could jeopardise the credibility of our decisions and undermine the area-wide 
perspective that we unanimously internalise in our meetings. 
The  importance  of  the  ECB’s  press  conference  as  a  relevant  source  of  policy-related 
information  can  be  gauged  by  its  real-time  effect  on  financial  markets.  The  ECB’s  case 
provides a particularly interesting opportunity to extract the different signals of central bank 
communication,  as  unlike  other  central  banks  that  release  their  decisions  and  explanatory 
statements  simultaneously,  there  is  a  short  time  difference  between  the  release  of  the 
decision  and  the  underlying  explanation  delivered  at  the  press  conference.  Changes  in 
forward rates during the press conference can therefore only be due to news related to the 
future path of short-term interest rates and cannot be contaminated by news relating to the 
announcement  of  the  policy  decision.  A  recent  ECB  study  shows  that  there  has  been  not 
only a general reduction in market reactions on Governing Council meeting days over time, 
but  that  the  small  remaining  reactions  relate  much  less  to the  surprise  component  for  any 
given decision and much more to the surrounding communication and its implications for the 
future path of interest rates.10 In a similar vein, a related research study finds that the ECB’s 
press  conferences  have  –  on  average  –  larger  effects  on  asset  prices  than  do 
announcements of policy decisions.11 At the same time, these larger effects on interest rates 
are accompanied by smaller effects on the volatility of asset prices, indicating that the signal 
to noise ratio of the press conference is high. This is not a surprising result at all. In fact, the 
Q&A  session  allows  journalists  to  pose  clarifying  questions  and  provides  them  with  the 
opportunity to digest the information provided.  
Accurate  communication  has  yielded  high  predictability.  There  is  compelling  empirical 
evidence indicating that the ability of financial market participants to correctly anticipate the 
next monetary policy decision is – both in absolute terms and relative to other central banks 
–  remarkably  high.12  For  instance,  out  of  a  total  of  153  days  on  which  Governing  Council 
meetings  were  held  from  1999  to  October  2008,  financial  markets  were  surprised  – 
according  to  a  common  definition  of  the  surprise  element  in  this  literature  –  on  only  eight 
occasions.  The  last  surprise  occurred  in  March  2003  when  markets  had  actually  perfectly 
anticipated  that  we  would  decrease  our  main  policy  rates,  but  they  were  rather  surprised 
about  the  size  of  the  change,  which  was  smaller  than  expected  at  that  time.  Market 
participants appear to have been able gradually to converge to a thorough understanding of 
the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  framework  and  communication  mode.  Similar  results  on  the 
degree  of  short-term  predictability  were  found  by  a  recent  survey  conducted  by  Barclays 
Capital among financial market participants. A sizeable majority of survey participants – 60% 
–  felt  either  “very  confident”  or  “confident”  in  the  way  they  were  able  to  anticipate  policy 
decisions by the ECB.  
                                                 
10   Brand,  C.,  D.  Buncic  and  J.  Turunen  (2006),  “The  impact  of  ECB  monetary  policy  decisions  and 
communication on the yield curve”, ECB Working Paper, No 657. 
11   Ehrmann,  M.  and  M.  Fratzscher  (2007),  “Explaining  Monetary  Policy  in  Press  Conferences”,  ECB  Working 
Paper No. 767. 
12   See Blattner et. al (2008), “The Predictability of Monetary Policy”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 83. 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2008
For  a  supra-national  institution  such  as  the  ECB,  speeches  are  a  particularly  important 
communication tool as they allow the Governing Council members to convey the view of the 
Council  in  their  own  languages,  thereby  overcoming  potential  cultural,  linguistic  or  other 
national barriers of communication and bringing our policy closer to the people. The delivery 
of  speeches  by  policy-makers  is  an  opportunity  for  the  public  to  test  whether  the  policy-
making  committee  is  a  truly  collegial  body,  rather  than  a  collection  of  individuals,  and 
whether  its  members  share  a  sense  of  common  ownership  of  decisions.  The  principle  of 
speaking with a “single voice”, to which the members of the Governing Council adhere when 
talking publicly is meant to ensure that the views expressed individually always convey those 
of  the  Council  as  a  whole.  This  policy  is  a  manifestation  of  our  collective  responsibility;  it 
raises the clarity of our message and has – according to the empirical literature – efficiently 
reduced  the  potential  “noise”  in  our  communication.  The  importance  of  this  policy  will 
certainly  increase  as  the  euro  area  expands.  In  this  respect,  an  ECB  study  shows  that  a 
higher degree of communication dispersion among committee members about the conduct of 
monetary policy lessens the ability of financial markets to anticipate future monetary policy 
decisions and raises the degree of uncertainty.13
Communication in difficult times 
Quoting from Alan Blinder, “perhaps the best a central bank can do is to teach the markets 
its way of thinking.”14 This didactical role of central bank communication – if supported by an 
established strategy – is often a quiet and uneventful activity. As I mentioned, the strategy 
and the founding principles of monetary policy largely take care of aligning the “transmitter” 
and  the  “receiver”  and  make  the  broadcast  a  reassuring  repetition  of  known  facts  and 
principles.  
In difficult times, however, when the economic outlook darkens exceptionally and confidence 
falters,  communication  becomes  even  more  important  to  explain  how  the  central  bank 
intends to control the inevitable trade-off that such testing circumstances pose: the need to 
take swift action – on the one hand – and the need to communicate the complete adherence 
to its long-term objectives and the way it intends to steer the policy course back to a normal 
path once those circumstances have subsided.  
The resolution of this trade-off is inherently challenging for all central banks. However, it is 
facilitated by two fundamental components of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.  
The first is the quantification of a price stability objective. This grants predictability even in the 
absence of explicit communication about the future path of policy. Agents can draw inference 
about the most likely direction of policy by comparing the most likely evolution of inflation – 
which is part of the information that the ECB conveys to the market – with the objective of the 
ECB.  
The  second  component  of  the  strategy  which  helps  in  times  when  expectations  become 
disoriented is the agility of action in the management of the money market combined with a 
measured,  medium-term  oriented  approach  to  the  reassessment  of  the  stance.  The  latter 
ensures that the ECB keeps – and communicates – a sense of direction when markets are 
gripped by a sudden loss of confidence. The former reassures markets that any temporary 
disfunctionalities  in  the  way  markets  work  will  not  impede  the  transmission  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy intentions to the economy.  
                                                 
13   Ehrmann, M. and M. Fratzscher (2005), “How Should Central Banks Communicate?”, ECB Working Paper, No 
557. 
14   See Blinder (2004), “The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking goes modern”, New Haven, CN, Yale University 
Press. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 7
The  two  components  of  the  strategy  have  afforded  the  ECB  a  flexible  management  of  its 
operational  instruments  and  procedures  in  the  midst  of  extreme  conditions,  most  notably 
during the recent turmoil in global financial markets. They have allowed a robust supporting 
role  for  solvent  banks  while  at  the  same  time  preserving  the  long-term  focus  on  price 
stability. 
When  the  risks  to  our  financial  system  –  which  we  had  repeatedly  highlighted  in  open 
communication – materialised last summer and threatened to impair the orderly functioning 
of the euro money market, two messages had to be clearly conveyed. One was that the ECB 
was  determined  –  from  the  onset  of  the  financial  crises  in  August  2007  –  to  ensure  the 
orderly  functioning  of  the  euro  area  interbank  money  market  by  offering  supplementary 
liquidity-providing  refinancing  operations  or  –  more  recently  –  by  widening  the  collateral 
framework to facilitate the provision of liquidity to merchant banks and to engage in unlimited 
provision of liquidity for all our refinancing operations at a fixed rate.  
The  other  message  was  to  raise  the  public’s  awareness  that  the  exceptional  interventions 
aimed to alleviate the tensions in the money market would not compromise in any respect 
the  longer-term  achievement  of  the  price  stability  objective  and  that  the  ECB  would  not 
tolerate or encourage imprudent behaviour by market participants. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. The fundamental changes in central bank communication have helped to 
enhance the effectiveness, predictability and credibility of monetary policy and have notably 
contributed to lowering both inflation rates and volatility in the real economy. For its part, the 
ECB  has  established  a  practise  of  making  its  policy  transparent  and  in  setting  new 
benchmarks  in  the  area  of  central  banking  communication.  That  being  said,  in  each 
occasion, a central bank has to carefully assess the relevance, clarity and timeliness of the 
information  as 
the  economy. 
Transparency  is  a  key  ingredient  of  an  effective  monetary  policy,  but  not  an  end  in  itself. 
Communication  is  an  ongoing  challenge  and  effective  communication  will  always  be 
characterised by a high degree of flexibility and adaptability in order to respond swiftly to a 
rapidly changing economic environment. 
ill-designed  communication  has 
the  power 
to  harm 
8 
 BIS Review 142/2008
