Ben S Bernanke: The future of mortgage finance in the United States  
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  UC  Berkeley/UCLA  Symposium:  “The  Mortgage  Meltdown,  the 
Economy, and Public Policy”, Berkeley, California, 31 October 2008. 
 I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this  symposium.  My  remarks  will  focus  on  the 
mortgage securitization process, how it has been affected by the financial crisis, and how it 
may  evolve  in  response  to  this  crisis.  In  the  United  States,  as  you  know,  mortgage 
securitization  has  been  dominated  by  two  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs), 
Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  as  well  as  by  the  combination  of  the  Federal  Housing 
Administration  (FHA)  and  Ginnie  Mae.  By  contrast,  private-label  securitization  became  a 
significant presence in mortgage securitization only during the past decade, motivated in part 
by developments in financial engineering.  
The financial crisis has upset the linkage between mortgage borrowers and capital markets 
and  has  revealed  a  number  of  important  problems  in  our  system  of  mortgage  finance, 
including  weaknesses  in  the  structure  and  oversight  of  the  GSEs  and  perhaps  in  the 
originate-to-distribute model of credit provision itself. Private-label securitization has largely 
stopped, and Fannie and Freddie were placed into conservatorship by their regulator after 
they  were  judged  to  be  operating  in  an  unsafe  and  unsound  manner.  Our  task  now  is  to 
begin thinking about how to best reestablish a link between homebuyers and capital markets 
in a way that addresses the weaknesses of the old system. In light of the central role that the 
GSEs  played,  and  still  play,  any  such  analysis  must  pay  particular  attention  to  how  those 
institutions should evolve. 
The mortgage market and mortgage securitization in the financial crisis 
The  financial  crisis  that  began  in  August  2007  has  entered  its  second  year.  Its  proximate 
cause  was  the  end  of  the  U.S.  housing  boom,  which  revealed  serious  deficiencies  in  the 
underwriting  and  credit  rating  of  some  mortgages,  particularly  subprime  mortgages  with 
adjustable  interest  rates.  As  subsequent  events  demonstrated,  however,  the  boom  in 
subprime mortgage lending was only a part of a much broader credit boom characterized by 
an  underpricing  of  risk,  excessive  leverage,  and  the  creation  of  complex  and  opaque 
financial instruments that proved fragile under stress. The unwinding of these developments 
is the source of the severe financial strain and tight credit that now damp economic growth. 
Although problems with mortgage origination were not the only cause of the crisis, mortgage 
markets have been deeply affected. Banks and thrifts are still making new mortgage loans, 
but  they  have  tightened  terms  considerably,  essentially  closing  the  private  market  to 
borrowers with weaker credit histories. Importantly, with the securitization market for private-
label  mortgage-backed  securities  shut  down,  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  and  Ginnie  Mae 
currently  are  the  only  conduits  through  which  mortgages  can  be  securitized  and  sold  to 
investors. By contrast, in 2005, these three entities represented only about 50 percent of the 
securitization market.  
The  ability  of  Fannie,  Freddie,  and  Ginnie  to  continue  to  securitize  mortgages  has  largely 
depended  on  the  confidence  of  investors  that  the  government  stands  behind  these 
organizations.  As  such,  it  was  very  significant  when  signs  emerged  in  midsummer  that 
investors  were  beginning  to  lose  confidence  in  Fannie  and  Freddie.  As  investors  became 
increasingly  concerned  about  the  capital  positions  of  these  companies,  the  risk  increased 
that they would not be able to roll over their debt as needed to finance their portfolios and 
purchase new loans. Eroding investor confidence in the GSEs endangered not only the U.S. 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 1
mortgage market but the financial system more generally, given the enormous quantities of 
the companies' debt outstanding in private and public portfolios around the world.  
At the recommendation of the Administration, the Congress subsequently passed a bill that, 
among other things, created a new and stronger regulator for the GSEs, the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency (FHFA), and provided the Treasury with powers to purchase GSE debt and 
equity. The Federal Reserve worked closely with the FHFA, the Treasury, and the Office of 
the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (OCC)  to  assess  the  financial  condition  of  Fannie  and 
Freddie, including assessing the capacity of the firms to absorb potential losses stemming 
from the rapid deterioration evident in single-family mortgages and mortgage-related private-
label securities. The observations of Federal Reserve and OCC staff supported the view of 
the director of the FHFA that both firms were operating in an unsafe and unsound condition. 
In  light  of  these  findings,  the  director  of  the  FHFA  placed  Fannie  and  Freddie  into 
conservatorship  on  September  7.  At  the  same  time,  the  Treasury  committed  to  making 
significant capital and liquidity support available to the GSEs to ensure the continued safety 
of  their  senior  and  subordinated  debt  and  their  mortgage-backed  securities.  The  Federal 
Reserve endorsed those actions as consistent with maintaining financial stability, supporting 
the housing market, and protecting the taxpayer. 
The initial market reactions were positive. Funding costs for the GSEs declined sharply, as 
did  spreads  related  to  mortgage  pricing.  Moreover,  the  process  of  securitizing  conforming 
mortgages  remained  robust,  and  the  tens  of  thousands  of  investors  in  GSE  debt  and 
mortgage-backed  securities  have  been  reassured  that  their  investments  are  safe.  More 
recently,  however,  markets  for  GSE  debt  and  mortgages  have  again  come  under  some 
stress because of the widespread dislocations in financial markets generally. 
Looking  beyond  the  immediate  concerns,  I  agree  with  Secretary  Paulson  that  the 
conservatorships of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can usefully be viewed as a "time out" – 
one that will give everyone involved, especially the Congress, the opportunity to reconsider 
the appropriate roles of Fannie and Freddie in the U.S. mortgage market. Key objectives of 
that  reconsideration  include  both  minimizing  systemic  risk  and  putting  in  place  the  most 
efficient  mechanism  possible  for  providing  the  mortgage  credit  necessary  to  sustain 
homeownership and a healthy housing sector. To address these issues, we must consider 
both the part played by securitization in the mortgage market and the role of the government 
and government-sponsored entities in facilitating securitization. 
The  ability  of  financial  intermediaries  to  sell  the  mortgages  they  originate  into  the  broader 
capital market by means of the securitization process serves two important purposes: First, it 
provides  originators  much  wider  sources  of  funding  than  they  could  obtain  through 
conventional sources, such as retail deposits; second, it substantially reduces the originator's 
exposure  to  interest  rate,  credit,  prepayment,  and  other  risks  associated  with  holding 
mortgages to maturity, thereby reducing the overall costs of providing mortgage credit. 
Developing  an  effective  securitization  model  is  not  easy  –  according  to  one  economic 
historian,  mortgage  securitization  schemes  were  tried  and  abandoned  at  least  six  times 
between  1870  and  1940.1  Eventually,  experience  provided  three  principles  for  successful 
mortgage  securitization.  First,  for  the  ultimate  investors  to  be  willing  to  acquire  and  trade 
mortgage-backed securities, they must be persuaded that the credit quality of the underlying 
mortgages  is  high  and  that  the  origination-to-distribution  process  is  managed  so  that 
originators, such as mortgage brokers and bankers, have an incentive to undertake careful 
underwriting.  Second,  because  the  pools  of  assets  underlying  mortgage-backed  securities 
have  highly  correlated  risks,  including  interest  rate,  prepayment,  and  credit  risks,  the 
                                                 
1   See  Kenneth  Snowden  (1995),  "Mortgage  Securitization 
the  United  States:  Twentieth  Century 
Developments  in  Historical  Perspective,"  in  Michael  D.  Bordo  and  Richard  Sylla,  eds.,  Anglo-American 
Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century (New York: McGraw-Hill). 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2008
followed 
investors 
Investors 
these  principles. 
readily  understood 
institutions and other investors that hold these securities must have the capacity to manage 
their 
risks  carefully.  Finally,  because  mortgage-backed  securities  are  complex 
amalgamations  of  underlying  mortgages  that  may  themselves  be  complex  to  price, 
transparency  about  both  the  underlying  assets  and  the  mortgage-backed  security  itself  is 
essential. 
During the early phases of the development of the subprime mortgage market, most lenders 
and 
the  simple 
senior/subordinated  structure,  and  substantial  useful  information  was  provided  about  the 
subprime  pools.  However,  during  the  credit  boom  period  in  the  United  States,  worldwide 
demand  for  assets  of  perceived  high  quality  became  intense.  Incentives  to  properly 
underwrite and evaluate new mortgage credit weakened, and many investors became over-
reliant  on  credit  ratings.  To  meet  investor  demand  for  customized  products,  the  securities 
became increasingly complex. Although highly sophisticated methods for sharing risk were 
developed, not enough attention was paid to the risk that housing markets might turn down 
sharply across a range of geographical areas. The rapid rise in early payment defaults in the 
fall of 2006 signaled that something had gone wrong. As investors lost confidence, significant 
flaws in the securitization process, including inadequate risk management and disclosure as 
well as excessive complexity, became apparent.  
Perhaps  the  recent  mortgage  cycle  will  be  remembered  as  just  another  failed  episode  of 
financial innovation. But one feature that makes it different from previous episodes was the 
relative  success  of  government-sponsored  securitization.  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac 
continued  to  produce  and  sell  significant  quantities  of  mortgage-backed  securities  to 
secondary-market  investors  throughout  the  period  of  turmoil.  Their  ability  to  continue  to 
securitize  when  private  firms  could  not  did  not  appear  to  result  from  superior  business 
models or management. Instead, investors remained willing to accept GSE mortgage-backed 
securities because they continued to believe that the government stood behind them. That 
experience  suggests  that,  at  least  under  the  most  stressed  conditions,  some  form  of 
government  backstop  may  be  necessary  to  ensure  continued  securitization  of  mortgages. 
However, as I will discuss, that government support can take many forms. 
The future of the GSEs: improving upon the existing model? 
How can we ensure that, in the future, mortgage securitization will be feasible even during 
highly  stressed  financial  conditions?  In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I  will  consider  some 
alternative  approaches  that  focus  largely,  but  not  exclusively,  on  the  potential  role  of  the 
GSEs. 
One  approach  would  be  to  try  to  return  Fannie  and  Freddie  to  their  pre-conservatorship 
status. In considering this possibility, we should remind ourselves of the problems that have 
surfaced  with  the  traditional  GSE  structure.  First,  the  existing  GSE  model  involves  an 
inherent  conflict  between  the  objectives  of  the  companies'  private  shareholders  and  the 
objectives of public policy. For example, the GSEs were reluctant earlier this year to raise 
capital  and  to  expand  their  operations,  even  though  this  would  have  helped  financial  and 
macroeconomic  stability  at  a  time  of  much-reduced  mortgage  availability.  The  GSEs' 
disinclination  to  support  the  mortgage  market  was  motivated  by  the  fact  that  raising 
additional  capital  would  have  diluted  the  values  of  the  holdings  of  the  existing  private 
shareholders.  Second,  during  the  past  15  years  or  so,  the  GSEs  have  operated  with  high 
leverage  compared  with  other  large  financial  institutions.  This  relative  lack  of  capital 
ultimately  proved  their  downfall.  Of  course,  to  the  extent  that  the  debt  of  the  GSEs  is 
perceived  to  be  guaranteed  by  the  government,  it  is  in  the  shareholders'  interest  for  the 
companies  to  increase  leverage  whenever  possible.  Third,  it  is  also  in  the  shareholders' 
interest  for  the  GSEs  to  maximize  the  size  of  their  portfolios  to  take  advantage  of  the 
differential  between  the  returns  to  mortgage-backed  securities  and  the  low  GSE  funding 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 3
costs arising from the perceived guarantee. However, as the Federal Reserve has argued for 
many years, the enormous GSE portfolios pose risks to financial stability. 
As  a  result  of  the  concerns  I  just  outlined,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  in  the  past  has 
advocated  a  three-part  approach  to  GSE  oversight:  a  strong  regulator,  capital  standards 
adequate for the risks the GSEs assume, and an explicit and measurable public purpose for 
the  GSEs'  portfolios.2  Progress  has been  made in  meeting some  of  these  conditions.  The 
Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 established a strong regulator with the power 
to  establish  more-robust  capital  standards  and  with  some  authority  over  the  size  of  GSE 
portfolios. In particular, the law directs the new regulator to establish criteria to ensure that 
the  portfolios  are  consistent  with  the  mission  and  safe  and  sound  operations  of  the 
enterprises. However, the public purpose of the GSE portfolios, at least during times when 
financial conditions are relatively normal, has not been fully clarified, and systemic risks will 
remain as long as the portfolios remain large. Moreover, the recent legislation does not fully 
resolve the fundamental conflict between private shareholders and public purpose that is the 
source of many concerns about the GSEs. Considering some alternative forms for the GSEs 
(or  for  mortgage  securitization  generally)  during  this  "time  out"  thus  seems  worthwhile. 
Needless to say, however, even if alternative organizational structures are considered for the 
future, the U.S. government's strong and effective guarantee of the obligations issued under 
the current GSE structure must be maintained. 
Linking the mortgage market and the capital markets: some alternative approaches  
How might the GSEs be reorganized in the future to address the problems that have been 
revealed with their traditional structure? Are there approaches that do not rely on GSEs to 
create  a  robust  mortgage  securitization  market  that  will  function  in  bad  times  as  well  as 
good? 
Privatization.  One  option  that  has  been  discussed  is  to  privatize  the  GSEs  and  let  them 
compete  in  the  market  as  private  mortgage  insurers  and  securitizers.  To  eliminate  the 
presumption  of  government  support  and 
to  stimulate  competition,  some  proposals 
advocating  privatization  call  for  breaking  up  the  companies  into  smaller  units  before 
privatizing them. 
Privatization would solve several problems associated with the current GSE model. It would 
eliminate the conflict between private shareholders and public policy and likely diminish the 
systemic  risks  as  well.  Other  benefits  are  that  private  entities  presumably  would  be  more 
innovative  and  efficient  than  a  government  agency,  and  that  they  could  operate  with  less 
interference from political interests. 
However, whether the GSE model is viable without at least implicit government support is an 
open question. From a public policy perspective, a greater concern with fully privatized GSEs 
is whether mortgage securitization would continue under highly stressed financial conditions. 
As I have noted, almost no mortgage securitization is occurring today in the absence of a 
government guarantee. So, if the GSEs were privatized, it would seem advisable to retain 
some means of providing government support to the mortgage securitization process during 
times of turmoil. One possible approach, suggested by Federal Reserve Board economists 
Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore, is to create a government bond insurer, analogous to 
the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC).3  This  new  agency  would  offer,  for  a 
                                                 
2   See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "GSE Portfolios, Systemic Risk, and Affordable Housing," speech delivered at 
the Independent Community Bankers of America's Annual Convention and Techworld (via satellite), Honolulu, 
Hawaii, March 6. 
3   See Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2008), "Three Mortgage Innovations for Enhancing the American 
Mortgage  Market  and  Promoting  Financial  Stability",  preliminary  draft  presented  at  the  UC  Berkeley-UCLA 
symposium The Mortgage Meltdown, the Economy, and Public Policy, Berkeley, Calf., October 31. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2008
premium,  government-backed  insurance  for  any  form  of  bond  financing  used  to  provide 
funding to mortgage markets. For example, debt and mortgage-backed securities issued by 
the (privatized) GSEs as well as mortgage-backed bonds issued by banks would be eligible 
for the guarantee. That approach would clearly limit the government's exposure while making 
the benefits of explicit government support available to the market. 
Covered bonds. GSE-type organizations are not essential to successful mortgage financing; 
indeed, many other industrial countries without GSEs have achieved homeownership rates 
comparable to that of the United States. One device that has been widely used is covered 
bonds. Covered bonds are debt obligations issued by financial institutions and secured by a 
pool of high-quality mortgages or other assets. Today, covered bonds are the primary source 
of  mortgage  funding  for  European  banks,  with  about  $3  trillion  outstanding.  These 
instruments are subject to extensive statutory and supervisory regulation designed to protect 
the  interests  of  covered  bond  investors  from  the  risks  of  insolvency  of  the  issuing  bank. 
Legislation  typically  specifies  the  types  of  collateral  permitted  in  the  cover  pool,  defines  a 
minimum over-collateralization level, provides certainty of principal and interest payments to 
investors  in  the  case  of  insolvency,  and  requires  disclosures  to  regulators  or  investors  or 
both.  In  addition,  the  government  generally  provides  strong  assurances  to  investors  by 
having bank supervisors ensure that the cover pool assets that back the bonds are of high 
quality and that the cover pool is well managed. 
Issuance of covered bonds in Europe has not been unaffected by the financial turmoil, and at 
times  the  interest  rate  spreads  relative  to  government  debt  have  risen.  But  generally 
speaking,  European  banks  have  been  able  to  find  buyers  for  these  bonds.  For  example, 
issuance of covered bonds totaled more than $16 billion in September 2008, although this 
amount  represents  a  decline  of  45  percent  from  a  year  earlier.  Moreover,  interest  rate 
spreads on covered bonds have typically been much narrower than the comparable spreads 
on senior unsecured debt and mortgage-backed securities. This relationship has continued 
to hold throughout the market turmoil, perhaps because of the comprehensive regulatory and 
statutory frameworks associated with covered bonds in most European countries. 
To  date,  not  many  covered  bonds  have  been  issued  in  the  United  States,  for  several 
reasons. First, the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB) can tap capital markets and provide 
cost-effective  funding  for  mortgage  assets.  In  addition,  as  a  source  of  financing,  covered 
bond issuance today is not generally competitive with FHLB advances. Second, Fannie Mae 
and  Freddie  Mac  have  traditionally  securitized  U.S.  prime  mortgage  assets.  The  GSEs' 
implicit government backing and their scale of securitization operations have made it difficult 
for  banks  to  use  covered  bonds  to  finance  their  own  prime  mortgages.  Third,  the  United 
States does not have the extensive statutory and supervisory regulation designed to protect 
the interests of covered bond investors that exists in European countries. To this end, the 
recent introduction of the FDIC policy statement on covered bonds and the Treasury covered 
bond  framework  were  constructive  steps.  Finally,  the  cost  disadvantage  of  covered  bonds 
relative  to  securitization  through  Fannie  and  Freddie  is  increased  by  the  greater  capital 
requirements associated with covered bond issuance. 
Covered bonds do help to resolve some of the difficulties associated with the originate-to-
distribute  model.  The  on-balance-sheet  nature  of  covered  bonds  means  that  the  issuing 
banks are exposed to the credit quality of the underlying assets, a feature that better aligns 
the incentives of investors and mortgage lenders than does the originate-to-distribute model 
of  mortgage  securitization.  The  cover  pool  assets  are  typically  actively  managed  –  non-
performing  assets  are  replaced  with  similar,  but  performing  assets  –  ensuring  that  high-
quality  assets  are  in  the  cover  pool  at  all  times  and  providing  a  mechanism  for  loan 
modifications and workouts. The structure used for such bonds tends to be fairly simple and 
transparent.  These  features,  together  with  the  demonstrated  success  of  covered  bonds  in 
other countries, make this approach attractive. That said, given longstanding features of the 
U.S. system such as the prominent role of the Federal Home Loan Banks, covered bonds 
may remain an unattractive option to U.S. banks. 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 5
Even closer ties to the government, with or without shareholders. A third approach, besides 
privatization and covered bonds, is to tie the government-sponsored enterprises even more 
closely  to  the  government.  In  doing  so,  the  choice  must  be  made  whether  to  continue  to 
allow an element of private ownership in these organizations. 
A  public  utility  model  offers  one  possibility  for  incorporating  private  ownership.  In  such  a 
model, the GSE remains a corporation with shareholders but is overseen by a public board. 
Beyond simply monitoring safety and soundness, the regulator would also establish pricing 
and  other  rules  consistent  with  a  promised  rate  of  return  to  shareholders.  Public  utility 
regulation  itself,  of  course,  has  numerous  challenges  and  drawbacks,  such  as  reduced 
incentives  to  control  costs.  Nor  does  this  model  completely  eliminate  the  private-public 
conflict of the current GSE structure. But a public utility model might allow the enterprise to 
retain  some  of  the  flexibility  and  innovation  associated  with  private-sector  enterprises  in 
which  management  is  accountable  to  its  shareholders.  And,  although  I  have  noted  the 
problems associated with private-public conflict, that conflict is not always counterproductive; 
an  entity  with  private  shareholders  may  be  better  able  to  resist  political  influences,  which, 
under some circumstances, may lead to better market outcomes. 
If  private  shareholders  are  excluded,  several  possibilities  worth  exploring  remain.  One 
approach would be to structure a quasi-public corporation without shareholders that would 
engage in the provision of mortgage insurance generally. Here, perhaps, one might envision 
the consolidation of the GSEs and the FHA, with all securitization undertaken by a Ginnie 
Mae-type  organization.  Private  mortgage  insurers  could  still  participate  in  this  framework, 
though the role of the government in supporting mortgage insurance and securitization would 
become  more  explicit  than  it  is  today.  Finally,  one  might  consider  cooperative  ownership 
structures,  where  the  originators  of  mortgages  must  hold  the  capital  in  the  government-
sponsored enterprises, analogous to the current structure of the Federal Home Loan Banks. 
Conclusion  
Regardless of the organizational form, we must strive to design a housing financing system 
that ensures the successful funding and securitization of mortgages during times of financial 
stress but that does not create institutions that pose systemic risks to our financial markets 
and the economy. Government likely has a role to play in supporting mortgage securitization, 
at  least  during  periods  of  high  financial  stress.  But  once  government  guarantees  are 
involved, the problems of systemic risks and contingent taxpayer involvement must be dealt 
with clearly and credibly. Achieving the appropriate balance among these design challenges 
will be difficult, but it nevertheless must be high on the policy agenda for financial reform.  
6 
 BIS Review 131/2008
