Caleb M Fundanga: Supporting education in Zambia 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Masomo 
Education Foundation Scholarship Presentation, Lusaka, 21 November 2008. 
 • The President, Masomo Education Foundation, Mr. Chisanga Puta-Chekwe 
• Hon Members of Parliament present 
• The Chairman, Selection Committee, Dr Silane Mwenechanya 
• Managing Director of Barclays Bank (Z) Ltd, Mr Zafar Masud 
• Representatives from the University of Zambia 
• Mr. John Mwanakatwe 
• Representatives from the Canadian High Commission in Zambia 
• Members of the Press 
• Distinguished invited guests 
• Ladies and gentlemen 
It is an honour and privilege for me to officiate at this scholarship award presentation. I am 
most  humbled  because  I  am  the  second  ever  guest  of  honour  to  grace  such  an  event 
following, a distinguished academician who officiated at the fist ceremony. This is someone 
who has inspired a lot of Zambians including me to be what we are today. He was one of the 
first Zambians to graduate with a university degree and has not looked back thereafter. He 
has  continued  to  inspire  and  encourage  others  to  climb  the  education  ladder  to  the  top. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let us all stand and recognize the presence of one of Zambia’s finest 
academician, lawyer and writer, Mr. John Mwanakatwe. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in the short history of post independence Zambia, we can take pride 
at the achievements scored in the area of education, thus far. While facing numerous and 
difficult challenges, the country has continued to produce university and college graduates of 
international standards year in year out. This situation would not have been possible, had it 
not be for the past tremendous contributions and personal sacrifices made by a number of 
citizens under the guidance of leaders who had great foresight and fortitude. The dedication 
and ingenuity of our teachers and lecturers both in the past and today, have also massively 
contributed to the economic development we have achieved to date. I have no doubt that our 
nation needs more of such outstanding and dedicated citizens at all levels of society to take 
our country’s development to a higher level. 
Mr  President,  as  we  speak,  Zambia’s  economy  is  facing  numerous  challenges  emanating 
from the global financial turmoil. As you are no doubt aware, the crisis has already resulted in 
a  reduction  in  commodity  prices  including  that  of  copper.  The  Zambian  foreign  exchange 
market  has  also  been  partly  affected  as  is  reflected  in  the  volatility  and  weakening  of  the 
Kwacha exchange rate in the recent past. The result of all this is lower Government revenues 
and more expensive imports which would in turn culminate in higher inflation. Unfortunately, 
for a low income country like Zambia, lower Government revenue entail lower spending on 
social amenities including Education and Health. High cost of goods and services also mean 
that most of our citizens would not afford to educate their families. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  we  strive  to  achieve  the  Vision  of  becoming  a  middle  income 
country by the year 2030, we shall no doubt be confronted with such and many more similar 
challenges  both  economically  and  politically.  To  be  well  prepared  for  such  trying  times 
ahead, we need to groom our best talents to assume leadership positions in all sectors of the 
economy. To achieve this vital task of nurturing our future leaders, the Government is trying 
its level best to provide education to all Zambians. The Government has done well thus far 
and should be implored to continue doing so. 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 1
However, providing education for the benefit of all citizens is never an easy task due to other 
budgetary  pressures  exerted  by  other  competing  sectors  like  Health,  Agriculture,  and 
Community Development etc. If we are to achieve education for the majority of our people, 
we need concerted efforts from all stakeholders including private institutions and charitable 
organisations like the Masomo Education Foundation. 
Mr  President,  I  am  informed  that  the  objective  of  the  Foundation  is  to  educate  young 
Zambians  at  local  colleges.  I  am  particularly  pleased  that  the  Foundation  is  utilizing  local 
educational institutions. This should be commended as it demonstrates the confidence you 
have in the calibre of our learned colleagues at these institutions. Having been a lecturer at 
the  University  of  Zambia  in  the  earlier  days  of  my  career,  puts  me  in  a  better  position  to 
understand the passion and deep knowledge of the local issues the Zambian teachers and 
lectures  possesses.  I  have  no  doubt  that  supporting  our  local  institutions  will  lead  to  a 
stronger motivation and morale in our teachers. 
To  this  end,  my  Institution,  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  currently  provides  scholarships  to  the 
University  of  Zambia  and  the  Copperbelt  University.  Additionally,  we  also  provide  salary 
supplements to relevant departments as a way of encouraging our Zambian academics who 
are working under very difficult and challenging situations. 
Furthermore, I am reliably told, that the Masomo Scholarship is conferred only on the best 
and  intelligent  young  men  and  women.  The  stringent  selection  criteria  ensure  that  only 
deserving  candidates  possessing  outstanding  performance  in  academic  and  co-curricular 
activities are selected. I am further informed that the candidates are of exemplary character 
and are committed to the betterment of their families, societies and the nation at large. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am also informed that this year, the Foundation received several 
applications from a wide section of candidates. It is gratifying to know that many young men 
and women wish to have an opportunity to better their education in these trying times. It is for 
this reason that I call on all of us to assist, foundations like Masomo, to increase the number 
of scholarships so that many more people could benefit from the scholarships. I therefore, 
urge  the  donors  to  the  Foundation  to  increase  their  allocation  in  the  coming  year  and  in 
future. I also call on other well wishers in this room and outside to support this noble cause. 
Remember, an educated population is a pre-requisite to a country’s economic development. 
This year, the Masomo Scholarship is conferred on three exceptional and deserving young 
individuals in Ms Lenganji Nalwamba who is studying Electrical Engineering, Mr. Wapatwa 
Silungwe, studying Civil Engineering and Mr. Emmanuel Mwila who is pursuing Agricultural 
Economics. In congratulating you on this deserved achievement, let me remind you that as 
you accept this scholarship, you have an obligation and duty to the Masomo Foundation and 
to the nation at large. It is this strong sense of obligation, duty, and commitments to serve the 
nation that enabled our fathers and fore fathers serve the Nation wholeheartedly and brought 
us where we are today. 
As students with a Masomo Scholarship, each of you will be given a unique opportunity to 
prove  yourself.  I  urge  you  to  work  hard  and  learn  from  others  around  you  including  those 
different  from  you  and  less  endowed  than  you.  Let  me  also  mention  that  as  a  Masomo 
Scholar,  your  progress  and  performance  will  be  closely  monitored  and  you  will  be  looked 
upon as role models. I urge you to set the standards for others to emulate. I am confident 
that all three of you will live up to the highest standards and will not disappoint us. 
I once again congratulate you and your parents, for it is only through their guidance and care 
that you shall continue to succeed. I wish you well in your studies and hope to see the day 
when all of you will graduate with flying colors. 
Lastly,  let  me  commend  the  President  of  this  Foundation,  for  the  noble  work  that  you 
undertaking. I hope others will emulate your commitment towards developing the youths so 
that they can contribute to the welfare of our country. Mr. President, I salute and urge you to 
keep up with the good work that you are doing. To the sponsors and the Board of Directors, 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2008
may the good Lord continue blessing your deeds and may he give more to those who had a 
hand in helping the cause. Let me finish by saying that I can not wait to see these beaming 
young faces to lead our future generations into a better Zambia and a better life for all. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 3
