Tarisa Watanagase: Asian banking – coping with risks and seizing 
opportunities  
Luncheon talk by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 27th Asian 
Pacific  Bankers  Council  (APBC)  General  Meeting  and  Conference,  Bangkok,  31  October 
2008.  
 Chairman of Asian Pacific Bankers Council,  
Distinguished Speakers and Guests,  
I would like to thank the Asian Pacific Bankers Council for inviting me to join this meeting 
today.  With  great  uncertainty  ahead,  actions  of  each  and  everyone  –  banks,  regulators, 
central bankers – can have significant impact at home and abroad. At this time, confidence 
and  trust  forged  by  candid  and  opened  communication  between  key  stakeholders  is  of 
paramount  importance.  Therefore,  this  meeting  offers  an  immense  opportunity  for  us  to 
foster this dialogue.  
Just over a month ago, the global economic and financial market condition was at a much 
different  place  from  today.  Since  then,  the  magnitude  of  market  adjustment,  volatility,  and 
contagion  across  markets,  types  of  institutions,  and  countries  have  proven  that  risk 
diversification is easier said than done. This is especially as markets and institutions seem to 
correlate in a crisis as a result of risk-aversion and fear of counterparty risk.  
Nevertheless, the positive factor that has emerged is that governments of major economies 
and  financial  centres  are  now  addressing  this with  comprehensive  package.  The  aims  are 
chiefly to restore “main street’s” confidence by deposit guaranty; to shore up “Wall Street’s” 
confidence  with  adequate  liquidity;  and  to  mitigate  counterparty  risk  through  interbank 
guaranty.  The  rescue  package  also  spans  injecting  capital  into  systemically  important 
players,  and  neutralizing  short-term  market  impact  of  valuation  of  toxic  assets  by 
underwriting those risks themselves.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Up to now, banks in Asia have been less affected by the direct impact of the global financial 
turmoil.  At  this  juncture,  subprime-related  losses  have  been  lower  in  Asia  than  elsewhere. 
The  estimated  write  down  and  credit  loss,  as  recoded  by  Bloomberg  on  28th  October,  is 
about 27 billion US dollars for Asia, compared with 430 billion US dollars in the U.S. and 221 
billion US dollars in Europe.  
While this may be the case, the impact on regional capital markets, including the prices of 
bank  stocks  and  widening  credit  spread,  signals  a  much  deeper  concern.  Events  in  the 
recent weeks reflected market worries of the second round impact via expected slowdown in 
the global economy, trade, and exports. Of course, the last leg to all of this is the currency 
volatility  experienced  by  regional  currencies.  In  fact,  we  saw,  for  the  first  time  in  this  past 
decade, intervention by some regional central banks that would have been quite unthinkable 
a year ago.  
Looking ahead, significant downside risk to growth and upside risk to volatility remains. On 
the growth side, the October IMF World Economic Outlook sees the world economy entering 
a major downturn. Global growth is projected to slow substantially in 2008 and only a modest 
recovery would begin later in 2009. Against this background, key concerns of Asian central 
banks  focus  on  the  global  economic  slowdown,  tightened  global  liquidity,  and  potential 
capital  outflow.  Indeed,  slower  export  growth  to  major  advanced  economies,  and  adverse 
changes in equity market wealth on real consumption, investment, and income will certainly 
affect export-dependent Asian economies.  
BIS Review 135/2008 
 1
As for financial market volatility going forward, some of the growth projections that came out 
of  various  sources,  including  the  degree  of  volatility  in  asset  and  currency  markets,  would 
quite easily exceed even the most conservative stress-test scenario that most banks would 
have carried out six months ago. However, if the experience of Asian crisis is anything to go 
by, one should remain alert to the possibility of a long period of correction and adjustment. 
Moreover, given the global contagion, economies and markets with less structural resiliency, 
and lacking width and depth and thus liquidity, may eventually encounter dislocations in their 
real sectors.  
What  does  this  combination  of  global  slowdown  and  heightened  market  volatility 
mean for banks and financial regulators?  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In this scenario, credit risk management would be the priority for banks and regulators, to 
ensure  that  going  forward,  asset  quality  remains  sound,  and  banks  have  adequate  capital 
and provision to absorb this risk. Indeed, the underlying cause of the present global financial 
crisis is the lapse in credit culture and credit risk management, which has allowed excessive 
leveraging and indebtedness. Moreover, raising new private capital in this environment is a 
very tall order; while the option of public capital injection very costly for shareholders and tax 
payers. Therefore, it is imperative that banks need to be even more vigilant in managing not 
only their asset quality but also their internal capital, funding, expenditure including executive 
pay, and dividend policy.  
Looking at banks in the Asian region, such as Thailand, despite rapid development of capital 
market in recent years, the core banking businesses remain traditional; largely deposit taking 
and loan extension. Meanwhile, treasury operation remains relative small. Moreover, with the 
financial market predominantly bank-based rather than market-based, there tends to be less 
risk and complication arising from the originate-to-distribute models of securitisation.  
Nevertheless,  in  the  past  few  years,  banks  have  expanded  business  scope,  operating  as 
universal  banks  or  financial  conglomerate,  with  securities  and  insurance  arms.  Therefore, 
organisational  structure  and  risk  profile,  of  even  the  more  traditional  banks,  have  become 
much more complex. This, in turn, demands that bank’s risk management, Board’s oversight, 
and  supervisory  framework  can  match  the  increasing  complexity  and  ensure  adequacy  of 
capital and risk management system on a consolidated basis.  
On  market  risk,  some  banks  in  Asia  and  Pacific  countries  have  been  exposed  to  the 
subprime related assets such as CDOs as well as assets of failed institutions. The losses so 
far  have  been  limited  to  foreign  assets  and  are  addressed  by  private  and  government 
assistance. On hindsight, this crisis highlights the fact that it is easy to overestimate one’s 
risk management ability. The same applies to banks, rating agencies, specialist players such 
as  bond  insurers,  hedge  funds,  and  regulators.  Mistakes  brought  down  even  highly 
sophisticated market makers and specialist players such as Lehman, Bear Sterns, and AIG.  
The  CDOs  and  structured  products  were  very  complex,  and  their  valuation  and  risk 
management required sophisticated quantitative skill. When mark-to-market failed, mark-to-
model becomes complicated by absence of in-house capacity. And, the option of turning to 
external expert valuer such as arrangers is very expensive, due to the lack of liquidity and 
captive nature of such market. Thus, the knowledge required to properly manage these risks 
goes well beyond the quantitative skill and the usual front-office ability to value, price, and 
trade in normal market period.  
During abnormal periods, the Board must understand the context of each market, especially 
its market structure, to be in a better position to gauge erratic market behaviour and liquidity. 
Board  members  need  to  have  a  clear  view,  for  example,  whether  the  market  would  likely 
become a captive one, and the degree of counterparty risk in such OTC derivatives market. 
In the crisis environment, the strength of capacity of mid-and back-office becomes critical for 
minimizing losses, such as by reducing counterparty risk, and dealing with settlement risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2008
As this crisis develops, financial markets have witnessed, in an unprecedented manner, the 
unwinding of many contracts, even those backed by standard agreements like ISDA.  
On this note, I must stress that under-investment in human capacity and system of mid- and 
back-offices,  as  opposed  to  fronts,  could  prove  costly.  Building  the  capacity  of  mid-  and 
back-offices  may  require  in-house  investment,  as  recruitment  from  market  may  not  be  as 
easy  as  front-office,  but  possibly  more  important,  a  change  in  management  culture,  which 
can only come from leadership of top management.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
For those more conservative banks or financial markets, not affected in this first round hit, I 
also say that they cannot afford to be complacent. As in risk rating framework, it is neither the 
risk exposure nor risk management ability that determines bank’s riskiness, but the danger 
lies in the gap between the two. Therefore, banks, though engaged in less complex products 
would still be at risk if their ability to manage such risk is lagging behind their products.  
Indeed, the gap between risk exposure and management capacity becomes more important 
in a very volatile macroeconomic and financial environment. This is since such a gap may 
possibly  emerge  or  expand  undetected,  given  the  dynamics  of  market  events.  Even  with 
plain  vanilla  products,  the  exposure  can  become  complex  due  to  the  number  of  positions 
used for different hedges and at different strikes. This is not to mention the complex layers of 
counterparty, with counterparty risk and concentration risk.  
At such time as this, caution is vital, because even conservative banks could be exposed to 
market risk from domestic assets as well as currency risk. Even if not  directly, risks could 
come indirectly via the exposure of their clients, especially in the case of interlinked market 
and credit risks.  
The  present  environment  also  raises  concerns  of  the  close  link  between  financial  and 
reputation risks. Banks or their affiliates, be they fund management or insurance arms, may 
have sold inappropriate products to clients without doing proper due customer diligence or 
education.  As  a  result,  clients’  losses  could  lead  to  either  bad  assets  and  credit  risk, 
counterparty risk, or reputation risk for banks if dissatisfied customers generate queue and 
protest  in  front  of  the  banks,  or  even  legal  risk.  In  this  environment  of  tight  liquidity,  and 
depositors  have  bargaining  power,  reputation  risk  and  customer  queue  and  loss  of 
confidence could translate into liquidity risk.  
This brings me to the third risk implication from this global crisis, which is the liquidity risk. 
Indeed, tightened global liquidity will be more pronounced for economies that rely on external 
short-term debt. For other economies, the shift of external funding toward domestic sources 
and the effect on trading partners’ economies could cause a widespread contraction in credit 
supply. Furthermore, re-pricing of risks by investors and deleveraging has increased the risks 
and volatilities in global financial markets, which could in turn lead to greater risk-aversion in 
emerging markets. As a consequence, there could potentially be  more  reversals of capital 
flows  from  emerging  markets,  including  Asia,  thereby  denting  growth  in  countries  heavily 
dependent on capital inflows.  
Having  said  this,  there  is  a  sense  of  comfort  that  the  capital  base  of  banks  in  this  region 
remains  relatively  sound.  But  going  forward,  banks,  regulators,  and  central  banks  would 
benefit from undergoing stress-test and crisis management exercise to assess their strategy 
and  make  necessary  adjustment  to  their  risk  management  and  capital  policy.  The  close 
dialogue  forged  by  such  an  exercise  will  be  very  useful  in  helping  to  instigate  coordinated 
actions including information sharing.  
In 
financial  stability  surveillance,  candid  on-going  dialogue  and  market 
communication  between  key  stakeholders  is  at  the  heart  of  an  early  identification  of 
emerging trends and risk in the system. We all know that most indicators, risk models, and 
early warning models are built based on the structure of the past crisis, but no two crises are 
identical. For the Thai banks, you are already familiar with the stress-test, both top-down and 
terms  of 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 3
bottom-up, that has started last year when we successfully completed the assessment of the 
Financial Sector Assessment Programme of the IMF and the World Bank, or the FSAP.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  present  global  financial  crisis  highlights  the  importance  of  supervisory  coordination. 
While this has been especially critical for crisis management in affected countries, a step-up 
in coordination would also be critical for currently unaffected countries as well. Importantly, 
this coordination should include both domestic and cross-border dimensions. And, it should 
encompass  key  regulators  and  central  banks,  for  information  sharing  and  elimination  of 
regulatory arbitrage, which has been one of the underlying causes of this crisis.  
While the crisis management may lead to rapid changes in regulatory framework, such as 
the  much  discussed  mark-to-market  rule,  it  is  important  to  remember  two  things.  First, 
investors would form their own opinion of valuation. Second, differences in such treatment 
could, if not carefully managed, cause regulatory arbitrage, moral hazard, deterioration in risk 
management culture, and difficulty in exit-policy.  
There is of course no simple rulebook on how to deal with a crisis. Each country has to take 
into  account  its  own  institutional  context.  But,  the  mantra  of  a  good  and  sensible  risk 
management,  especially  at  its  core  principle  level,  should  not  be  violated.  Again,  I  cannot 
overemphasize  that  the  internal  risk  management  system  of  banks  should  match  its  risk 
profile,  as  deemed  appropriate  by  the  Board.  Simply  observing  minimum  regulatory 
standards  or  international  standards  may  not  be  adequate.  Should  the  nature  of  its 
underlying  risk  indicate  otherwise,  attempts  to  ignore  it  would  likely  be  tested  by  markets, 
and with real consequences. For this reason, the key principle of Basel II makes a very good 
sense, and even more so with the dynamic changes in risk emerging from the current crisis.  
On  the  issue  of  cooperation,  I  am pleased  to say  that  central  banks and  regulators  of  the 
Asia Pacific region have forged a very close cooperation over the years, under fora including 
ASEAN, EMEAP, SEACEN, and SEANZA. These fora, where finance ministers, central bank 
governors,  and  financial  regulators  meet  regularly  with  each  other  and  with  their  private 
sector counterparts, have achieved an important voice in the global financial community in 
recent years.  
In  the  area of  banking supervision,  EMEAP  –  comprising ASEAN  5,  China,  Japan,  Korea, 
Hong  Kong,  plus  Australia  and  New  Zealand  –  has  representatives  in  the  various  BIS 
committees  and  working  group,  which  set  the  international  standards  for  financial 
regulations.  In  fact,  Thailand  currently  represents  the  EMEAP  group  in  the  Accord 
Implementation  Group.  Through  such  avenues,  the  authorities  in  Asia  Pacific  region  have 
and will continue to influence the evolution of the global standards. The goal is to ensure that 
these standards are suitable to the context of our economies and financial systems, based 
on feedbacks and dialogues with our regional banks.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
We  all  agree  that  the  challenges  for  Asian  economies  and  Asian  banks  are  higher  going 
forward.  To  ensure  financial  and  economic  stability  to  support  long-term  growth,  the 
authorities  need  to  foster  closer  policy  coordination  among  regulators,  domestically  and 
internationally,  as  well  as  having  continuous  dialogue  with  market  participants.  Where 
possible,  closer  regional  cooperation  in  the  areas  of  surveillance  and  financing  should  be 
promoted 
flexibility  hinges  on 
augmenting monetary and fiscal policies with financial policies that mitigate contagion risks in 
financial  markets.  In  any  case,  a  policy  should  be  implemented  carefully,  avoiding 
overreaction  that  could  increase  distortion  and  instability  in  the  economic  and  financial 
systems.  
Given that the current turmoil will bring about changes in the financial landscape, both the 
policymakers  and  private  sector  have  to  adapt  themselves  in  an  effective  manner.  To 
increase  financial  system  resiliency,  including  by  improving  the  credit  information  system, 
further.  Domestically,  greater  macroeconomic  policy 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2008
regulatory reform could possibly mean more stringent prudential guidelines during the upturn 
to help financial institutions achieve bigger cushions during the downturn period.  
In  this  challenging  time,  the  private  sector  has  to  be  alert,  yet  prudent  with  the  new 
opportunities available. The board of directors and senior management has to oversee the 
operations and risk profile of their organization closely and regularly.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Just before ending note, allow me to touch on the situation in Thailand and the impact of the 
global crisis.  
The latest assessment of Monetary Policy Committee projected that growth is expected to 
moderate, to a range of 4.3 to 5 percent this year, and 3.8 to 5 percent next year. Inflation 
should subside next year, with headline CPI at around 3 to 4 percent. External position will 
remain strong with current account surplus for this year and next year, international reserves 
currently at around 104 billion US dollars, while external debt is 65 billion US dollars as of 
August,  of  which  just  over  one-third  is  short-term.  Overall,  the  economy  does  not  have 
imbalances that could pose as vulnerability.  
The  Thai  banking  system  remains  resilient  and  profitable,  due  to  strengthened  risk 
management of banks as well as the continued stable macroeconomic conditions at home, 
and credit growth remains supportive of the economy. BIS capital ratio stood at 15.7 percent 
at  end-September.  NPL  has  continued  to  decline  in  third  quarter  by  another  15.7  billion, 
gross ratio to total loans down to 6 percent, and Net NPL ratio down to 3.3 percent. NPL is 
fully provisioned for in  according to IAS 39 since the end  of last year. We will continue to 
encourage banks to focus on bringing this down further to strengthen the sector outlook.  
Liquidity  conditions  in  the  banking  system  remains  normal  as  Thai  banks  rely  on  local 
funding  in  the  form  of  deposit  with  some  small  portion  of  bill  of  exchange,  or  B/E,  for  86 
percent of the total liability. Thus, the Thai baking system is quite unaffected by direct impact 
from global credit crunch. Overall, the liquidity indicator, the ratio of loan to deposit plus B/E, 
is stable at around 90 percent throughout the third quarter, with slight tightening at the end of 
second quarter as loan growth accelerated, reaching 13.2 percent in September.  
The direct impact of the turmoil so far on the Thai banking sector has been limited. This is 
because the Thai banking sector has low direct exposure to CDOs and other problem assets. 
Thai  banks’  exposure  to  CDOs  including  sub-prime  CDOs  is  now  less than  0.1  percent  of 
total asset. Banks with CDO exposure have already made full provisioning and recognized 
losses in line with IAS 39, and presently all sub-prime related CDOs have been unwound. 
Thai banks also have very low exposure to investment banks like Lehman Brothers and have 
no investment in US GSE securities. In all, total exposure of Thai banks to foreign investment 
is about 1.2 percent of total assets, about half of which are sovereign assets.  
Having  said  this,  we  are  very  mindful  of  the  risk  from  second  round  effect  of slowdown  in 
global growth and domestic growth, which can affect credit, market, as well as liquidity risk. 
To handle this, the Bank of Thailand has been holding dialogue with top managements of 
banks  to  discuss  financial  stability  outlook,  and  have  conducted  stress-test  to  ensure  that 
banks are alert to these risks and are able to manage them to ensure adequate capital and 
liquidity. We will continue to hold candid and two-ways dialogues with all the banks operating 
here to ensure that we can manage these challenges and dynamics of the global turmoil.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to conclude with some lessons learned so far to increase our immune system 
going  forward.  First,  growth  must  be  based  on  strong  macroeconomic  foundation,  with 
prudent  fiscal  and  monetary  policy,  flexible  policy  options,  and  strong  external  positions. 
Second,  sound  system  of  financial  institutions,  with  adequate  capital  fund,  good  risk 
management,  corporate  governance,  and  systematic  and  effective  system  of  financial  and 
market  information  disclosure  that  promotes  market  discipline  is  important  for  economic 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 5
stability. Finally, the private sector should increase competitiveness and the ability to adapt, 
with emphasis on human resource development and key infrastructure.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
With  increased  globalisation  and  financial  integration,  emerging  market  economies  has 
become  more  synchronized  with  advanced  countries.  As  the  turmoil  is  unfolding,  we  must 
work even more closely together to ensure smooth adjustment and safeguard economic and 
financial stability.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2008
