Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Restarting a market – the case of the interbank 
market 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  Conference  on  Global  Financial  Linkages,  Transmission  of
Shocks and Asset Prices, Frankfurt am Main, 1 December 2008. 
 Introduction1 
1.  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  speak  tonight  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  audience. 
Tonight, I would like to share with you some concerns about the present state of financial 
markets, as some of these markets are not functioning properly or are barely functioning at 
all. Given the relevance of this issue at a global level, I find it quite interconnected with the 
topics addressed at this conference.  
Markets  exist  for  many  goods  –  but  not  for  all.  There  are  many  conceivable  markets  for 
goods and services that do not exist. Milton Friedman, for example, was famously puzzled by 
the absence of inflation-linked securities, although we have seen some developments since 
his times. I am sure each of us would be able to come up with other examples. Reasons for 
the incompleteness of markets may be related to the obstacles to setting up an environment 
for  trade,  such  as  transaction  costs,  network  externalities  in  trading,  costs  related  to  legal 
enforcement, or more generally asymmetric information problems. It can happen that society 
would benefit from the creation of a new market, but that market forces may not be sufficient 
by themselves to overcome such obstacles. In these cases, the public sector can play a role 
in  the  starting  of  a  market.  These  considerations  are  particularly  pertinent  for  financial 
markets,  which  require  significant  technical  infrastructure,  where  network  externalities  are 
very  important,  and  where  asymmetric  information  plays a  paramount  role.  In  fact,  it  is  no 
surprise that stock market capitalisation and financial market development are an increasing 
function of institutional and legal development.2  
I would like tonight to focus on a special activity in the field of market creation, which is the 
re-starting of a market which has stopped functioning properly. I consider as an example the 
interbank  market.  As  you  are  aware,  the  functioning  of  the  interbank  market  has  been 
severely  affected  by  the  recent  events  in  financial  markets.  While  precise  data  on  market 
activity are not available, as much of the money market activity (also in normal times) takes 
place over the counter, contacts with market participants indicate that the turnover, especially 
in longer-term segments of the money market, has decreased drastically.  
Central  banks  have  increasingly  become  intermediaries  for  interbank  transactions,  as 
witnessed  by  the  steep  increase  in  the  size  of  their  balance  sheet  (the  size  of  the 
Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet,  for  example,  has  increased  very  significantly  since  the 
breakdown of Lehman Brothers). Especially since the introduction of fixed rate tenders with 
full  allotment  in  the  Eurosystem  weekly  open  market  operations,  coupled  with  a  narrower 
corridor  for  standing  facilities,  banks  have  been  borrowing  very  large  amounts  in  the 
Eurosystem open market operations and at the same time have significantly increased their 
                                                 
1   My  thanks  go  to  Cornelia  Holthausen,  Christoffer  Kok  Sørensen,  Kleopatra  Nikolaou  for  their  input  in  the 
preparation of these remarks. 
2   Notably R. La Porta, F. López-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1997), “Legal Determinants of External 
Finance”, Journal of Finance, 52, pp. 1131-1150, and R. La Porta, F. López-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. 
Vishny (1998), “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political Economy, 106, pp. 1113-1155, find that countries with 
well-defined and adequately enforced investor rights have more liquid bond and primary equity markets. 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 1
recourse to the regular deposit facility offered by the Eurosystem. Trading with central banks 
has thus to a large extent replaced interbank trading. 
Unusual  as  it  may  seem  now,  a  financial  system  without  a  proper  interbank  market  is  not 
unprecedented. In fact, even in some euro area countries, full-fledged money markets came 
into existence only in recent decades. Also in Japan, starting in the middle of the 1990s, a 
weakening  of  the  financial  sector  and  a  series  of  bank  failures  led  to  a  breakdown  of  the 
interbank market, in some respects not unlike the situation we are facing today in Europe.  
In such a context, there are two questions that arise for a central bank and that I would like to 
address tonight. First, how is monetary policy affected when the interbank market does not 
exist? Second, how can the interbank market be restarted?  
The current money market environment is characterised by a high degree of mistrust among 
participants, based on general uncertainty and asymmetric information. I will argue that the 
public sector plays an important role in re-establishing confidence in the functioning of the 
interbank  market,  be  it  by  re-shaping  the  market  environment  or  by  taking  a  temporary 
intermediation role. At the same time, the aim is not to permanently replace the market. The 
public sector needs to ensure that an exit strategy is in place that allows it to withdraw from 
its interfering role and to leave room for market forces to unfold in a constructive way. 
Running monetary policy without an interbank market? 
2.  
Let me start with the first question: why is the interbank market important? 
A deep and liquid interbank market supports the main purpose of financial intermediation, the 
channelling of funds from savers to investment. In the traditional view, banks take in deposits 
from a large number of consumers and channel these funds to profitable investment projects. 
A reallocation of funds between banks may be necessary because of the rise of unexpected 
(or  expected)  liquidity  needs  of  banks,  or  simply  because  banks  are  heterogeneous  and 
specialise  in  different  activities.  Without  an  interbank  market,  such  reallocation  would  be 
difficult and most likely not lead to an efficient outcome.3 
For a central bank, a key question is how current tensions in the interbank money market 
influence  the  financing  conditions  faced  by  non-financial  corporations  and  households. 
Addressing this question is central to understanding how the transmission of monetary policy 
to  the  economy  as  a  whole  has  been  affected  by  the  financial  turmoil.  Indeed,  in  normal 
times, the money market plays a central role in the transmission of monetary policy in the 
euro area. Given the bank-centred structure of the euro area financial system, the marginal 
cost of funding bank loans (represented by interbank money market interest rates) is a key 
determinant of bank lending rates and thus of financing conditions. By steering very short-
term  money  market  interest  rates  to  keep  them  close  to  its  official  rates,  using  its  regular 
monetary  policy  operations,  the  ECB  has  been  able  to  influence  the  longer-maturity  rates 
that are relevant for bank loan rates. 
However,  in  the  context  of  the  drastic  reduction  of  turnover  in  the  unsecured  markets, 
especially for longer maturities, large and variable spreads have emerged between the policy 
rates determined by the ECB and unsecured money market rates (such as the EURIBOR at 
various maturities) which are the basis for bank loan rates. When no transactions are taking 
place,  the  meaningfulness  of  unsecured  money  market  reference  rates  (such  as  the 
EURIBOR) is open to question. Yet, even if the EURIBOR is not meaningful as an indicator 
of money market transactions, it is still of importance from the perspective of transmission of 
                                                 
3   For  a  discussion  of  the  economic  functions  and  benefits  of  a  well-functioning  interbank  market,  see  P. 
Hartmann and N. Valla (2008), “The Euro Money Markets”, in X. Freixas, P. Hartmann and C. Mayer (eds.), 
Handbook of European Financial Markets and Institutions, Oxford University Press. 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2008
information  along  the  yield  curve,  because  the  interest  rates  applied  to  many  outstanding 
loans are indexed to, or at least priced against, the EURIBOR.4 Moreover, many derivative 
contracts relate to benchmark interest rates. 
The dislocation in the usual relationship between short-term rates is illustrated by Chart 1, 
which shows developments in EONIA and EURIBOR rates, short-term MFI lending rates and 
the BBB-rated non-financial corporate bond yield since the start of EMU. Chart 1 suggests 
that in the most recent period during the turmoil, bank lending rates departed from their usual 
co-movement vis-à-vis EONIA.5 
More  formal  empirical  pass-through  results  suggest  that  despite  the  tensions  in  the 
unsecured money market and the resulting widening of the EURIBOR-EONIA spread up until 
October 2008, euro area banks so far seem to be continuing to adjust their short-term retail 
rates to changes in the term money market rates (see Charts 2 and 3).6 Thus the persistence 
of money market tensions is hampering the smooth transmission of monetary policy. 
Furthermore, it is not just the pricing of loans but also the availability of bank credit that is 
affected. While many euro area banks tend to depend less on wholesale funding than their 
Anglo-Saxon  counterparts,  typically  having  large  retail  deposit  bases,  even  their  ability  to 
grant new loans depends, at least to some extent, on the possibility of using the interbank 
market  as  a  marginal  source  of  funding,  especially  in  case  of  an  unforeseen  shock. 
Consequently, a complete drying-up of the interbank market has important implications for 
the supply of loans beyond the interest rates charged. This is all the more important as even 
well-managed banks become more and more dependent on obtaining funds in the overnight 
market, as term borrowings mature and can no longer be replaced. 
Notwithstanding the importance of a functioning interbank market, central banks do have to 
find a way to influence the provision of credit also in its absence. In France until the mid-
1980s,  for  example,  no  developed  interbank  market,  as  we  know  it  today,  existed.  In  this 
environment,  the  Banque  de  France  determined  the  level  of  interest  rates  using  bilateral 
relationships with a few major banks in the country, which were the only counterparties to its 
open market operations. Given the two-tiered structure of the French banking system, it was 
indeed able to steer the general level of interest rates, even though this took place in a less 
developed system without markets for sophisticated financial products.  
In  Japan,  in  the  first  half  of  this  decade,  the  situation  was  somewhat  different,  as  money 
markets were shallow not only because of the high credit risk in unsecured transactions, but 
also because of the extremely low level of nominal interest rates. Unable to lower interest 
rates  further,  the  Bank  of  Japan  tried  to  encourage  the  provision  of  credit  by  its  policy  of 
quantitative easing. With interest rates very close to zero, interbank trading dried up almost 
completely. The case of Japan illustrates well the importance of a well-functioning interbank 
market also for other financial products. Without a price for short-term liquidity, the market for 
term lending stopped functioning. Furthermore, the basis for other financial markets, such as 
repo,  bond  and  certain  derivatives  markets,  disappeared,  and  these  markets  became  less 
liquid as well.  
                                                 
4   Many loan contracts have clauses that allow the interest rate to be de-indexed from the EURIBOR in the event 
of  “market  disruption”.  However,  such  clauses  have  not  been  widely  invoked  as  yet  and  the  legal  and 
economic implications of so doing remain uncertain. 
5   The only exception to this apparent change in the long-term relationship seems to be the case of short-term 
rates on consumer credit, which have been typically found to be rather sluggish. Also the corporate bond yield 
displays a more volatile pattern than bank lending rates. 
6   Whether short-term retail interest rates in the euro area over the past  year have followed more closely the 
EONIA rate or EURIBOR rates can be analysed using the standard vector error-correction model of the bank 
interest rate pass-through where short-term retail bank lending and deposit rates are regressed against either 
the EONIA rate or a term money market rate. 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 3
In  the  present  environment,  the  intermediation  role  taken  by  the  central  bank  replaces  to 
some  extent  money  market  activity.  There  are  limits,  however,  to  the  extent  that  a  central 
bank can perform this function. First, not all participants in the money market are banks and 
thus eligible to interact with the central bank. This holds even for the Eurosystem, which has, 
compared with other central banks, a very large counterparty base. Second, the central bank 
cannot  provide  liquidity  at  all  maturities.  It  can  in  fact  only  offer  a  standardised  range  of 
products, while the market could display much more variation. Third, the central bank treats 
all counterparties equally: banks obtain liquidity at uniform rates, and they can post the same 
collateral. In an interbank market, on the contrary, banks can vary loan rates, depending on 
the credit risk of the borrower. Thus, there is a role for the collection of information (or peer 
monitoring) here, which serves to find the appropriate valuation of liquidity.7  
Creating and restarting an interbank market 
3.  
Given the benefits of an interbank market, its revival is of high importance to central banks 
right  now.  The  revival  of  a  market  that  once  existed  is  quite  different  from  setting  up  a 
completely  new  market.  In  many  countries,  including  many  of  the  Eastern  European 
economies, central banks supported the creation of completely new money markets. Such 
support  is  helpful  if  the  existence  of  such  a  market  is  beneficial  to  its  potential  users,  but 
especially when there are obstacles to setting it up. For instance, trading on markets may be 
much more beneficial once a certain critical mass of trading volume is reached; this is the 
concept of network externality. Also, conventions may need to be agreed upon before trading 
picks up in a particular market segment – in the context of the interbank market I am thinking 
of conventions like the establishment of certain reference rates that contracts can be based 
upon, such as the EURIBOR rates. Finally, only sufficient technological progress may make 
a market viable. For instance, short-term repo markets were in the past difficult to establish 
because  settlement  was  costly  and  time-consuming  –  this  was  much  facilitated  with  the 
advent  of  fully  computer-based  real-time  settlement  with  straight-through  processing.  No 
individual market player can have the financial resources and the incentives to pay the fixed 
costs  needed  to  set  up  a  market,  although  an  association  of  private  players  conceivably 
could. 
The reactivation of a market is a different story and requires a different set of measures. The 
previously mentioned measures helped to overcome problems related to the infrastructure of 
markets, or the absence of conventions. These initiatives could help if there was a need by 
private  agents  to  have  such  a  market.  Reviving  a  market,  on  the  other  hand,  alludes  to  a 
situation in which the necessary infrastructure is in place, and in which market participants 
have  full  knowledge  about  products  and  procedures,  but  simply  choose  not  to  participate. 
The challenging task here is to encourage banks to participate again in a market, that is, to 
create a need to do so. More than in the setting-up of a new market, in the reactivation of the 
market the key hurdle to overcome is asymmetric information. 
A main factor behind the drying-up of a market is the lack of trust that loaned funds will be 
repaid. This is based on two concerns:8 the first is the general uncertainty about the state of 
the  financial  sector,  and  in  particular,  the  future  path  of  asset  prices.  The  second  is  the 
                                                 
7   The importance of peer monitoring for interbank lending has been spelled out in J.-C. Rochet and J. Tirole 
(1996),  “Interbank  lending  and  systemic  risk”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and  Banking,  pp.  733-62,  and  M. 
Manove, J. Padilla and M. Pagano (2001), “Collateral Vs. Project Screening: A Model Of Lazy Banks”, RAND 
Journal of Economics, 32, pp. 726-44. 
8   See N. Cassola, M. Drehmann, P. Hartmann, M. Lo Duca and M. Scheicher (2008), “A research perspective 
on the propagation of the credit market turmoil”, ECB Research Bulletin, June. 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2008
currently  very  high  degree  of  asymmetric  information  about  counterparty  risk.9  As  is  well 
understood since the work of Akerlof,10 asymmetric information can lead to reduced market 
activity, in which only the “worst” parties are willing to trade. In the extreme, this can lead to a 
complete breakdown of the market: bankers, who have to decide on extending loans in an 
environment of extreme uncertainty, are reluctant to lend in a market in which no-one else 
lends.  Banks  with  comparatively  healthier  balance  sheets  should  theoretically  have  every 
incentive to lend in the market in order to signal their condition and possibly attract external 
financing on better terms; in equilibrium, all banks should therefore be lending to each other 
in  order  not  to  signal  their  poor  quality.  However,  in  the  current  environment  of  low 
confidence  and  trust  this  virtuous  mechanism  has  difficulties  to  develop.  The  fact  that 
transactions  in  the  money  market  are  over-the-counter,  and  therefore  not  widely  known, 
could also contribute to preventing this positive signalling mechanism. 
How can such market malfunctioning be avoided? In theory, there are two types of remedies 
to this: the first is to foster a general decrease of asymmetric information about the quality of 
goods  that  are  traded  in  a  market.  For  the  interbank  market,  this  would  imply  that  better 
information on a bank’s credit exposure is available to potential lenders. In other words, the 
banking sector needs to be put on more solid grounds again. Here, one factor is to improve 
banks’  solvency.  The  second  factor  is  to  ensure  that  liquidity  problems  do  not  turn  into 
solvency issues.11 Thus, a second measure to foster interbank market activity is to ensure its 
liquidity.12 
Finally, a further reason for market activity not to pick up is related to network problems. If 
one side of the market is basically  non-existent – I am referring to the lending side of the 
term market – then this may reduce the incentive for participants to be the first one to act. A 
liquidity  manager  of  a  bank  may  not  dare  to  do  trades  that  are  considered  exceptional 
compared  with  others,  because  he  may  be  punished  more  severely  for  any  losses.  Herd 
behaviour exists not only in booms, but also in busts, or even when markets do not exist. 
This  has  to  do  with  benchmark  remuneration  practices  which  are  very  common  in  the 
financial industry.13 The result of such practices can be multiple equilibria, some of which are 
characterised  by  a  high  trading  activity,  some  by  a  lower  one.  Thus,  a  further  action  to 
remedy the situation could entail the steering of markets from one equilibrium to another. 
From theory to practice: reviving the interbank market  
4.  
I will now examine in more concrete terms the measures that I identified above.  
The first way to limit adverse selection in the interbank market is to increase transparency. 
Currently,  more  than  a  year  after  the  start  of  the  financial  turmoil,  the  distribution  of  risks 
among financial market players is still not entirely known. This asymmetric information is a 
                                                 
9   Adverse selection in the interbank market has been identified as a source of liquidity hoarding in e.g. ECB 
(2007),  “Recent  issues  in  the  euro  area  money  market:  causes,  consequences  and  proposed  mitigating 
measures”, Financial Stability Review, December, pp. 89-91. 
10   G.  Akerlof  (1970),  “The  Market  for  “Lemons”.  Quality  Uncertainty  and  the  Market  Mechanism”,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 488-500. 
11   Heider et al. study the effects of asymmetric information and counterparty credit risk on the structure of the 
interbank  market  and  analyse  the  effects  of  different  policy  responses;  see  F.  Heider,  M.  Hoerova  and  C. 
Holthausen  (2008),  “Information  asymmetries  in  the  interbank  market:  theory  and  policy  responses”, 
presented at the 2008 UniCredit Conference on Banking and Finance, Vienna, 6-7 November. 
12   A decomposition of the spread in the unsecured market into a liquidity and a credit risk component is done in 
ECB (2008), Financial Stability Review, June, Box 10, pp. 82-84. 
13   See J. Zwiebel (1995), “Corporate Conservatism and Relative Compensation”, Journal of Political Economy, 
Vol. 103, pp. 1-25, and H. Hong, J. Kubik and A. Solomon (2000), “Security analysts’ career concerns and 
herding of earnings forecasts”, RAND Journal of Economics, 31(1), pp. 121-44. 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 5
that 
rates 
fundamental  reason  for  the  heightened  solvency  concerns  that  led  to  the  cutting  of  credit 
limits  and  the  elevation  of  rates  in  the  unsecured  interbank  market.  In  principle,  more 
information  about  the  allocation  of  these  risks  should  help  in  re-assuring  banks.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, sound banks should have an incentive to disclose detailed information in 
order to signal their quality. In doing so, they have to make sure that this clearly distinguishes 
them  from  more  troubled  banks  so  that  a  pooling  equilibrium  is  avoided.14  It  is  well 
conceivable that sound private banks form “clubs” in which they mutually trade. 
The second measure is a reduction of credit risk in the banking sector. In the past months, in 
particular after the failure of Lehman Brothers, which led to an intensification of tensions in 
money  markets,15  European  governments  have  discussed  and  put  forward  packages  that 
aim at alleviating risks associated with bank assets, improving banks’ solvency and generally 
enhancing  confidence  in  the  banks.  These  include  capital  injections,  public  buying  of 
distressed  assets  and  issuance  of  government  bonds  that  are  deposited  with  banks. 
Furthermore, interbank lending guarantees (usually through new debt issuance guarantees) 
have  been  provided.  These  plans  aim  specifically  at  addressing  the  problems  that  hinder 
banks from lending to each other – that is, they can help the recapitalisation of banks that are 
solvent and fundamentally sound, but do not have sufficient capital, so that concerns about 
counterparty credit risk are alleviated. Any improvement can, of course, only be gradual, but 
some positive effects are already being seen in the money markets, for instance the drop of 
three-month  EURIBOR 
rescue  plan 
announcements.  
Let  me  now  address  the  third  type  of  measure,  which  relates  to  the  need  to  ensure  that 
liquidity problems do not turn into solvency problems. One factor potentially triggering such a 
development is the classical bank run by depositors. In fear of massive runs on the banking 
sector, many governments, in September 2008, issued or enhanced widespread guarantees 
for depositors in case of a bank failure. But naturally, liquidity conditions are under the direct 
control of the central bank, so let me turn to the measures employed by the ECB. Since the 
start  of  the  credit  turmoil  in  August  2007,  the  ECB  has  reacted  quickly  and  forcefully  to 
alleviate  tensions  in  money  markets.  Any  measures  that  the  ECB  has  taken,  or  might  be 
taking in the months to come, are mainly addressed at this issue. As the monopoly supplier 
of central bank money, the ECB has sufficient means, valid scope and abundant flexibility to 
intervene. It is not, however, in a position to address banks’ credit problems.16 
The  ECB’s  actions  during  the  past  one  and  a  half  years  were  able  to  stabilise  the  overall 
liquidity  situation  in  the  market,  and  thus  avoided  that  individual  banks’  liquidity  problems 
could be a factor aggravating the crisis. In the first wave of measures (from August 2007 until 
September  2008),17  the  ECB  used  its  general  and  flexible  framework  of  monetary  policy 
implementation to change the timing and the maturity of liquidity provision. Namely, the ECB 
adopted  front-loading  practices,  where  a  large  amount  of  liquidity  was  offered  at  the 
beginning of each reserve maintenance period and progressively reduced towards its end. It 
also  increased  the  average  maturity  of  its  open  market  operations.  Finally,  it  made  use  of 
swap lines with the Federal Reserve. These liquidity measures aimed to reassure banks that 
they would not be “squeezed” for liquidity at the end of the maintenance period, by allowing 
them to fulfil their reserve requirements early.  
followed  a  wave  of  government 
                                                 
14   A. M. Spence (1973), “Job Market Signaling”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 87, No. 3, pp. 355-374. 
15   Heider  et  al.  (2008)  map  different  phases  of  recent  money  market  tensions  into  equilibria  that  are 
characterised by varying degrees of adverse selection. 
16   J. Taylor (2008), “A black swan in the money market”, NBER Working Paper 13943, points out that indeed the 
actions of the Federal Reserve did not help to alleviate tensions related to credit concerns. 
17   For details, see ECB (2008), “The Eurosystem’s open market operations during the recent period of financial 
market volatility”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, May. 
6 
 BIS Review 154/2008
When from September 2008 market tensions dramatically intensified, a new set of temporary 
liquidity measures was announced by the Eurosystem on 8 October. First and foremost, all 
regular open market operations are now conducted as fixed rate tenders with full allotment, 
so that banks’ aggregate demand determines the liquidity provision to the market. Second, 
the width of the corridor between the two standing facilities was narrowed symmetrically to 
half its former size, in order to keep short-term rates under tighter control. Finally, the list of 
assets eligible as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations was expanded. 
The aim of this second wave of measures was to assure banks that the ECB was willing to 
provide  sufficient  liquidity  under  all  circumstances,  and  to  eliminate  fears  that  liquidity 
problems could turn into a series of bank failures. The ECB however faced a conflict between 
trying  to  achieve,  on  the  one  hand,  ample  liquidity  conditions  and  smaller  fluctuations  of 
short-term interest rates, and on the other hand, to maintain an active interbank market for 
short  maturities.  Indeed,  these  second-wave  measures  were  characterised  by  a  major 
increase  in  the  intermediation  role  of  the  ECB  with  respect  to  interbank  money  markets. 
Notably,  the  average  activity  in  the  overnight  segment  of  the  money  market  (which  had 
increased  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  because  of  the  replacement  of  longer-term 
lending  by  the  rolling-over  of  shorter-maturity  loans)  declined  by  around  40%.  Possibly, 
however, the activity in interbank markets would also have declined further in the absence of 
the ECB’s measures, as they were introduced at a time when interbank markets had all but 
disappeared already.  
The benefits of recent ECB actions can be regarded from two perspectives. First, several of 
the new measures can help to re-activate the market in a direct way. The expansion of the 
collateral  framework  allows  banks  to  post  a  larger  variety  of  assets  as  collateral  for 
Eurosystem operations. This should, first, increase banks’ availability of assets that can be 
used  in  the  repo  market,  such  as  government  securities.  Moreover,  it  would  increase  the 
value  of  all  eligible  collateral  that  banks  have  at  their  disposal  and  promote  its  use  in 
interbank  transactions,  given  that  at  any  time  it  can  be  used  to  obtain  liquidity  from  the 
central bank. 
Second,  the  narrowing  of  the  corridor  between  standing  facility  rates,  as  well  as  the 
introduction of fixed rate tenders, constitute an effective protection against liquidity risk. More 
specifically, these measures should reassure the markets that liquidity is available at a low 
opportunity cost, when needed. This should provide important help to banks at the current 
juncture, because it effectively guarantees access to liquidity for all banks in need, thereby 
eliminating  liquidity  risk.  In  that  sense,  if  a  bank  knows  that  it  will  always  be  able  to  get 
unlimited  short-term  funding  from  the  central  bank  against  adequate  collateral,  it  might 
become less restrictive in extending term credit in the interbank market.  
Further steps and open issues 
5.  
Both the governmental initiatives to address credit concerns in the banking sector, as well as 
central  banks’  liquidity  provision,  have  helped  to  stabilise  the  situation.  Three  unanswered 
questions  remain:  Will  these  measures  be  sufficient  to  let  the  financial  markets  return  to 
normality? What are the downsides of the proposed measures? What else can be done? 
Whether the measures put forward by governments will be successful will depend crucially 
on  their  design.  So  far,  their  announcement  has  halted  the  widening  of  money  market 
spreads, but they have not resulted in a significant reduction either. Some positive signs can 
be extracted from anecdotal evidence of at least some renewed activity in the term money 
market,  and  also  in  the  Short  Term  European  Paper  (STEP)  market,  where  issuance  by 
financial  institutions  has  slowly,  but  steadily,  increased  over  the  past  three  months.  In 
interpreting this evidence, one should keep in mind that the market is currently preparing for 
the year-end, which regularly causes market tensions, and there is hope that some recovery 
could take place early next year.  
BIS Review 154/2008 
 7
These measures are often criticised on three grounds. First, they can be slow to implement, 
and,  inevitably,  this  also  affects  the  speed  of  recovery  in  the  markets.  Second,  in  some 
cases,  taxpayers’  money  is  used  to  refinance  an  industry  which  has,  in  the  past  years, 
reaped substantial profits.18 Third, these measures are prone to create moral hazard: that is, 
while  they  alleviate  present  tensions,  they  may  be  taken  for  granted  in  the  future,  lead  to 
further imprudent behaviour in the banking sector, and thus sow the seeds for possible new 
crises. While this might be true, I believe that at the present stage, the financial crisis has 
reached a level where our first priority has to lie with the resolution of present problems, and 
there  has  been  no  alternative  to  acting  firmly.  At  the  same  time,  to  limit  moral  hazard 
implications, a clear exit strategy needs to be put in place for the extraordinary interventions.  
I would also like to stress that a careful design of these measures is crucial, to avoid negative 
side-effects  as  far  as  possible.  I  would  like  to  single  out  some  problematic  aspects  of 
government guarantees on interbank deposits. Such guarantees can indeed help in reviving 
the  interbank  market,  as  they  eliminate  credit  concerns  in  unsecured  lending  transactions. 
However, they would entail a wide re-nationalisation of money markets and thus reverse a 
long process of liberalisation. Here, it is essential that the guarantees do not interfere with 
the Eurosystem’s ability to steer conditions in the money  market. Moreover, depending on 
the national implementation of such measures, a substantial distortion of the various national 
segments of the euro area money market could result, thus impairing a common monetary 
policy across the euro area. For example, in its recent Opinion on the draft Austrian law on 
the stability of the Austrian financial market, the ECB has made it clear that “ uncoordinated 
decisions among Member States should be avoided as they may involve a fragmentation of 
the euro area money market”.19 
Another question is whether the ECB’s measures to ensure central bank liquidity should be 
further amended. On the one hand, the high degree of central bank intermediation that we 
are  currently  seeing  may  be  needed  to  keep  banks  afloat.  On  the  other  hand,  the  market 
may  be  ready  to  take  a  more  active  role,  in  which  it  relies  less  on  central  bank  financing. 
Indeed, a situation, in which banks simply find transactions with an intermediating ECB safer, 
cheaper and more convenient than trading with their peers, would be an unwelcome scenario 
from the point of view of the ECB, among other reasons because it would make an exit more 
difficult.  It  should  be  stressed  that  our  intermediation  role  is  clearly  a  temporary  measure 
which should be reversed as soon as possible.20 In this regard, at some point the ECB may 
start thinking about measures that would help to reactivate the money market, such as a re-
widening  of  the  corridor  in  some  way  or  other.  Such  a  widening  would  reduce  the 
intermediation role of the Eurosystem and would be a necessary measure to reactivate some 
segments of the money market. However, it is not a necessary condition, so one cannot be 
sure  to  which  extent  the  money  market  would  be  revived.  This  would  depend  on  other 
obstacles  to  trading  –  such  as  low  credit  limits  –  that  cannot  be  addressed  via  liquidity 
measures.  
To  find  the  appropriate  timing  of  further  changes  to  the  way  it  supplies  liquidity,  the  ECB 
needs  to  carefully  weigh  the  benefits  of  reassuring  banks  with  regard  to  their  liquidity 
concerns against the potential costs of a further, potentially massive intermediation role for 
the central banks, which could make the revival of the interbank market more difficult. 
                                                 
18   For some measures, such as guarantees, the actual credit exposure of the Treasury might be limited, as the 
sheer announcement, not its actual use, could prove to be effective. 
19   See the Opinion of the European Central Bank of 20 October 2008 at the request of the Austrian Ministry of 
Finance (CON/2008/55). 
20   However, according to W. Buiter (2008), “Central banks and financial crises”, paper presented at the annual 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s symposium at Jackson Hole, the temporary replacement of short-term 
market segments by central bank intermediation is not in itself harmful. 
8 
 BIS Review 154/2008
Three  additional  considerations  have  to  be  kept  in  mind.  First,  in  the  recent  period  some 
improvements have been noted in the financial markets, or at least it seems that the situation 
has not deteriorated further. EURIBOR-OIS spreads have come down and some activity has 
re-emerged  in  term  markets,  albeit  very  limited.  Second,  the  combined  effect  of  our 
measures  and  the  government  measures  may  take  a  while  to  be  felt.  Third,  interbank 
spreads in the US and the UK are even higher than in the euro area, in spite of the lower 
level of interest rates. There might thus be an international dimension to the problem that can 
hardly be tackled with national measures only.  
The  above  considerations  suggest  that  work  still  needs  to  be  done  to  induce  banks  to  be 
active again in markets. However, it should be recalled that ultimately, the main factor behind 
the malfunctioning of the interbank market is counterparty risk, and this risk can disappear 
only if the commitment to avoid bank failure is credible. As I recalled in a recent speech, euro 
area  countries  have  committed  themselves  solemnly,  at  the  12  October  Paris  meeting,  to 
ensuring adequate capitalisation of the banks.21 The implementation of this commitment is 
lagging.  Furthermore,  the  meaning  of  “adequate”  is  subject  to  interpretation.  Supervisory 
authorities  continue  to  use  their  regulatory  measures,  and  rightly  so.  However,  markets 
consider that this is not sufficient and would like to see banks being further capitalised, in 
light  of  the  uncertainties  about  the  economy  and  about  their  balance  sheets.  Public 
authorities in all countries have made public money available for such recapitalisations and 
the ECB has defined a common pricing scheme, which would ensure a level playing-field. 
However,  there  is  the  problem  of  the  “first  mover”,  and  banks  are  afraid  to  apply  for  such 
recapitalisation  because  of  the  stigma  that  would  be  attached  to  it.  There  is  thus  a 
coordination failure that needs to be addressed by public authorities. Ideally, all banks should 
be  provided  with  extra  capital,  in  a  way  that  is  not  penalising  but  sufficient  to  reassure 
markets that indeed no bank will be allowed to fail, even if the economy deteriorates further. 
This type of recapitalisation, in excess of prudential requirements, would be a way to restore 
confidence  in  the  financial  system  and  tackle  the  macroeconomic  problems  that  would 
emerge if banks start curtailing loans to the private sector as the preferred way to achieve 
the capital requirements that markets request. It is important that the European authorities in 
charge  of  competition  and  state  aid  realise  that  such  capital  injections  are  nor  aimed  at 
addressing  individual  banks’  solvency  but  rather  to  promote  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability and should thus be assessed on criteria that are not only legalistic. Any time that is 
spent  to  delay  these  recapitalisations  results  in  delaying  the  stabilisation  and  recovery  of 
financial markets. 
Conclusions 
6.  
I would like to conclude by re-iterating that a fast revival of the interbank market is of high 
importance  for  central  banks.  Different  public  authorities  have  already  taken  a  number  of 
steps to increase confidence in banks and the banking sector. These types of measures may 
be  enhanced  and  refined  further,  and  will  hopefully  reduce  credit  risk,  which  is  one  of  the 
major sources of reduced interbank market trading activity. The Eurosystem has, since the 
start  of  the  turmoil,  adjusted  its  liquidity  provision  to  banks  and  ensured  that  banks  have 
continued  access  to  liquidity,  to  avoid  situations  where  illiquidity  might  raise  solvency 
problems. These actions have helped to stabilise the banking sector. At the same time, in an 
environment with remaining major concerns about credit risk in the banking sector, the ECB 
has  increased  its  role  as  intermediary  in  the  interbank  market.  When  considering  possible 
further measures to revive the money market, the ECB must carefully balance the objective 
of steering short-term money markets and ensuring sufficient liquidity in the banking sector, 
on the one hand, and its wish to foster a reactivation of the money market, on the other hand.  
                                                 
21   “Restoring Confidence”, Madrid, 25 November 2008 (www.ecb.int). 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 9
Finally, I would like to emphasise that both central banks and governments have done a lot 
to  support  the  banking  system  to  help  it  cope  with  the  recent  challenges  and  to  restore 
confidence  in  the  market.  These  measures,  which  constitute  a  safety  net  for  the  financial 
system, should act as a catalyst to recreate an environment in which financial institutions act 
again as financial institutions, and start again lending to each other. 
Chart 1: EONIA, EURIBOR, short-term MFI rates and BBB-rated non-financial 
corporate bond yields (percentages per annum) 
Sources: ECB and Reuters 
Note: Last observation: end-November 2008. 
 10 
 BIS Review 154/2008
Chart 2. N-step ahead forecast of the rate on large-sized loans to non-financial 
corporations at a floating rate and with up to one year initial rate fixation (percentages 
per annum) 
Sources: ECB and Reuters 
Note: Model-based forecast based on Jan. 1994-June 2007 sample. Last observation: Sep. 2008. 
 Chart 3. N-step ahead forecast of the rate on loans to households for house purchase 
at a floating rate and with up to one year initial rate fixation (percentages per annum) 
Sources: ECB and Reuters. 
Note: Model-based forecast based on Jan. 1994-June 2007 sample. Last observation: Sep. 2008. 
BIS Review 154/2008 
  11
