Ben S Bernanke: Housing, mortgage markets, and foreclosures 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  System  Conference  on  Housing  and  Mortgage 
Markets, Washington DC, 4 December 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 The U.S. financial system has been in turmoil during the past 16 months. Credit conditions 
have  tightened  and  asset  values  have  declined,  contributing  substantially,  in  turn,  to  the 
weakening of economic activity. As the participants in this conference are keenly aware, I am 
sure, housing and housing finance played a central role in precipitating the current crisis. As 
the crisis has persisted, however, the relationships between housing and other parts of the 
economy  have  become  more  complex.  Declining  house  prices,  delinquencies  and 
foreclosures, and strains in mortgage markets are now symptoms as well as causes of our 
general financial and economic difficulties. These interlinkages imply that policies aimed at 
improving  broad  financial  and  economic  conditions  and  policies  focused  specifically  on 
housing  may  be  mutually  reinforcing.  Indeed,  the  most  effective  approach  very  likely  will 
involve a full range of coordinated measures aimed at different aspects of the problem.  
I will begin this morning with some comments on developments in the housing sector and on 
the  interactions  among  house  prices,  mortgage  markets,  foreclosures,  and  the  broader 
economy. I will then discuss both some steps taken to date and some additional measures 
that  might  be  taken  to  support  housing  and  the  economy  by  reducing  the  number  of 
avoidable foreclosures. As we as a nation continue to fashion our policy responses in coming 
weeks and months, we must draw  on the best thinking available. I expect that the papers 
presented  at  this  conference  will  add  significantly  to  our  understanding  of  these  important 
issues.  
Developments in housing and housing finance 
As you know, the current housing crisis is the culmination of a large boom and bust in house 
prices and residential construction that began earlier in this decade. Home sales and single-
family  housing  starts  held  unusually  steady  through  the  2001  recession  and  then  rose 
dramatically  over  the  subsequent  four  years.  National  indexes  of  home  prices  accelerated 
significantly over that period, with prices in some metropolitan areas more than doubling over 
the first half of the decade.1 One unfortunate consequence of the rapid increases in house 
prices was that providers of mortgage credit came to view their loans as well-secured by the 
rising values of their collateral and thus paid less attention to borrowers' ability to repay.2
However, no real or financial asset can provide an above-normal market return indefinitely, 
and houses are no exception. When home-price appreciation began to slow in many areas, 
the consequences of weak underwriting, such as little or no documentation and low required 
down payments, became apparent. Delinquency rates for subprime mortgages – especially 
those  with  adjustable  interest  rates  –  began  to  climb  steeply  around  the  middle  of  2006. 
                                                 
1   Estimates for specific metropolitan areas are based on Case-Shiller Home Price Indexes. 
2   See Kristopher Gerardi, Andreas Lehnert, Shane Sherlund, and Paul Willen (forthcoming), "Making Sense of 
the Subprime Crisis", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution Press). Also 
see Chris Mayer, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund (2008), "The Rise in Mortgage Defaults", Finance and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2008-59  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
November). 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 1
When  house  prices  were  rising,  higher-risk  borrowers  who  were  struggling  to  make  their 
payments  could  refinance 
into  more-affordable  mortgages.  But  refinancing  became 
increasingly difficult as many of these households found that they had accumulated little, if 
any,  housing  equity.  Moreover,  lenders  tightened  standards  on  higher-risk  mortgages  as 
secondary markets for those loans ceased to function.  
Higher-risk  mortgages  are  not  the  only  part  of  the  mortgage  market  to  have  experienced 
stress.  For  example,  while  some  lenders  continue  to  originate  so-called  jumbo  prime 
mortgages  and  hold  them  on  their  own  balance  sheets,  these  loans  have  generally  been 
available  only  on  more  restrictive  terms  and  at  much  higher  spreads  relative  to  prime 
conforming  mortgage  rates  than  before  the  crisis.  Mortgage  rates  in  the  prime  conforming 
market  –  although  down  somewhat  from  their  peaks  –  remain  high  relative  to  yields  on 
longer-term Treasury securities, and lending terms have tightened for this segment as well. 
As house prices have declined, many borrowers now find themselves "under water" on their 
mortgages – perhaps as many as 15 to 20 percent by some estimates. In addition, as the 
economy has slowed and unemployment has risen, more households are finding it difficult to 
make their mortgage payments. About 4-1/2 percent of all first-lien mortgages are now more 
than 90 days past due or in foreclosure, and one in ten near-prime mortgages in alt-A pools 
and more than one in five subprime mortgages are seriously delinquent.3 Lenders appear to 
be on track to initiate 2-1/4 million foreclosures in 2008, up from an average annual pace of 
less than 1 million during the pre-crisis period.4  
Predictably, home sales and construction have plummeted. Sales of new homes and starts 
of single-family houses are now running at about one-third of their peak levels in the middle 
part of this decade. Sales of existing homes, including foreclosure sales, are now about two-
thirds of their earlier peak. Notwithstanding the sharp adjustment in construction, inventories 
of unsold new homes, though down in absolute terms, are close to their record high when 
measured  relative  to  monthly  sales,  suggesting  that  residential  construction  is  likely  to 
remain soft in the near term. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  problems  in  housing  and  mortgage  markets  have  become 
inextricably  intertwined  with  broader  financial  and  economic  developments.  For  example, 
mortgage-related losses have eroded the capital of many financial institutions, leading them 
to  become  more  reluctant  to  make  not  only  mortgage  loans,  but  other  types  of  loans  to 
consumers  and  businesses  as  well.  Likewise,  some  homeowners  have  responded  to 
declining home values by cutting back their spending, and residential construction remains 
subdued.  Thus,  weakness  in  the  housing  market  has  proved  a  serious  drag  on  overall 
economic activity. A slowing economy has in turn reduced the demand for houses, implying a 
further weakening of conditions in the mortgage and housing markets. 
Reducing preventable foreclosures 
Because developments in the housing sector have become so interlinked with the evolution 
of the financial markets and the economy as a whole, both macro and micro policies have a 
role in addressing the strains in housing. At the macro level, the Federal Reserve has taken 
a  number  of  steps,  beginning  with  the  easing  of  monetary  policy.  To  the  extent  that  more 
accommodative  monetary  policies  make  credit  conditions  easier  and  incomes  higher  than 
they otherwise would have been, they support the housing market. 
                                                 
3   Estimates  of  delinquencies  are  based  on  data  from  the  Mortgage  Bankers  Association  and  from  First 
American LoanPerformance. 
4   Foreclosure starts are based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association, adjusted to reflect the limited 
coverage of their sample. Historically, about half of foreclosure starts resulted in the borrower losing the home, 
but recent rates appear higher. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2008
(GSEs),  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac, 
The Federal Reserve has also implemented a series of actions aimed at restoring the normal 
functioning of financial markets and restarting the flow of credit, including providing liquidity 
to  a  range  of  financial  institutions,  working  with  the  Treasury  and  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to help stabilize the banking system, and providing backstop 
liquidity to the commercial paper market. The Federal Reserve supported the actions by the 
Federal  Housing  Finance  Agency  (FHFA)  and  the  Treasury  to  put  the  housing-related 
government-sponsored  enterprises 
into 
conservatorship, thereby stabilizing a critical source of mortgage credit. The Federal Reserve 
has  also  recently  announced  that  it  will  purchase  up  to  $100  billion  of  the  debt  issued  by 
Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  and  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks  and  up  to  $500  billion  in 
mortgage-backed securities issued by the GSEs.  
Although  broad-based  macroeconomic  policies  help  to  create  an  economic  and  financial 
environment  in  which  a  housing  recovery  can  occur,  policies  aimed  more  narrowly  at  the 
housing  market  are  important,  too.  In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I  will  focus  on  policy 
options for reducing preventable foreclosures. 
Foreclosures impose large costs on families who face the loss of their homes and reduced 
future access to credit. But the public policy case for reducing preventable foreclosures does 
not  rely  solely  on  the  desire  to  help  people  who  are  in  trouble.  Foreclosures  create 
substantial social costs. Communities suffer when foreclosures are clustered, adding further 
to  the  downward  pressure  on  property  values.  Lower  property  values  in  turn  translate  to 
lower tax revenues for local governments, and increases in the number of vacant homes can 
foster  vandalism  and  crime.5  At  the  national  level,  the  declines  in  house  prices  that  result 
from  the  addition  of  foreclosed  properties  to  the  supply  of  homes  for  sale  create  broader 
economic and financial stress, as I have already noted.6  
On the surface, private economic incentives to avoid foreclosure would appear to be strong 
for  the  lender  as  well  as  the  borrower.  Foreclosure  dissipates  much  of  the  value  of  the 
property: Indeed, recent losses on defaulted subprime mortgages have averaged around 50 
to  60  percent  of  the  loan  balance.7  Besides  the  general  decline  in  property  values  and 
foregone payments, fees related to foreclosure, such as court costs, maintenance expenses, 
and others, can amount to 10 to 15 percent of the loan balance; furthermore, the discount in 
value due to foreclosure status can be an additional 5 to 15 percent.8
However, despite the substantial costs imposed by foreclosure, anecdotal evidence suggests 
that some foreclosures are continuing to occur even in cases in which the narrow economic 
interests  of  the  lender  would  appear  to  be  better  served  through  modification  of  the 
mortgage.  This  apparent  market  failure  owes  in  part  to  the  widespread  practice  of 
securitizing mortgages, which typically results in their being put into the hands of third-party 
                                                 
5   For evidence that concentrations of foreclosures lead to lower house prices throughout the neighborhood, see, 
for  example,  William  C.  Apgar,  Mark  Duda,  and  Rochelle  Nawrocki  Gorey  (2005),  "The  Municipal  Cost  of 
Foreclosures: A Chicago Case Study", Housing Finance Policy Research Paper 2005-1 (Minneapolis, Minn.: 
Homeownership 
February), 
www.995hope.org/content/pdf/Apgar_Duda_Study_Full_Version.pdf;  and  John  P.  Harding,  Eric  Rosenblatt, 
and Yao Vincent (2008), "The Contagion Effect of Foreclosed Properties", Social Science Research Network 
working paper 1160354 (July). 
Preservation 
Foundation, 
6   To be sure, policy should not attempt to keep house prices from falling sufficiently to stabilize the demand for 
housing.  But  preventing  avoidable  foreclosures  does  not  block  necessary  adjustments.  Indeed,  failing  to 
prevent such foreclosures may heighten the risk that house prices will move lower than they would otherwise 
need to go. 
7   See  J.P.  Morgan  (2008),  "SOS  -  Summary  of  Subprime,  Alt-A,  Prime  Jumbo",  Global  Structured  Finance 
Research  (November  2);  and  Credit  Suisse  (2008),  "Deep  Dive  into  Subprime  Mortgage  Severity",  Fixed 
Income Research Report (June 19). 
8   See "Deep Dive", note 8. 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 3
lenders, 
including  portfolio 
servicers  rather  than  those  of  a  single  owner  or  lender.  The  rules  under  which  servicers 
operate  do  not  always  provide  them  with  clear  guidance  or  the  appropriate  incentives  to 
undertake economically sensible modifications.9 The problem is exacerbated because some 
modifications may benefit some tranches of the securities more than others, raising the risk 
of investor lawsuits. More generally, the sheer volume of delinquent loans has overwhelmed 
the  capacity  of  many  servicers, 
to  undertake  effective 
modifications. 
During  more  normal  times,  mortgage  delinquencies  typically  were  triggered  by  life  events, 
such as unemployment, illness, or divorce, and servicers became accustomed to addressing 
these  problems  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Although  taking  account  of  the  specific 
circumstances  of  each  case  remains  important,  the  scale  of  the  current  problem  calls  for 
greater  standardization  and  efficiency.  Loan  modification  programs  with  clearly  defined 
protocols can both help reduce modification costs and protect servicers from the charge that 
they have acted arbitrarily. The federal banking regulators have urged lenders and servicers 
to work with borrowers to avoid preventable foreclosures. The regulators recently reiterated 
that position in a joint statement that encouraged banks to make the necessary investments 
in staff and capacity to meet the escalating workload and to adopt systematic, proactive, and 
streamlined modification protocols to put borrowers in sustainable mortgages.10  
A number of initiatives have attempted to address the problem of unnecessary foreclosures. 
Working in collaboration with the Treasury Department, the Hope Now Alliance, a coalition of 
mortgage servicers, lenders, housing counselors, and investors – led by Faith Schwartz, a 
member  of  the  Fed's  Consumer  Advisory  Council  –  has  produced  a  set  of  guidelines  that 
participating servicers have agreed to use as they work to prevent foreclosures. In addition, 
servicers in the Alliance agreed to delay foreclosure proceedings if an alternative approach 
might allow the homeowners to stay in their home. Recently, in conjunction with the FHFA, 
the coalition announced that its members will adopt a streamlined modification program for 
certain loans that they service for the GSEs. This program will closely follow the one that the 
FDIC has introduced for modifying the loans in the portfolio that it took over from IndyMac.11  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  been  actively  supporting  efforts  to  prevent  unnecessary 
foreclosures.  Through  the  System's  Homeownership  and  Mortgage  Initiative,  we  have 
conducted  studies  on  housing  and  foreclosures,  provided  community  leaders  with  detailed 
analyses  to  help  them  better  target  their  borrower  outreach  and  counseling  efforts,  and 
convened  forums  like  this  one  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  ideas  and  the  development  of 
policy options. Taking advantage of the Federal Reserve's nationwide presence, the twelve 
Reserve  Banks  have  sponsored  or  co-sponsored  more  than  100  events  related  to 
foreclosures  around  the  country  since  last  summer,  bringing  together  more  than  10,000 
lenders,  counselors,  community  development  specialists,  and  policymakers.  A  particular 
focus of the Fed's efforts has been the mitigation of the costs to communities of high rates of 
foreclosure.  For  example,  we  have  partnered  with  NeighborWorks  America  on  a 
neighborhood stabilization project and helped them develop responses to community needs 
as well as train local leaders.  
                                                 
9   Servicers of mortgages in securitized pools must abide by the pooling and servicing agreements, which state 
what modifications may be prohibited but provide limited guidance about what types of modifications investors 
would consider to be appropriate. See Larry Cordell, Karen Dynan, Andreas Lehnert, Nellie Liang, and Eileen 
Mauskopf  (2008),  "The  Incentives  of  Mortgage  Servicers:  Myths  and  Realities",  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion Series 2008-46 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 
10   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the 
Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers", joint press release, November 12. 
11   In addition, Hope Now has been an important source of data on loss-mitigation activity. The loan-level data 
that  they  plan  to  provide  in  the  future  will  be  useful  for  analyzing  the  relative  effectiveness  of  alternative 
strategies for loan modifications. 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2008
Beyond  these  efforts,  two  government  programs  to  facilitate  loan  modifications  have  been 
authorized,  both  through  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA).  The  FHASecure 
program has provided long-term fixed-rate mortgages to borrowers facing a rise in payments 
due to an interest rate reset. Another, more recent program, dubbed Hope for Homeowners 
(H4H), allows lenders to refinance a delinquent borrower into a new, FHA-insured fixed-rate 
mortgage if the lender writes down the mortgage balance to create some home equity for the 
borrower and pays an up-front insurance premium. In exchange for being put "above water" 
on the mortgage, the borrower is required to share any subsequent appreciation of the home 
with the government.  
Although the basic structure of the H4H program is appealing, some lenders have expressed 
concerns  about  its  complexity  and  cost,  including  the  requirement  in  many  cases  to 
undertake substantial principal write-downs. As a result, participation has thus far been low. 
In response to these concerns, the board of the H4H program – on which Governor Duke 
represents  the  Federal  Reserve  –  recently  approved  a  number  of  changes,  using  the 
authority  granted  to  it  under  the  Emergency  Economic  Stabilization  Act  (EESA).  These 
changes would reduce the necessary write-down on some loans, address the complications 
caused  by  subordinate  liens  by  permitting  up-front  payments  to  those  lien  holders,  allow 
lenders to extend mortgage terms from 30 to 40 years to increase affordability, and eliminate 
the  trial  modification  period  to  expedite  loan  closings.  It  is  still  too  early  to  know  what  the 
ultimate demand for  H4H loans under this set of rules will be, but as I will discuss further 
momentarily, a case can be made for further adjusting the terms of the program to make it 
more attractive to both lenders and borrowers. 
Despite good-faith efforts by both the private and public sectors, the foreclosure rate remains 
too  high,  with  adverse  consequences  for  both  those  directly  involved  and  for  the  broader 
economy.  More  needs  to  be  done.  In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks  I  will  discuss,  without 
ranking, a few promising options for reducing avoidable foreclosures. These proposals are 
not  mutually  exclusive  and  could  be  used  in  combination.  Each  would  require  some 
commitment of public funds. 
To be effective, loan modifications should aim to put borrowers into mortgages that they can 
afford over the longer term. During more normal times, many homeowners could be helped 
with a temporary repayment plan – for example, a deferral of interest payments for a period. 
But under the current circumstances, with house prices declining and credit tight, permanent 
loan modifications will often be needed to create sustainable mortgages and keep people in 
their homes. Most current proposals to reduce foreclosures incorporate this view and thus 
emphasize permanent modifications.  
A  more  difficult  design  question  turns  on  the  extent  to  which  the  probability  of  default  or 
redefault  depends  on  the  borrower's  equity  position  in  the  home,  as  well  as  on  the 
affordability  of  the  monthly  payment.  Although  not  conclusive,  the  available  evidence 
suggests  that  the  homeowner's  equity  position  is,  along  with  affordability,  an  important 
determinant  of  default  rates,  for  owner-occupiers  as  well  as  investors.  If  that  evidence  is 
correct, then principal write-downs may need  to be part of the toolkit that servicers use to 
achieve sustainable mortgage modifications.12
                                                 
12   Studies  tend  to  find  that  equity  positions  matter  most  for  default  rates  when  they  interact  with  other 
contributing factors; for example, numerous studies have found that borrowers are more likely to default when 
house  prices  have  fallen  and  incomes  decline.  At  the  household  level,  such  "double  triggers"  may  induce 
defaults  because  of  cash  flow  constraints  or  because  continuing  to  make  payments  on  a  mortgage  whose 
balance  significantly  exceeds  the  value  of  the  house  is  more  difficult  to  justify  when  the  family  budget  is 
strained.  See  Shane  Sherlund  (forthcoming),  "The  Past,  Present,  and  Future  of  Subprime  Mortgages", 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System); 
Kristopher  Gerardi,  Christopher  L.  Foote,  and  Paul  S.  Willen  (2008),  "Negative  Equity  and  Foreclosure: 
Theory  and  Evidence",  Public  Policy  Discussion  Papers  08-3  (Boston:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston, 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 5
If  one  accepts  the  view  that  principal  write-downs  may  be  needed  in  cases  of  badly 
underwater  mortgages,  then  strengthening  the  H4H  program  is  a  promising  strategy,  as  I 
have noted. Beyond the steps already taken by the H4H board, the Congress might consider 
making the terms of H4H loans more attractive by reducing the up-front insurance premium 
paid  by  the  lender,  currently  set  in  law  at  3  percent  of  the  principal  value,  as  well  as  the 
annual  premium  paid  by  the  borrower,  currently  set  at  1-1/2  percent.  The  Congress  might 
also  grant  the  FHA  the  flexibility  to  tailor  these  premiums  to  individual  risk  characteristics 
rather than forcing the FHA to charge the same premium to all borrowers. 
In addition, consideration might be given to reducing the interest rate that borrowers would 
pay  under  the  H4H  program.  At  present,  this  rate  is  expected  to  be  quite  high,  roughly  8 
percent, in part because it is tied to the demand for the relatively illiquid securities issued by 
Ginnie  Mae  to  fund  the  program.  To  bring  down  this  rate,  the  Treasury  could  exercise  its 
authority to purchase these securities, with the Congress providing the appropriate increase 
in  the  debt  ceiling  to  accommodate  those  purchases.  Alternatively,  the  Congress  could 
decide to subsidize the rate.  
A  second  proposal,  put  forward  by  the  FDIC,  focuses  on  improving  the  affordability  of 
monthly payments. Under the FDIC plan, servicers would restructure delinquent mortgages 
using  a  streamlined  process,  modeled  on  the  IndyMac  protocol,  and  would  aim  to  reduce 
monthly payments to 31 percent of the borrower's income. As an inducement to lenders and 
servicers  to  undertake  these  modifications,  the  government  would  offer  to  share  in  any 
losses sustained in the event of redefaults on the modified mortgages and would also pay 
$1,000 to the servicer for each modification completed.13 The strengths of this plan include 
the  standardization  of  the  restructuring  process  and  the  fact  that  the  restructured  loans 
remain with the servicer, with the government being involved only when a redefault occurs.  
As noted, the FDIC plan would induce lenders and servicers to modify loans by offering a 
form  of  insurance  against  downside  house  price  risk.  A  third  approach  would  have  the 
government share the cost when the servicer reduces the borrower's monthly payment. For 
example, a servicer could initiate a modification and bear the costs of reducing the mortgage 
payment  to  38  percent  of  income,  after  which  the  government  could  bear  a  portion  of  the 
incremental cost of reducing the mortgage payments beyond 38 percent, say to 31 percent, 
of  income.  This  approach  would  increase  the  incentive  of  servicers  to  be  aggressive  in 
reducing monthly payments, which would improve the prospects for sustainability. Relative to 
the FDIC proposal, this plan would pose a greater operational burden on the government, 
which would be required to make payments to servicers for all modified loans, not just for 
loans 
leverage  existing  modification 
frameworks,  such  as  the  FDIC/IndyMac  and  Hope  Now  streamlined  protocols,  and  in  this 
respect would build on, rather than crowd out, private-sector initiatives.  
Yet  another  promising  proposal  for  foreclosure  prevention  would  have  the  government 
purchase delinquent or at-risk mortgages in bulk and then refinance them into the H4H or 
another FHA program. This approach could take advantage of the depressed market values 
of  such  mortgages,  and  buying  in  bulk  might  help  avoid  adverse  selection  problems.  In 
that  redefault.  However, 
this  approach  could 
                                                                                                                                                      
June);  and  Haughwout,  Andrew,  Richard  Peach,  and  Joseph  Tracy  (forthcoming),  "Juvenile  Delinquent 
Mortgages: Bad Credit or Bad Economy?" Journal of Urban Economics. 
13   The original plan would have had the government share half of any loss incurred by the lender, regardless of 
how far underwater the loan might have already been by the time of modification. The latest version of the 
plan modifies this provision by offering lower loss-sharing rates for loans that have loan-to-value (LTV) ratios 
above 100 percent at the time of the modification. Under the modified plan, the loss-sharing rate declines from 
50 percent on a loan with an LTV of 100 percent at the time of modification to 20 percent on a loan with a LTV 
of 150 percent. Loans with LTVs of more than 150 percent at the time of modification do not qualify for loss-
sharing. An alternative way to address this concern would be to base the amount of the government insurance 
payment on the loss in value relative to the appraised value of the property at the time of the loan modification. 
6 
 BIS Review 152/2008
addition,  scale  efficiencies  could  be  achieved  by  contracting  with  specialty  firms  (perhaps 
including the GSEs) capable of re-underwriting large volumes of loans to make them eligible 
for  H4H  or  another  program.  The  Treasury  has  already  considered  how  to  undertake  bulk 
purchases as part of its work under EESA, and the Federal Reserve has submitted to the 
Congress an analysis of bulk purchases per a legislative requirement in the H4H bill. Even 
so,  this  program  could  take  some  time  to  get  up  and  running,  and  the  re-underwriting 
required for H4H loans would likely take more time and incur greater operational costs than 
other plans. But such an approach could result in many homeowners being refinanced into 
sustainable mortgages.  
Conclusion 
The housing market remains central to the economic and financial challenges that we face. 
Because housing and mortgage markets are tightly interlinked with the rest of the economy, 
actions  to  strengthen  financial  markets  and  the  broader  economy  are  important  ways  to 
address housing issues. By the same token, steps that stabilize the housing market will help 
stabilize the economy as well. 
In this regard, reducing the number of preventable foreclosures would not only help families 
stay in their homes, it would confer much wider benefits. Significant efforts have been taken 
in  this  direction,  but  more  can  be  done.  Today  I  have  briefly  discussed  a  few  promising 
options, which are not necessarily mutually exclusive. As we as a country consider ways to 
address  our  financial  and  economic  challenges,  policy  initiatives  to  reduce  the  number  of 
preventable foreclosures should be high on the agenda. 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 7
