Lars Nyberg: The financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  HQ  Bank,  15 
October 2008. 
 Over  the  past  year  my  colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  and  I  have  spoken  on  several 
occasions  about  the  financial  turbulence  currently  affecting  the  entire global  economy.  We 
have had reason to return to the topic because the turbulence is constantly taking new twists 
and turns. The turmoil has intensified during the autumn and once again we have reason to 
reflect on what is happening and what will happen. That is also what I intend to do in my 
speech here today. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to speak about the role of the Riksbank and other 
authorities in relation to this situation and about what needs to happen to calm the unrest. 
However, I would like to begin with a brief glance at the past. 
Run-up to the crisis 
The financial turmoil began over a year ago with the notorious subprime crisis. For a long 
time,  US  financial  institutions  had  engaged  in  aggressive  lending  to  borrowers  with  weak 
credit  histories,  after  which  the  loans  were  repackaged  and  sold  to  investors  all  over  the 
world. When the credit losses on these loans became unexpectedly large, it was clear that 
those who had invested had grossly underestimated the risks. 
The  subprime  problem  was  primarily  a  US  problem,  but  since  the  loans  had  been  sold  to 
others outside the United States the turmoil had a global effect right from the start. Since no 
one really knew where the losses would turn up, a situation quickly arose in which banks and 
other financial institutions became cautious about lending money to each other. They began 
to hoard liquidity to meet their own obligations and to deal with any speculations that they 
were  affected  by  the  subprime  problems.  As  a  result  the  conditions  for  interbank  lending 
deteriorated, causing market interest rates to soar. 
In  this  situation  several  central  banks  chose  to  act  by  injecting  liquidity  into  the  interbank 
market. This intervention achieved the desired effect in part, but did not eliminate the mutual 
distrust among banks. Northern Rock, one of the first casualties of the crisis, became well 
aware of this situation in September last year when it could no longer find private financing. It 
turned instead to the Bank of England – and as we all know, the story ended when, following 
a complicated process, the British government nationalised Northern Rock. 
The turbulence deepens 
Now the turmoil was not just related to the US subprime market. More and more assets and 
markets became affected when even borrowers with better credit ratings were hit. Nor were 
the problems just a matter of inadequate creditworthiness of US borrowers any more, as the 
ability of European borrowers to pay now came into question. 
During the spring the turmoil reaped its most startling victim so far. Bear Stearns, the fifth 
largest investment bank in the US, was forced to suspend payments after being unable to 
arrange  short-term  financing.  It  hardly  needs  to  be  said  that  Bear  Stearns  was  heavily 
exposed to the subprime market. 
Conditions  on  the  credit  markets  temporarily  eased  after  Bear  Stearns.  Although  tensions 
continued,  the  market  began  to  slowly  return  to  more  normal  conditions  and  credit  risk 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 1
premiums decreased sharply for a while. Confidence seemed to be returning to the financial 
markets. 
However,  the  turmoil  gained  renewed  strength  during  the  late  summer  when  Lehman 
Brothers  was  forced  to  apply  for  bankruptcy  protection.  Since  then  a  number  of  banks  in 
Europe  and  the  United  States  have  experienced  severe  problems.  Banks  and  financial 
institutions  that  were  forced  into  being  sold  or  nationalised  include  heavyweights  such  as 
Fortis  in  Belgium,  Merrill  Lynch  and  AIG  in  the  United  States,  and  Hypo  Real  Estate  in 
Germany.  The  financial  crisis  had  progressed  from  being  a  subprime  crisis  in  the  United 
States into a global confidence and liquidity crisis. 
Where can we find the explanations? 
In light of current events, the obvious question is how do we explain the situation? What we 
see is largely the result of an extended period of vast expansion of credit and growth of the 
financial  industry's  assets,  which  with  hindsight  has  proven  to  be  unsustainable.  This 
development was made possible because for some time economic conditions in both the US 
and the rest of the world were extremely favourable, with low interest rates, low and stable 
inflation, and robust growth. The low interest rates resulted in increased indebtedness and 
willingness  to  invest,  which  in  turn  contributed  to  rising  asset  prices,  especially  in  the 
property markets. Rising asset prices allowed further indebtedness, which once again fuelled 
asset prices. 
Parallel  to  this  trend,  financial  market  participants  engaged  in  increasingly  aggressive 
strategies in the search for yield. Banks and mortgage institutions eased credit terms in order 
to gain market shares. High-risk loans were packaged in complex structured products that 
were perceived as more secure investments than they actually were. 
At the foundation, the art of financial engineering that underpins the development of these 
products  is  undoubtedly  positive,  making  it  possible  to  convert  illiquid  loans  into  liquid 
securities  and  enabling  investors  to  trade  in  credit  risk  without  having  to  handle  individual 
loans.  However,  it  is  essential  that  the  products  can  be  purchased  and  sold  on  a  market 
where investors are offered clear and continuous pricing information. However, this was not 
the case. The variety of instruments became so immense and their complexity so great that 
few people – if anyone – were capable of assessing these markets. 
One  driving  force  behind  the  development  was  the  large  US  investment  banks,  which  in 
many cases were the creators of the new products and which were also highly leveraged and 
invested in these and other risky instruments. However, everything did not remain within the 
United States; large volumes of risky loans were packaged and sold in various forms all over 
the world. Investors showed a strong desire to buy and drove up the prices of many financial 
assets to levels that did not at all reflect actual risk. 
In  brief,  mispricing,  imbalances  and  complicated  structures  evolved  over  a  long  period  of 
time  and  when  the  US  subprime  borrowers  were  unable  to  repay  their  loans  to  a  greater 
extent than expected, the ball was set in motion. 
As  I  said  initially,  concerns  about  the  US  mortgage  market  soon  expanded  into  a  general 
distrustfulness of the overall condition of the global financial system. The issue today is less 
about the original US problems, but rather about a general confidence crisis and how banks 
around the world will manage in the future. Just as in the United States, the global financial 
markets  have  long  been  characterised  by  favourable  macroeconomic  conditions  and 
aggressive growth strategies among financial institutions. As business activity now declines, 
concern about the European banks is expanding from previously mainly involving losses due 
to exposure in US markets, to dealing more with the credit quality of their own loan portfolios. 
As a result of this uncertainty, participants who usually are active in the credit markets are 
withdrawing, causing disrupted pricing along with a drastic decrease in liquidity. When the 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2008
markets deteriorate or cease to function in this way, individual financial institutions are also 
hit hard, especially the banks. We have seen the consequences of these developments now 
during  the  autumn,  causing  central  banks  and  governments  to  take  powerful  measures  to 
avoid a full-scale systemic crisis. 
Although most banks have satisfactory solvency levels today, the turmoil has developed into 
a serious liquidity crisis, based on distrust of the banks' ability to survive in the future. The 
entire problem can actually be summarised in a single word; confidence. Currently there is a 
lack of confidence in the financial sector as a whole. 
So what needs to happen to restore confidence? Before I attempt to answer that question, I 
thought  I  would  say  a  few  words  about  the  situation  in  the  Swedish  financial  system  and 
about the role of the Riksbank and other Swedish authorities. 
is 
far 
from 
financial  system 
the  epicentre  of 
the  crisis.  According 
The situation in the Swedish financial system 
Even  if  the  situation  has  worsened  in  recent  weeks  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the 
Swedish 
to 
Finansinspektionen  (The  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  –  and  according  to  our 
own assessment – the Swedish banks continue to have strong balance sheets. Their capital 
situation  is  strong,  credit  losses  are  low  and  profitability  has  reached  historic  highs.  The 
Swedish  banks  have  been  relatively  conservative  in  their  lending,  and  have  not  been 
exposed to any great extent to the worst-hit markets or institutions. 
However, although we are not the source of the turmoil, it now has a considerable impact 
even on the Swedish financial system. Several parts of the credit market are not working as 
well  as  usual.  For  example,  due  to  uncertainty  among  investors  we  have  seen  a  sharp 
increase  in  demand  for  Swedish  government  securities  and  a  corresponding  decrease  in 
demand for mortgage bonds. As we know, this development caused the Swedish National 
Debt Office to auction extra treasury bills and use the money to buy mortgage bonds. 
The uncertainty has also had an impact on those markets where the banks borrow money, 
as it has become more difficult to borrow over longer time periods, and on the international 
markets. Even if the major Swedish banks are lending to each other, international investors 
are less willing to invest, which has reduced the supply of loans and driven up the banks' 
cost of borrowing. However, I would like to point out that higher borrowing costs do not mean 
that the banks have problems (in the sense that their financial situation is threatened). It is 
true that the Icelandic bank Kaupthing's Swedish subsidiary did suffer from an acute liquidity 
need due to developments on Iceland and was forced to turn to the Riksbank. However, the 
major Swedish banks do not have – nor have they had – any of the liquidity problems that 
Kaupthing and banks in other countries have had. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  a  significant  risk  that  the  credit  supply  to  Swedish  companies  and 
households could worsen considerably if the problems on the credit markets take hold and 
persist.  Not  only  would  the  effects of  such  a credit  squeeze  be  unfortunate  for companies 
and households – they would harm the entire economy. It is in part against the background 
of this risk that we should view the Riksbank's liquidity support measures over the past few 
weeks. It is also one of the reasons for The Riksbank's most recent decision to cut the repo 
rate by 0.5 percentage points. 
Role of Swedish authorities 
One of the main duties of the Riksbank is to promote a safe and efficient payment system. 
More specifically, this means that the Riksbank continually analyses risks and threats to the 
stability  of  the  Swedish  financial  system.  The  purpose  of  the  analysis  is  to  discover  any 
changes and vulnerabilities that could lead to a serious crisis. In the event that a crisis should 
occur, certain tools are at our disposal to handle the situation. Over the past few weeks you 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 3
have seen several examples of how we can assist the banking system in various ways with 
liquidity-supporting measures when the situation so requires. 
The  Riksbank  is  not  the  only  authority  that  is  responsible  for  ensuring  financial  stability. 
Finansinspektionen also plays an important role as a regulatory authority. In the current crisis 
the  National  Debt  Office  has  also  helped  to  improve  liquidity  conditions  in  the  financial 
system by auctioning extra treasury bills. Ultimately, the Government and the Riksdag also 
have  a  responsibility  for  financial  stability  if  it  becomes  apparent  that  the  initiatives  of  the 
authorities are unable to bring a crisis under control. 
These  days  the  Riksbank  is  working  very  closely  with  other  authorities  to  monitor 
developments and discuss how to handle the situation. Like other Swedish authorities, we 
are also in frequent contact with our foreign colleagues and with market participants. 
As I mentioned previously, the Riksbank has helped where we could to improve liquidity and 
market conditions. But what have we actually done? 
What has the Riksbank done? 
First  of  all,  we  have  taken  several  general  measures  aimed  at  all  of  the  Riksbank's 
counterparties.  The  purpose  of  the  measures  is  to  solve  two  problems  with  the  Swedish 
banks:  inadequate  access  to  long-term  financing  in  Swedish  krona  and  a  limited  ability  to 
gain access to US dollars. 
The lack of long-term financing is due to the lack of mutual trust among the banks during the 
crisis,  which  have  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  interbank  lending  markets.  One 
consequence is that the banks have been forced to borrow for shorter terms. Even if it has 
been possible to get financing, liquidity management have  become much more difficult for 
the  banks  and  risks  also  have  increased.  To  enable  the  banks  to  restore  the  situation  to 
more normal conditions, the Riksbank has offered financing at longer terms than what the 
markets  can  currently  provide  by  lending  Swedish  krona  with  maturities  of  three  and  six 
months. 
The lending is designed so that we provide liquidity in the form of somewhat longer loans and 
absorb the same quantity of short term liquidity. Combined with the fact that lending takes 
place  at  market  rates,  this  means  that  banks  receive  help  with  their  strained  financing 
situation  at  the  same  time  that  the  measures  do  not  have  any  direct  effects  on  monetary 
policy. This is a very important point. The Riksbank is quite simply helping the banks replace 
their  short-term  financing  with  longer-term  financing.  In  a  broader  sense,  the  Riksbank  is 
assuming  the  role  of  market  maker  in  the  money  market  and  by  doing  so  ensuring  its 
functioning. 
The  other  problem  is  that  a  general  shortage  of  financing  opportunities  in  US  dollars  has 
arisen.  Since  the  Swedish  banks  are  not  counterparties  with  the  US  central  bank,  they 
cannot  be  certain  that  they  will  receive  any  of  the  injections  of  liquidity  that  the  Federal 
Reserve makes. That is why the Riksbank have offered their counterparties large loans in US 
dollars. 
Together with the measures that the National Debt Office have taken, the Riksbank's lending 
of  both  Swedish  krona  and  US  dollars  contribute  to  a  general  strengthening  of  liquidity 
primarily in the Swedish credit markets, thereby also creating conditions for the markets to 
return to more normal conditions and allowing financial stability to be maintained. 
Second  of  all  the  Riksbank  has  –  as  I  just  mentioned  –  also  provided  special  liquidity 
assistance  to  Kaupthing  Bank  Sweden.  This  loan  is  against  collateral  and  with  an  interest 
rate that is above normal lending costs. Even if this measure is aimed at an individual bank, it 
should  also  be  viewed  as  an  initiative  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  to  maintain 
confidence  in  Sweden's  entire  credit  and  payment  system.  The  decision  is  based  on  the 
assessment that although the bank is solvent, it is unable to perform its obligations without 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2008
liquidity assistance. What happens next with Kaupthing Sweden is mainly a question for the 
bank's owner, the Icelandic state. 
The  liquidity  support  to  Kaupthing  differs  in  many  regards  from  the  Riksbank's  other 
measures.  In  this  case  the  support  is  aimed  at  an  individual  institution  and  not  at  money 
market participants in general. In Kaupthing's case the point was to enable the bank to obtain 
any funding whatsoever and thereby continue to exist. An important similarity with the other 
measure, however, is that the liquidity that was injected via Kaupthing into the system also 
comes  back  to  the  Riksbank  in  the  form  of  deposits  from  the  bank(s)  that  have  excess 
liquidity. In this way this measure does not have any direct monetary policy effects either. 
The common denominator for everything the Riksbank has done to date is that all measures 
are  aimed  at  strengthening  liquidity  conditions  within  the  Swedish  financial  system.  Unlike 
many  other  countries,  thus  far  it  has  not  been  necessary  for  the  Swedish  authorities  to 
provide the banks with any form of capital support from the government. This point is also 
important. However, it remains to be seen whether the Riksbank and other authorities have 
done  enough.  How  the  situation  develops  in  the  future  is  essentially  a  question  of  what 
happens  outside  of  Sweden.  Nevertheless,  the  Swedish  authorities  are  prepared  to  take 
those measures that are necessary to ensure financial stability. For the Riksbank, this means 
that we will continue to provide the banks with the liquidity required for the financial system to 
function. 
Let me now proceed to discuss paths out of the crisis. 
Paths out of the crisis 
We are now in the middle of the most serious financial turmoil that the world has seen in a 
very long time. It is difficult to anticipate how the situation will develop in the future, which 
means that it is also difficult to talk about paths out of the crisis. However, let me share a few 
general thoughts. 
In the short term 
Large  imbalances  have  been  built  up  in  the  global  financial  system  over  a  long  period  of 
time. The risks that banks and other financial institutions have assumed have quite simply 
become  too  high  in  relation  to  the  risk-bearing  capital.  Therefore  the  risk  level  must  be 
reduced  and  capital  must  be  injected.  This  adaptation  process  is  in  full  swing  and  write-
downs have been taken globally for a value of USD 637 billion. Lower asset values must be 
met  with  lower  indebtedness,  either  by  disposing  of  assets  or  by  increasing  equity.  This 
process is also in full swing. Including the measures taken by the US government yesterday, 
capital injections of about USD 611 billion have been made so far, but additional capital will 
be needed as further write-downs will be made. 
To put it succinctly, what is needed is that many financial institutions all over the world must 
shrink  or  disappear.  This  process  will  be  both  time-consuming  and  painful.  Iceland  is  the 
current  example  of  how  just  painful  and  spectacular  the  process  can  be.  But  the  fact 
remains: only when the banks' balance sheets have stabilised and the markets have made 
certain  that  solvency  levels  are  satisfactory  will  the  situation  normalise.  Only  then  will 
confidence return to the financial markets, and only then will liquidity also return. 
Central banks and other authorities need to accept their part of the responsibility while these 
processes are in progress. The task of the central bank is to provide the financial system with 
liquidity when needed. As we know, this has also taken place to a large extent. However, 
there  are  limitations  to  what  the  central  banks  can  do.  Other  measures  must  be  taken  for 
banks with inadequate solvency. For these purposes a functioning order to handle banks in 
insolvency is needed. Where taxpayer money is involved, the process must be carried out on 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 5
condition  that  the  socioeconomic  costs  are  minimised  and  that  the  owners  of  the  financial 
institutions that are taken under public administration must carry their own losses. 
The coordinated crisis package that the Euro countries launched earlier this week contains 
the  essentials  and  largely  offers  the  desirable  components  for  such  a  package.  After  the 
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy it became clear to financial market participants that even the 
largest financial enterprises could fall. This insight caused the freezing of the markets that 
has now lasted for almost a month. Promises by leading nations that this will not be allowed 
to  happen  again  will  hopefully  help  to  thaw  the  financial  markets.  It  is  both  welcome  and 
desirable  that  the  government  support  measures  are  accompanied  by  tough  counter-
demands on the banks. 
The  Swedish  government  has  announced  that  it  intends  to  carry  out  a  nationally  adapted 
version  of  this  crisis  package  in  Sweden.  It  is  hoped  that  Swedish  banks  will  not  have  to 
make use of the opportunity for government guarantees or capital injections, since the terms 
will probably be rather tough. However, we do not know the details of the proposal at this 
time. 
However,  what  we  do  know  is  that  the  Government  has  decided  to  expand  the  deposit 
guarantee. This is an important measure to strengthen confidence in the Swedish banking 
system.  At  the  same  time  it  is  important  to  add  that  measures  of  this  type  must  be 
complemented in the long term with mechanisms that facilitate a sustainable financing of the 
system; in other words, those institutions that are covered by the guarantee must also carry 
its costs. 
In the somewhat longer term 
In a longer perspective there is reason to consider which structural changes are needed to 
prevent  similar  situations  from  arising  again.  An  intense  discussion  is  currently  underway 
about the need for changed regulations and stricter supervision of the financial markets and 
institutions. The Riksbank has discussed these issues in various contexts for some time. 
For  example,  the  rules  for  management  and  supervision  of  liquidity  risks  need  to  be 
developed and improved. The financial sector needs greater transparency so that customers 
and investors can gain a better overview of the companies' commitments. For Sweden it is 
also important to create a functioning regulatory framework to handle banks in insolvency. 
And just for the sake of clarity, let me add that this view is in no way related to any such 
situation being present in Sweden. This is something that the Riksbank has advocated for a 
long time. 
In  light  of  what  happened  in  the  United  States  we  should  also  consider  regulation  of 
institutions that do not take deposits from the public. Such institutions are often the subject to 
weaker  supervision  and  regulation,  which  has  been  justified  because  they  are  not  as 
important for financial stability. But as the developments in the US investment banks clearly 
illustrate, even such institutions can substantially shake up the financial system. 
Given the global scope of the crisis it is important to coordinate both short-term and long-
term  measures  among  countries.  If  nations  try  to  find  separate  solutions  in  this  type  of 
situation,  the  costs  for  handling  the  turmoil  could  become  even  greater  than  what  they 
otherwise  would  have  been,  even  for  individual  countries.  Therefore,  in  all  of  the  issues 
mentioned here, much can be won through international coordination and harmonisation. 
Yet another example of an issue that requires international coordination is how to organise 
supervision and crisis management within the EU. Today several banks engage in significant 
operations  in  several  EU  countries,  while  the  responsibility  for  supervision  and  crisis 
management  is  still  national.  Under  such  circumstances  there  is  a  risk  that  coordination 
problems and conflicts of interest could arise between countries, which obviously does not 
benefit  financial  stability.  Cooperation  within  the  EU  offers  a  unique  opportunity  to  discuss 
and agree on how to handle these problems. 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2008
However, dealing with all of these problems is not just a matter of changes in regulation and 
supervision. If I may once again take the US as an example, the problems there show that 
the  incidence  of  financial  crises  can  also  have  a  clear  political  dimension.  One  important 
reason for the lending boom was that the country's political leaders had long pressured the 
mortgage lending institutions to increase lending to low income groups. Institutions such as 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were quite simply forced to base their operations on political 
objectives  rather  than  on  sound  credit  risk  policies.  The  fact  that  unfortunate  political 
decisions such as these, as well as inadequate regulation, can help to create a crisis is an 
important lesson to keep in mind when we eventually close the books on this crisis. 
I am aware that my wish list is long and requires extensive reform work. However, the course 
of  events  over  the  past  year  has  clearly  underscored  the  need  to  quickly  deal  with  these 
issues. 
Meanwhile,  it  is  important  to  make  clear  that  we  must  not  become  overly  zealous  about 
regulation. In times such as these it is easy for opportunism to gain the upper hand, resulting 
in  measures  that  do  more  harm  than  good.  The  Riksbank  supports  the  EU  commission's 
motto of “better regulation” and that all regulation changes must be preceded by objective 
and extensive impact assessments and cost-benefit analyses. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me now summarise. 
The  financial  turmoil  that  began  in  the  United  States  over  one  year  ago  has  now  spread 
around the world with full force. Strong distrust currently prevails in the markets, which in one 
way  or  another  essentially  afflicts  all  financial  institutions.  For  Swedish  banks  this  trend  is 
mainly expressed by the fact that they are forced to borrow on much shorter terms than usual 
and at higher rates. In brief, although we are not responsible for the current situation we are 
certainly feeling its repercussions. 
Both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  still  hold  the  opinion  that  the  major  Swedish 
banks  have  strong  capital  buffers,  robust  earnings  and  low  loan  losses.  Consequently, 
conditions  are  good  for  handling  the  current  uncertainties  as  well  as  for  dealing  with 
unexpected future losses in the economic downturn we see ahead of us. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 7
