Radovan Jelašić: Issues of key importance for the National Bank of 
Serbia and also for the country 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  Serbian 
Economic Summit, Belgrade, 4 November 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Regardless  of  all  political  and  economic  challenges  during  the  last  two  years,  Serbia 
managed to maintain its economic stability. And the challenges have been quite a few, what 
with  things  like  adoption  of  the  new  Constitution,  early  elections,  presidential  elections, 
Kosovo  issue  and  again  early  elections,  oil  and  agricultural  shocks,  etc.  However,  the 
challenge we are currently facing comes from abroad and forces upon us a new set of rules, 
puts  things  into  a  different  context  and  requires  a  different  perspective  –  if  not  to  adopt  a 
completely new pattern of thinking and working criteria then at least to think and work faster 
and  more  efficiently.  And  though  I  am  convinced  that  Serbia  will  again  be  successful  in 
fighting these difficulties, allow me to point out today some issues of key importance, not only 
for the NBS, but for the country as a whole. These are as follows: 
1. 
Market has grown less tolerant now of eventual mistakes in macroeconomic policy 
as  we  are  still  paying  for  the  mistakes  made  in  earlier  years.  The  speed  and 
intensity  of  change  in  the  course  of  the  last  several  days  is  unprecedented  in 
modern  history:  spreads  double  overnight,  first  rate  institutions  lose  their  hard 
earned reputation, state ownership is not only commended but positively reflected in 
prices of shares, while valuation of balance sheet items at market prices – one of 
the key pillars of market economy – is suddenly put aside for better times. But what 
are the implications for Serbia? The spreads are changing now, even the exchange 
rate, and we are receiving bills for all that we have not, or have only partially done. 
However,  it  is  solely  up  to  us  how  we  shall  proceed,  whether  we  are  ready  for  a 
complete overhaul or shall try to muddle through for some time yet. Serbia still has 
two  choices:  a)  not  to  change  anything  of  consequence  or  to  make  only  slight 
changes which would contribute to further growth in consumption and increase the 
current account deficit, hence necessarily leading to a change in the exchange rate, 
problems in budget execution and higher inflation, or b) to make a turnaround in its 
economic  policy,  freeze  consumption  and  allow  only  for  the  increase  in  capital 
investment.  Fare  meter  is  ticking  and  each  day  lost  is  a  loss  for  Serbia.  I  am 
convinced, however, that we not only want, but also can change the economic policy 
in our favour. This shall not be popular, but shall certainly be useful for us. 
Psychological reactions should not be countered by pragmatic measures, but rather 
by  those  inducing  psychological  effects  regardless  of  the  consequences  that  may 
logically ensue. When Germany decided to promptly take a decision to guarantee all 
deposits  in  order  to  strengthen  confidence  of  the  public,  everybody  was  thinking 
what  the  Chancellor  Angela  Merkel  actually  had  in  mind  when  she  said  that  “all 
citizens’  deposits  are  safe”.  When  countries  decide  to  increase  the  volume  of 
insured deposits, nobody should calculate the impact such measure would have on 
the budget, since in case of some countries that could be as high as the country’s 
GDP. Quite frankly, I underrated the significance of the psychological effect! Still, the 
NBS  was  quick  and  efficient  enough  in  its  response  to  all  the  challenges  during 
several  recent  weeks.  Banks  have  managed  to  withstand  the  pressure  without 
resorting to either tax payer’s money or decreasing the volume of insured deposits 
as the level of reserve requirements have remained unchanged. 
2. 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 1
3. 
4. 
5. 
All  countries  tend  to  overreact  instead  of  taking  moderate  measures.  Financial 
package  assembled  by  the  IMF,  EU  and  World  Bank  for  Hungary  is  the  best 
illustration. I am convinced that the response in case of Serbia will be decisive, not 
in  the  sense  of  taking  additional  funds,  but  additional  measures  to  maintain  and 
strengthen  macroeconomic  stability,  which  is  much  more  efficient.  All  of  that  has 
already been incorporated into the Budget for 2009 and will soon be made public. 
Not even a political defence mechanism, such as membership in the EU, will now do 
to defend a country from a potential crisis situation. No more muddling through, it is 
only  hard  work  that  counts  now.  Spreads  are  again  more  under  the  influence  of 
macroeconomic  data  than  membership  in  certain  political  organizations.  This  is  a 
confirmation for Serbia that entering into force of the Agreement on Stabilization and 
Association with the EU does not mean that we will be able to relax because the 
Agreement represents only a chance, and not a guarantee of a better life. 
Each  country  is  primarily  concerned  with  taking  decisions  and  passing  measures 
which are in its own best interest, and only then looks at the broader picture. This is 
best  illustrated  by  the  national  system  of  deposit  insurance.  No  matter  how  many 
memoranda  of  understanding  in  respect  of  supervision  are  signed,  if  things  go 
wrong,  everybody  will  almost  exclusively  tend  to  its  own  interests.  Recent  events 
confirm that it pays off to be restrictive if you are a financial sector supervisor like the 
NBS  is,  but  I  would  be  much  happier  had  we  not  been  in  the  right  when  we 
tightened the reins. Our banking sector has proved in practice that it is solvent and 
liquid and can withstand the pressure. Moreover, when push came to shove, foreign 
majority investors were ready to support their institutions in Serbia. 
Serbia shall, I am convinced, be successful in fighting yet another challenge like it always 
has. And if not sooner, I intend to give you a detailed report on our performance at the next 
summit. 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2008
