Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Folha 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
by Denyse Godoy and Clovis Rossi, FOLHA, Sao Paulo, 8 November 2008. 
 FOLHA – It is a (paradigm) dogma that central banks should only pay attention to inflation 
and not to other points of the economy like jobs or consumer spending. You have indicated 
that you are, now, more concerned about growth than about inflation. In times of a severe 
crisis like these in which we are, isn’t that dogma correct anymore? 
JEAN-CLAUDE TRICHET – I didn’t say that. We are not changing the way we look at our 
monetary policy strategy. We consider that our primary mandate has been – it is today and 
will be tomorrow – to deliver price stability in the medium term. This is the mandate that we 
were asked to fulfil by the Treaty of Maastricht. In this perspective, we decided to decrease 
interest  rates  by  100  basis  points  in  less  than  one  month  because  we  have  observed  a 
significant  alleviation  of  inflationary  pressures.  We  also  took  into  account  that  we  had 
regained  control  of  medium  term  inflation  expectations.  That  being  said,  I  profoundly  trust 
that by delivering price stability, we are contributing to sustainable growth, job creation and 
fostering  financial  stability.  By  being  credible  in  delivering  price  stability  over  time,  and  by 
solidly  anchoring  inflation  expectations,  we  are  fostering,  in  very  difficult  times,  the 
confidence  of  households.  Our  fellow  citizens  have  to  be  reassured  on  the  fact  that  their 
purchasing  power  will  be  preserved  in  the  period  to  come.  It  is  also  very  important  for 
sustainable  growth  that  all  economic  agents  take  appropriate  decisions  because  they  can 
rely on the credible delivery of price stability. A solid anchoring of inflation expectations also 
allows to have medium and long term market interest rates more favourable to growth and 
less volatile, which is essential in an episode of financial turbulences. 
As regards these turbulences, we have been one of the first central banks in the world to 
react  immediately,  on  August  9th,  2007,  when  we  had  the  first  tensions  on  the  money 
markets.  We  decided  to  provide  liquidity  in  order  to  put  the  market  in  a  situation  where  it 
would function as normal as possible under the circumstances. But it is important to note that 
we apply a separation principle between our monetary policy stance, which is designed to 
deliver price stability in the medium term, and the implementation of this policy – at the level 
of  interest  rates  decided  to  deliver  price  stability  –  which  is  managed  with  a  view  of 
appeasing the tensions in the money market.  
FOLHA – But why aren’t the financial markets as smooth as they should be after all these 
guarantees? 
TRICHET – This is an important issue, despite the fact that central banks and government 
authorities have taken very important decisions. The central banks put in place a first line of 
defence  against  systemic  liquidity  threats,  and  then  the  governments  came  with  a  second 
line  of  defence  against  what  I  would  call  systemic  solvency  threats.  At  the  moment  I  am 
speaking,  there  is  a  remaining  level  of  tensions  that  doesn’t  take  fully  into  account  all  the 
decisions that have been taken. 
FOLHA – Does it mean that markets do not trust governments? 
TRICHET  –  No.  I  think  it  is  a  question  of  time  and  I  have  called  on  commercial  banks  to 
speed up the process of fully taking into account the decisions that have already been made.  
FOLHA  –  How  much  can  emerging  countries  like  China  and  Brazil  help  to  avoid  a  worse 
global crisis? 
TRICHET – I think that first of all we should recognize that, for the first time since World War 
II,  we  have  seen  a  solid  resilience  of  the  emerging  economies,  which  has  been  quite 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 1
impressive at a time when we could see the industrial economies heavily affected. And that 
is true, since the start of the turbulences, since the beginning of August, last year. During one 
year we observed that the emerging world was more resilient than the developed world. At 
the present moment, it is clear that even the emerging economies are affected by what has 
happened in the industrialized economies, and in particular since mid September. Of course, 
we  are  in  a  global  economy  where  we  are  all  interdependent.  I  myself  never  spoke  of 
decoupling. So, we are all more or less touched by a phenomenon that comes here or there, 
but it is wrong to think that any of us could be out of the influence of the others. That doesn’t 
prevent me from thinking that for the global economy to get out of this difficult period we have 
to count very much on Brazil, on Mexico, on China, on India, and on all other major emerging 
economies. That’s absolutely clear. The potential for global growth is there. That’s not to say 
that  the  industrialized  world  has  not  to  put  itself  in  order  and  contribute  themselves  to  a 
steady and sustainable growth. 
FOLHA – Is there a case for a stimulus package in Europe? 
TRICHET  –  Various  countries  are  in  very  different  situations  in  the  euro  area.  Some 
countries have fortunately exemplary fiscal policies and I would say that they have room for 
manoeuvring. But it is not the case for all. You have unfortunately countries that have already 
no  room  for  manoeuvring.  In  those  particular  cases  fiscal  activism,  instead  of  having  a 
positive impact on the economy, could harm confidence, as economic agents would expect 
government authorities to address these imbalances, by increasing taxation a posteriori. On 
top of that, I would say also that you have to accept that when there is a very powerful oil and 
commodity shock it has necessarily an impact on the cycle, and to embark on excessively 
proactive  policies  to  avoid  these  fluctuations  in  the  business  cycle  could  create  future 
problems in the years to come. We experienced that on the occasion of the first and second 
oil shock in the 70’s, when the authorities’ response created mass unemployment in Europe 
for the first time since World War II. To sum up, a number of countries have the possibility to 
use their room for manoeuvring. Others have not. In all cases we have a framework which is 
the Stability and Growth Pact. 
FOLHA – What about this idea France has launched of an European economic government? 
TRICHET  –  There  are  some  suggestions  saying  that  the  euro  area  needs  an  economic 
government. And I have to say that a large number of other voices would accept “economic 
governance” but not the expression “economic government”, in particular because they fear it 
could mean exerting pressure on the independent central bank. As President of the ECB, I 
always make the point that the central bank is totally independent. Our own credibility relies 
on  this  independence,  which  has  been  granted  to  us  by  the  European  democracies.  It  is 
clear  that  the  governments  of  the  euro  area  themselves  together  with  the  European 
Commission have their governance which is being carried out. In particular, the Stability and 
Growth  Pact,  in  the fiscal  policy  area  which  is  a  key  element.  You  have  also,  certainly,  to 
improve the implementation of the Lisbon agenda, in the domain of structural reforms. The 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the  implementation  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  on  structural  reforms, 
and  the  peer  surveillance  by  executive  branches  on  unit  labour  cost  evolution  in  each 
economy  are  three  pillars  that  are  very  clearly  under  the  responsibility  of  governments. 
Initiatives to foster the effective implementation of these elements are positive. 
FOLHA  –  Have  you  felt  in  these  recent  months,  in  special  in  the  past  60  days,  a  kind  of 
pressure  from  the  governments  in  order  to  be  more  focused  on  growth  than  on  stability 
because of the recession that’s coming? 
TRICHET – I have to say that all the governments understand pretty well that they have to 
respect the rules of the Treaty and they know that our own credibility is essential to permit us 
to deliver price stability and, therefore, sustainable growth and job creation.  
FOLHA – Are you in favour of reforming the IMF, which is an institution, dominated by the 
industrialized  countries?  Brazil  is  defending  that  the  emerging  countries  must  have  more 
voice than they have today. How could it be reformed? 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2008
TRICHET  –  I  think  there  is  a  general  consensus  to  consider  that  it  is  normal  that  the 
emerging economies – taking into account their growing influence and the size of their GDP 
and the contribution of their growth to global prosperity – should become more influential in 
the IMF and at the level of the global economic institutions in general. So, I think nobody is 
disputing that, and nobody is, of course, disputing the fact that the G20 is taking more and 
more influence. There is also a call for the Financial Stability Forum to be itself more opened 
to the emerging countries and I think it is fully legitimate. The next question is of course how 
you speed up the process for all institutions to be more inclusive. 
FOLHA – Do you think it would really be possible to regulate all these complex instruments, 
such as the hedge funds and the credit rating agencies? 
TRICHET – I think we have to be clear that in market economies there are risks; otherwise 
you are not in a market economy. There are uncertainties and there are risks. If there are 
risks, from time to time there is also necessarily the materialization of some of these risks. 
The only country I know that had no risk and no materialisation of risks was the Soviet Union, 
and everybody knows the result of that: the final risk was that the full body of the economy 
collapsed. That being said, we have to improve very significantly the present functioning of 
the  global  financial  system  and  the  global  economy.  We  have  a  large  consensus  to  have 
much more transparency for financial instruments, for markets and for institutions. We need 
appropriate  rules,  standards  and  codes.  And  that  is  valid  for  all  institutions,  including  the 
highly  leveraged  institutions.  We  must  have  an  efficient  and  effective  fight  against 
procyclicality.  We  have  to  improve  very  significantly  risk  management  in  all  pertinent 
institutions. And last but not least, we have to introduce much more discipline in the macro-
economic  policies,  and  that  of  course  goes  for  fiscal  policies,  but  also  for  appropriate 
discipline to prevent excessive domestic and external imbalances. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 3
