Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Building a sound framework for the fund 
management industry 
Keynote guest address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al  Maraj, Governor of the 
Central Bank of Bahrain, at the FundForum Middle East 2008: "Building a Sound Framework 
for the Fund Management Industry", Manama, 2 December 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I would like to thank the organisers of this Second Annual Fund Forum Middle East for their 
kind invitation to speak to you today. My topic is “Building a Sound Framework for the Fund 
Management  Industry”,  and  a  sound  framework  involves  both  macro-economic  and  micro-
prudential elements. 
The  macro-economic  elements  are  obviously  the  uppermost  in  everyone’s  thoughts  at  the 
moment.  The  global  financial  and  economic  system  is  currently  experiencing  what  is 
generally  accepted  are  the  worst  conditions  for the  last  50 years.  Until  only  a  few  months 
ago, many commentators and analysts believed that the economies of the GCC would be an 
oasis of calm in the on-going financial turmoil. We also tended to hear a great deal about the 
so-called “decoupling” thesis. This was the idea that the emerging economies would continue 
their recent strong growth despite the economic downturn in Europe and the United States. 
Following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  mid-September  we  now  know  that  these 
scenarios were too optimistic. It has become clear that no part of the world will be immune to 
the current crisis, and the IMF expects that this will be the first time in fifty years that all of the 
advanced economies will experience a synchronized recession. This cannot fail to have an 
impact on the rest of the global economy.  
Although the GCC countries enjoy strong fundamentals, we have not  been immune to the 
credit crisis. One consequence of the financial market disruption in the wake of the Lehman 
collapse  was  a  substantial  outflow  of  dollar  liquidity  from  all  of  the  emerging  markets, 
including the GCC. The liquidity impact of the crisis has also combined with a general risk 
aversion  which  has  had  an  adverse  impact  on  the  supply  of  credit  to  many  emerging 
economies, including to the GCC countries.  
As a result of these global financial market developments there have been significant stock 
market corrections in several GCC countries. Some GCC members have needed to provide 
support  for  banking  sectors,  in  the  form  of  recapitalization  funds,  or  by  providing  blanket 
guarantees  of  the  deposits,  or  by  a  combination  of  both.  There  is  plenty  of  anecdotal 
evidence that the credit is becoming more restricted, and that investment projects are being 
delayed or scaled back.  
Nonetheless, compared with many other regions of the world, the GCC countries remain in a 
strong position to withstand the current crisis. They now form a $1 trillion economy. In the 
first  five  years  of  this  decade  an  economy  the  size  of  Sweden  was  added  to  the  GCC  in 
terms of aggregate output. The GCC is a net capital exporter, its Governments have surplus 
fiscal positions, and the GCC countries collectively are one of the world’s largest holders of 
foreign exchange reserves. 
Although oil prices have recently declined sharply from their highs in July of this year, when 
the price peaked at 147 dollars per barrel, the economic outlook for the GCC remains sound. 
A  range  of  economic  forecasts,  including  from  the  IMF,  suggest  that  the  GCC  can  expect 
economic growth in excess of five percent next year. This will be lower than the 6.5 percent 
projected for 2008, but would, nonetheless, represent a solid performance when set against 
the background of current global economic conditions. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 1
the  enormous  stresses  of  recent  months  resulting 
At  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  we  have  been  monitoring  domestic  and  international 
developments  very  closely.  However,  our  domestic  financial  markets  have  continued  to 
function  normally  despite 
from 
international events. It is true that domestic liquidity conditions have become tighter, but this 
has been mainly due to outflows of capital linked to earlier speculation on the revaluation of 
GCC  currencies.  Our  financial  system  has  shown  its  resilience  by  absorbing  both  large 
capital inflows and outflows over the past year. 
In recognition of tighter domestic liquidity conditions the Central Bank has taken a number of 
measures to provide additional liquidity to the market. However, we have not seen the need 
to take exceptional measures to support our banks, which remain liquid and well capitalized.  
We  will,  of  course,  continue  to  keep  the  situation  under  review  and  will  take  appropriate 
monetary policy and liquidity measures to continue to protect the stability of the markets here 
in Bahrain. 
Ensuring  macro-economic  stability  is,  of  course,  vital  for  the  development  of  the  fund 
management  industry.  The  measures  that  the  Central  Bank  has  taken  to  ensure  financial 
stability  within  Bahrain  will  continue  to  provide  the  conditions  within  which  a  vibrant  and 
growing fund management industry needs for its further development. 
The second component that the fund management industry needs for its development is a 
sound regulatory framework. Let me devote some remarks to this subject, as it is an area to 
which the Central Bank has devoted substantial resources in recent years. 
The Central Bank of Bahrain is the single regulator for the financial services sector. We are 
the  only  central  bank  in  the  region  with  responsibility  for  regulating  all  banking,  capital 
markets,  fund  management  and  insurance  business  under  one  roof.  We  have  a  policy  of 
following  international  standards  very  closely,  and  in  the  area  of  Islamic  finance,  we  have 
been a pioneer in developing prudential standards. We were the first regulator in the world to 
issue a comprehensive set of regulations tailored to the needs of Islamic financial institutions. 
We  see  the  development  of  the  fund  management  industry  as  a  vital  part  of  Bahrain’s 
strategy  to  remain  the  strategic  financial  hub  for  the  MENA  region.  Our  position  was 
confirmed by the recent announcement that assets under management by Bahrain’s mutual 
fund industry, surged by 73.7 percent to over US 17.2 billion dollars from September 2007 to 
September  2008.  This  growth  in  volume  has  come  from  both  overseas  funds  and  from 
mutual  funds  that  are  locally  incorporated.  The  locally  incorporated  funds  have  been 
established by domestic and international asset management companies and banks based in 
Bahrain and abroad. 
Although our domestic market is small, many of the asset management firms and banks use 
their presence in Bahrain as a hub from which to tap into the enormous opportunities that 
exist  in  both  the  GCC  and  the  wider  Middle  East.  These  firms  also  tell  us  that  they  are 
attracted by the maturity and efficiency of our financial markets, and by our comprehensive 
and transparent regulatory framework. 
Bahrain,  via  the  CBB  and  the  Economic  Development  Board,  has  actively  encouraged 
inward investment, and the success of this strategy is evident in both the predominance of 
foreign funds – both regional and international – in Bahrain’s capital markets. Of the 2,746 
funds registered as of September 2008, 95 percent of them are domiciled overseas. The total 
assets of all funds are US$17.2, while the total assets of foreign funds are US$ 10.2 billion. 
Recent  changes  that  we  have  made  to  the  CBB  Rulebook  have  increased  transparency 
across  all  types  of  investment.  Our  new  rules  aim  to  differentiate  between  the  various 
categories  of  collective  investment  undertakings  and  to  provide  appropriate  levels  of 
protection  for  investors.  Besides  retail  schemes,  the  new  regulations  also  authorize  expert 
schemes which are suitable for medium size investors. Also, the regulations create a new 
category of “exempt” schemes, under which hedge funds, leveraged buyouts, and other high 
risk funds could be established.  
2 
 BIS Review 163/2008
The  creation  of  the  exempt  category,  in  particular,  demonstrates  that  we  understand  the 
complex  nature  of  investors’  requirements,  as  well  as  those  of  market  players.  We  are 
determined  to  offer  the  necessary  amount  of  regulation  without  stifling  innovation  and, 
provided that they satisfy certain criteria, to allow financial institutions to set up various types 
of funds. 
These  changes  promise  to  be  a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  specialist  funds,  such  as 
hedge  funds  and  other  alternative  investment  products,  for  which  investors  have  an 
increasing appetite. Specialist funds are quickly becoming a market niche in which Bahrain is 
becoming increasingly active. 
We have also been developing our Rulebook as it applies to capital markets activities. We 
have made significant progress in the past year in developing a suitably comprehensive set 
of regulations for the capital markets, which will be issued as Volume 6 of the CBB Rulebook. 
The Capital Markets volume will include 13 modules which will contain regulations based on 
international best practice standards. We have recently finalized the Module on “Markets and 
Exchanges”,  and  the  consultation  period  for  the  Module  on  “Takeovers,  Mergers  and 
Acquisitions”, ended at the end of October of this year. The Module on “Clearing Settlement 
and Central Depository”, has now been issued for consultation.  
I  would  like  to  end  by  mentioning  a  final  development  in  the  capital  markets  to  which  we 
attach  great  significance.  This  concerns  the  agreement  that  has  just  been  entered  into 
between  the  Bahrain  Stock  Exchange  and  the  Singapore  Exchange.  The  agreement 
between the two exchanges provides a platform for the further development of the Bahrain 
Stock  Exchange,  using  the  world  renowned  technical  expertise  of  its  counterpart  in 
Singapore. 
To  conclude,  in  Bahrain  we  are  taking  a  wide  variety  of  measures  to  strengthen  the 
framework  for  the  fund  management  industry.  These  include:  maintaining  a  sound  macro-
economic environment, developing our regulatory framework, and enhancing the role of the 
Bahrain Stock Exchange. Although we may now be entering the down-swing of the global 
business cycle, there will, I am sure, be many investment opportunities that will continue to 
arise  in  the  region.  As  the  leading  financial  centre  in  the  region,  Bahrain  offers  a  strong 
platform from which to access these opportunities. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 3
