Michael C Bonello: Financial crisis impact on the Maltese economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  annual 
dinner of the Malta Institute of Financial Services – Malta, Saint Julian’s, 5 December 2008. 
 I would first of all like to thank you, Mr President, and your Council for inviting me to address 
the  members  of  your  Institute  and  their  guests.  I  would  also  like  to  commend  IFS  Malta’s 
growing contribution to the Maltese economy through its learning activities, and in particular 
its  involvement  in  the  Education  Council.  I  understand  that  it  has  also  been  participating 
actively in the work of the European Banking Training Network, and that it will next year start 
offering the Foundation Degree Programme of the University of Kent and the IFS School of 
Finance. 
When  I  addressed  this  distinguished  gathering  a  year  ago,  the  world  was  a  very  different 
place. At the time, the ECB forecast a euro area growth rate of around 2% for 2009; now the 
talk  is  about  the  likely  depth  and  duration  of  the  incipient  recession.  A  year  ago  we  were 
concerned about the upside risks to inflation; only twelve months later the prospects are of 
inflation  falling  well  below  the  ECB’s  price  stability  objective.  What  has  gone  so  terribly 
wrong, so quickly? 
In The Great Crash, 1929, J.K. Galbraith noted that “Far more important than rate of interest 
and  the  supply  of  credit  is  the  mood”.  And  as  the  editorial  of  the  November  issue  of  the 
Institute’s journal Financial World goes on to explain, “It is the mood that has fundamentally 
changed and this change is why, though governments may pump money into banks, share 
prices are still weak. It is why central banks are cutting rates but Libor is staying put. It is also 
why, despite public money to provide liquidity to markets, to guarantee bond issues and even 
to take stakes in banks, stock markets continue to drop like so many stones.” Perhaps this is 
happening because, as former ECB Executive Board member and Italian Economy Minister, 
Tommaso Padoa Schioppa aptly put it, this is not a crisis in the system, it is a crisis of the 
system. 
As  tales  of  woe  beyond  our  shores  multiply,  it  is  appropriate  to  take  stock  of  what  this 
systemic  shock  could  mean  for  Malta.  First,  some  background.  Our  financial  system  has 
changed  beyond  recognition  in  recent  years,  driven  by  a  combination  of  domestic  market 
reforms and international integration. The liberalisation process of the 1990s saw the gradual 
removal  of  interest  rate  restrictions,  the  easing  of  capital  controls  and  the  privatisation  of 
most of the financial sector. The legal framework was entirely overhauled, bringing it in line 
with EU standards and laying the foundations for the growth of new areas of financial activity, 
such as investment services and trusts. 
EU membership in 2004 opened up the Maltese financial market to service providers from 
other  member  states.  Conversely,  our  financial  institutions  gained  access  to  the  single 
European  market,  a  factor  which encouraged  additional  inward  foreign  investment  into  the 
sector. At the same time, the last exchange controls were removed. The adoption of the euro 
last January was a further step in the integration process into the single market. Financial 
transactions across the euro area can now take place without incurring exchange rate risks. 
Furthermore, Maltese banks now have access to the Eurosystem facilities available to credit 
institutions within the euro area. These include a variety of instruments designed to provide 
short-term liquidity, as well as standing deposit and lending facilities. At the same time, euro 
adoption entailed a reduction in the minimum reserve requirements that Maltese banks had 
to comply with, resulting in the release of additional funds into the banking system. 
Euro adoption also led to improvements in the financial infrastructure supporting the Maltese 
economy.  In  November  2007,  Malta  formed  part  of  the  first  group  of  countries  that  joined 
TARGET2,  the  payment  system  used  by  the  Eurosystem  for  the  settlement  of  large  value 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 1
interbank  transfers  in  euro.  Maltese  banks  can  use  TARGET2  to  carry  out  transfers  with 
other banks in Malta and throughout the euro area rapidly, safely and effectively. The Single 
Euro Payments Area (SEPA), launched in January this year, is a further step towards closer 
financial  integration  and  aims  at  making  retail  payments  across  the  euro  area  as  easy  as 
they currently are within national boundaries. 
Liberalisation and integration into the EU have underpinned the rapid growth of the Maltese 
financial sector. The number of banks rose from 16 in 2004 to 23 in September this year. 
During  the  same  period,  the  total  assets  of  the  banking  system  more  than  doubled  to 
EUR45.1 billion. Nor was growth restricted to the banking sector. The number of local and 
foreign-based collective schemes climbed from around 70 in 2004 to nearly 400 today, partly 
reflecting legislative changes that spurred the formation of professional investor funds. Total 
assets  under  management  have  also  increased  exponentially  to  over  EUR8  billion.  More 
moderate  growth  was  recorded  in  the  insurance  sector,  though  the  captive  insurance 
business is growing fast. 
These  developments  in  Malta  mirrored,  to  a  certain  extent,  those  abroad.  Financial 
liberalisation, deregulation and the expansion of cross-border capital flows have driven the 
rapid growth of the financial sector globally. Indeed, until the start of the turmoil last year, the 
global financial system had benefited from a long period of economic expansion, relatively 
easy  monetary  conditions  and  innovation.  As  a  result,  the  size  of  the  financial  industry 
relative to the economy increased considerably. In the United States it grew to a point where 
it represented nearly 25 per cent of the stock market capitalization, while financial assets in 
Britain in 2007 were equivalent to almost nine times the GDP. 
Such a favourable combination of circumstances could not last. And when the whole edifice 
started  to  crumble,  the  shock  waves  travelled  fast,  a  testimony  to  the  efficiency  of  the 
transmission channels in a globalized economy. Thus, in no time at all, a crisis that had its 
roots  in  a  narrow  segment  of  the  housing  market  in  the  United  States  moved  across  the 
Atlantic to Britain and then to the euro area. And as demand in the advanced economies and 
commodity  prices  began  to  tumble,  emerging  economies  started  to  decelerate  rapidly.  So 
much for the decoupling theory! 
Unlike other recent crises, the current turmoil had its origin within the financial system itself. It 
followed  a  boom  in  asset  prices,  particularly  house  prices.  Although  some  observers, 
including central banks, had warned about mispricing of risk, many investors purchased what 
are now known as “toxic” assets in a search for yield, increasing leverage to generate higher 
profits.  The  growing  use  of  securitisation  allowed  banks  to  originate  loans  and  distribute 
them, packaging risk and selling it to other investors. It was believed that this would spread 
risks  more  evenly,  enhancing  the  stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  But  the  financial 
engineering involved in this process was so complex that neither the regulators nor the credit 
rating agencies could calculate the risks. 
What the regulators also overlooked were the dangers that were developing as banks moved 
further away from their customers. On the financing side, banks were becoming increasingly 
dependent on wholesale investors for funding. On the lending side, the dispersion of credit 
risks through securitisation lowered the incentive to monitor borrowers’ behaviour and led to 
increased  moral  hazard.  As  information  became  ever  more  fragmented  and  financial 
instruments more opaque, confidence began to dissipate. 
Now as we know, the market economy – and its ultimate objective, the creation of wealth – 
are predicated upon the efficient intermediation of money between savers and investors, and 
this in turn depends on the existence of an intangible, but fundamental commodity, trust. This 
vital ingredient was being steadily, but surely eroded. 
The  first  rumblings  of  the  approaching  storm  were  heard  in  August  2007,  when  signs  of 
distress began to emerge in the interbank market, a key component of the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. The turmoil then ebbed and flowed in waves, each larger than the 
previous  one.  The  crisis  hit  with  full  force  in  mid-September  this  year,  however,  with  the 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2008
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, the emergency support given to AIG and the disappearance 
of  Merrill  Lynch  as  an  independent  institution.  When  a  large  money  market  fund  that  had 
invested  in  Lehman  Brothers  commercial  paper  failed,  other  funds  stopped  buying 
commercial paper, forcing issuers to draw on their credit lines, bringing interbank lending to a 
standstill. Credit spreads rose to unprecedented levels and panic overtook the stock market. 
The  crisis  rapidly  spread  to  Europe,  resulting  in  the  co-ordinated  rescue  of  Fortis  by  a 
number of euro area governments, among other episodes. 
As the turbulence gathered strength, banks began to record growing valuation losses. The 
consequent erosion of their capital, and a reassessment of risk, led to a tightening of credit 
standards. In turn, this gave rise to concerns about “deleveraging” and a growing shortage of 
credit, which began to adversely affect the real economy. 
In the euro area, the Eurosystem’s response since the early stages of the crisis was to use 
the  full  range  of  instruments  available  to inject  liquidity  into the  banking  system.  Here,  the 
Eurosystem  was  fortunate  in  that  it  was  already  able  to  accept  a  wide  range  of  assets  as 
collateral and could deal with a large number of counterparties. Let us not forget, either, that 
the  focus  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  –  correctly  –  was  and  remained  price  stability. 
Though driven by booming commodity prices, the major risk was that high levels of inflation 
would feed into inflation expectations and trigger second-round effects on wages and prices. 
At times of heightened uncertainty, the importance of price stability as the central objective of 
monetary policy cannot be overemphasized. 
As the financial crisis impacted the real economy, with the cost of financing rising and credit 
standards tightening, firms found it harder to raise money. Sovereign issuers, too, began to 
face  higher  borrowing  costs.  Evidence  mounted  of  growing  downside  risks  to  economic 
activity and of moderating inflationary pressures. 
The monetary policy response was unprecedented. On 8 October, six of the world’s major 
central  banks,  including  the  ECB,  cut  official  interest  rates  by  half  a  percentage point  in  a 
coordinated move. Later in the month, the Eurosystem shifted the conduct of its monetary 
operations toward the injection of liquidity at fixed rates, with full allotment at the minimum 
bid rate, to ease funding concerns and to drive money market rates closer to official ones. A 
further  half-point  interest  rate  cut  by  the  ECB  followed  in  November,  and  yesterday  we 
reduced rates by a further 75 basis points amid growing evidence that inflationary pressures 
are diminishing further. 
The  crisis  has  so  far  had  a  limited  impact  on  the  domestic  financial  system  and  on  the 
Maltese economy. While the latest data point to continued, if slower economic expansion in 
the third quarter, Maltese banks continue to benefit from an approach based on traditional 
intermediation  between  retail  depositors  and  borrowers.  Their  funding  model,  therefore, 
eschews reliance on wholesale markets; they have substantial liquidity, adequate capital and 
prudent lending policies. Exposures to asset-backed securities or failed institutions are small, 
while lending in foreign currency to residents is limited. 
It would be naïve, indeed dangerous, however, to expect that the turmoil abroad will leave 
the Maltese economy and its financial system unscathed. 
First, Malta has a small open economy, highly dependent on trade. As the recession grips 
our  major  markets,  Maltese  exporters  will  be  increasingly  affected.  Indeed,  firms  in  the 
automotive  sector  have  already  been  hit,  while  the  bleak  outlook  for  the  UK  economy  in 
particular is likely to have a negative impact on tourism. As the export sector comes under 
pressure,  this  will  have  an  adverse  effect  on  domestic  demand.  Accordingly,  the  Bank’s 
growth projections for 2009 have been revised downwards to under 2%. This, in turn, could 
have repercussions for the banking system as asset quality deteriorates. 
Second,  partly  because  of  the  small  size  of  the  economy,  bank  loan  portfolios  are  highly 
concentrated. More specifically, domestic banks are exposed to the construction, mortgage 
and property development sectors directly to the extent of over 50% of total loans, and in the 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 3
than 
faster 
incomes 
form of collateral securing other lending. Recent international experience shows that strong 
increases in property prices fuelled by rapid growth in credit are unsustainable. House prices 
cannot  rise 
indefinitely.  Otherwise,  housing  simply  becomes 
unaffordable. The Bank’s property price index – which is based on advertised prices – fell 
moderately on a year earlier during the September quarter. While domestic banks have been 
more prudent than banks abroad, however, the continuing high dependence on property as a 
driver of credit growth, and as collateral for other lending, remains a source of risk. 
At the same time, it is important to reiterate the strengths of the domestic banking system. In 
June  2008,  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  stood  at  14%  on  average,  as  against  a  statutory 
minimum of 8%, while the average liquidity ratio was 48%, well above the 30% benchmark. 
The loan to deposit ratio averaged a prudent 77%, while non-performing loans extended their 
downward trend. 
The Central Bank of Malta has been playing an active role in responding to the events I have 
described. 
First,  with  the  support  of  my  Bank  colleagues,  I  have  participated  in  the  deliberations  and 
decisions of the Governing Council of the ECB on the provision of liquidity and on monetary 
policy. 
Allow  me  at  this  point  to  digress  briefly.  As  we  said  in  our  statement  after  the  November 
meeting,  we  expect  the  banking  sector  to  make  its  contribution  to  restoring  confidence. 
Reinforcing this message, the President pointed out that central banks and governments had 
taken bold decisions, and now commercial banks, too, had to live up to their responsibilities, 
especially at a time of deteriorating growth prospects. With bank lending rates in Malta being 
generally set with reference to official policy rates, I would, therefore, expect bank customers, 
particularly those whose borrowings promise most to support domestic economic activity, to 
benefit fully from the recent ECB rate cuts, which have totalled 175 basis points. 
Apart from its monetary policy role, the Central Bank of Malta is also charged with preserving 
financial stability, which it defines as a condition where the financial system is able to allocate 
savings towards investment opportunities and facilitates the efficient settlement of payments. 
A  stable  financial  system  is  also  one  that  is  able  to  manage  risks  that  may  harm  its 
performance,  and  consequently  that  of  the  economy,  and  that  should  be  able  to  absorb 
shocks without impairing its operations. 
The Bank carries out this task through the regular monitoring of the financial system, as well 
as  of  the  domestic  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems.  The  Bank’s  findings  are 
shared with the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA) and with the Ministry of Finance. 
The  Authority  is  responsible  for  the  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  of  all  financial 
institutions in Malta, while the Bank remains the lender of last resort. It is, therefore, the only 
domestic  institution  with  the  capacity  to  inject  liquidity  into  a  troubled  institution  against 
collateral. The Ministry of Finance, on the other hand, is involved with respect to the possible 
use of public funds. 
As  the  international  financial  crisis  unfolded,  the  Bank  was  in  continuous  contact,  at  the 
highest  levels,  with  both  the  MFSA  and  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  It  also  took  steps  to 
obtain more frequent balance sheet data from credit institutions. The Government on its part 
gave a commitment to protect financial institutions and depositors in Malta should the need 
ever arise. Meanwhile, and in the light of similar steps taken elsewhere, it decided to raise 
the guarantee provided on bank deposits to EUR100,000. 
Here I would like to remind this audience that the relevant EU Directive emphasises that the 
cost  of  financing  such  guarantee  schemes  must  be  borne  by  the  credit  institutions 
themselves.  Furthermore,  in  the  light  of  the  Commission’s  proposals  to  strengthen  the 
Directive, which have been supported by ECOFIN, it is clear that the resources available to 
the Maltese Depositor Compensation Scheme need to be significantly enhanced before the 
end of 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2008
Looking  beyond  the  crisis,  we  can  already  anticipate  further  changes  at  the  international 
level.  Major  modifications  are  likely,  for  example,  in  the  regulatory  framework,  covering 
liquidity,  leverage  and  risk  management.  The  role  of  credit  rating  agencies  is  also  being 
reappraised. Clearly, the models used in the past to evaluate risk have proved inadequate. 
Entire  types  of  financial  institution,  such  as  stand-alone  investment  banks,  may  cease  to 
exist while certain categories of financial instruments, such as the more exotic derivatives, 
may never be traded again. 
As  regards  regulatory  arrangements,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  a  close 
central bank involvement in prudential oversight. This stems from the fact that central banks 
need supervisory information to carry out their core functions, including the implementation of 
monetary policy. Information about the soundness of banks is important for them to be able 
to assess the health of their counterparties in the conduct of monetary operations. It is also 
valuable because central banks, including the Central Bank of Malta, are often responsible 
for  the  regulation  and  oversight  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Such  information 
becomes  essential  when  central  banks  are  called  upon  to  provide  emergency  liquidity  in 
times of stress as lenders of last resort. 
In Malta, it is important that we maintain our reputation, and the credibility that goes with it, 
as  a  sound  and  well-regulated  financial  services  centre.  To  this  end,  the  institutional  links 
between the Bank, the MFSA and the Ministry of Finance could be strengthened further in 
the light of the experience provided by the global financial crisis. Malta, moreover, is one of 
two  euro  area  member  states  where  the  central  bank  is  least  involved  in  the  conduct  of 
banking  supervision.  Although  the  means  already  exist  for  exchanging  views  and 
information, it could prove mutually beneficial for the Bank and the supervisory authority to 
seek to deepen the level of existing cooperation. 
As  for  our  capacity  to  manage  any  eventual  financial  crisis,  the  Domestic  Standing  Group 
was set up in 2007, chaired by the Deputy Governor and comprising senior representatives 
from  the  Bank,  the  MFSA  and  the  Ministry.  As  in  other  EU  countries,  a  crisis  simulation 
exercise  was  held  soon  after  to  test  communications  between  the  parties,  co-ordinate 
decision making and manage potential conflicts of interest. Useful lessons have been learnt. 
Another  important  problem  area  highlighted  by  the  crisis,  and  which  is  also  relevant  for 
Malta, relates to cross-border issues. Foremost among these is the co-operation between the 
home  and  host  regulators.  In  this  regard,  the  spirit  underlying  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding on co-operation to safeguard cross-border financial stability signed last June 
by EU central banks, regulators and ministries of finance, now needs to be translated into 
clear  modalities  for  effective  cooperation.  In  particular,  it  is  essential  from  Malta’s  point  of 
view that the presence of subsidiaries of cross-border banks that are systemically important 
to  a  host  country  be  given  due  weight  in  determining  participation  in  the  college  of 
supervisors. 
International experience has also shown that state intervention may be necessary to resolve 
problems in the financial sector. The state is often the only entity in a democracy that has the 
political legitimacy, financial strength and credibility to support ailing institutions and, hence, 
restore confidence in the financial system as a whole. In extreme situations, which require 
the  injection  of  public  funds,  the  cost  to  the  public  purse  can  be  very  high.  This  is  an 
additional reason why maintaining fiscal discipline in the shape of balanced budgets over the 
economic cycle is important. This would allow a buffer to be built up that could be used in 
exceptional situations if required, without jeopardising the sustainability of public finances. 
Finally, safeguarding the health of the financial sector in these challenging times also calls 
for prudent behaviour on the part of the market players themselves. Though not under any 
identifiable threat, Maltese banks should build on their existing strengths by reinforcing their 
capital  base  through  the  retention  of  a  greater  proportion  of  earnings;  and,  as  domestic 
economic conditions are expected to weaken, loan loss provisioning levels may also need to 
rise. 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 5
The  current  crisis  will  not  be  over  until  confidence  and  trust  are  restored,  and  the  credit 
channel starts to function fluidly again. This requires greater transparency and a recognition 
that a sound financial system is one that practices the traditional banking values of integrity 
and faithfulness. Some of you might recall that these values were captured in the motto of 
The Chartered Institute of Bankers, “Probus et Fidelis”. It is perhaps a sign of the times that 
the Institute’s current logo of two overlapping arrows is, we are told, all about its core value: 
winning,  a  value  which  some  market  players  have  pursued  with  excessive  zeal  with  the 
calamitous results we all know. It is just possible that we might not have been where we are 
today had the old, but tested values continued to prevail. 
6 
 BIS Review 155/2008
