Jean-Claude Trichet: A new banking supervision programme for Egypt 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at the press conference on the occasion of the signing a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the Central Bank of Egypt on a new banking supervision programme, Cairo, 26 November 
2008. 
 Dear Governor, Minister, Ambassador 
Dear colleagues 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to be in Cairo today to sign the Memorandum of Understanding with 
Governor El Okdah. This signing confirms the close cooperation between the central banking 
community of the European Union and the Central Bank of Egypt. We are also committed to 
working very closely together over the next three years, to implement a technical assistance 
programme  that  aims  to  design  a  new  set  of  Egyptian  banking  supervisory  standards  and 
principles  inspired  by  international  best  practices.  The  programme  will  start  on  1  January 
2009  and  will  be  financed  by  the  European  Commission  in  the  framework  of  relations 
between the European Union and the authorities in Egypt. I should like to thank Mrs Fayza 
Abu El Naga, Egyptian Minister for International Cooperation, and Dr Klaus Ebermann, Head 
of the Delegation of the European Commission to Egypt, for witnessing the signature of the 
Memorandum of Understanding and for committing to undertake all necessary steps to have 
the programme in place by the end of 2008.  
I will first say a few words on our cooperation with the Central Bank of Egypt over the last 
couple of years before addressing what we aim to do together during the next three. Finally, I 
will share with you some thoughts on the present financial market turmoil, its implications on 
global financial stability and the lessons that we can draw from this.  
The Eurosystem, i.e. the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro 
area, has enjoyed close relations with the Central Bank of Egypt for many years. Since 2004 
we  have  been  holding  high-level  meetings  at  our  Mediterranean  seminars,  where  central 
banks from the euro area meet their counterparts from the southern and eastern shores of 
the Mediterranean to exchange views on issues of common interest. The fifth such seminar 
will  be  held  tomorrow  in  Alexandria  and  will  be  hosted  by  Governor  El  Okdah  and  his 
colleagues from the Central Bank of Egypt. I am convinced that the discussions tomorrow will 
be very interesting – we will also be holding a press briefing afterwards. 
Our cooperation with the Central Bank of Egypt reached a new dimension in 2005 when we 
started  a  programme  of  cooperation  in  the  area  of  banking  supervision.  Over  two  years, 
many banking supervisors from Germany, Greece, France and Italy shared their knowledge 
and  experience  with  their  Egyptian  counterparts  to  reform  the  internal  procedures  and 
policies of the Central Bank of Egypt towards a greater focus on risk-based supervision. This 
programme ended in November 2007 and was considered a success by all those involved. 
The new programme on banking supervision will begin on 1 January 2009 and will build on 
the capacity of the staff of the Central Bank of Egypt in terms of risk-based supervision. As I 
have  already  mentioned,  it  will  run  for  a  period  of  three  years  and  will  be  funded  by  the 
European  Union.  The  aim  of  the  programme  is  to  support  the  Central  Bank  of  Egypt  in 
drafting new rules, policies and practices that will effectively create an appropriate Egyptian 
version  of  the  internationally  accepted  banking  supervision  standard  known  as  Basel  II.  In 
this  process  we  will  also  take  account  of  the  most  recent  European  experiences  from  the 
financial market turmoil. 
More  specifically,  we  will  assist  the  Central  Bank  of  Egypt’s  banking  supervisors  in 
developing a specific Egyptian guideline for the implementation of Basel II, as well as a new 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 1
regulation that will apply to banks in the country and a new reporting scheme for banks in 
order to provide the Central Bank of Egypt’s banking supervisors with the information they 
need to carry out their job.  
Before  this  goal  is  reached,  many  steps  need  to  be  taken  and  many  publications  will  be 
printed. As always, it will be very important to design the new framework in such a way that it 
is suitable for local market conditions. With this aim in mind the European Union’s banking 
supervisors  will  support  the  Central  Bank  of  Egypt  in  its  key  dialogue  with  Egypt’s 
commercial banks to begin in the first half of 2009. 
From  the  side  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  or  the  ESCB,  i.e.  the  European 
Central Bank and the national central banks of the European Union, the programme will be 
implemented by the European Central Bank in partnership with seven national central banks, 
namely  those  of  Bulgaria,  the  Czech  Republic,  Germany,  Greece,  France,  Italy  and 
Romania.  The  banking  supervisors  from  these  countries  will  support  and  assist  their 
Egyptian colleagues in the challenging tasks that they have set out to achieve. I would like to 
welcome the representatives from the ESCB that are here today. 
From  our  side  there  will  be  a  need  to  coordinate  these  efforts  and  to  be  continuously 
available  to  support  the  work  of  our  Egyptian  colleagues.  This  will  be  the  main  task  of  Mr 
Hervé  Leclerc,  Inspector  of  the  Banque  de  France,  who  will  be  our  Resident  Programme 
Coordinator here in Cairo from 1 January for three years. He is here today, and I would like 
to wish him every success in his new post. 
Let me finally make a few remarks on the global financial situation and the lessons we can 
draw from this. We are currently experiencing an extraordinary and very challenging period, 
characterised  by  severe  financial  market  turmoil  that  originated  in  advanced  economies. 
Recently,  the  tensions  in  the  financial  sector  have  spilled  over  into  the  real  economy  and 
have dampened significantly global growth. 
Since the start of the turmoil in August 2007, the European Central Bank, like other central 
banks around the world, has acted decisively to provide sufficient liquidity. In the euro area 
we  have  been  flexible  in  our  use  of  operational  instruments  and  procedures  in  order  to 
contribute  to  a  smooth  functioning  of  the  money  market.  This  has  been  crucial in  order  to 
ensure that solvent banks continue to have access to liquidity, notwithstanding the difficulties 
in the interbank market. 
It  has  been  encouraging  to  see  the  decisiveness  with  which  European  governments  have 
worked together, as a second line of defence, to address the turmoil. In this month the G20 – 
at the level of the Ministers and Governors in São Paulo and then at the level of the Heads of 
State  or  Government  in  Washington  –  has  adopted  a  concerted  action  plan  with  several 
dimensions,  such  as  strengthening  transparency  and  accountability,  enhancing  regulation, 
promoting integrity in financial markets and strengthening international cooperation. 
Global  and  close  cooperation  between  central  banks  has  been  the  first  line  of  defence  in 
addressing the challenges. The second line of defence has now been put up by governments 
to address the solvency issues of financial institutions affected by the crisis.  
The  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  these  events  represent  what  I  would  call  work  in 
progress along the following lines: we need more transparency; less short-termism; less pro-
cyclicality in the functioning of the global financial system; and better risk management by 
individual institutions. This has to be accompanied by more discipline in macro policies at the 
level of all major participants in the global economy.  
To  sum  up,  I  would  like  to  assure  you,  Governor  El  Okdah,  that  from  our  side  it will  be  a 
pleasure  to  renew  the  cooperation  between  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  partner 
national  central  banks  of  the  ESCB  with  the  Central  Bank  of  Egypt.  I  also  welcome  the 
support of and commitment from the European Commission and the Ministry of International 
Cooperation and look forward to the finalisation of procedures that will allow us to sign the 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2008
contract  with  the  Delegation  of  the  European  Commission  to  Egypt  before  the  end  of  this 
year. 
I will be ready to answer questions once the other speakers have made their remarks. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 3
