Lars Nyberg: The crisis, the Riksbank and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of 
Bankmarknadsdagen, Stockholm, 28 November 2008. 
the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
the 
 Introduction  
The financial system is an important part of our social structure. The payment system and 
the  supply  of  credit  are  central  to  all  economic  activities.  When  the  general  public’s 
confidence  in  the  financial  system  is  shaken  and  when  the  participants  in  the  system  no 
longer trust one another, then something serious has happened in our society. This means 
that all those involved, both in the private and public sectors, must have a discussion on how 
this situation arose and what we can do to avoid it happening again.  
The financial turbulence, which began in summer 2007 with problems in the US mortgage 
market,  has  during  the  autumn  become  an  acute  crisis.  Also  during  the  autumn  we  in 
Sweden have gone from largely watching the crisis from the sidelines, to being very much 
involved. 
Today I will give my views on how this could happen and on what has occurred during the 
autumn. Last spring there were many indications that conditions in the financial markets were 
gradually  improving.  I  shall  also  reflect  on  the  methods  used  by  central  banks  and 
governments  around  the  world  to  try  to  manage  the  problems  and  to  safeguard  financial 
stability. It would take too long in this context to analyse what conclusions should be drawn 
for  the  future,  and  it  is  probably  too  early  to  do  so  yet,  but  I  shall  nevertheless  share  my 
impressions this far. In conclusion, I shall discuss how monetary policy can complement the 
more acute financial measures taken, and alleviate the effects of the financial crisis on the 
real economy.  
Acute financial crisis… 
The turn for the worse can be clearly dated to the middle of September when US investment 
bank  Lehman  Brothers  was  forced  to  file  for  bankruptcy  protection.  Money  market 
participants had not expected such a prominent bank to default. When the bank nevertheless 
defaulted,  fears  grew  that  more  participants  risked  the  same  fate.  This  was  when  the 
confidence crisis broke out in earnest. No one dared to lend money to anyone else because 
of fears that the other party could become insolvent and the money that had been lent would 
disappear. Investors preferred to put their money in government securities. One result was 
that interbank lending around the world more or less ceased. The difficulties the banks had 
experienced earlier with financing at longer maturities were intensified. The banks’ borrowing 
costs  increased  further  and  companies  outside  of  the  financial  sector  also  experienced 
financing difficulties. 
At  the  same  time,  the  large  US  commercial  paper  market  suffered  substantial  disruptions. 
This market is an important source of financing, both for financial companies and ordinary 
industrial  companies.  The  industrial  companies  tried  to  make  use  of  their  promised  loan 
facilities with the banks, but the banks were not able to lend money as usual. This resulted in 
a credit gridlock, which severely limited the access to loans. The problems spread from the 
United States to Europe and the European credit system also essentially ceased functioning. 
This  meant  that  the  Swedish  banks  and  the  Swedish  financial  system  also  suffered 
problems. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 1
…followed by countermeasures and stabilisation 
In this situation governments, central banks and other authorities were forced to intervene to 
avoid a collapse in the global financial system. Without these measures the financial markets 
would most probably have ceased functioning – things were so serious. The measures have 
taken different forms in different countries, but two main types can be identified. The first is 
that the banks have been offered risk capital or other guarantees so that they can survive the 
crisis. The aim is to avoid more defaults like Lehman Brothers occurring when the financial 
market is so vulnerable. Those who lend money to a bank should be able to feel certain that 
the bank will still be there when it is time to repay the loan. The second type of measure is 
that the central banks have continuously supplied the banks with the short and medium-term 
loans they have not been able to obtain in the usual way on the market. 
Although  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  know  whether  the  measures  will  succeed  in  full,  my 
assessment  is  that  they  have  been  sufficient  to  counteract  the  most  acute  problems.  The 
measures  create  a  basis  for  restoring  confidence  among  the  general  public  and  between 
participants in the financial markets. If one tries, one can see some signs of normalisation in 
the  form  of  falling  interbank  rates  and  improved  liquidity  in  the  form  of  higher  turnover  on 
some  markets.  But  progress  is  slow.  I  consider  it  rather  surprising  that  market  functioning 
has not normalised to a greater degree, despite the extensive and forceful measures taken 
by central banks and governments. It is possible that the authorities have not succeeded in 
communicating  the  fundamental  message  that  all  who  lend  money  to  a  bank  will  get  their 
money back. 
A remaining problem is that, as a result of the crisis, the market is requiring that the banks 
reduce their risks in relation to equity capital. The banks are therefore selling financial assets, 
which squeezes the price in the entire world market. This is why the banks want to reduce 
their  balance  sheets  by  cutting  back  on  lending.  The  process  will  continue  until  the  banks 
have reduced their balance sheets sufficiently or acquired new risk capital. 
The Riksbank will contribute liquidity as long as is necessary 
The  Swedish  interbank  market  functioned  satisfactorily  up  to  mid-September,  although  the 
cost  of  the  banks’  international  borrowing  rose,  of  course.  But  the  confidence  crisis  that 
followed  in  the  wake  of  Lehman  filing  for  bankruptcy  protection  also  affected  the  Swedish 
financial system. To counteract the effects of the financial crisis, the Riksbank has supplied 
the  market  with  loans  in  kronor  and  US  dollars  in  a  similar  manner  to  what  other  central 
banks have done in their currency areas. The loan facilities have allowed a different class of 
collateral than usual. The maturities have been longer than those the market has been able 
to offer and longer than the Riksbank normally provides. In total, the Riksbank has increased 
its lending by more than SEK 400 billion. We will continue to provide the market with liquidity 
as long and as far as it is needed.  
During  the  autumn  the  Riksbank  has  received  signals  from  Swedish  industrial  and  trade 
companies that they have been unable to find satisfactory credit. Quite simply, they have not 
been able to borrow on the market or from the banks in the same way as usual. This problem 
originates  outside  of  Sweden  and  has  arisen  despite  the  Swedish  banks  being  financially 
strong. As a preventive measure, the Riksbank established a new, temporary, credit facility 
on  29  October.  The  aim  is  to  improve  the  opportunities  for  companies  to  borrow  money. 
Companies  can  organise  their  financing  through  this  facility  by  issuing  and  selling 
commercial paper to the banks. The banks can in turn use commercial paper as collateral for 
loans from the Riksbank. The purpose is thus to make it easier for companies to borrow in 
that the banks are given better scope for financing. It is primarily large companies that issue 
commercial paper, but smaller companies should also benefit as the banks’ increased scope 
for borrowing from the Riksbank means their total lending capacity will be less strained. So 
far, however, the banks have chosen to use only a small part of the credit facilities offered by 
the  Riksbank.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  this  is  because  the  companies  have 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2008
nevertheless succeeded in borrowing elsewhere or whether they consider the bank loans to 
be  too  expensive.  Despite  the  fact  that  some  companies  are  experiencing  problems  with 
borrowing,  bank  lending  in  Sweden  is  continuing  to  rise.  However,  this  should  not 
automatically  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  supply  of  credit  is  functioning  well  in  every 
aspect.  The  international  credit  markets  are  still  largely  closed  to  Swedish  companies  and 
they cannot borrow from foreign banks to the same extent as before. 
The Riksbank has also granted special liquidity assistance during the autumn to Kaupthing 
Bank Sverige AB and Carnegie Investment Bank AB. The liquidity assistance was offered in 
the form of loans against collateral and at a higher interest rate than on normal loans. The 
market turbulence and the great uncertainty that prevailed were reasons for granting liquidity 
assistance  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  even  though  these  institutions  were  relatively 
minor  participants  in  the  Swedish  financial  market.  Confidence  in  the  Swedish  financial 
system could have been seriously damaged if a failure like the one at Lehman Brothers had 
been  allowed  to  occur.  The  Riksbank’s  assessment  was  that  the  two  banks  were 
experiencing  temporary  liquidity  problems,  but  that  their  solvency  was  not  threatened. 
Finansinspektionen later revoked Carnegie’s licence to conduct banking activities owing to 
serious deficiencies in the company’s risk management and violation of the law concerning 
asset  management.  The  decision  to  revoke  the  licence  thus  had  nothing  to  do  with 
Carnegie’s  liquidity  problems  or  with  the  Riksbank’s  loan.  Carnegie  is  now  owned  by  the 
Swedish National Debt Office and the Riksbank’s liquidity assistance has been repaid. 
The Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) has also introduced a new act concerning support to 
credit  institutions,  which  will  give  the  government  the  opportunity  to  take  the  necessary 
measures  to  strengthen  stability  in  the  financial  system.  For  instance,  a  government 
guarantee programme has been presented to support the banks’ and mortgage institutions’ 
medium-term funding, and a stability fund has been established to manage potential future 
solvency problems in Swedish institutions. 
The current situation 
Despite  the  crisis  in  the  global  financial  markets  and  the  increasingly  gloomy  economic 
prospects, the assessment is that the Swedish banks still have good resilience to facing the 
situation that has arisen and future developments.1 The losses arising from the international 
crisis  have  so  far  been  limited,  not  least  in  an  international  perspective,  and  the  Swedish 
banks have good financial strength. In addition, most of the banks’ borrowers have a good 
ability  to  pay  their  loans.  To  summarise,  the  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  therefore  that  the 
stability in the Swedish financial system is satisfactory. But it is important to emphasise that 
the  measures  taken  by  the  Riksbank  and  other  authorities  are  currently  a  necessary 
condition for this to be the case. 
Improved regulatory framework 
The measures the Riksbank has taken after 15 September, and which I have just described, 
concern stabilising the functioning of the market and ensuring financial stability in the short 
and medium term. In the longer term, however, other types of measure are required to make 
the financial system function as it should, both in Sweden and abroad. 
The crisis has clearly shown that the regulatory framework and financial supervision need to 
be  improved.  But  it  is  not  necessarily  the  case  that  a  larger  number  of  more  complicated 
regulations are needed to make the financial sector function efficiently in society. One must 
carefully consider how the regulations should be changed. 
                                                 
1   For  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  situation  in  the  Swedish  financial  system,  see  the  Riksbank’s  most  recent 
report on stability – Financial Stability Report 2008:2. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 3
I  believe  that  on  an  overall  level  it  is  mainly  a  question  of  developing  and  modifying  the 
regulations that are already in place rather than introducing further regulations. The talk of a 
new financial order should, in my opinion, be taken with a pinch of salt. But one must try to 
assess  in  what  areas  there  are  clear  market  failures  and  how  society  should  best  act  to 
remedy  these.  The  usefulness  of  new  regulations  must  also  outweigh  the  costs. 
Unfortunately,  the  existing  regulations  are  designed  so  that  they  have  in  some  respects 
encouraged  rather  than  limited  risk  taking  in  the  current  crisis.  Speedy  and  short-term 
changes in regulations should not be allowed to prevail. But experience unfortunately shows 
that  political  eagerness  to  quickly  furnish  new  regulations  often  prevents  a  more  in-depth 
analysis of the problems.  
Which  areas  of  the  international  regulatory  framework  are  in  most  urgent  need  of  review? 
Essentially, of course, the problem is that the risk taking was too great in relation to equity 
capital.  Both  the  trend  towards  increased  securitisation  and  a  focus  among  financial 
institutions  on  short-term  activities  have  contributed  to  an  increase  in  risk  taking.  It  is  of 
course  important  to  eliminate  any  loopholes  in  the  capital  adequacy  rules,  and  the  capital 
adequacy requirements in both banks and other financial institutions will probably need to be 
tightened once we have come through the financial crisis. 
It is undeniable that the liquidity risks have been underestimated and a review of the banks’ 
management  of  these  risks  will  be  necessary.  It  is  also  evident  that  increased  insight  is 
necessary,  both  into  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and  into  certain  markets  and  instruments. 
Some  products  that  have  been  common  outside  of  Sweden  have  had  such  complicated 
structures that they have been difficult to understand and to valuate. It is also evident that the 
reputations of the credit rating agencies have become tarnished, but how much of this can be 
remedied through regulation is not so clear. 
In addition, the trading, clearing and settlement of certain derivatives has been carried out in 
such a way that insight has been poor and counterparty risks have been substantial. There is 
thus reason for the authorities to press for the development of the underlying infrastructure 
of, for instance, OTC-traded derivatives. 
Many ideas regarding what needs to be done to reduce the risk of future crises will probably 
be  put  forward  over  the  coming  six  months.  Let  us  hope  that  the  wise  and  well-reasoned 
proposals will be the ones that are implemented. 
Crisis management  
I would also like to touch briefly on some crisis management issues. Good preparedness and 
good  preparations  are  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  crisis  management.  Both  in  Sweden  and 
other  EU  countries,  and  in  particular  in  the  United  States,  it  has  been  necessary  on  this 
occasion to improvise measures to a great extent in the management of the financial crisis. 
This  is  of  course  not  exactly  desirable.  Experiences  of  earlier  crises  point  to  improvised 
measures often coming too late and costing more than ought to have been necessary. 
It is as yet too early to say what the outcome of the measures taken now will be, but there 
are nevertheless some bright spots. It has recently become slightly easier for the banks to 
issue at longer maturities both in Sweden and other parts of Europe. In the United States, 
too,  the  issue  volumes  in  the  commercial  paper  market  have  increased.  The  Swedish 
mortgage  spreads  have  also  declined.  We  can  thus  see  positive  effects  of  the  measures 
taken, although there appears to be a long way to go before the crisis has run its course. 
However,  looking  ahead  to  future  crises  –  and  I  do  not  believe  that  we  can  entirely  avoid 
crises occurring in the future – it is desirable that we acquire a better preparedness. If there 
is one thing we have learned from this crisis it is that we need to have in place regulatory 
frameworks for managing banks in distress. Such regulations should include several different 
aspects, everything from a deposit guarantee system to insolvency procedures for banks. 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2008
Above  all,  the  crisis  has  pointed  to  the  need  for  cross-border  cooperation.  We  have  seen 
examples of this in Europe. This type of cooperation on crisis management should begin in 
“peace time”. Contacts that have been cultivated already and a common parlance may be 
decisive factors in determining how efficiently a crisis in a cross-border institution is handled. 
It is also important to hold joint crisis exercises, using different scenarios. 
We can also observe that the Memorandums of Understanding in the field of financial crisis 
management, which have been drawn up between authorities in Europe in recent years have 
proved  to  be  too  vague.  In  future,  therefore,  we  need  to  have  more  concrete  and  binding 
arrangements.  One  complicated  and  important  question  is  how  the  costs  should  be 
distributed when a crisis spreads to several countries. 
Differences  in  regulation  and  supervision  also  complicate  the  crisis  management.  Greater 
harmonisation is in actual fact an important condition for both crisis management and crisis 
prevention work. As a result of the crisis, the EU has begun to look into how its framework for 
supervision can be improved. My view is that after the crisis it is both essential and possible 
to take a step towards better joint supervision in Europe. But although the supervision issue 
is important, the systems for deposit guarantees and crisis management must be designed to 
function  when  needed,  not  merely  within  individual  countries,  but  also  between  countries. 
This has not always been the case during the current crisis.  
Monetary policy and the build-up of risks 
Does monetary policy have a role to play in preventing a financial crisis? This has long been 
a controversial issue, where economists have held differing opinions. However, the financial 
crisis has undoubtedly given us experiences we should make use of. 
The predominant view has probably been that one should not use the interest rate to try to 
counteract a credit boom that is expressed in rapid price increases on houses or financial 
assets. This view is based on the fact that it is difficult or almost impossible for a central bank 
to determine whether a credit boom has its base in the real economy or whether it is due to 
unrealistic expectations of continuing price increases. Instead of trying to deliberately burst 
the bubble, one should use monetary policy to counteract the negative effects that may result 
if it bursts. 
The disadvantage of this reasoning is that the negative effects when the bubble bursts may 
be fairly substantial – which to a large degree is illustrated by the current financial crisis. It is 
also difficult to deny that the long period of low interest rates in the world prior to the crisis 
may  have  contributed  to  an  unreasonably  high  build-up  of  credit.  With  hindsight,  this  view 
does not appear so controversial. 
Does this mean that monetary policy can and should be used to prevent financial crises? I 
believe that monetary policy can be a complement to other measures when overly large risks 
appear to be building up in the financial sector, but that the main responsibility must lie with 
other methods of regulating the relationship between capital and risks. The emphasis here is 
on regulatory frameworks and supervision. Putting all of the responsibility on monetary policy 
would  probably  mean  such  high  interest  rates  that  they  would  have  seriously  negative 
repercussions  for  the  real  economy.  Moreover,  the  argument  remains  that  it  is  difficult  to 
determine when a credit boom changes from being beneficial for growth to becoming a risk 
that can trigger a financial crisis. 
I nevertheless think that the crisis has taught us that when we conduct monetary policy we 
must also follow a number of variables that are linked to the build-up of risk in the financial 
markets, primarily credit growth in different sectors of the economy. The fact that monetary 
policy  alone  cannot  prevent  financial  crises  does  not  mean  that  we  can  only  look  at  an 
inflation target and otherwise disregard what a long period of low interest rates may entail 
with regard to risks in the financial system. This is also the view the Riksbank has expressed 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 5
in recent years, occasionally, one must say under strong criticism from both academics and 
various other parties in society. 
Monetary policy can alleviate the consequences of the financial crisis 
The financial crisis has meant that the focus normally placed on monetary policy has been 
transferred to the measures taken to safeguard financial stability. Monetary policy cannot be 
used  to  resolve  acute  problems  in  the  financial  markets.  This  requires  a  different  type  of 
measure, as I have already described. What role can monetary policy then play in the current 
situation? How has the Riksbank formulated monetary policy during the autumn to counteract 
the negative events? 
On 8 October the Riksbank took part in a joint action with other central banks to alleviate the 
consequences of the financial crisis. The Riksbank, together with the Bank of England, the 
ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve,  announced  cuts  in  their  monetary  policy  rates.  The 
advantage with this type of coordinated action is that it reinforces confidence and increases 
the chances of the rate cut having positive effects. The Riksbank cut the repo rate by 0.50 
percentage points in this action.  
At our most recent ordinary monetary policy meeting on 22 October the decision was to cut 
the repo rate by a further 0.50 percentage points, to 3.75 per cent. The Riksbank adjusted its 
forecast for the repo rate path downwards, compared with that presented at the beginning of 
September. The members of the Executive Board were unanimous regarding both the repo 
rate  cut  and  the  new  interest  rate  path.  Together  with  the  joint  central  bank  action  on  8 
October, the Riksbank thus cut the repo rate by a total of one percentage point in the space 
of two weeks. Other central banks have also substantially cut their policy rates. For example, 
the Bank of England has cut its bank rate from 5 per cent to 3 per cent since the beginning of 
September. 
The reason for the repo rate cuts was to alleviate the effects of the financial crisis on the real 
economy, while ensuring that inflation stabilised around the target of two per cent. Although 
monetary policy cannot be used to resolve the financial problems, it can help to dampen the 
negative effects on the real economy, without jeopardising the inflation target.  
The  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  the  financial  crisis  aggravates  the  ongoing  economic 
downturn resulting in weaker growth, a deterioration in the labour market and lower inflation. 
The repo rate therefore needs to be cut by a relatively large amount during a short period of 
time. In addition to the cuts already made, the assessment at the most recent meeting was 
that the repo rate needs to be cut by a further 0.50 percentage points, to 3.25 per cent, over 
the coming six months.  
The repo rate is currently less effective than normal as a tool for influencing the economy. 
The  repo  rate  cuts  in  October  did  not  lead  to  an  immediate  fall  in  interbank  rates.  The 
confidence crisis in the financial system has meant that the normal link between market rates 
and the repo rate has been broken. Although market rates also declined, there remains an 
unusually  large  gap  between  the  repo  rate  and  mortgage  rates  in  particular.  The  gap 
between  the  3-month  lending  rate  to  households  and  the  repo  rate  has  been  around  100 
basis points in less turbulent periods than that we are experiencing now. At present the gap 
is around 200 basis points. This is a lot in an historical perspective. Although some mortgage 
rates have declined slightly following the repo rate cuts, the gap remains. Mortgage rates are 
to a great extent governed by the banks' possibilities to borrow abroad. The effect of this is 
that interest costs for households with mortgages fall less than one might have expected. As 
a  result  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  stimulating  effect  of  a  repo  rate  cut  is  thus  less  than  it 
would have been otherwise. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  there  is  unusually  great  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
assessments and forecasts at present and that it is thus more difficult to judge the effects of 
our monetary policy. The outcome data and indicators the Riksbank has received since the 
6 
 BIS Review 149/2008
monetary policy meeting in September clearly pointed to a severe deterioration in economic 
activity, both in Sweden and abroad. Compared with the assessment made in September, 
the  Riksbank  revised  down  its  forecast  for  international  growth  by  almost  one  percentage 
point. Growth in 2009 was assumed at the monetary policy meeting held on 22 October to be 
close to zero in the United States, the euro area and Sweden. There are also signs that the 
economies in Asia are slowing down. In China, growth has fallen during the first half of the 
year and is expected to continue to fall. Economic activity in Japan has also slowed down 
and the most recent GDP figures show that the economy is now in a recession.  
Inflation is still high at present, but the forecast for inflation was adjusted downwards for the 
entire forecast period in the Monetary Policy Report published in October. Our assessment 
was  that  inflation  will  fall  quickly  over  the  coming  year  and  then  rise  slightly,  reaching  the 
target of 2 per cent in 2011. The slowdown in economic activity will in all likelihood have a 
dampening effect on domestic price pressures. Another factor that contributes significantly to 
the changed view of inflation prospects is the fall in commodity prices. It is mainly increases 
in  energy  and  food  prices  that  have  earlier  pushed  up  inflation  in  Sweden  far  above  the 
target.  During  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  commodity  prices  began  to  rise.  The  inflation 
rate will fall if there are no price increases or if the increases are lower than last year. To 
summarise, there are several factors pointing to a decline in the inflation rate. The Executive 
Board’s assessment at its most recent meeting in October was therefore that a repo rate cut 
was not incompatible with the price stability target. It was possible to use monetary policy to 
alleviate the negative effects of the crisis on the real economy without any risk of neglecting 
the inflation target.  
What has happened since the most recent monetary policy meeting? The picture of a drastic 
slowdown  in  economic  activity  has  been  reinforced,  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  New 
statistics confirm the picture of an economic downturn and falling inflationary pressures. With 
regard to Sweden, a record-low level in the purchasing managers index points to a continued 
slowdown in economic activity. The purchasing managers’ index for the manufacturing sector 
fell in October, for the fifth month in a row. Households’ confidence in the economic situation, 
as  reported  in  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  economic  tendency  survey, 
plummeted in October to the lowest level since the beginning of 1993. Confidence did not 
change substantially in November, but remained at a historically low level. The confidence 
indicator  for  the  manufacturing  industry  fell  further  in  November  and  is  well  below  the 
average. A large number of redundancies have been notified by Swedish companies in both 
October  and  November.  Inflation  fell  in  October,  which  was  entirely  in  line  with  the 
Riksbank’s most recent forecast, and there are also signs of lower inflation expectations. At 
the  same  time,  the  krona  has  been  weaker  than  in  our  most  recent  forecast,  which  in  all 
likelihood  will  somewhat  weaken  the  forces  pushing  down  inflation.  The  indicators  and 
outcome  data  that  have  been  received  regarding  international  growth  point  to  a  sombre 
development. The GDP figures for the United States indicate negative growth during the third 
quarter and a weak beginning to the fourth quarter. The confidence indicators are pointing 
downwards, the retail trade is weak and orders are falling. The euro area is in a recession as 
growth was negative during both the second and third quarters. Since the monetary policy 
meeting  on  22  October,  growth  prospects  have  deteriorated  considerably,  both  in Sweden 
and abroad. 
Concluding remarks 
During the autumn, the Riksbank has taken measures, together with governments and other 
central  banks,  to  counteract  the  confidence  crisis  that  arose  in  the  financial  markets  in 
connection  with  Lehman  Brothers  filing  for  bankruptcy.  The  measures  have  been  taken 
different  forms.  The  Riksbank  has  taken  part  in  these  measures  through  both  general 
liquidity  support  to  the  Swedish  banking  sector  and  special  support  to  Carnegie  and 
Kaupthing  Bank,  but  also  through  cooperation  with  other  central  banks.  The  Riksbank  will 
continue to contribute liquidity as long as is necessary. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 7
Although the most acute problems in the global financial markets have been counteracted, I 
consider it slightly surprising that the markets have not normalised to a greater extent than 
they have. Although the interbank rates have fallen, they are still at a high level in historical 
terms.  The  measures  implemented  by  central  banks  and  governments  have  nevertheless 
been both extensive and forceful. An important part of the counter-measures implemented by 
governments and central banks around the world during the autumn has been to ensure that 
no systemically-important bank is allowed to fail. 
The financial crisis has meant that the focus has been moved from monetary policy to the 
efforts made to safeguard financial stability. This is entirely natural. Monetary policy is not an 
effective tool in preventing financial crisis or in resolving a crisis that has broken out. It has 
had some impact on financial stability in that the Riksbank's repo rate cuts have helped to 
push  down  market  rates.  However,  the  large  gap  remaining  between  the  repo  rate  and 
market  rates  shows  that  monetary  policy  cannot  resolve  the  financial  crisis.  But  I  would 
nevertheless  like  to  emphasise  that  monetary  policy  fulfils  an  important  complementary 
function in alleviating the effects of the financial crisis on the real economy. 
As I described earlier, the stimulating effect of the Riksbank cutting the repo rate has been 
weakened  as  the  normal  link  between  the  short-term  market  rates  and  the  repo  rate  has 
been broken. This situation should gradually change as conditions in the financial markets 
normalise. When the inflation rate falls again, there will be good opportunities for monetary 
policy to dampen the economic downturn without jeopardising the Riksbank’s inflation target.  
Thank you! 
8 
 BIS Review 149/2008
