Ewart S Williams: Trinidad and Tobago – state of the economy and  
short-term prospects 
Remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Monetary Policy Report media conference, Port-of-Spain, 17 November 2008. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen and thank you for joining us. Before I discuss today’s 
Monetary Policy Report, which reflects the Central Bank’s latest thinking on the economy, I 
would like to say a few words about the global financial crisis. 
The honest truth is that it is difficult to make an informed assessment about the state of the 
crisis since each day brings more depressing news. 
There would seem to be sufficient evidence to suggest that the risk of a total melt-down of 
the world’s financial system has receded somewhat, though all the accompanying ills are still 
with us. 
While solvency concerns have eased in the light of official commitments to use public funds 
to recapitalize financial institutions, lingering uncertainty has impeded the proper functioning 
of money and capital markets. 
Thus,  we  are  seeing  unprecedented  volatility  in  the  world’s  major  equity  markets;  liquidity 
preference, risk aversion, and bank spreads remain at elevated levels. 
Perhaps the big legacy of the financial crisis may be a global recession. The US is now in 
recession; the UK has been in recession for a few months now; and on Friday, the Euro zone 
conceded that recession had arrived. 
(One last word on the international economy) 
Contagion has finally reached developing and emerging market economies, all of which will 
experience slowdowns. Even so, the entire increase in global growth in 2009 is expected to 
come  from  these  economies.  The  industrialized  economies  as  a  group  are  projected  to 
decline  by  as  much  as  1  per  cent.  Emerging  and  developing  economies  are  projected  to 
grow by around 5 per cent (most of it from China and India). 
It is not surprising therefore that the historic talks held in Washington DC over the weekend 
(some  called  it  Bretton  Woods  II),  were  not  among  the  G7  or  G8  (as  is  the  custom)  but 
among a broader group called the G20 countries. 
Many observers see this as a clear recognition that the world could not get out of its present 
predicament  without,  China,  India,  Saudi  Arabia,  Brazil,  and  a  host  of  others…  they  are 
providing the growth and they have reserves to pull even the developed countries out of the 
present dilemma. 
We will have to wait and see whether this historic power shift is temporary or permanent. 
Now what is the state of the economy of Trinidad and Tobago? 
As  indicated  in  the Overview,  which  we  handed  out  this morning,  so  far,  the  contagion  is 
coming  largely  through  the  sharp  decline  in  oil  and  gas  prices  and  falling  demand  for  our 
energy-based products – iron and steel and petro-chemicals. 
• 
The Central Bank’s projection is for a slowing of real GDP growth to 3.5 per cent in 
2008,  down  from  5.5  per  cent  in  2007.  Most  of  the  slowdown  is  coming  from  the 
energy sector. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 1
    As the non-energy sector continues to do relatively well, unemployment remains low 
at  4.6  per  cent  with  persistent  labour  shortages,  mainly  in  construction  and 
manufacturing. 
Since the last MPR in April, headline inflation has accelerated, from 9.3 per cent 
(year-on-year)  to  14.8  per  cent  in  September.  Food  inflation  has  risen  from  an 
already high 20 per cent to a mind-boggling 35 per cent in September. (If we are 
looking for some comfort, the last data we have has food inflation at 16 per cent in 
Barbados and 34 per cent in Jamaica and Suriname). 
Core inflation i.e. excluding food has risen from around 4 per cent as at end-2007 
to 6.2 per cent in September 2008. (For us, at the Bank, core inflation is a good 
measure of underlying inflationary pressures – and we would like to see it at around 
2-3 per cent). 
Not surprisingly, the report identifies the main drivers of inflation as: 
(i) 
the record rise in international food prices that shocked the entire world 
from around the second half of last year, through mid-2008 (and you know 
all  the  reasons  ;  high  oil  prices,  the  diversion  of  agricultural  lands  to 
ethanol, climate change etc). 
Insufficiency  of  domestic  agricultural  production  (and  persistent  crop 
damage resulting from floods). 
Our expansionary fiscal stance as we seek to pursue rapid development 
and to relieve the constraints being posed by declining spare capacity 
Rapid bank credit expansion, fuelled by buoyant liquidity conditions; and 
High inflation expectations (which has become a major issue). 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
In  terms  of  policy  responses,  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  September  2008,  while  fiscal 
policy may have resulted in a larger overall surplus, permitting an increase in transfers to the 
HSF, it made little dent in the non-energy fiscal deficit which currently stands at 14.7 per 
cent of GDP. (The report tries to explain why the non-energy fiscal deficit is important from 
the standpoint of inflationary pressure). 
Throughout 2008, the Central Bank has sought to maintain a restrictive monetary stance, 
utilizing  all  the  instruments  in  its  arsenal  –  special  sterilization  bonds,  open  market 
instruments, reserve requirements, the repo rate – with mixed results. 
All these measures tend to result in higher interest rates, which can affect business activity, 
in particular small businesses (which could be a problem) and mortgage rates (which could 
cause severe hardships, including for people who can least afford). 
The  message  here  is  that  excessive  dependence  on  monetary  policy  to  deal  with 
inflation carries real risks and that the only way of reducing inflation, without severe 
consequences  for  interest  rates  is  by  having  a  better  balance  between  fiscal  and 
monetary  policy  i.e.  sharing  the  burden  between  the  government  and  the  private 
sector. 
What are the short term prospects? 
To say the least the current international crisis and in particular, the steady decline in energy 
prices,  are  giving  rise  to  much  uncertainty  in  our  domestic  economy.  This  nervousness  is 
being reflected in several ways: 
• 
An  incipient  recovery  in  the  stock  market  has  petered  out  and  as  in  the  US, 
investors are now playing safe. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2008
  Businesses  are  now  becoming  quite  concerned  about  the  cost  funding,  about  the 
impact of any budget adjustments on domestic demand, and about declining export 
demand in CARICOM. 
There are clear signs that the real estate market is softening (that’s a good thing) 
and  that  housing  construction  activity  may  have  peaked  (both  in  the  public  and 
private sector); and 
Consumer confidence in the economy also seems to be weakening. 
• 
Against this background, our projection is for real GDP to decline further in 2009 to about 2 
per cent. The slowdown will come both from the energy and non-energy sectors and could 
have some impact on employment, though any employment reduction is not expected to be 
major. 
(One thing that we need to be clear about is that unemployment is unlikely to remain 
forever  at  4.6  per  cent  but  will  fluctuate  (hopefully  in  a  narrow  band)  in  line  with 
business conditions). 
For several governments (the US, the UK, the Euro zone and many others worldwide) the 
overriding risk is of a major slowdown and all that implies (high unemployment etc.). Further, 
as these economies do not see the inflation risk as serious and imminent, they are taking 
expansionary monetary and fiscal action. 
In the Bank’s view, for Trinidad and Tobago, with inflation already at 14.8 per cent, inflation 
reduction should be priority number one. In the Overview, we make the point that a quick 
return  to  single-digit  inflation  is  critical  for  reversing  inflation  expectations  and  bringing 
inflation down to 6-7 per cent in the medium term. 
One cannot have sustained growth and improve the quality of life of the population 
until inflation is brought under control. 
The downward trend in global food prices will help to reduce food price inflation; expected 
increases  in  domestic  agricultural  production  and  increased  food  imports  from  Guyana 
should also help to bring down food prices. 
The  Government  has  indicated  that  it  will  respond  to  projected  reduction  in  energy  tax 
collections  by  trimming  expenditures.  The  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  tightening  the 
monetary stance as required. 
Dealing with wage demands could present a challenge. High inflation and in particular, high 
food price inflation have seriously eroded the real incomes of workers and understandably 
this  is  going  to  be  reflected  in  their  wage  demands.  How  we  deal  with  this  will  determine 
whether we achieve a reduction in inflation or whether we face the risk of a wage/price spiral. 
We  continue  to  believe  that  the  best  way  of  resolving  this  is  through  dialogue  (a  social 
compact)  between  the  major  stakeholders  Finally,  the  MPR  touches  on  a  worst-case 
scenario  (hopefully,  highly  unlikely)  in  which  oil  prices  fall  below  US$40  per  barrel  with 
corresponding declines in gas prices. We argue that our economy is in a better position now 
to withstand such a worst case scenario (given our level of reserves, low external debt, the 
HSF etc.). Obviously addressing such a worst case scenario would call for major adjustment 
in both the public and private sectors. 
Thank you Ladies and Gentlemen. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 3
