Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Beyond the turmoil – rules, supervision and 
infrastructures 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the opening panel at the SPIN 2009 Conference, Rome, 15 June 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the opening discussion at this conference. The 
organisers,  in  choosing  the  title  of  the  panel,  have  given  us  the  challenging  task  to  look 
beyond  the  current  turmoil  surrounding  rules,  supervision  and  infrastructures.  This  is 
certainly not easy as we cannot yet speak of an end to the difficult period facing both the 
financial  and  real  sectors  of  the  economy.  However,  looking  beyond  the  turmoil  and  start 
implementing  the  lessons  we  have  learned  is exactly  what  is  needed at  this  point  in  time. 
Against the background of the crisis up until now, we have to draw the right conclusions and 
begin  designing  the  future  of  the  financial  architecture,  including  new  rules  and  improved 
supervision and oversight. This needs to be done now before the window of opportunity – 
which will not remain open forever – closes.  
However, before looking beyond the turmoil let me take the opportunity first to examine the 
performance  of  market  infrastructures  in  the  current  crisis.  Developments  in  the  financial 
markets  and  the  fate  of  specific  institutions  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the  public  debate. 
However,  owing  to  the  close  interdependencies  between  financial  markets,  intermediaries 
and infrastructures, the difficulties affecting institutions and markets have also had a knock-
on  effect  on  market  infrastructures,  putting  the  functioning  of  payment  systems,  central 
counterparties and securities settlement systems under a real-life stress test. Fortunately, as 
I will illustrate in a moment, EU market infrastructures have proven to be remarkably resilient, 
thereby  limiting  the  overall  systemic  risk.  In  the  main  this  has  been  due  to  the  successful 
interaction  between  industry,  regulators  and  overseers,  just  like  –  if  I  may  –  in  the  Italian 
banking  sector,  which  has  also  shown  itself  to  be  remarkably  resilient  in  the  current 
circumstances.  
In the second part of my intervention, I would indeed like to look beyond the current turmoil. I 
will – despite the very positive overall assessment for infrastructures – point to three areas 
that warrant particular attention for the future of market infrastructures. The first of these is 
the enhancement of overall crisis management arrangements for market infrastructures. The 
second  involves  strengthening  market  infrastructures  for  OTC  derivatives.  And  third,  given 
the importance of retail markets to the overall stability and efficiency of the financial system, 
there is the need to complete the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). 
Performance of EU market infrastructures during the financial turmoil  
The financial market turmoil has impacted on EU payment systems, central counterparties 
(CCPs)  and  securities  settlement  systems  mainly  through  intensified  and  more  volatile 
market  activity.  We  have  also  seen  some  peaks  in  transaction  volumes  as  well  as  more 
frequent and higher margin calls. Furthermore, many infrastructures have had to cope with 
the default of a major participant, notably in the context of the demise of Lehman Brothers in 
September 2008 and the corresponding spill-over effects on its subsidiaries.  
Fortunately,  EU  market  infrastructures  were  able  effectively  to  overcome  these  challenges 
without any major operational disruptions. In particular, the Eurosystem’s TARGET system – 
which  is  not  only  the  backbone  of  the  large-value  payment  infrastructure  for  the  euro,  but 
also plays a central role in providing settlement services for 36 retail payment systems and 
33 securities settlement systems that are connected as ancillary systems – has proven to be 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 1
stable  and  resilient.  Nonetheless,  I  would  like  to  mention  three  key  stylised  facts  which 
illustrate the impact of the current turmoil:  
First, the values processed in TARGET in the last quarter of 2008 showed an unusually high 
increase  of  13%  compared  to  the  first  three  quarters  (see  Chart  1).  When  looking  at  the 
average  values  settled  in  different  time  bands  during  the  day,  the  main  difference 
between the third and the fourth quarter of 2008 relates to the values settled in the last hour 
of  operations.  This  reflects  the  strong  increase  in  overnight  deposits  made  by  banks  with 
national central banks as a consequence of the switch to the full allotment fixed rate tenders 
in  the  ECB’s  open  market  operations,  following  the  intensification  of  the  crisis  after  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.  
Second, not surprisingly from September 2008  onwards, we see a remarkable increase in 
the number of sender limits along with a decrease in their value (see Chart 2). Nonetheless, 
these changes had a marginal impact on the smooth flow of transactions and did not cause 
delays to the timely submission of payments.  
Third,  the  level  of  non-settled  payments  remained  fairly  stable  in  the  second  half  of  2008, 
amounting to just 1% or so of the total daily average value settled in the system (see Chart 
3), indicating the overall resilience of the TARGET system in the face of the financial turmoil.  
Crucially,  market  infrastructures  continued  to  function  robustly.  In  particular,  by  providing 
stable  networks  despite  the  highly  disruptive  conditions  in  financial  markets,  market 
infrastructures  played  an  important  shock-absorbing  role  and  helped  to  maintain  overall 
public confidence in the financial system.  
Since  central  banking  overseers  and  financial  regulators  recognised  long  ago  the  critical 
importance  of  the  reliable  functioning  of  market  infrastructures  for  overall  financial  stability 
and efficiency, they took action together with the service providers. Stringent requirements 
ensure that EU infrastructures are adequately designed, effectively manage their risks, and 
operate  efficiently  and  reliably,  both  under  normal  circumstances  and  at  times  of  crisis. 
Recent  experiences  suggest  that  these  measures  were  well-targeted.  Nevertheless,  some 
areas for further improvement have also been identified. I shall now mention a few key areas 
for further action.  
Areas for improvement 
As stated, I would like to focus on three areas: firstly, improvements related to the overall 
crisis management arrangements; secondly, the strengthening of market infrastructures for 
over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives;  and  thirdly,  efforts  geared  to  producing  a  more 
integrated retail payments infrastructure. 
Crisis management arrangements 
One priority that relates to the overall crisis management arrangements is to further improve 
notification  procedures,  particularly  regarding  the  communication  of  insolvencies  by  public 
authorities  and  infrastructure  providers  to  market  participants.  Although  this  has  generally 
worked  well  during  the  current  turmoil,  some  measures  are  in  progress  to  foster  the 
exchange of standardised information.  
In  addition,  further  measures  are  needed  to  ensure  close  cooperation  with  the  authorities 
regarding the relationship with the defaulting participant and the coordination of measures to 
limit the impact of the default. Moreover, it might be an advantage if infrastructures were able 
to end unilaterally the contractual relationship with the participant (without waiting for the final 
decision by the relevant judicial or administrative authority). 
Furthermore,  the  current  turmoil  has  reminded  us  that  default  rules  need  to  be  not  only 
sufficiently  clear  and  comprehensive  for  the  infrastructure  participant,  but  also  that  they 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2009
should  not  cause  any  conflict  between  infrastructures.  Therefore,  as  infrastructures  are 
becoming  increasingly  interlinked,  more  coordination  in  the  implementation  of  the  default 
rules is vital for further mitigating risks at the systemic level. 
Finally, the default of Lehman Brothers was a major showcase for the severe implications of 
“institution-based interdependencies” between two or more infrastructures resulting from the 
exposures  of  major  financial  institutions  participating  in  each  of  these  infrastructures. 
Therefore, it is crucial for us to continue closely monitoring the interdependencies between 
individual institutions in order to assess their impact on the stability of the infrastructure. 
Infrastructures for OTC derivatives 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  need  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  for  OTC  derivatives.  OTC 
derivative markets have been very dynamic with a veritable explosion in outstanding contract 
volumes  primarily  over  the  past  decade.  The  basic  problem,  however,  is  that  this  very 
dynamic evolution of OTC derivatives markets has outstripped development of the underlying 
clearing  and  settlement  arrangements.  Indeed,  as  the  post-trading  of  OTC  derivatives 
remained  predominantly  bilateral  and  non-standardised,  the  respective  arrangements  have 
become increasingly inadequate for coping with the growing volumes and complexity of OTC 
derivatives trades. This was highlighted in particular during the financial market turmoil, when 
higher  trading  activity  and  market  volatility  further  aggravated  the  existing  tensions.  [The 
resulting  processing  backlogs  and  uncertainties  about  counterparty  risk  raised  strong 
concerns  among  policymakers,  as  highlighted  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum’s  April  2008 
report 1 on the lessons from the financial turmoil.]  
The need to strengthen market infrastructures for credit default swaps (CDS) stems from the 
importance  of  CDS  markets  for  overall  financial  stability,  for  three  reasons.  First,  the 
systemic  importance  of  CDS  markets  comes  from  the  high  degree  of  interconnectivity 
between  CDS  markets  and  credit  and  cash  securities  markets,  the  embedded  financial 
leverage of CDS, and the significant level of CDS exposures in relation to the total assets 
and  capital  cushions  of  the  banks  involved.  Second,  the  associated  financial  risks,  for 
example when compared to interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives, are more difficult 
to manage. This stems from the greater underlying complexity and the correlations between 
different  CDS  exposures  when  market-wide  strains  occur.  Third,  specific  risks  to  financial 
stability stem from the high degree of market concentration where very sizable financial risks 
are held by a small group of major market players. Therefore – as we have seen not only 
with the default of Lehman Brothers, but also the earlier near-defaults of Bear Stearns and 
AIG – the default of one major CDS counterparty can put these markets under very severe 
strain. 
A natural inference from our experiences during the current turmoil is, therefore, to improve 
the  resilience  of  OTC  derivatives  markets  through  a  more  widespread  adoption  of  central 
counterparty clearing or exchange trading. Central counterparties (CCPs), by concentrating 
all  outstanding  derivatives  positions  of  the  participating  buyers  and  sellers  in  one  place, 
enable  a  significant  reduction  in  counterparty  risk:  firstly,  through  the  diversification  and 
netting of risk exposures; secondly, through the application of stringent risk-based margining 
procedures to ensure adequate management; thirdly, through collateralisation of outstanding 
exposures  on  at  least  a  daily  or  even  intra-day  basis.  In  addition,  CCPs  also  contribute 
significantly to market transparency and integrity and bring significant operational efficiency 
gains,  e.g.  through  the  standardisation  of  risk  management  processes  as  well  as  via 
multilateral netting and collateral management.  
                                                 
1   Financial  Stability  Forum,  “Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional 
Resilience”, April 2008. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 3
As  a  result,  public  authorities  and  industry  bodies  worldwide  have  embraced  the 
establishment  of  CCPs  for  CDS  markets  as  a  top  priority  and  we  expect  a  number  of 
solutions in both the EU and the United States to be up and running by the end of July 2009. 
In view of the role of the euro for the derivatives market, I would welcome a CCP in the euro 
area.  The  effective  and  timely  implementation  of  the  respective  roadmaps  and  full  dealer 
commitment to making the maximum possible use of these facilities will be essential.  
Looking ahead, it will also be vital to ensure close convergence between the requirements 
and approaches of the overseers and regulators involved so as to maintain a level playing-
field between the different CCPs and pre-empt possible regulatory arbitrage. At EU level, the 
forthcoming  ESCB-CESR  recommendations  for  central  counterparties  have  already  been 
revised to include specific guidance on their application to CCPs for OTC derivatives. It is 
now also crucial to achieve such a common understanding at the global level as well. In this 
respect,  we  look  forward  to  the  recently  initiated  joint  efforts  of  the  CPSS  and  IOSCO  to 
review the CPSS-IOSCO recommendations for central counterparties issued in 2004. 
Finally, I wish to reiterate that the introduction of CCPs will not be a panacea for addressing 
all concerns regarding the resilience and efficiency of OTC derivatives markets. For instance, 
we will need complementary action to ensure better risk management and transparency as 
well  for  those  products  that  are  not  yet  sufficiently  standardised  to  be  eligible  for  central 
clearing. Furthermore, sound post-trading needs to be complemented by enhanced trading, 
pre-clearing  and  lifecycle  management  of  OTC  derivatives,  e.g.  via  the  greater  use  of 
automated  trading  and  confirmation,  portfolio  compression,  the  registration  of  all  trades  in 
central  data  depositories,  as  well  as  enhanced  risk  management  and  disclosure 
requirements for the financial institutions involved in OTC derivatives trading.  
Towards more efficient and resilient retail infrastructures for the euro area  
Let me finally come to the third issue we need to focus on beyond the current turmoil: the 
vital role of retail infrastructures in terms of financial stability. The retail business facilitates 
the bulk of payments related to the day-to-day lives and financial activities of both individuals 
and companies. It represents the financial system’s interface with the general public and is 
crucial for preserving confidence in the financial system and, ultimately, in the euro as the 
single currency.  
Two issues relating to the retail business and the current turmoil are noteworthy. First, the 
retail  business  –  with  its  cornerstones  of  saving,  lending,  and  payment  services  –  has 
successfully  withstood  the  financial  crisis.  Second,  banks  with  a  balanced  business  model 
have been best equipped to cope with the current challenges. Therefore, retail services offer 
two major opportunities at the present time: first, to revive confidence in the banking sector in 
the eyes of the general public; second, to strengthen banks’ balance sheets.  
However, one important – sometimes overlooked – issue seems a key prerequisite: in the 
same  way  as  the  large  value  infrastructures  mentioned  before,  stable  and  efficient  retail 
infrastructures  are  needed  throughout  Europe  in  order  to  alleviate  systemic  risk  and 
safeguard financial stability. However, despite 50 years of European  economic integration, 
Europe is still lacking an integrated retail payments market.  
Therefore, the further realisation and completion of the Single Euro Payments Area project is 
a  crucial  element  for  the  retail  banking  and  payments  market  beyond  the  turmoil.  Without 
doubt, SEPA is the largest payment initiative undertaken in Europe, following the euro cash 
changeover.  Major  milestones  have  already  been  achieved:  only  recently,  regulators  have 
addressed the uncertainties surrounding interchange fees and the reachability of the SEPA 
Direct Debit. Nevertheless there are still a number of further topics on our common agenda, 
e.g.  standardisation  in  cards,  payment  innovations,  a  migration  end  date,  and  the 
governance of payment issues at the European level.  
4 
 BIS Review 74/2009
Harmonisation in the field of retail payments is a natural area for efficiency gains. However, 
the market is moving only slowly in this direction. Although SEPA continues to be a mainly 
self-regulated  project,  some  elements  might  need  more  regulator  involvement.  The 
Eurosystem  has  emphasised  that  a  realistic  but  ambitious  SEPA  migration  end  date  is 
necessary.  Such  a  date  would  facilitate  communication  and  provide  more  certainty  for  all 
stakeholders. The most viable option for achieving an end date is through regulation by the 
public  authorities.  Since  an  EU  regulation  is  probably  the  most  effective  option  the 
Eurosystem appreciates the Commission’s launch of a public consultation on this topic.  
Only by tearing down the walls of fragmentation can we ultimately bring about harmonisation, 
efficiency gains and a level playing-field. Such a development inevitably leads to increased 
competition. I am fully aware that it is not easy – especially in a period of low growth and 
higher credit risks – to change revenue models. However, those who invest early will benefit 
and position themselves successfully. Corporates tell us that they would benefit from SEPA 
services because they are internationally connected. Taking into consideration the renewed 
relevance  of  retail  payments,  the  key  success  factors  in  the  years  ahead  will  be 
harmonisation,  innovation  and  increased  competitiveness.  Banks  and  infrastructures  will 
successfully take up these challenges only by continuing to play an important role in retail 
payments. 
Conclusion  
From the very beginning of the crisis, the ECB has acted in a decisive manner. It has taken a 
number  of  measures  unprecedented  in  nature,  scope  and  timing.  The  ECB  has  provided 
large amounts of liquidity support to banks. By making changes to its operational framework, 
the ECB made sure that all solvent banks would have sufficient access to funding. When the 
crisis  intensified  in  September  last  year,  we  introduced  a  number  of  new  measures.  Most 
importantly, we provided banks with unlimited access to liquidity at fixed rates for up to six 
months.  The  ECB  also  expanded  its  list  of  assets  eligible  for  use  as  collateral  in  the 
Eurosystem’s credit operations. Moreover, we recently announced further measures, namely 
to provide longer term refinancing up to one year and to purchase covered bonds of up to 
EUR 60 bn. 
Looking now beyond the turmoil on rules, regulation and infrastructures, the current financial 
turmoil  has  taught  us  one  key  lesson  for  the  future:  self-regulation  is  not  sufficient  for 
systemically important markets, institutions and infrastructures. Maintaining financial stability 
is  in  the  public  interest.  Therefore,  public  authorities  must  take  appropriate  measures  to 
regulate,  supervise  and  oversee  systemically 
institutions  and 
infrastructures  in  order  to  prevent  systemic  risks  spreading  and  safeguard  the  financial 
stability of the system.  
For  market  infrastructures,  one  lesson  for  the  future  is  that,  despite  their  remarkable 
resilience in the current crisis, there is no room for complacency given their crucial role in 
financial stability. On the contrary, overseers and regulators in future years need to increase 
their  efforts  towards  ensuring  safer  and  more  secure  market  infrastructures  and  also  to 
further  strengthen  EU  market  infrastructures.  I  have  highlighted  three  specific  areas  for 
enhancement.  First, 
the  general  crisis  management  arrangements,  particularly  on 
disseminating information and increasing awareness about default arrangements of market 
infrastructures.  Second,  measures  for  building  market  infrastructures  for  OTC  derivatives, 
also in the euro area. And third – as in the case of large value payment systems – the need 
for  a  more  integrated  and  harmonised  retail  payments  structure.  Therefore,  I  regard 
continued full support from all stakeholders for the effective and timely implementation of the 
Single Euro Payments Area as a key priority for the period ahead. 
Thank you for your attention. 
important  markets, 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 5
ANNEX I: Charts 
Chart 1 Values settled in TARGET per time band 
  Chart 2 Evolution of the limits on the SSP 
 
 
Chart 3 Non-settled payments on the SSP 
   6 
 BIS Review 74/2009
