Joseph Yam: HKMA congratulates the Central Bank of Malaysia on 50 
years of achievements 
Address by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Ceremony for the 50th Anniversary of Bank Negara Malaysia: "50 Years of Central Banking – 
Stability and Sustainability", Kuala Lumpur, 8 February 2009. 
 YANG  AMAT  BERHORMAT  PERDANA  MENTERI  MALAYSIA  Dato'  Seri  Abdullah  Haji 
Ahmad Badawi 
YANG BERBAHAGIA KETUA SETIAUSAHA NEGARA Tan Sri Mohd Sidek Haji Hassan 
Dear Governors, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  an  enormous  honour  and  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  today’s  ceremony.  The 
honour is a special one because over the years Bank Negara and the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority  have  worked  in  close  partnership  on  many  projects,  to  the  extent  that  a  deep 
friendship has been built between our institutions: with that friendship has developed great 
admiration on the part of my colleagues and myself for Bank Negara’s many achievements. 
The  pleasure  is  not  just  in  having  the  opportunity  to  visit  once  again  this  beautiful  and 
hospitable country, but also in being able to pay tribute to a valued colleague and dear friend, 
Governor Tan Sri Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz. Governor Zeti's strong and inspired leadership of Bank 
Negara  for  most  of  the  last  decade  has  turned  it  into  a  first-rate  central  bank  and  a  great 
force for good in this region.  
We  are  all  mindful  that  we  celebrate  this  50th  anniversary  in  the  midst  of  intense  global 
financial  crisis.  This  will  not  –  and  should  not  –  diminish  the  happiness  of  the  occasion. 
Indeed, much of the history of Bank Negara Malaysia is the history of timely, productive, and 
often courageous response to crisis, and examining that history gives cause for optimism in 
our present circumstances. In my comments today, I shall touch only briefly the current crisis. 
Instead,  I  shall  reflect  on  the  achievements  of  Bank  Negara  during  the  decade  or  so  that 
followed  the  last  great  crisis  –  the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997-8.  As  I  hope  I  shall 
demonstrate, these achievements are more than of merely historical interest.  
It is clear to any observer that Bank Negara Malaysia has been a driving force in the building 
of this country. To speak only of its purely central-banking functions, Bank Negara has fully 
discharged its responsibilities through keeping inflation under control and maintaining stable 
interest  and  exchange  rates,  despite  rapid  economic  growth.  This  has  been  crucial  in 
supporting rising living standards and an increasingly diverse external trade. As adviser to 
the Government, the Bank has played a key role in formulating economic policies. The Bank 
has also been at the forefront of financial-sector development, in particular through building 
efficient  and  advanced  payment  systems.  This  work  has  stimulated  a  diverse  financial 
system, with impressive growth in stock-market capitalisation and other non-bank activity.   
All  of  this  is  indeed  impressive,  and  reason  enough  for  celebration.  But  Bank  Negara's 
contributions  to  the  well-being  of  the  country  go  somewhat  beyond  the  more  conventional 
central bank functions. Of great interest in any survey of its role in nation-building is Bank 
Negara’s  promotion  of  forms  of  financial  intermediation  that  are  of  special  relevance  to 
Malaysia's  needs  and  culture.  The  Bank  has  been  a  pioneer  in  the  promotion  of 
microfinance,  and  a  leading  participant  in  the  national  agenda  to  promote  a  strong  SME 
sector. Considerable funding and expertise have been devoted to these activities in recent 
years,  with  the  result  that  the  share  of  SME  financing  in  total  business  financing  has 
increased from 31% in 2000 to 44% in 2007. The experience and networks established in 
this field have been of great value in the Government's efforts to mitigate the effects of the 
current global financial crisis, which have included the recent launch of a substantial Micro 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 1
Enterprise  Fund.  Like  many  other  economies  in  this  region,  Malaysia  is  a  land  of  small 
businesses, but the attention that has, during years of stability, been given to strengthening 
channels of finance to the smallest of enterprises offers lessons for all economies at this time 
of pervasive credit crisis. 
Bank Negara has also taken a prominent part in the development and advocacy of Islamic 
finance, which has seen rapid growth in the country since 2003, with annual growth rates in 
Islamic  banking  assets  and  insurance  assets  approaching  20%,  and  Malaysia  now 
accounting  for  about  70%  of  all  global  sukuk  issues.  Islamic  finance  is  increasingly 
recognised as an important alternative channel of financial intermediation, and not only within 
primarily  Islamic  communities.  As  Governor  Zeti  has  persuasively  argued,  Islamic  finance 
encourages  business  activities  that  generate  legitimate  profits,  and  rests  on  principles  of 
fairness, shared risk and ethical practices.1 There is, I think, much for us all to reflect on in 
this when considering how badly things have gone wrong recently in what might be called 
"traditional" finance. 
No institution with such a long history can have escaped controversy, and BNM has had its 
fair share. What is interesting, however, is that perhaps the most controversial action by the 
Malaysian authorities in recent years – the response to the 1997-8 Asian financial crisis – 
has now come to be understood as appropriate and effective. At the centre of this response 
was the imposition of capital controls to contain speculative capital flows, stabilise the ringgit, 
and  give  the  economy  a  breathing  space.  This  was  widely  criticised  internationally  as  a 
retrograde step. Yet it was a limited and temporary measure, which, along with other policies 
succeeded in stabilising the system and providing the conditions for economic recovery. The 
role of Bank Negara in promoting international understanding of this measure was crucial to 
its effectiveness. It is not, of course, my purpose to recommend capital controls as a general 
solution  to  financial  crisis.  The  lesson  here  is  that  unorthodox  measures  can  be  effective, 
provided that they are well thought out and properly implemented. At a time like the present, 
when governments around the world have been ready to adopt measures that were barely 
conceivable  a  few  months  ago,  this  is  perhaps  a  lesson  that  has  already  been  quickly 
learned. 
The region's recovery from the Asian financial crisis was nearly as rapid as the unfolding of 
the crisis itself, thanks to the vigorous measures taken by authorities in the region and the 
underlying momentum and vibrancy of the Asian economies. The experience of this shock 
generated  a  determination  in  the  region  to  try  to  ensure  that  such  a  crisis  did  not  happen 
again,  and  to  strengthen  financial  systems  against  other  forms  of  crisis.  It  would  be 
complacent  to  suppose  that  we  have  been  completely  successful  in  these  aims.  We  are, 
after all, in the midst of a serious financial crisis that no efforts by this region on its own could 
have prevented. The region’s financial systems may have been largely undamaged by the 
first wave of that crisis. But the second wave is now upon us, and this second wave may well 
carry greater risks to emerging markets. Even so, the determination among Asian economies 
in  the  aftermath  of  1998  to  build  strength  against  future crises  has  placed  this  region  in a 
much more resilient position.  
The  raw  resources  for  maintaining  financial  stability  –  foreign  exchange  reserves  –  have 
more  than  doubled  in  most  of  the  economies  in  this  region  over  the  past  decade.  Many 
economies have embarked on financial-sector reform, with the aim both of ensuring that the 
banking  system  is  well  capitalised  and  of  promoting  other  forms  of  intermediation.  Central 
banks have seen a strengthening of their capabilities and a clarification of their policies and 
roles. Most heartening of all, co-operation among central banks in the region has flourished. 
Many examples could be cited, from bilateral swap agreements to payment system linkages. 
                                                 
1   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: "Enhancing the Resilience and Stability of the Islamic Financial System": Governor's Keynote 
Address  at  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  and  Institute  of  International  Finance  Conference,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 20 November 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2009
At  the  centre  of  this  regional  co-operation  has  been  the  work  of  EMEAP  in  facilitating 
practical co-operation in all areas of central bank activity, and particularly in surveillance and 
crisis  management.  I  should  add  that  these  activities  have  benefited  enormously  from  the 
wisdom  and  leadership  of  Governor  Zeti  and  her  colleagues.  The  Zeti  Taskforce  –  the 
EMEAP  taskforce  on  Regional  Financial  Co-operation  –  has  laid  out  a  comprehensive 
framework for enhancing central bank co-operation, which has been adopted by EMEAP as 
a blueprint for action. 
Calls were also made in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis for a reform of the global 
financial  architecture.  Yet  one  of  the  great  disappointments  from  those  years,  particularly 
when  set  against  the  real  progress  in  regional  co-operation,  was  the  general  absence  of 
concrete  measures  on  an  international  scale.  There  was,  it  must  be  said,  a  greater 
determination at least to pool expertise and discuss possible solutions in various international 
forums. But the political motivation for further reform gradually weakened during the period of 
strong global growth for most of the last decade. 
The present financial crisis has much in common with the Asian financial crisis in that it has 
involved massive failures in financial intermediation, a rapid transmission of problems, and a 
strong element of surprise. However, the present crisis is global, not regional, and it centres 
on the world’s most advanced economies. At its climax, in September 2008, the crisis raised 
the  real  possibility  of  a  collapse  of  the  world  financial  system.  The  reputations  of  many 
leading institutions and individuals have been damaged or destroyed. Large sectors of major 
financial systems have been effectively nationalised. Disillusion has spread, and fundamental 
questions have been raised about the future of free markets, as people count the cost of the 
excesses of the past few years.  
Inevitably, central banks and regulators have been among those that have faced criticism: for 
not seeing – or not heeding – the danger signals; for having allowed financial innovation to 
get out of hand, to the benefit of intermediaries but to the detriment of the public; and for not 
responding  quickly  enough  when  the  crisis  began  to  emerge.  Although  there  are  many 
lessons  to  learn,  not  all  of  these  criticisms  are  fair.  The  rapid,  unconventional  and  co-
ordinated response by central banks at the peak of the crisis undoubtedly averted a collapse 
of the system, and the  vigorous measures to maintain the functioning of financial systems 
have been largely effective – so far. Nevertheless, the crisis itself, and the very scale of the 
response, have brought central banks more into the foreground than ever before. As the full 
implications of what has happened unfold there will undoubtedly be questions about their role 
and the policies they pursue.  
The  appropriate  response  to  this  is  for  central  banks,  international  organisations,  and 
government  authorities  to  seize  the  initiative  for  reform  so  that  financial  crisis  does  not 
become a crisis of confidence in the system itself. Since, as recent events have resoundingly 
demonstrated, the financial system is a global system, the reforms must be organised along 
international lines. The limited achievements in international co-operation following the Asian 
financial  crisis  might  make  us  sceptical.  But,  in  fact,  the  signs  are  positive.  Co-ordination 
among  central  banks  in  crisis  management  has  been  effective.  Technical  blueprints  for 
regulatory reform on an international scale have already been drawn up. And the political will 
has been demonstrated in the commitment by the world’s largest economies to implement 
far-reaching reform. One area of progress is the movement towards greater participation by 
developing economies in international forums and in the process of reform. This is important, 
not  just  because  of  the  growing  influence  of  these  economies  –  nor  even  because  the 
leading international forums are currently dominated by the very economies that are now in 
the deepest trouble – but because the ordinary people of developing economies are usually 
the ones who suffer most in a global financial crisis. 
International  co-operation  will  also,  I  hope,  act  as  a  countervailing  influence  against  any 
repeat  of  the  disastrous  mistakes  that  were  made  in  the  1930s.  There  has  so  far  been  a 
resistance  to  trade  protectionism,  although  the  idea  has  begun  to  gain  some  ground  as  a 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 3
spurious answer to economic distress. There is a risk that the idea will spread to the financial 
sector,  particularly  if  there  is  political  pressure  to  include  protectionist  measures  in  rescue 
packages for troubled banking systems in the developed economies. I need hardly point out 
that  –  no  less  than  trade  protectionism  –  such  a  trend  would  deepen  the  hardship  of  the 
developing economies, many of which rely heavily on international finance. It would also be a 
matter for serious concern in financial markets across the world. One of the central aims in 
building a more robust international financial architecture must be to ensure that there can be 
no excuse for resorting to financial protectionism as a solution to global or national crisis. 
This will be a year of hardship and anxiety throughout the world. Much effort will be spent in 
fire-fighting  and  managing  expectations.  But  this  is  also  a  time  when  central  banks, 
international  organisations,  and  leaders  generally  must  work  with  optimism  and  resolution 
towards  improving  the  international  financial  system.  Crisis  can  provide  the  stimulus  to 
reform,  the  determination  to  change,  and  the  spirit  to  co-operate.  There  is  no  better 
illustration of this spirit than Bank Negara Malaysia. Nor is there a more happy example of a 
central bank working in partnership with the people it serves to the benefit of the country. It is 
therefore with the greatest of pleasure and respect that I join you all in congratulating Bank 
Negara on its 50 years of achievements and in wishing the Bank and all who are associated 
with it continued success and happiness in the next 50 years and beyond.  
Tahniah kepada Bank Negara Malaysia di atas Ulangtahun ke lima puluh!2 
                                                 
2   Congratulations to Bank Negara Malaysia on its 50th anniversary. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2009
