European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
5 February 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On  the  basis  of  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  at  today’s  meeting  the 
Governing Council decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. As anticipated 
in  our  interest  rate  decision  of  15  January  2009,  the  latest  economic  data  and  survey 
information  confirm  that  the  euro  area  and  its  major  trading  partners  are  undergoing  an 
extended  period  of  significant  economic  downturn,  and  that  accordingly  both  external  and 
domestic inflationary pressures are diminishing. We continue to expect inflation rates in the 
euro  area  to  be  in  line  with  price  stability  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon, 
thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  This  assessment  is 
supported  by  available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  for  the  medium  term.  It  is  also 
confirmed by the further deceleration in monetary and credit growth in the euro area. Fully in 
line  with  its  primary  objective,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  keep  inflation 
expectations firmly anchored in accordance with its definition of price stability, that is inflation 
rates of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. This supports sustainable growth and 
employment  and  contributes  to  financial  stability.  Overall,  the  level  of  uncertainty  remains 
exceptionally  high.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments 
over the period ahead. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Reflecting  the  impact  of  the  intensified  and  broadened  financial  market  turmoil,  economic 
activity throughout the world, including in the euro area, has weakened substantially. Foreign 
demand  for  euro  area  exports  has  declined,  and  domestic  factors,  notably  very  low 
confidence and tight financing conditions, have adversely affected domestic demand. Taken 
together  with  other  available  economic  data  for  the  euro  area,  this  points  to  very negative 
quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth in the last quarter of 2008.  
This  information  is  in  line  with  our  current  analysis  and  forward-looking  assessment.  We 
continue to see persistent weakness in economic activity in the euro area over the coming 
quarters, as the financial market tensions have a further impact on the global and domestic 
economy.  At  the  same  time,  the  very  substantial  fall  in  commodity  prices  seen  since  the 
middle of 2008 should support real disposable income, and thus consumption, in the period 
ahead. Most recently, there have been tentative signs of stabilisation in some survey data, 
albeit at historically low levels. These indications, however, require confirmation on a broader 
basis. 
In the view of the Governing Council, the outlook for the economy remains surrounded by an 
exceptionally high degree of uncertainty. Overall, risks to economic growth remain clearly on 
the downside. They relate mainly to the potential for a stronger impact on the real economy 
of  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets,  as  well  as  to  concerns  about  the  emergence  and 
intensification of protectionist pressures and to possible adverse developments in the world 
economy stemming from a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
Over time, the euro area should reap the benefit of the effects of significant policy measures 
that  have  been  decided  upon  over  recent  months  to  deal  with  the  financial  turmoil.  They 
should help to restore trust in the financial system and to ease constraints on credit supply to 
companies  and  households.  In  order  to  ensure  that  such  measures  effectively  support  a 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 1
to  maintain  a  stability-oriented  and  medium-term  perspective 
sustainable recovery, it is of the utmost importance that they remain focused and temporary 
in  nature  so  as 
in 
macroeconomic policy-making.  
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  continued  to  decline  in  January 
2009, falling to 1.1%, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, from 1.6% in December 2008. 
While  no  detailed  breakdown  for  HICP  developments  in  January  is  available  as  yet,  the 
decline in headline inflation observed since the middle of 2008 primarily reflects the sharp 
falls in global commodity prices over this period, owing mainly to weak global demand.  
Looking  ahead,  lower  commodity  prices  and  the  prospect  of  weak  demand  confirm  our 
assessment  of  mid-January  that  inflationary  pressures  in  the  euro  area  are  diminishing. 
Owing mainly to base effects stemming from the past behaviour of energy prices, headline 
annual inflation rates are projected to decline further in the coming months, possibly reaching 
very low levels at mid-year. However, also owing to base effects stemming from past energy 
price developments, inflation rates are expected to increase again in the second half of the 
year. Accordingly, it is likely that HICP inflation rates will fluctuate sharply during 2009. Such 
short-term  volatility  is,  however,  not  relevant  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective.  Looking 
over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, annual HICP inflation is expected to be in line 
with  price  stability.  This  assessment  is  supported  by  available  indicators  of  inflation 
expectations for the medium term.  
Regarding  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  unexpected  further  declines  in 
commodity prices or a stronger than expected slowdown in the economy could put downward 
pressure on inflation, while upside risks to price stability could materialise, particularly if the 
recent fall in commodity prices were to reverse or if domestic price pressures turn out to be 
stronger than assumed. It is therefore crucial that price and wage-setters fully live up to their 
responsibilities.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest evidence confirms a continued deceleration in 
the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  in  the  euro  area,  supporting  the  view  that 
inflationary pressures are diminishing.  
In  analysing  monetary  developments  it  should  be  recognised  that  the  intensification  and 
broadening  of  the  financial  turmoil  since  September  2008  has  the  potential  to  affect  the 
evolution of monetary aggregates significantly. It has already had a substantial impact on the 
behaviour  of  market  participants,  as  indicated  by  recent  money  and  credit  data.  Both  the 
broad aggregate M3 and, in particular, the components of M3 that are most closely related to 
the ongoing financial tensions – such as holdings of money market funds – have shown high 
month-to-month volatility of late. Overall, looking to the extent possible through this volatility, 
the underlying pace of broad money expansion continues to decelerate gradually from the 
peak seen in early 2007. However, the intensification of financial tensions since September 
2008 is leading to significant substitution among the components of M3.  
Turning to the evolution of bank credit, the flow of MFI loans to the private sector moderated 
in the course of 2008, largely on account of weakness in loans to households, especially for 
house purchase. In December, however, outstanding MFI loans to non-financial corporations 
contracted for the first time since the onset of the financial turmoil, confirming the significant 
weakening of corporate credit at the end of the year after a long period of dynamic growth. At 
the  same  time,  the  substantial  reduction  in  key  ECB  interest  rates  since  October  2008 
appears to have been passed through to lower bank lending rates, thereby easing financing 
conditions  for  companies  and  households.  Moreover,  there  are  some  indications  that  the 
pace  of  tightening  of  bank  credit  standards  is  stabilising,  albeit  at  high  levels  by  historical 
standards.  Overall,  the  incoming  information  on  financing  conditions  requires  continuous 
close monitoring. 
To  sum  up,  as  anticipated  in  our  interest  rate  decision  of  15  January  2009,  the  latest 
economic  data  and  survey  information  confirm  that  the  euro  area  and  its  major  trading 
partners are undergoing a period of significant economic downturn, and that accordingly both 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2009
external and domestic inflationary pressures are diminishing. We continue to expect inflation 
rates in the euro area to be in line with price stability over the policy-relevant medium-term 
horizon, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. This assessment 
is supported by available indicators of inflation expectations for the medium term. It is also 
confirmed  by  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis, against the background of a further deceleration in monetary and credit 
growth  in  the  euro  area.  Fully  in  line  with  its  primary  objective,  the  Governing  Council  will 
continue  to  keep  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  in  accordance  with  its  definition  of 
price stability, that is inflation rates of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. This 
supports sustainable growth and employment  and contributes to financial stability. Overall, 
the level of uncertainty remains exceptionally high. Accordingly, we will continue to monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
Turning  to  fiscal  policy,  the  European  Commission  projects  in  its  January  2009  interim 
forecast  a  substantial  rise  in  the  average  euro area  government  budget  deficit,  to 4.0%  of 
GDP  this  year,  from  1.7%  in  2008.  This  rapid  deterioration  of  the  fiscal  position  is  broad-
based among euro area countries and is due to the economic downturn, additional revenue 
shortfalls and the fiscal stimulus measures adopted by  many governments. In 2009 seven 
euro  area  countries  are  currently  expected  by  the  Commission  to  exceed  the  3%  of  GDP 
reference value for the budget deficit. In addition, many governments have assumed large 
contingent  liabilities  in  connection  with  the  guarantees  provided  to  banks  and  will  need  to 
finance  the  capital  injections  in  support  of  the  financial  sector.  To  support  the  public’s 
confidence in the sustainability of public finances, it is therefore essential that governments 
return to a credible commitment to medium-term budgetary objectives as soon as possible.  
As  regards  structural  policies,  it  is  important  to  continue  on  the  long-term  reform  path 
foreseen by the Lisbon agenda. At the current juncture, it is essential to pursue economic 
policies in line with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, resisting 
any  protectionist  pressure.  Moreover,  product  and  services  market  reforms  should  foster 
competition and help to speed up effective restructuring. Labour market reforms should help 
to facilitate appropriate wage-setting, as well as labour mobility across sectors and regions. 
This  will  be  particularly  important  for  those  areas  and  sectors  hit  strongly  by  the  negative 
demand  shock.  In  several  countries,  it  is  also  crucial  to  take  measures  with  a  view  to 
addressing competitiveness losses accumulated over recent years.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 3
