Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Implementing SEPA – our expedition to a 
fully integrated euro retail payment market 
Keynote  speech  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the IEA & Marketforce’s 2nd Annual Conference “The Future of 
Cards and Payments”, London, 6 July 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure today to update you on where we stand in our expedition to a fully 
integrated  euro  retail  payment  market  –  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA).  A 
successful expedition calls for a good combination of exploratory spirit, a sense of orientation 
and  determination.  Sometimes  just  one  single  person  can  possess  this  combination  of 
qualities.  Take  Captain  James  Cook,  for  example:  not  far  from  our  venue,  in  front  of 
Admiralty Arch, you will find a statue in memory of this famous British explorer, navigator and 
cartographer, who died 230 years ago. 
Captain Cook undertook three major journeys; likewise, the SEPA challenge comprises three 
stages: the SEPA Credit Transfer (SCT) scheme, the SEPA Direct Debit (SDD) scheme and 
SEPA for cards. 
The  players  in  the  European  banking  industry  have  joined  forces  to  establish  SEPA  and 
successfully  reached  the  first  stage  of  this  demanding  but  very  promising  journey  –  the 
introduction of the SEPA Credit Transfer scheme. We cannot, of course, hide the fact that a 
lot of stakeholders – including the Eurosystem – would have appreciated a faster adoption of 
SEPA by both providers and customers. 
The adoption of the SCT scheme has started, but progress remained slow throughout 2008. 
However, recent figures give reason to hope that the dead calm is coming to an end and that 
a fresh breeze is ahead. The latest figures give a clear indication that SEPA has reached the 
tipping point: it is now being used for more than just cross-border payments. Therefore, there 
is  a  confident  hope  that  the  adoption  rate  might  accelerate  further  in  the  near  future, 
especially when we take into consideration the plans of the respective public authorities to 
adhere to the SCT scheme later this year. 
This momentum will be further accelerated by the introduction of the SDD scheme. Forward-
looking  and  European-thinking  banks  and  infrastructures  will  already  be  offering  SDD  by 
November 2009 while others have up to a year in which to sign up to the scheme. Thanks to 
the  reviewed  regulation  on  cross-border  payments,  banks  offering  legacy  direct  debits  in 
euro will definitely be introducing SDD by November 2010 at the latest. This will motivate a 
lot of companies to finally set sail and start implementing SEPA. 
The outcome of the third stage of the SEPA journey, SEPA for cards, is perhaps the most 
uncertain.  The  Eurosystem  continues  to  encourage  market  participants  to  introduce  a 
European  card  scheme.  Joint  research  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  De 
Nederlandsche Bank shows that the launch of a new European card scheme could provide 
the  impetus  for  solving  the  problem  of  interoperability  and  overcoming  the  costly 
fragmentation of the European card market. Consumers and merchants are likely to benefit 
most  from  SEPA  when  sufficient  competition  in  the  card  payment  market  alleviates  any 
potential  monopolistic  tendencies.  The  ECB  appreciates,  therefore,  the  different  initiatives 
that have a European card scheme as their destination and welcomes the travel preparations 
made by them. That said, we should not lose sight of our objective by starting even more 
initiatives.  Instead,  the  projects  that  have  already  taken  off  are  invited  to  get  down  to 
business  and  perhaps  combine  forces.  Now  is  the  time  to  come  up  with  concrete  travel 
plans, including defining and committing to milestones. 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 1
Perhaps  it  is  not  by  chance  that  the  British  Prime  Minister’s  Strategy  Unit  is  located  in 
Admiralty Arch, with the statue of Captain Cook in front of it. With everything that we hope to 
achieve for SEPA in the short and medium term, we must not lose sight of the broad SEPA 
strategy and our long-term objectives.  
The objectives of greater harmonisation and increased innovation 
In  the  past,  the  main  reasons  for  exploration  at  sea  were  political  as  well  as  commercial, 
such as the discovery of new trade routes. However, Captain Cook’s voyages in particular 
had  an  explicitly  scientific  purpose,  too.  The  aim  of  his  first  journey,  for  example,  was  to 
observe and record the transit of Venus across the Sun.  
SEPA is a project driven by business as well as politics and is also gaining more and more 
academic  attention.  A  research  conference  held  recently  at  the  ECB  found  that  a 
fundamental  relationship  exists  between  the  retail  payment  business  and  overall  banking 
performance.  There  is  academic  evidence  that,  in  countries  with  more  developed  retail 
payment markets, the banks perform better. This relationship is stronger in countries which 
have adopted a relatively high number of technologies for retail payment transactions. 
Starting  in  the  15th  century,  the  Age  of  Discovery  was  characterised  by  increased 
competition among explorers in order to be the first to discover the last remaining uncharted 
waters. A by-product of this was that innovations in sailing ship technologies, the creation of 
new maps and advances in astronomy were achieved. In the same way, competition is an 
important  contributor  to  innovation  and  efficiency  in  the  field  of  retail  payments,  too. 
According  to  academic  research,  consumers  in  a  very  competitive  retail  payment  market 
benefit from more choice, quicker execution of payments and greater efficiency. Competition 
among retail payment instruments fosters innovation and may also encourage retail payment 
providers to improve their services. As a result, banks also perform better in such a market. 
Furthermore, greater use of electronic retail payment instruments seems to stimulate banking 
business. At a time when banks are having to reconsider their business models in light of the 
current financial market developments, these are promising results and should even motivate 
us  to  strengthen  our  joint  efforts  to  achieve  a  real  Single  Euro  Payments  Area.  Retail 
payments could well prove to be the banks’ trade route out of the rough sea that they are 
currently having to navigate. Therefore, the SEPA objective of harmonisation is of sustained 
importance  and  the  European  Payments  Council  (EPC)  is  encouraged  to  proceed  with  its 
efforts in realising this goal. 
So  far  the  EPC  has  been  focusing  mainly  on  core  and  basic  payment  instruments.  This 
approach was necessary in order to establish a SEPA-wide framework within a reasonable 
amount of time. The final service offered should, of course, go beyond these basic products, 
since  customers  will  set  the  benchmark  at  the  level  of  service  of  the  legacy  instruments. 
However,  this  should  not  prevent  providers  and  users  from  making  a  thorough  analysis  of 
their business processes and adapting them to suit their new SEPA environment. In addition, 
the  EPC  should  also  pay  increased  attention  to  the  standardisation  of  the  customer-bank 
interface.  
The basic SEPA instruments that the European banking industry has delivered so far should 
provide the foundations on which to build a more innovative retail payment market. I expect 
more  innovative  products  based  on  the  core  SEPA  instruments,  such  as  e-payments  or 
m-payments,  to  emerge  onto  the  market  sooner  rather  than  later.  Flexible  and  innovative 
service providers are the most likely to succeed. Banks and infrastructures have to be open 
to new payment instruments in the electronic and mobile environment. Otherwise, as we can 
already  see  happening,  third  parties  will  step  in  and  fill  the  gap.  The  EPC  is  encouraged, 
therefore, to intensify its work on mobile and electronic payments, and banks are encouraged 
to adopt the solutions developed by the EPC. We must start preparing now for the future and 
think beyond the borders of our current payment behaviour. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2009
All  these  efforts  to  foster  harmonisation  and  innovation  will  contribute  to  reducing  the 
persistent  fragmentation  of  the  European  payment  market.  History  has  indicated  that  a 
tendency towards national retrenchment may increase in times of uncertainty and the recent 
crisis has indeed confirmed this. Currently the state of our financial integration shows some 
signs  of  segmentation  along  national  borders,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  interbank 
market.  
Thus, it is important not to forget that integrated financial markets can help financial stability. 
They offer their participants a more efficient environment than a market divided by national 
borders ever could. Integrated markets are more liquid and offer better opportunities for risk 
diversification,  thereby  reinforcing  the  system’s  capacity  to  absorb  shocks.  Therefore, 
financial integration is directly linked to our objective of improving market resilience and also 
contributes to financial stability in the long term. As cross-border financial risks are becoming 
more  and  more  important  in  Europe,  we  need  to  remain  firmly  committed  to  financial 
integration. For this, the further integration of the retail payment market is crucial. However, a 
persistent  debate  surrounds  this  integration  process:  who  is  the  navigator  on  our  SEPA 
journey?  
Barriers to self-regulation – regulatory needs 
Retail  payments  have  traditionally  been  off  the  radar  screen  of  most  of  the  central  banks, 
except from the perspective of pure oversight. Now, however, not only in Europe, but also in 
other regions, the crucial role of retail banking and payments in an efficient overall economy 
has  been  recognised.  Therefore,  central  banks  have  decided  to  strengthen  their  role  as  a 
catalyst for change and the fostering of integration and innovation in this field.  
I  have  persistently  emphasised  that  SEPA  continues  to  be  a  mainly  self-regulated  project. 
However,  we  must  not  underestimate  the  limitations  of  self-regulation  and  the  thin  line 
between cooperative and competitive space. There are elements which the market will not 
be able to accomplish on its own and which need more regulatory involvement. That is why 
the ECB has been increasingly involved as a moderator for the past few months in order to 
keep SEPA successfully on course. 
Take, for example, the discussion on the multilateral interchange fee for direct debits. After 
intensive discussions with market participants, the European Commission, together with the 
ECB, has provided clarity on this controversial issue. The transitional provisions published by 
the ECB and the European Commission in September 2008 have been integrated into the 
amended regulation on cross-border payments.  
Beyond  these  transitional  provisions,  banks  requested  additional  guidance  regarding  the 
long-term business model for SDD. Consequently, in March 2009 the European Commission 
and  the  ECB  published  a  joint  statement  providing  further  clarification.  In  particular,  it  has 
been  made  clear  that,  for  reasons  of  efficiency,  a  general  per  transaction  multilateral 
interchange fee for national and SEPA direct debit transactions does not seem justified, nor 
would it be compatible with EU antitrust rules.  
Another example of where self-regulation might not be the best solution is the question of the 
migration end-date. Although we have successfully started out on our journey to SEPA, we 
have  not  yet  determined  our  date  of  arrival.  The  Eurosystem  has  emphasised  that  an 
ambitious  and  yet  realistic  end-date  for  migration  to  SCT  and  SDD  is  necessary.  Recent 
experiences  with  cash  support  the  need  to  set  a  migration  end-date.  Despite  several 
attempts  to  make  dollar  coins  popular,  customer  acceptance  has  been  limited.  One  of  the 
major  reasons  given  is  that  the  1  dollar  bill  was  not  simultaneously  phased  out  with  the 
introduction  of  the  1  dollar  coin.  The  UK  has  been  successful  in  introducing  the  1  £  coin 
several years ago. When the first 12 European countries introduced euro cash each country 
defined a transitional period for the parallel use of the euro and the national currency, based 
on the maximum time frame set by the EU legislator.  
BIS Review 84/2009 
 3
A  common  migration  end-date  across  Europe  should,  however,  give  national  communities 
the  possibility  of  setting  earlier  dates  at  the  national  level.  Setting  an  end-date  for  SEPA 
migration would facilitate communication and provide more certainty for all stakeholders. The 
most  viable  option  for  determining  a  migration  end-date  is  through  regulation  by  public 
authorities,  for  instance  by  way  of  an  EU  regulation.  The  Eurosystem  appreciates  the  fact 
that the European Commission has launched a public consultation on this matter.  
Some people are of the opinion that, with the guidance given by the European Commission 
and the ECB on multilateral interchange fees for direct debits and the possible regulation of 
an end-date for SEPA migration, there is no room for self-regulation any more. Or, in other 
words, that there is no reason for the EPC to exist any more. I could not disagree more! The 
guidance  provided  on  the  multilateral  interchange  fees  for  direct  debits  and  the  possible 
setting of a migration end-date are necessary in order to allow the EPC’s self-regulation to 
function. In other words, without this well-targeted public intervention, the SEPA project could 
have come to a halt. Therefore, for the Eurosystem, it is not a case of either self-regulation or 
outside regulation; rather, both should exist in parallel.  
The question of governance 
Amid all our ambitions to foster a more integrated and innovative market, we must focus on 
the customer even more. Both policy-makers and the financial services industry should be 
focusing  on  the  customers’  needs  and  benefits.  After  all,  the  financial  industry  has  a 
legitimate interest in its products being used and accepted by its customers.  
In its Sixth Progress Report on SEPA in November 2008, the Eurosystem emphasised that 
the success of SEPA depends greatly on adequate governance of the project and stressed 
that such good governance arrangements should aim to involve different stakeholders and 
provide transparency.  
In more concrete terms, there is a difference between the governance of the EPC and the 
governance  of  the  overall  European  retail  payment  market.  Although  the  EPC  plays  an 
important – even crucial – role in the emergence of SEPA, it cannot be held accountable for 
the European retail payment market in general. 
Let  us  first  discuss  the  governance  of  the  EPC.  So  far  the  EPC  has  done  a  good  job,  by 
publishing  its  rulebooks  and  recently  also  providing  summaries  of  its  industry  discussions. 
However, more information could be provided on the EPC’s planning and how it deals with 
changes requested by stakeholders.  
Let me be clear: without a credible and decisive EPC, an integrated European retail payment 
market is hardly imaginable. Therefore, in my view, the EPC should continue to play a central 
role. As an executive body of payment service providers, it should define the common rules 
and standards for the European market. In such a way, and in line with our statements in our 
progress  reports,  the  EPC  should  continue  to  work  on  improving  its  own  governance 
arrangements.  The  EPC  has  the  power  to  involve  stakeholders  and  consult  them  on  its 
deliverables. The recently launched Cards Stakeholder Forum is a step in the right direction, 
even if the exact structure of the group warrants further discussion.  
There are lessons to be learned from what happens at the national level when attention is 
paid  to  the  needs  of  the  general  public.  The  governance  of  payment  systems  requires 
transparent processes. Major changes to payment schemes should be subject to transparent 
evaluation, weighing up the costs and benefits to the banking industry and to society as a 
whole.  
This  leads  me  directly  from  the  governance  of  the  EPC  to  the  governance  of  the  overall 
European retail payment market. To put it in the context of Captain Cook: we need a captain; 
and we need to make the tasks of this captain clear before the end of 2009. We can learn 
from the experience of the Payments Council in the UK. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2009
The governance of the European retail payment market also entails a more social, strategic 
and political dimension to retail payments, which, by definition, cannot be handled by a self-
regulating  body  of  banks  or  payment  service  providers  alone.  In  some  countries,  best 
practices have emerged in the past few years. In addition to the coordination on the “supply 
side”, which is the role that the EPC plays at the European level, national fora have emerged. 
These fora deal with the more social and political elements of the retail payment market, and 
we need to represent this to a certain extent at the European level. 
A  new  European  forum  could  promote  the  goals  of  SEPA  in  the  context  of  the  evolving 
landscape of the European retail payment market by: 
1. 
firstly, ensuring appropriate coordination and dialogue with national structures during 
the migration process; 
secondly,  promoting  innovative  solutions  in  line  with  the  objectives  of  the  Lisbon 
agenda; and  
finally,  being  transparent  as  regards  end-users  and  all  relevant  stakeholders  and 
involving them as market partners. 
2. 
3. 
The creation of a European forum does not, however, dilute the continued importance of the 
EPC, now or in the future. The European retail payment market will benefit considerably from 
a  strong  EPC  and  an  additional  European  forum  dealing  with  the  social,  strategic  and 
political aspects of the retail payment market. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, allow me to re-emphasise that the SEPA ship has left the harbour destined for 
a fully integrated market for euro retail payments. The compass is set for a full Single Euro 
Payments Area.  
The Eurosystem appreciates the efforts of those banks that are committed to launching SDD 
in November 2009 and we encourage all the others to follow suit as soon as possible. The 
projects for the introduction of an additional European card scheme are invited to increase 
their efforts and publish their concrete itineraries.  
Payment services have stood solid as a rock throughout the turbulence of the recent months 
and  it  has  been  widely  acknowledged  that  retail  payments  will  be  a  cornerstone  of  banks’ 
business in the years to come.  
Therefore,  it  is  even  more  important  that  our  journey  to  SEPA  will  succeed  –  despite  the 
periods of nearly stand still and turbulences. Competition, standardisation, innovation and the 
right level of regulation are the key factors contributing to a favourable outcome.  
BIS Review 84/2009 
 5
