Spencer Dale: Inflation targeting – learning the lessons from the financial 
crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Spencer  Dale,  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at the Society of Business Economists’ Annual Conference, London, 23 June 2009. 
I would like to thank Rohan Churm, Jens Larsen and Rob Wood for their considerable help in preparing these 
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. 
 We are in the midst of a deep recession.  
Unlike  recessions  of  the  late  twentieth  century,  this  twenty-first  century  version  is  not  the 
result of deliberate, but belated, attempts to slow the expansion of money spending in order 
to bring down inflation from very high levels. Inflation is close to the Government’s 2% target. 
This recession has at its heart a crisis in the banking system; a crisis that has strangled the 
supply of credit and undermined public confidence. For the first time in fifty years, the total 
amount of money spent in our economy during the first quarter of this year was lower than a 
year earlier. The era of “Great Stability” is over. 
The  Great  Stability  followed  hot  on  the  heels  of  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  targeting 
framework  for  monetary  policy.  Some  attributed  part  of  the  improvement  in  economic 
performance  to  better  policymaking.  The  abrupt  end  to  that  stability  has,  in  turn,  led  the 
inflation targeting framework to be questioned.  
Today I want to explain why, despite recent events, I believe that inflation targeting should 
remain a mainstay of macroeconomic policymaking in the UK. But we have to learn from the 
crisis,  and  I  will  discuss  my  views  on  the  way  in  which  the  policy  framework  needs  to  be 
strengthened. I will conclude with a brief review of our asset purchase programme and, in 
particular, respond to some of the comments made about the programme. 
Inflation targeting in action 
1.  
Over the past year, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has responded to the dramatic 
deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook  with  an  equally  dramatic  easing  in  monetary  policy. 
Bank Rate was cut by 4.5 percentage points in just six months and by 1.5 percentage points 
in November last year alone. That was the largest cut for 25 years and is twice the size of 
any reduction made by another G7 central bank in the past eighteen months. The MPC also 
voted  to  purchase  £125bn  of  assets  financed  by  the  issuance  of  central  bank  money  – 
equivalent to around 9% of annual UK GDP. 
The scale of the easing took many by surprise and some of the decisions may, at first blush, 
look  rather  courageous.  Those  of  you  who  remember  “Yes  Minister”  may  recall  that  Jim 
Hacker, the hapless minister, became very nervous whenever Sir Humphrey suggested his 
decision was “courageous”. Central bankers can have similar instincts. When faced with big 
decisions,  there  is  a  temptation  for  caution  to  prevail:  do  interest  rates  really  need  to  be 
moved by that much? Why not wait and see before resorting to the use of unconventional 
instruments? 
And  indeed  the  MPC  has  tended  to  move  rates  in  relatively  small,  sequential  steps  in  the 
past.  But  I  would  argue  that  this  is  because  for  much  of  the  period  since  the  MPC  was 
established the outlook for inflation evolved relatively gradually. That all changed following 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Since  the  autumn  of  last  year,  we  have  experienced  an 
unprecedented  sequence  of  events  that  has  caused  a  substantial  re-assessment  of  the 
economic outlook and of the stance of policy necessary to keep inflation on track to meet the 
target. As the economy slowed sharply and inflation threatened to fall substantially below the 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 1
target, the Committee responded with unprecedented actions that were previously confined 
largely to the realms of theory.  
I believe that the operation of monetary policy during this period demonstrates the strength of 
the  inflation  targeting  framework  in  action.  The  clear  numerical  target,  combined  with  a 
framework of transparency and accountability, impose discipline on the MPC. They ensure 
that we take the decisions necessary to bring inflation back to target, however “courageous” 
those decisions might seem.  
I  do  not  think  it  is  coincidence  that  arguably  the  two  most  significant  monetary  policy 
decisions taken over the past year – the decision to reduce Bank Rate by 1.5 percentage 
points  in  November  and  the  announcement  in  February  that  the  Committee  had  sought 
approval  to  use  the  Asset  Purchase  Facility  to  conduct  large  scale  asset  purchases  – 
occurred in months when the  Inflation Report  was published. The quarterly forecast round 
provides an opportunity for the Committee to reassess thoroughly its view of the economic 
outlook.  This  view  is  then  explained  and  communicated  via  the  Inflation  Report  and  in 
particular  through  the  projections  for  GDP  growth  and  inflation  contained  in  the  Report.  In 
both  November  and  February,  the  judgement  of  the  Committee  was  that,  without  further 
substantial easing in monetary policy, there was a significant risk of a large and persistent 
undershoot of the inflation target. Given the transparency of these judgements and the clarity 
of the target, it would have been courageous not to have taken the decisions we did. 
The  inflation  target  is  symmetric.  Likewise,  the  discipline  it  imposes  on  the  MPC  is 
symmetric. The inflation target has been instrumental in ensuring that monetary policy has 
responded  boldly  and  decisively  to  the  events  that  have  unfolded  since  the  autumn.  And, 
when the time comes, the clarity and transparency of the inflation targeting framework will 
ensure  that  the  Committee  takes  the  right  decisions  on  the  way  back  up,  however 
courageous or unpopular those decisions might appear.  
The public commitment that the Committee will do whatever it takes to hit the inflation target 
is central to the conduct of monetary policy. It underpins the credibility of the inflation target. 
This commitment is more important than ever in the current environment of unprecedented 
shocks and unconventional policy measures.  
Recent events have raised the question of whether the Committee could provide even more 
information about its policy strategy by committing to keep interest rates low for a particular 
period of time or until the economic outlook evolves in some specified way. 
The  difficulty  is  in  designing  such  a  commitment  that  would  be  both  useful  and  that  the 
Committee  would  be  willing  to  adhere  to.  A  commitment  to  keep  interest  rates  low  for  a 
certain period of time runs the risk of being overtaken by events. The past eighteen months 
has  demonstrated  only  too  well  how  rapidly  the  state  of  the  economy  can  change.  I  truly 
have little idea as to how long Bank Rate will need to be maintained at its current low level in 
order to meet the inflation target. As such, it would make little sense to commit to a rule that 
suggested I did!  
The  potential  benefit  of  a  state  contingent  commitment  –  in  which  the  MPC  commits  to 
maintaining  Bank  Rate  at  its  current  level  until  the  economic  outlook  has  evolved  in  a 
particular way – is that it may aid the public’s understanding of how the Committee is likely to 
react to economic developments. It may convey information about our reaction function. But 
such  a  commitment  is  not  easy  to  design.  If  too  general,  it  will  not  add  anything  to  our 
existing – and over-riding – commitment to do whatever it takes to hit the inflation target. If 
too precise, it will not capture the myriad of factors that affect the outlook for inflation. The 
array of judgements underlying the Committee’s policy decisions are not easily summarised 
by reference to one or two economic variables.  
The Committee’s preferred approach is to describe its assessment of the outlook for output 
and inflation, and allow the public and markets to make their own assessment of the likely 
future  path  of  interest  rates.  In  the  most  recent  Inflation  Report  published  in  May,  the 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2009
Committee  judged  it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  CPI  inflation  would  be  below  the  2% 
inflation target in two or three years time if interest rates followed a path implied by market 
yields  and  the  stock  of  purchased  assets  increased  to  £125bn.  Market  participants 
subsequently revised down their view about the pace at which Bank Rate was likely to rise.  
Strengthening the policy framework  
2.  
I remain firmly convinced that an inflation targeting framework should continue to be central 
to the design of macroeconomic policy in the UK. The benefits of low and stable inflation are 
clear  and  well  understood.  And,  as  I  have  argued,  the  combination  of  a  clear  quantitative 
target  and  an  open  and  transparent  policy  regime  have  been  instrumental  in  shaping  the 
response of monetary policy to the current crisis and will continue to be so.  
But  recent  events  must  serve  as  a  wake  up  call  for  policymakers.  The  spectacle  of  bank 
runs, asset price falls and a sharp unwinding of economic imbalances testifies that inflation 
targeting  as  currently  operated  is  not  sufficient.  How  should  the  macroeconomic  policy 
framework in the UK be strengthened to reduce the likelihood of such events reoccurring?  
One  common  suggestion  is  that  the  conduct  of  policy  under  inflation  targeting  should  be 
modified to take greater account of movements in asset prices or economic imbalances that 
threaten  the  attainment  of  the  inflation  target,  even  if  those  risks  may  not  materialise  for 
several  years.  In  principle,  the  remit  given  to  the  MPC  provides  the  latitude  for  policy  to 
respond to such medium-term risks. In particular, the Committee’s objective is timeless – it is 
tasked  with  keeping  inflation  close  to  target  “at  all  times”  in  the  future.  Therefore,  if  the 
Committee judged that intentionally undershooting the inflation target in the near term would 
help to reduce the risk of a much larger deviation from target in the future, it has the scope to 
follow such a policy.  
But a policy of “leaning against the wind” is difficult to implement in practice.  
In part this reflects the difficulty of identifying changes in asset prices and economic flows 
which are unsustainable. At which point, for example, did the run up in UK house prices over 
the past 10 years cease to be warranted by a change in economic fundamentals, such as the 
rise in the number of households and the move to a low and stable inflation environment? 
Likewise,  at  which  point  did  it  become  clear  that  sub-prime  lending  had  ceased  to  be  a 
beneficial  financial  innovation  with  the  scope  to  allow  people  who  had  not  previously  had 
access  to  credit  the  chance  to  own  their  own  home  and  had  instead  become  a  source  of 
international financial instability?  
These  are  difficult  judgements.  They  involve  second  guessing  outcomes  generated  by 
financial and economic markets. Policymakers will inevitably sometimes get the assessment 
wrong,  with  costly  repercussions.  But  these  judgements  cannot  be  ducked.  Monetary 
policymakers have to form views about a range of uncertain and ill-defined issues, such as 
the level of potential supply and the credibility of policy. The sustainability of asset prices and 
economic  imbalances  are  no  different.  Ultimately,  a  policy  has  to  be  set  even  if  explicit 
judgements are not formed.  
But  policymakers  also  need  better  tools  to  back  up  these  judgements  with  actions.  Short-
term  interest  rates  are  a  blunt  instrument  best  deployed  maintaining  a  broad  balance 
between nominal demand and supply. They are not well suited to the task of managing asset 
price bubbles and economic imbalances. They may be wholly ineffective in addressing some 
types  of  imbalances,  particularly  those  with  an  international  dimension.  And,  even  for 
domestic imbalances, short-term interest rates would probably need to be held substantially 
higher  for  a  persistent  period  in  order  to  suppress  rapid  rises  in  asset  prices  or  growing 
imbalances. Such policy actions could generate significant economic costs.  
The practical difficulty of implementing a policy of “leaning against the wind”, where the main 
policy  instrument  is  short-term  interest  rates,  should  not  be  underestimated.  If,  as 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 3
policymakers, we were successful in preventing a bubble from inflating, it might appear as if 
we were responding to phantom concerns. The bubble or imbalance would be nowhere to be 
seen, but interest rates would be higher, inflation would undershoot the inflation target and 
we  would  appear  to  have  inflicted  unnecessary  economic  hardship.  That  could  undermine 
public faith and support in both the inflation target and the MPC. 
For me, the single most important lesson from the financial crisis is the need to expand the 
range  of  instruments  available  to  policymakers.  The  inflation  targeting  framework  provides 
the scope to respond to asset price bubbles and to imbalances that threaten future economic 
stability. But short-term interest rates are not well suited to managing such risks.  
The precise design of such new instruments is now the focus of much work and analysis. It is 
likely that a range of instruments and initiatives will be required. These may extend beyond 
new  regulatory  instruments  and  should  embrace  the  need  for  greater  international  policy 
coordination.  The  ideal  would  be  policy  instruments  and  processes  which  are  effective  in 
preventing  the  build  up  of  asset  price  bubbles  and  economic  imbalances  and  efficient  in 
minimising  the  associated  costs  to  the  real  economy.  This  would  allow  short-term  interest 
rates to continue to be the primary tool for hitting the inflation target in the short-to-medium 
term, supported by additional instruments which are used to manage emerging imbalances 
which may pose substantial risks to economic stability further out.  
Strengthening the policy framework in this way should lead to greater economic and financial 
stability.  But  we  should  not  be  lulled  into  a  false  sense  that  it  will  solve  all  our  problems. 
Operating such a framework will continue to require finely balanced judgements and difficult 
decisions. And no policy toolkit can anticipate all future changes to the structure of markets 
and the economy, or to the shocks hitting them. The process of increasing the robustness of 
the macroeconomic policy framework should be seen as continuous, not a one-off response 
to the current crisis. 
A response to some criticisms of the asset purchase programme 
3.  
Strengthening the policy framework in this way should help to reduce the likelihood of future 
crises.  I  thought  I  would  end  today  with  a  few  words  on  the  progress  we  are  making  in 
managing the current crisis and, in particular, by addressing some of the concerns that have 
been raised about the asset purchase programme. 
As you know, the objective of the asset purchase programme is to increase the growth of 
nominal spending to a rate consistent with meeting the inflation target. There are a number of 
channels through which the asset purchases should help to stimulate demand. Purchases of 
gilts  are  likely  to  cause  investors  to  reallocate  their  portfolios  into  other  assets,  including 
corporate bonds and equities. This increase in demand for corporate assets should help to 
reduce  borrowing  costs  faced  by  firms.  Moreover,  expansion  in  the  supply  of  money  and 
liquidity  may  in  itself  encourage  greater  levels  of  lending  and  borrowing.  Not  least,  bank 
deposits  are  likely  to  increase  as  a  result  of  our  asset  purchases,  providing  banks  with  a 
ready  source  of  funding.  Purchases  of  private  sector  debt  should  aid  the  functioning  of 
corporate credit markets and so improve the availability of credit via these markets. And the 
programme  of  asset  purchases  should  help  to  demonstrate  the  Committee’s  ability  and 
willingness  to  do  whatever  it  takes  to  hit  the  inflation  target  and  so  help  to  ensure  that 
inflation expectations remained firmly anchored.  
The  Bank  has  so  far  purchased  a  little  over  £96bn  of  assets  and  is  on  track  to  have 
purchased £125bn of assets by the end of July. It is still early days in terms of judging the 
ultimate  success  of  the  programme  in  stimulating  nominal  spending,  but  initial  indications 
remain  encouraging.  The  growth  rate  of  underlying  broad  money  has  picked  up  in  recent 
months. Gilt yields fell sharply following the announcement of the asset purchase programme 
and our initial purchases of gilts. Yields have subsequently drifted back up, but this reflects a 
range of other factors and it is likely that yields are lower than they would otherwise have 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2009
been. Borrowing costs within the commercial paper market appear to have fallen as a result 
of  our  operations.  And  in  the  corporate  bond  market,  spreads  have  narrowed  sharply  in 
recent months and issuance levels have been at record highs. However, this has coincided 
with a global rally in corporate bond markets and so it is difficult to isolate the incremental 
impact of our purchases.  
Despite these encouraging signs, there have been some questions raised about the design 
and effectiveness of our operations, and I thought I would take this opportunity to address 
three particular criticisms that have been levelled against the asset purchase programme. 
The first is that the asset purchases have been too heavily skewed towards gilts and that we 
should have purchased a greater proportion of private sector debt. The aim of our purchases 
of corporate debt is to improve the functioning of corporate credit markets. This is in line with 
the  remit  specified  by  the  Chancellor  when  establishing  the  Asset  Purchase  Facility.  It  is 
important  not  to  judge  the  economic  significance  of  these  purchases  by  their  scale.  Even 
relatively small purchases of debt, if appropriately targeted, can improve liquidity and lower 
the cost of finance to businesses. Indeed, the very knowledge that the Bank stands ready to 
purchase assets may be as beneficial as the actual purchases. And over a period of time, as 
market  functioning  improves,  the  quantity  of  private  sector  assets  held  by  the  Asset 
Purchase  Facility  may  well  decline  as  assets  mature  and  are  rolled  over  into  the  private 
market. This should be seen as a sign of success not of dwindling support.  
The  Bank  continues  to  review  actively  the  case  for  extending  its  operations  into  other 
corporate  credit  markets,  and  recently  announced  its  intention  to  extend  its  purchases  to 
include  commercial  paper  secured  on  loans  for  working  capital.  But  given  the  relatively 
modest size of corporate credit markets in the UK, to increase significantly the scale of our 
corporate debt purchases would involve changing the nature of our operations. Rather than 
improve their functioning, large scale asset purchases would risk crowding out private debt 
markets: substituting for markets rather than supporting them. That is not consistent with the 
aims  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Facility  and  could  detract  from  the  long-term  efficiency  of  the 
economy.  
A  second  criticism  that  is  sometimes  made  against  the  asset  purchase  programme  is  that 
some of the gilts we have purchased have been from foreign investors and this may limit the 
effectiveness  of  the  purchases.  This  argument  is  based  on  the  supposition  that  overseas 
investors may be more likely to reallocate their portfolios into foreign currency assets, rather 
than into alternative sterling assets, such as corporate bonds or UK equities. But even if that 
is  the  case,  it  does  not  mean  the  asset  purchases  will  not  have  any  economic  benefit. 
Rather, more of the effect will come through a lower exchange rate than through a change in 
the relative price of domestic assets. As with interest rate changes, the exchange rate is a 
key  channel  through  which  the  monetary  easing  may  be  transmitted.  Moreover,  it  is 
important  to  remember  that  the  additional  sterling  liquidity  created  by  the  original  asset 
purchase still exists. Someone is holding additional sterling deposits and it is possible that 
these may flow back into sterling assets as investors reallocate their portfolios.  
The final criticism that I want to address is that the MPC needs to articulate more clearly its 
exit  strategy.  This  brings  us  back  to  where  we  started,  and  the  importance  of  the  inflation 
target. It was the outlook for inflation relative to target that dictated the speed and magnitude 
of the dramatic loosening in monetary policy. And likewise, it will be the outlook for inflation 
relative  to  target  that  will  determine  the  rate  at  which  the  current  exceptional  degree  of 
monetary stimulus is withdrawn as economic prospects recover. When the time comes, the 
Committee  can  tighten  policy  both  by  raising  Bank  Rate  and  by  selling  assets.  A  natural 
corollary  of  both  actions  is  that  yields  will  rise  –  that  is  what  happens  when  policy  is 
tightened. The most difficult issue concerning the exit strategy will be deciding the timing at 
which policy should begin to be tightened. Although that decision will be highly uncertain and 
subject to intense scrutiny, the strategy guiding the decision – and the primacy of the inflation 
target within that strategy – should be clear.  
BIS Review 86/2009 
 5
Conclusion 
4.  
The inflation target remains a vital pillar of the macroeconomic policy framework and should 
continue  to  provide  the  focus  for  monetary  policy.  But  there  are  lessons  that  need  to  be 
learnt from this financial crisis. Good policy frameworks should provide policymakers with the 
right  incentives  to  take difficult  decisions  and  the  right  tools  to  implement  those  decisions. 
Inflation targeting goes a long way: the clarity of the objective and the transparency of the 
regime act as an important discipline on the MPC and short-term interest rates are, for the 
most part, effective in maintaining a broad balance between nominal demand and supply and 
so  generating  low  and  stable  inflation.  But  they  are  not  well  suited  to  nipping  incipient 
bubbles  in  the  bud  and  restricting  burgeoning  imbalances.  Policymakers  need  to  make 
difficult  judgements  about  asset  prices  and  imbalances  but  they  also  need  effective  and 
efficient tools to enact those judgements.  
6 
 BIS Review 86/2009
