Caleb M Fundanga: Strengthening Zambia’s financial and private health 
sector 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Second Private 
Health Sector Trade Fair, Lusaka, 5 June 2009. 
 The Chairperson, Banking on Health; 
Representatives from the Medical Council of Zambia; 
Representatives from The General Nursing Council; 
Representatives from the Zambia Medical Association; 
Members of the Zambia Union of Nurses Organisation; 
Members of the Zambia Alliance of Private Health Providers; 
Representatives from the Pharmaceuticals Society of Zambia; 
Distinguished invited guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 It is with great joy and gratitude that I stand to address you at this important Second Private 
Health  Sector  Trade  Fair.  This  occasion  brings  together  many  of  our  esteemed  medical 
providers from the private sector and other important stakeholders in the delivery of medical 
services  in  Zambia  like  financial  institutions,  pharmaceutical  distributors,  and  other 
commercial suppliers who support the medical industry. 
The Bank of Zambia as regulator of the financial system is committed to strengthening the 
financial sector and position it so that it is relevant to the country development agenda by 
providing finance to sectors like health and qualified private health providers. I believe this 
will lead to the improved quality of medical services provision in Zambia and contribute to the 
country’s economic growth. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia, recognizes the important role that 
the  private  sector  continues  to  play  in  providing  health  services  to  much  of  Zambia’s 
population.  These  service  providers,  whether  they  are  doctors,  nurses,  midwives,  clinical 
officers, dentists, or pharmacists offer their clients increased choices. 
More choices in health provision allow people to find the best care for their own particular 
circumstance and needs. The expanded choices and reach provided by the private sector is 
a wonderful complement to the existing public health services. 
Furthermore,  the  recent  decision  by  the  Zambian  Government  to  designate  Health  and 
Education  as  economic  sectors  will  undoubtedly,  assist  all  investors  in  the  health  and 
education  sectors.  This  entails  that  investors  in  these  sectors  can  now  enjoy  the  various 
incentives previously available only to investments in the real sector. 
Chairperson, In order for the private health sector to truly flourish in Zambia, it is vital that the 
government  provides  an  enabling  environment  that  will  ensure  that  private  providers  of 
health  services  can  obtain  the  financing  they  need  to  expand  and  improve  their  medical 
practices.  Most  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprise  firms  in  Africa,  including  health 
businesses, only receive 5 percent of their financing through banks, while larger firms get 22 
percent  of  their  financing  needs  from  banks.  In  Zambia,  a  recent  survey  on  financial 
inclusiveness  indicated  that  only  about  one  third  of  the  population  is  financially  served  by 
banks  and  non  bank  financial  institutions.  Barriers  to  access  to  credits  identified  included; 
high interest rates, caps on loans and excessive collateral requirements. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 1
The  importance  of  increasing  access  of  banking  services  to  a  larger  proportion  of  our 
population  cannot  be  overemphasized.  Financial  services  are  a  critical  tool  to  help  people 
step  onto  the  economic  growth  ladder  and  create  a  brighter  future  by  tapping  their  own 
creativity  in  creating  jobs  and  incomes.  It  can  also  be  instrumental  for  broader  human 
development,  by  letting  clients  invest  in  themselves  and  seek  protection  from  shocks  and 
bad fortune. 
It is however, gratifying to note that following the survey, commercial banks and other non-
bank financial institutions in Zambia have increasingly become receptive to lending to small 
and medium-sized enterprises and have in this regard established departments dedicated to 
small and medium enterprise lending and introduced financial products specifically designed 
to meet the financing needs of these businesses. In working with Banking on Health, banks 
have  shown  interest  in  learning  about  the  private  health  sector,  a  sector  whose  business 
characteristics were largely unknown to banks. However, banks can still misunderstand the 
risks, overestimate the costs, and underestimate the potential returns of lending to sectors, 
such as the health sector. 
In addition to the structural barriers in the financial sector that limit access to finance, many 
private  health  care  providers  have  limited  financial  and  business-management  skills  and 
often struggle to prepare a bankable loan applications or business proposals. It is difficult for 
commercial  banks  to  assess  the  credit  risk  of  a  loan  without  the  financial  statements  and 
business plans to support the loan application. 
Chairperson,  I  am  happy  to  state  that  “Banking  on  Health”,  with  support  from  the  U.S. 
Government,  has  worked  to  address  some  of  the  barriers  to  credit  by  providing  market 
research  information  on  the  private  medical  sector  to  commercial  banks  and  microfinance 
institutions so that they can understand the business characteristics of the sector. 
The  financial  management  training  that  Banking  on  Health  provides  to  health  businesses 
also lowers the risk of lending to these borrowers. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me end by pointing out that the challenges arising from the global 
financial and economic crisis are huge but surmountable. Major economies of the world are 
putting in place various stimulus packages, which are expected to take the world economy 
out  of  the  crisis.  Without  doubt,  these  measures  will  benefit  emerging  and  developing 
economies as well, provided that we remain  committed to pursuing strong socio-economic 
policies. Although the global financial crisis has negatively affected the Zambian economy in 
many respects and presents serious challenges to maintaining the health of the economy, 
macroeconomic stability has been maintained. 
The Bank of Zambia has continued to monitor the global developments and take appropriate 
measures  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  avoid  systemic  risk.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  despite  the  crisis,  there  still  remains  investment  confidence  in  the 
Zambian  economy  and  one  example  of  this  is  the  number  of  new  commercial  banks  that 
have commenced operations in Zambia in the last 12 months. 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  is  also  committed  to  ensuring  the  availability  of  finance  to  viable 
businesses including qualified health businesses. Doing so will help create a foundation for 
greater investment in the health of the nation. We appreciate the partnership and initiatives 
such as the “Banking on Health” in extending health services in Zambia and look forward to 
greater investment in the health sector of Zambia. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2009
