 Mario Draghi: The Turner Review rollout  
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board  (previously  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)),  at  the  Turner  Review 
Conference, Financial Services Authority (FSA), London, 27 March 2009.  
 The past eighteen months of crisis have been a learning experience for all of us. Many had 
expressed forebodings about the build-up of risks and leverage ahead of the crisis – and I 
would count both the FSF, BIS and the FSA in that number – but the weaknesses of risk 
management  at  major  banks  were  so  serious  and  pervasive  as  to  defy  even  the  more 
pessimists. Authorities have had to re-examine their fundamental assumptions about how the 
financial system works, and draw conclusions for how to reshape regulation. Lord Turner’s 
review does an excellent job at both of these tasks.  
As we seek solutions to these immediate challenges, from a longer-term perspective we are 
revising our ideas about what regulation can do, what it cannot do, and what it needs to do. 
Some  say  that  we  should  avoid  detailing  how  we  will  move  to  a  more  transparent,  better 
capitalised, less  leveraged  system  in  the  future  and  that  to  do  so  now  would  increase  the 
burdens and uncertainties faced by banks in the present. I, and I think Lord Turner as well, 
would reject this view. To the contrary, as policymakers, while being fully aware about the 
time scale of implementation of these measures, we need to be as clear as possible right 
now about how we see the system evolving as we emerge from this crisis, if we are to rebuild 
confidence in the system among financial institutions, investors and the public at large.  
Lord Turner’s review lays out a sound, well argued case for revising our approach to financial 
regulation and placing such revision in an international context. Many of these changes are 
fully in line with discussions and recommendations that have taken place in the FSF. This 
shouldn’t come as a surprise, since Lord Turner and Callum McCarthy before him, and more 
broadly the whole of the FSA have made important contributions to these recommendations. 
I would especially emphasise:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I  also  applaud  Lord  Turner’s  proposals  for  enhancing  macroprudential  analysis  –  that  is, 
assessing the implications of macroeconomic trends for financial stability, the ability of the 
financial  system  to  absorb  or  propagate  macroeconomic  shocks,  and  the  interlinkages 
among financial firms. Indeed, it is precisely in this area that we have the most to learn from 
the  experience  of  this  crisis.  We  need  to  think  hard  and  carefully  about  how  to  put  these 
lessons into practice in formulating policies that incorporate financial stability concerns into 
traditional macroeconomic policy levers as well as regulatory rules and approaches.  
Many of these areas for action have an important international dimension. As we implement 
these new approaches, it is critical to maintain a level playing field internationally as far as 
possible. We must avoid a situation where national authorities are reluctant to impose tighter 
regulation  for  fear  that  this  gives  an  advantage  to  banks  in  other  countries.  We  need 
internationally consistent rules and standards to support sound international financial activity 
and  mechanisms  for  supervisors  to  share  information  and  coordinate  supervision  of  large 
cross-border  institutions.  And  we  must  better  understand  the  systemic  risks  that  never 
respect national borders, as we have repeatedly seen during the past 18 months.  
improving the quantity and quality of bank capital, especially for the trading book;  
improved regulation and risk management of liquidity risk;  
a risk-based approach to compensation in the financial industry;  
counter-cyclical capital buffers; and  
incorporating cyclical factors in published accounts. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 1
This means that we need more effective international cooperation. The FSF contributes to 
this cooperation by regularly bringing together senior officials responsible for setting financial 
policy at the national level along with international financial institutions and standard setters. 
Our dialogue facilitates a common diagnosis of problems, a better understanding of how key 
policy  responsibilities  and  fields  of  operation  interact,  and  a  more  coherent  and  consistent 
approach to maintaining a stable and efficient financial system.  
FSF members share a determination to address the systemic problems that have been at the 
heart of the crisis and have engaged in an active collaborative effort over the past year and a 
half  to  develop  and  implement  measures  to  strengthen  the  underpinnings  of  the  financial 
system.  A  year  ago  we  published  our  Report  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional 
Resilience,  which  set  out  a  plan  of  action  for  strengthening  the  system  in  such  areas  as 
prudential  regulation,  transparency,  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies,  and  international 
cooperation  in  the  supervision  of  large  complex  groups.  We  are  also  about  to  issue 
recommendations and principles in important additional areas:  
• 
On  procyclicality,  the  FSF  recommends  actions  that  will  dampen  procyclicality  in 
bank capital, establish more forward-looking loan loss provisions, and mitigate the 
adverse interaction between the build-up of leverage, maturity mismatching and fair 
value accounting;  
The FSF has also endorsed Principles for Sound Compensation Practices that will 
better align compensation arrangements in financial firms with prudent risk taking, 
and make these arrangement subject to supervisory oversight;  
Finally,  we  have  endorsed  Principles  for  Cross-border  Cooperation  on  Crisis 
Management  that  commit  our  members  to  cooperate  in  preparing  for  and  dealing 
with financial crises.  
  A significant amount of this work delivers on the G20 Action Plan and will be published as 
part of the London Summit in the next few days.  
To be effective and retain legitimacy, the FSF’s international coordination activities need to 
involve the leading advanced and emerging economies. For this reason, we have recently 
announced the expansion of our national membership to encompass all of the G20 countries, 
as well as Spain and the European Commission. The expansion of the FSF’s membership 
will enhance the FSF’s ability to contribute to ongoing reforms of the international financial 
system. Countries that are members of the FSF commit to co-operate in promoting financial 
stability, maintain the openness of the financial sector, endorse and implement international 
financial standards and to undergo periodic peer reviews of their financial, supervisory and 
regulatory arrangements.  
Looking  forward,  the  FSF  needs  to  remain  engaged  with  the  most  important  issues  and 
questions that have been raised by the present crisis. For example, as the Turner Review 
recognises,  regulation  needs  to  focus  on  the  economic  substance  of  financial  activities, 
rather  than  the  legal  form  assumed  by  institutions.  We  have  learned  that  the  activities  of 
large,  highly  leveraged  institutions  of  all  kinds  have  significant  systemic  impacts  and 
potentially pose critical systemic risks. For this reason, the FSF has initiated work to assess 
the proper perimeter of regulation – to evaluate which institutions, markets, instruments and 
activities need to be supervised directly with an eye to their systemic relevance, regardless of 
their legal form, and what regulatory tools are appropriate.  
Finally,  as  authorities  we  need  to  improve  our  ability  to  recognise,  assess  and  respond 
effectively to mitigate nascent systemic risks at the global level. This is by no means an easy 
task – as we have learned from the experience of the present crisis, many critical risks are 
hidden on and off the balance sheets of large, complex institutions, or in the exposures to 
complex financial instruments, or in the idiosyncratic characteristics of national markets. No 
single  authority  can  realistically  obtain  a  complete  picture.  Yet,  looking  back  on  what  was 
said by the FSF, the FSA and others in the leadup to the crisis, it is clear that there was a 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 growing unease with the overall degree of risk-taking, financial institutions’ management of 
the  risks  of  complex  credit  products,  and  with  the  expectation  of  many  institutions  and 
markets  that  high,  stable  levels  of  market  and  funding  liquidity  would  continue  indefinitely. 
What  the  official  sector  lacked  previously  was  the  willingness  to  dig  deeper  into  these 
concerns, develop timely strategies to mitigate these risks, and track the effectiveness of our 
responses over time.  
For this reason, it is critical that we better pool the analysis and assessments of supervisors 
and  central  bankers  across  the  major  economies  and  financial  centres  and  that  of  the 
international financial institutions that undertake surveillance of the global financial system. 
The FSF and the IMF have begun a process to do just this. Second, we need to be more 
proactive and persistent in how we respond to the risks that we identify. While we will never 
be  able  to  precisely  anticipate  the  nature  and  timing  of  the  next  financial  crisis,  there  is  a 
great  deal  we  can  do  to  ensure  the  follow  up  on  the  actions  of  policy-makers  to  mitigate 
macrofinancial risks before they become threats to systemic stability, and thereby to ensure 
that future episodes of financial turbulence remain contained.  
So let me conclude by once again commending Lord Turner for his timely and well thought 
report. I hope it will spur all of us, at both the national and international levels, to rethink how 
and why we regulate, and to make the tough decisions that will be necessary if our financial 
systems are to resume their primary function in supporting stable economic growth. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 3
