Panayotis Thomopoulos: The role of central banks as financial 
supervisors 
Speech  by  Mr  Panayotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at    The 
Economist  Conferences  8th  Banking  Forum:  Banking  and  the  Economy  in  turbulent  times, 
Athens, 26 January 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to thank the Economist Conferences and their representatives for Greece and 
Cyprus for inviting me to address this conference and its distinguished participants.  
Representing the authority responsible for the supervision of Greek credit institutions, I am 
confident  to  state  that  the  term  “crisis”  is  not  the  suitable  one  to  describe  the  current 
condition of the Greek banking system. There are problems more of a liquidity nature after 
the drying up of the London interbank market for small to medium sized banks. As well as 
there is need to guarantee the fluidity of the reduced liquidity to the real economy, which are 
both  addressed  thanks  to  the  ECB  funding  and  the  state’s  €28  billion  banking  support 
package.  
On the other hand, due to the fact that Greece was not lured by the ephemeral fashion of 
detaching  the  supervisory  functions  from  the  Central  Bank  contributed  to  making  more 
efficient both planks of the Bank of Greece’s functions and especially the supervisory role, for 
which the Bank has complete responsibility.  
Recently, the new Governor Mr George Provopoulos, in order to further strengthen the Bank 
of Greece’s role in this very sensitive but key area, established a new department dedicated 
to the monitoring of financial stability.  
Accordingly, under one roof there are now six different departments and, hence, there is a 
cross  fertilisation  of  ideas,  exchange  of  information  and  a  decision  making  process 
encapsulating  the  knowledge,  the  analysis  and  points  of  view  of  these  departments:  the 
Economic Research Department, the Supervision of Credit and Related Financial Institutions 
Department, the Government Financial Operations and Accounts Department, the Payment 
Systems  Department,  the  Financial  Operations  Department,  and  the  Financial  Stability 
Department. The end result is a synthesis reached by the  Banking and Credit Committee, 
chaired by the Governor, with members the two deputy Governors and six directors. 
After  the  presentation  of  the  possible  effects  of  the  international  financial  turmoil  on  the 
Greek banking system and the challenges in implementing the aforementioned Greek state 
plan, I will make a short reference to what the international trends are with regard to possible 
supervisory reforms.  
The first question is: 
How the current financial turmoil may affect the Greek banking system and the real 
economy. 
I would like to remind you that fifteen years ago the Greek banking system was characterised 
by an oligopolistic nature, with one bank acting as a piper calling the tune, controlling almost 
60%  of  the  system,  while  there  were  many  administrative  shackles  and  high  obligatory 
reserves to the tune of 12% restricting banks’ activities and limiting credit availability. In two 
words,  it  was  an  underdeveloped  bureaucratic  financial  system  and  supervision  was 
moulded  accordingly.  The  liberalisation  of  the  financial  system  completed  after  Greece’s 
entry into the euro area, and the merging of many small banks into bigger units made the 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 1
banking system very competitive. I am dismayed when I hear about “banks’ cartel” as if the 
proponents of this thesis don’t see individual bank’s aggressiveness to gain market shares 
and the significant reallocation of the pie. During the last 10 years, supervision by the Bank 
of Greece was transformed and played a leading role in promoting a sound and competitive 
banking  system,  which  was  thus  capable  of  extending  its  activities  in  S.E.  Europe.  Three 
years ago, the Bank of Greece asked individual banks to assess their future developments in 
view of the likely end of the expansionary phase of the economic cycle and their need to be 
prepared to endure lean years. 
Today the soundness of the Greek banking system is not questioned; yet, the contagion from 
the  global  crisis  has  led  to  the  drying-up  of  the  interbank  market  and  an  increased 
dependence  of  banks  on  funding  from  the  European  Central  Bank.  It should,  however,  be 
noted that since the last week there are positive signs of a gradual normalization of the inter 
bank market concerning Greek banks. Rising risk premia have been increasingly reflected in 
widening interest rate spreads, leading to tighter credit conditions and, superimposed on the 
cyclical  slowdown,  should  ultimately  result  in  a  marked  slowdown  in  economic  growth  for 
2009,  as  broadly  forecast  by  international  organisations.  Indeed,  the  external  shock  has 
greatly reinforced the inherent weaknesses of the Greek economy.  
A possible deterioration in the economic environment in the South East Europe should also 
have negative implications on the subsidiaries of Greek banks. However, as banks’ exposure 
to  the  S.E.  European  countries  is  less  than  9%  of  total  assets,  the  total  impact  on  Greek 
banks  will  be  relatively  limited.  Moreover,  this  impact  was  incorporated  into  a  worst  case 
stress scenario conducted by the Bank of Greece for the banks, which – under this unlikely 
event  –  assumed  that  NPLs  would  almost  double  (compared  with  the  base  scenario  for 
2008)  and  S.E.  European  countries’  currencies  would  devalue.  The  total  effects  from  this 
very  bad  scenario  were  limited,  and  the  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  (CAR)  continued  to  be 
above the limits allowed.  
Nonetheless,  because  the  aim  is  for  Greek  banks  to  have  sufficient  capital  and  liquidity 
buffers as well as to minimise any negative spill-over effects on the Greek economy from the 
global financial crisis, the € 28 billion state banking support package has been arranged, thus 
ensuring that, even under the very bad scenario, Tier 1 capital will remain between 8-10% in 
2009-2010. 
The enhanced preparedness of the Greek banking system.  
The  current  financial  turmoil  found  the  Greek  banking  system  in  a  state  of  revision  of  its 
strategic priorities in line with Basel II. I will not cite the numerous and detailed Acts of the 
Bank of Greece (and individual consultations), which called the banks to strengthen internal 
control systems and risk management, built high capital ratios exceeding 11% and maintain 
high  liquidity  ratios.  For  this  reason,  the  Bank  of  Greece,  joining  a  small  number  of  EU 
countries, imposed liquidity ratios in 2005, which, moreover, lean towards the severe side. 
Indeed,  thanks  to  these  buffers  in  October  2008,  when,  due  to  the  increasing  global 
uncertainty  after  Lehman’s  debacle  there  were  some  withdrawals  of  deposits,  the  Greek 
banks surmounted the situation without great difficulties.  
The Bank of Greece, since 2006, has asked banks to reduce their credit risk, control better 
their credit expansion, decrease the ratio of non performing loans and provide incentives for 
write-offs. By mid-2008, banks were already well engaged to meet the target of the 3½%-
ratio for non performing loans for the end of 2008, but the global crisis has interrupted this 
downward trend of NPLs.  
It  should  be  noted  that,  the  outburst  of  the  ongoing  financial  turmoil  found  Greek  credit 
institutions without exposures to toxic assets, quite solvent and in the midst of a tidying-up 
process. This also explains the continuing high rate of return on equity during the first nine 
months of 2009 (14%) and the CAR around 10½%. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2009
Since  the  beginning  of  the  global  crisis  in  2007,  large  banks  were  required  to  submit  a 
strategic plan concerning the funding of their future activities.  
On the basis of Pillar 2 of Basel 2 framework, Greek banks have been advised to adjust their 
risk appetite and to increase their capital base in accordance with the results of a series of 
stress  tests,  and  in  such  a  way  that,  despite  an  adverse  global  financial  landscape  and 
macroeconomic environment, their Tier 1 CAR would be maintained at 8-10% in 2009 and 
2010, as already stated. 
Within  the  Euro  area  co-ordinated  framework,  the  €28  billion  banking  support  package 
arranged  by  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  in  close  co-operation  with  the  Bank  of 
Greece  addresses  both  the  issues  of  the  capital  base  and  liquidity  of  the  banks,  so  as  to 
minimize the risks from the global crisis on the real economy. The banks, in turn, will channel 
the available liquidity to the real economy, because this is also in their own interest, since 
their own profitability depends on giving loans. 
To restore medium-term liquidity, the guarantee of the Greek State, will be provided to credit 
institutions  for  the  issuance  of  new  medium-term  loans,  as  well  as  for  notes  that  will  be 
issued  or  refinanced  up  to  the  end  of  2009  and  for  a  maturity  of  up  to  3  years.  The  total 
amount of this guarantee will not exceed €15 billion and it will be provided either against a 
commission  and  the  provision  of  adequate  collateral  or  without  collateral,  but  against  a 
higher commission.  
Measures for strengthening the capital base: 
Credit institutions may benefit, on a voluntary basis, from the purchase by the Greek State of 
preference redeemable shares, up to an aggregate amount of €5 billion. These shares will 
pay  a  fixed  annual  return  of  10%  and  they  will  be  eligible as  Tier  I  capital,  allowing  credit 
institutions to enhance their capital base.  
The  state  plan  has  now  entered  its  implementation  phase  and  most  of  the  banks  are 
preparing  their  participation,  but  the  impact  of  the  measures  will  be  felt  more  in  the  2nd 
quarter of 2009. 
Despite  popular  belief,  Greek  credit  institutions  are  ready  to  make  use  of  the  measures. 
Although  specific  criteria  have  been  already  set,  a  fair  distribution  of  the  total  available 
amount of €28 billion remains an extremely delicate task. It is also difficult to estimate how 
much each bank will ultimately draw and which part of the whole amount must be retained to 
be used in a later stage.  
It should be noted that, in exchange of the Government bonds and guarantees, the Bank of 
Greece will have to assess, process and monitor on a continuous base the volume and the 
variety of the collaterals given by the banks. This means that we will have to be constantly 
alert  and  the  relevant  mechanisms  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  must  operate  efficiently  at  full 
capacity for as long as it will be deemed necessary.  
Basically, the aim of the measures is to restore as far as possible normal market conditions 
and, along with the interest rate cuts announced by the ECB, to bring interest rates back to 
levels that do not hinder growth. The government guarantee should also contribute to the re-
establishment of banks’ mutual trust and to the normalisation of interbank lending. There are 
positive signs in this area as Greek banks have started lending each other bigger sums for 
longer  duration  than  overnight  or  one  week.  However,  the  process  may  encounter 
unexpected hurdles and, therefore, may be lengthier than it is desirable.  
Necessary regulatory changes: 
What changes might be envisaged to financial regulation and the structure of the financial 
sector as a result of the current crisis? I will try to answer taking into consideration what is 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 3
under  discussion in  the  various  international  fora,  bearing  in  mind  the  global  nature  of  the 
current turmoil.  
As  you  are  aware,  a  number  of  reforms  have  been  put  forward  at  the  European  and 
international level, notably by the ECOFIN Council and the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), 
and have recently been reflected in the declaration of the G20 summit.  
However, we will have to bear in mind that any changes will be implemented gradually and, 
in  some  cases,  only  after  the  crisis  is  over,  especially  those  aiming  to  the  control  of  risk 
taking, as the system is currently in reverse mode.  
There  is  a  need  for  fair  evaluation  and  strengthening  of  regulatory  regimes,  prudential 
oversight  and  risk  management,  and  ensure  that  all  financial  markets,  products  and 
participants are regulated or subject to oversight, as appropriate to their circumstances. In 
the  same  vain  and  to  the  extent  that  they  represent  a  substantial  factor  for  the  smooth 
functioning of markets, credit rating agencies will be required to meet specific standards. The 
philosophy of auto-regulation and “markets know best” as they care for the interests of the 
economy and of themselves has been wiped out by the ongoing traumatic experience. But 
we don’t want to go to the other extreme of over-regulation and nationalisation of the banks. 
The banking system will probably have to operate with higher capital buffers than prior to the 
crisis, in order to address specific loopholes revealed by the crisis, to meet increased capital 
requirements calculated under Pillar 2, especially after the data concerning the crisis period 
will  be  fed  into  the  internal  capital  calculations.  The  merits  of  introducing  a  limit  on  the 
leverage ratio of financial institutions are also under examination, which also might call for 
more capital.  
Liquidity  risk  now  urges  for  more  attention  by  both  banks  and  regulators.  In  this  respect, 
liquidity buffers have to be higher than before although several challenges involved have to 
be addressed, such as how to design relatively simple measures for funding liquidity risk and 
whether to impose minimum liquidity buffers.  
Markets  have  excessively  rewarded  short-term  profits  at  the  expense  of  lower  long-term 
performance  or  plain  losses.  The  excessive  focus  on  the  short-term  has  resulted  in  a 
significant underestimation of low probability but high impact risks, as well as in an increase 
of risk-taking behaviour. In this context, there is a need to create an incentive framework that 
adequately assesses and rewards performance over the medium to longer term. 
There  are  no  doubts  that  the  financial  system  has  a  natural  tendency  to  amplify  business 
cycles  and  there  is  a  need  to  mitigate  pro-cyclical  effects  stemming  from  the  current 
regulatory framework. A number of potential areas need to be investigated, including capital 
requirements,  valuation  and  leverage,  banks’  compensation  schemes  and  provisioning 
regimes. A key issue for regulators is how to make use of the build-up of risks and leverage 
during  boom  times  –  for  example,  through  countercyclical  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  that 
would be accumulated during booms and allowed to run down during periods of downturns 
and stress in the financial system.  
Weaknesses  in  bank  transparency  and  valuation  practices  for  complex  products  have 
contributed  to  the  build-up  of  concentrations  in  illiquid  structured  credit  products  and  the 
undermining of confidence in the banking sector. In this respect, concrete and solid industry 
practices must be promoted.  
The  availability  of  aggregate  information  regarding  the  main  risks  to  the  financial  system 
needs to be significantly enhanced. Information should be available concerning institutions, 
instruments  and  markets  that  are  currently  unregulated  but  whose  risks  raise  financial 
stability concerns given their potential systemic impact.  
The effectiveness of the financial safety net composed of deposit insurance and access to 
emergency lending facilities at the central bank was also tested. The role of lightly regulated 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2009
investment banks, and other financial institutions is dwindling under the international trend for 
more regulation and supervision.  
The need for more cross border co-operation between central banks, especially with regard 
to  liquidity,  and  the  spread  of  toxic  structured  products  around  the  world  became  evident 
during 
liquidity 
management of banks are necessary, like the establishment of swap lines and auctions of 
foreign  liquidity,  and  the  acceptance  of  foreign  collateral,  as  some  major  central  banks  do 
already.  
the  crisis1.  New  arrangements 
future  cross-border 
facilitate 
the 
to 
Issues related to the potential evolution of the financial sector: These are discussed in 
international fora and also within the Bank of Greece, in order to be ready to apply the 
new regulations on time. 
Higher capital and liquidity buffers and higher risk premia will entail a higher cost of capital 
and credit than before the crisis. That is not necessarily bad, as in hindsight it seems that risk 
has been underpriced.  
Financial  firms  basing  their  business  models  on  cheap  access  to  funding  in  wholesale 
markets will either have to adapt or disappear. Competition for deposit financing will also be 
intense for a while.  
On the product side, simpler products will be considered more attractive because regulators 
and investors will remain sceptical of complex structured products.  
The  originate-to-distribute  model  remains  to  be  fixed,  and  the  interests  of  all  the  various 
players in the securitisation chain have to be better aligned. However, that does not mean 
that the model will disappear. At the fundamental level, the idea of distributing risk away from 
the  institutions  at  the  core  of  the  financial  system  to  investors  that  are  willing  and  able  to 
share  in  the  risks  is  basically  sound.  But  banks  have  to  see  that  the  leverage  of  the 
institutional  investors  is  not  excessive,  because,  in  the  end,  banks  may  discover  to  their 
surprise that they are the ultimate investors. 
Finally,  the  financial  sector  will  become  smaller  and  less  leveraged,  but  the  weight  of 
traditional banks should increase, in the interests of soundness and profitability over the long 
term.  
The supervisory role of central banks  
Some  years  ago,  when  the  separation  of  supervisory  and  central  bank  functions  was 
considered as a politically correct action, there were voices arguing against this mode, and in 
many  countries  central  banks  succeeded  to  retain  the  supervisory  function  despite  strong 
national and international pressures. 
The  experience  on  the  financial  market  turmoil  confirms  and  reinforces  the  arguments  in 
favour  of  a  strong  interaction  between  the  prudential  supervisory  and  central  banking 
functions.  We  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  resisted  proposals  for  the  establishment  of  a  single 
national  supervisory  authority  in  the  form  of  UK’s  FSA.  I  am  sure  that,  if  this  division  of 
responsibilities had taken place, we would be now collecting the pieces of some of the Greek 
banks. Many argue that cases like Northern Rock failure could be avoided if supervisory and 
central bank functions were not separated.  
                                                 
1   Cross-border strains in dollar funding markets have been dealt with through swap lines between central 
banks  and  the  auction  of  dollar  term  liquidity  by  the  ECB  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  the  Bank  of 
England, the Bank of Japan and the Bank of Canada. 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 5
There  are  three  main  arguments,  also  confirmed  during  the  present  crisis,  in  favour  of 
combining  prudential  supervision  with  central  banking,  namely  (i)  information-related 
synergies between supervision and core central banking functions; (ii) the macroprudential 
approach argument; and (iii) independence and technical expertise.  
First,  the  experience  of  the  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  highlighted  the  existence,  in 
practice,  of  relevant  information-related  synergies  between  the  central  banking  and  the 
prudential  supervisory  function.  In  general,  the  sharing  of  supervisory  information  was 
facilitated  when  the  central  bank  had  the  possibility  of  direct  access  to  information  on 
individual  financial  institutions  that  was  properly  assessed  and  fully  understood  given  its 
operational supervisory involvement.  
In terms of content of information exchange, the central banks normally sought information 
on  individual  institutions’  liquidity  positions  and  forecasts,  intra-group  and  inter-bank 
exposures,  bank’s  liquidity  and  funding  policies,  and  data  related  to  potential  channels  of 
contagion. Central banks are the lender of last resort and the activation of the Emergency 
Liquidity  Assistance  (ELA)  in  the  euro  area  requires  speed  and  detailed  information 
regarding  conditions  of  vulnerable  banking  groups  seeking  assistance.  NCBs  cannot  give 
blank cheques and, therefore, this necessitates NCBs to have full knowledge and advance 
preparation  that  only  NCBs  with  the  supervisory  responsibility  can  do.  On  their  part, 
supervisory authorities sought information on money and financial markets, banks’ liquidity 
positions  and  collateral  provided  by  banks  in  open  market  operations,  patterns  of  banks’ 
recourse to payment systems (e.g., timing of flows during the intraday session; ratio between 
available and used intraday credit), and volumes in post-trading systems. The monitoring of 
the Target and other payment systems by the Eurosystem (including the NCBs) is a decisive 
advantage in this area. 
This  information  is  necessary  to  central  banks  (CBs)  as  a  basic  input  for  conducting  their 
monetary policy. CBs are required to estimate the liquidity deficit of the banking system and 
in  accordance  to  their  policy  objectives  to  determine  the  size  of  their  intervention  through 
open market operations, with the view to steer market rates to desired level (which of course 
should  be  consistent  with  the  official  rates).This  is  why  CBs  are  required  to  know  among 
others and on a daily basis the amount and the quality of the available collateral. Moreover, 
according to E.U Treaty, Central Banks (and the Eurosystem) are responsible for overseeing 
payment systems (domestically and cross border operating). In this respect the Eurosystem 
runs the Target 2 system for both cross border and within the country transfers of funds in 
Euro.  Thus,  ensuring  the  real  time  execution  of  the  orders,  as  the  transfers  are  in  central 
bank  money.  Privately  run  payment  system  do  not  provide  to  the  same  extend  this 
guarantee. In addition, it was decided that the Eurosystem will develop the Target 2 security 
settlements system (the TS2) operating on a centralized platform, thus providing additional 
guarantee that the movement of cash and titles will automatically match. This removes the 
counterparty  risk  of  not  fulfilling  contractual  obligations.  The  smooth  functioning  of  cross 
border  payments  and  settlement  systems  are  essential  for  preserving  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system  and  for  the  timely  execution  of  individual  banks’  commitments.  These 
services  provided  by  central  banks  give  an  important  advantage  to  them  over  FSAs, 
especially in times of crisis.  
Second, the experience of the turmoil confirmed the need for strengthening in general the 
interplay  between  the  financial  stability  assessment  of  central  banks  and  the  prudential 
oversight of individual financial institutions. This stems from the fact that the turmoil has been 
characterised by a combination of disruptions in the functioning of some markets, including 
money markets, and concerns over the state of health of individual financial institutions. In 
practice,  the  supervision  of  individual  institutions  should  benefit  from  the  outcome  of  the 
financial stability assessment of central banks, which in turn should rely also on input coming 
from  supervisors.  The  close  linkage  between  the  two  functions  is  also  recognised  in  the 
reform  projects  in  the  UK  and  the  US  where  the  envisaged  reinforcement  of  the  financial 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2009
stability role of the central bank is always accompanied by the possibility for the latter to have 
direct access to supervisory information. 
Third,  the  independence  and  expertise  argument  highlights  the  quality  of  the  contributions 
central banks can make to financial stability, also benefiting from their independence.  
Allow me at this point to say a few words about the role of the ECB. First, without the liquidity 
injection  of  almost  €1  trillion  by  the  ECB  the  euro  area  banking  system  could  not  have 
overcome  the  financial  crisis.  Second,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  important  role  that  the 
Vice-President of the ECB, Mr Lucas Papademos – as responsible for Financial Stability in 
the  ECB  –  has  played  for  the  preparation  of  the  EU  banking  support  package  framework. 
The recognition also by the EU governments of the crucial role of the ECB during the present 
financial crisis, in addition to the growing calls for a EU banking co-ordinator in the regulation 
and supervision field, augurs well that if a decision is taken on this issue the role of the ECB 
in this area should be further enhanced. 
Conclusions 
In conclusion and given that the severe stress in global financial markets and its impact on 
the  Greek  economy  will  probably  last  for  some  time  yet,  we  can  argue  that  the  measures 
taken by the Greek state represent a necessary and proportionate package to enhance, first, 
financial stability and hence ensure the deposits and the savings of the population (which is 
one of the key obligations of supervisory authorities) and, second, confidence in the Greek 
economy,  provided  that  during  the  initial  implementation  phase,  all  parties  involved  will 
perform their tasks in the best possible manner. Moreover, there are a number of positive 
factors: no Greek bank has faced any crisis; in 2008 their high profit rates will be sufficient to 
help banks to further increase their capital base.  
Of course, many questions remain on the adequacy of the measures at the euro area level 
and  on  the  volume  and  pattern  both  of  the  state  financial  support  and  fiscal  stimulus. 
Examples  of  repetitive  packages  introduced  in  some  countries  and  calls  by  non-euro  area 
countries  to  be  assisted  may  lead  –  in  the  end  –  to  bigger  packages  than  presently 
envisaged. As far as it concerns the exit strategy, this is still lacking, but first things first.  
BIS Review 10/2009 
 7
