Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: An ocean apart? Comparing transatlantic 
responses to the financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Panel session “Taking stock: Global implications of transatlantic differences”, of 
the  Conference  organised  by  Bank  of  Italy,  Bruegel  and  the  Peterson  Institute  for 
International Economics, Rome, 10-11 September 2009. 
 This conference has examined in detail how policy authorities on both sides of the Atlantic 
have reacted to the financial crisis. I won’t consider in depth the events of the past two years. 
Let me just say that central banks on both sides of the Atlantic have responded swiftly and 
decisively, especially since September of last year, working very closely together, even to the 
point  of  coordinating  some  of  their  actions.  Indeed,  you  doubtless  remember  that  the  first 
interest rate reduction in the easing cycle, on 8 October 2008, was a coordinated move by a 
number of major central banks.  
Market interest rates are now at very similar levels. For instance, the money market interest 
rates at the twelve-month horizon both in the US and the euro area are currently just below 
1.3%.1
Central banks on both sides of the Atlantic have also resorted to a number of non-standard 
measures  to  provide  additional  support  and  stimulus  to  their  respective  economies.  The 
choice  and  design  of  those  measures  reflects  the  structural  characteristics  of  those 
economies. The non-standard measures implemented by the ECB have focused primarily on 
banks,  as  banks  are  the  main  source  of  funding  in  the  euro  area  economy.  In  the  US, 
however, market-based financing plays a more important role.  
The ECB’s framework for non-conventional measures comprises five main building blocks: 
meeting in full the banks’ liquidity requests at a fixed rate; expanding the list of assets eligible 
as  collateral;  lengthening  the  maturities  of  long-term  refinancing  operations;  providing 
liquidity  in  foreign  currencies;  and,  since  July,  supporting  the  financial  market  by  making 
outright purchases of covered bonds. 
These measures are by now well known. We consider that they have achieved the desired 
objectives,  in  particular  by  reducing  the  spreads  in  the  money  market,  flattening  the  yield 
curve over the short-term horizon and restarting the market for covered bonds – an important 
instrument through which banks finance themselves.  
So much for recent measures. Today, though, I’d like to look ahead and talk about a topic 
which  has  been  widely  discussed  at  recent  international  meetings:  the  exit  strategy.  This 
strategy  sets  a  course  for  progressively  reversing  the  policy  measures  that  were 
implemented in recent months, i.e. the interest rate levels and non-standard instruments. 
Let me make it quite clear: this is not – yet – the time to implement the exit strategy. We 
clearly stated our view last week that the level of interest rate is appropriate, and we decided 
to conduct another one-year refinancing operation at the MRO rate (1%) with full allotment.  
But it’s critical to have a well thought-out exit strategy, because markets have to realise that 
the  current  policy  is  temporary  and  will  be  reversed  when  it  is  no  longer  appropriate,  in 
particular  when  risks  to  price  stability  re-emerge  and  conditions  in  financial  markets  have 
improved. As far as the euro area is concerned, the primary goal of monetary policy remains 
                                                 
1   On Friday 4 September 2009, three, six and 12 month rates in the US (LIBOR) stood at 0.31%, 0.71% and 
1.29%. The corresponding rates in the euro area (EURIBOR) were 0.80%, 1.07% and 1.28%. 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 1
price  stability;  and  the  ECB  will  do  whatever  is  needed  to  carry  out  its  mandate.  Inflation 
expectations over the medium term have to remain well anchored. This is essential to ensure 
that long-term interest rates remain low, thereby supporting the economic recovery. 
Having an exit strategy is thus an act of responsibility for a central bank.  
Drawing up an exit strategy entails two questions above all: how? and when? I won’t touch 
upon the how – the instruments – as both Chairman Bernanke and President Trichet have 
examined this particular question recently.2  
Instead, I will address the issue of the when from an analytical point of view. The concrete 
implementation  will  depend  on  many  imponderables,  not  least  the  prospects  for  economic 
recovery and for the stabilisation of financial markets – and those prospects are fraught with 
uncertainty. I intend to discuss a few issues that – in my view – central banks will have to 
consider  when  taking  the  decision  to  exit.  This  will  show  how  complex  and  difficult  that 
decision is going to be.  
My  analysis  does  not  pretend  to  be  exhaustive,  but  in  my  view  the  following  five  issues 
demand our full attention. 
One issue is reversibility. Once the decision has been taken, we can’t easily go back on it. 
This seems pretty obvious, but it has some deeper implications. Let me explain. 
If the decision to exit is taken too late and monetary expansion continues for too long, fresh 
seeds of instability in the financial sector are sown. On the other hand, if the decision is taken 
too  early,  the  economic  recovery  might  be  undermined.  Mistakes  in  the  timing,  both 
premature and tardy, (what I would call type I and type II errors) have been made in the past. 
The solution is to do it right, obviously. 
Some might think that these errors are not so worrying because they can be remedied while 
the  exit  policy  is  being  implemented.  If  the  decision  to  exit  has  been  taken  too  early,  for 
instance, the central bank might slow things down. If, however, the decision has been taken 
too late, the exit can be speeded up. It sounds nice, but is a bit too easy. 
Why?  Because  the  decision  to  exit  is  bound  to  have  an  impact  on  agents’  interest  rate 
expectations throughout the whole yield curve, and lead to substantial portfolio reallocations. 
This is desirable, and inevitable, as the purpose of the exit strategy is indeed to change the 
behaviour of the private sector. But if the adjustment in expectations is large, it can lead to 
disruptions that affect financial stability and in turn jeopardise the sustainability of the whole 
exit  strategy.  In  particular,  any  late  exit  which  needs  to  be  accelerated  could  produce 
unexpected shocks, for instance in the form of losses in the fixed income market which could 
hamper  attempts  by  financial  institutions  to  progressively  regain  access  to  the  funding 
market.  The  effects  of  such  a  delay  might  lead  to  a  prolongation  of  the  non-standard 
measures  which  were  supposed  to  be  phased  out.  Remember  the  1994  episode,  when  a 
mere  25-basis-point  increase  in  the  Fed  funds  rate  gave  rise  to  major  losses  in  the  bond 
market (reflecting the fact that it was probably a bit too late). The losses then constrained the 
future moves, which had to be relatively more gradualistic.  
The  second  issue  relates  to  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  analytical  framework  that 
central  banks  have  at  their  disposal  in  order  to  decide  on  the  optimal  interest  rate  path. 
Ideally,  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  should  be  calibrated  in  such  a  way  as  to  avoid  an 
implicit easing of monetary conditions as the economy recovers. This implies that the interest 
rate  should  be  raised  as  the  economy  starts  growing  above  its  potential  rate  and  as  the 
output  gap  starts  closing.  The  problem  with  this  framework  is  that  it  is  very  difficult  to 
                                                 
2   See  the  speech  by  ECB  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  “The  ECB’s  exit  strategy”,  Frankfurt,  4  September 
2009,  and  testimony  by  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Ben  S.  Bernanke  before  the  Committee  on  Financial 
Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., 21 July 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2009
estimate potential growth and the size of the output gap, especially after a shock like the one 
experienced  over  the  last  two  years.  Looking  at  the  past,  the  major  policy  mistakes  have 
been made as a result of overestimating potential growth and the size of the output gap, in 
particular  during  a  recovery.  This  has  led  monetary  policy  to  be  overly  activist  and  has 
delayed the tightening phase, thus fuelling financial instability.  
The two-pillar strategy of the ECB has helped to reduce this type of risk, as monetary and 
credit  aggregates  have  been  used  as  indicators  of  a  strengthened  economy,  while 
inflationary pressures were still subdued. In the current phase, we might have to take into 
consideration the fact that the ongoing process of de-leveraging in the financial sector, which 
is likely to take place for some time as a result of the correction of the previous credit bubble, 
might affect the signalling content of money and credit aggregates. 
To  be  sure,  the  tightening  phase  cannot  wait  until  inflation  materialises,  but  will  have  to 
precede it. This is even more the case this time around, given the very low level to which 
interest rates have been reduced, and the distance from the steady state level that will need 
to be attained. The latter is in itself very difficult to determine, given the uncertainties about 
some  of  the  longer-term  developments  in  the  economy.  This  will,  as  usual,  present  some 
communication challenges, such as having to answer the question commonly put to central 
bankers  under  these  circumstances:  “Why  are  you  raising  interest  rates  if  there  is  no 
inflation?” 
The pace of the tightening will obviously depend on the underlying conditions, in particular 
the speed of the recovery. Given the uncertainties, it would be inappropriate to commit to any 
specific path ex ante. 
Another issue to take into account is the exit strategy from fiscal policy. I will not dwell on this 
issue, which is undoubtedly a challenging one per se. But there is a link with the exit from 
monetary policy and it will have to be considered. In particular, the more delayed the fiscal 
exit,  ceteris  paribus,  the  more  the  monetary  policy  exit  might  have  to  be  brought  forward. 
Indeed, given the level of the debt accumulated in most advanced economies, any delay in 
the fiscal exit is likely to have an effect on inflation expectations, and may even disanchor 
them.  This  is  a  risk  that  monetary  policy  cannot  take,  as  it  would  undermine  its  overall 
strategy. 
On the subject of inflation expectations, allow me to digress briefly. Inflation expectations are 
an  important  indicator  for  central  banks,  as  they  reflect  their  credibility  in  achieving  price 
stability.  However,  recent  experience  suggests  that  central  banks  should  not  be  too 
complacent, even when expectations appear to be anchored, as the private sector might not 
always  be  a  good  predictor  of  future  developments.  Over  the  previous  cycle,  inflation 
expectations  seemed  to  be  well  anchored,  but  partially  concealed  the  build-up  of  asset 
market 
inflation 
expectations  are  a  necessary  condition  for  an  appropriate  monetary  policy,  but  not  a 
sufficient one. 
Let me touch on a final issue, related to financial stability. The exit strategy for the interest 
rate policy will be defined on the basis of the primary objective: price stability. In this respect, 
financial stability can only be a secondary objective. If it were given the same priority as price 
stability, the latter would obviously be compromised.  
The exit from the non-standard measures is likely to be linked to the state of the financial 
markets, and in this respect can partly be disconnected from the interest rate policy. Given 
the  design  of  the  non-standard  instruments  implemented  by  the  ECB,  the  exit  from  those 
instruments can take place before or after the interest rate decision, without major effects on 
it.  However,  if  at  the  time  of  the  exit  a  number  of  financial  institutions  are  still  addicted  to 
central bank liquidity, the transmission channel of monetary policy might be impaired.  
It is not the central bank’s task to continue providing liquidity to financial institutions which are 
not  able  to  stand  on  their  own  feet,  once  the  turmoil  is  over.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the 
to  price  stability.  Well-anchored 
instability  and 
longer-run 
threats 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 3
supervisory  authorities,  and  ultimately  of  Treasuries,  to  address  the  problems  of  these 
addicted  banks  as  soon  as  possible,  through  recapitalisation  and  restructuring,  as 
appropriate,  and  to  ensure  that  all  banks  in  their  jurisdictions  can  stand  on  their  own  feet 
even without the central bank’s facilities. 
Let me conclude. 
I have tried to identify some of the issues which will have to be considered in implementing 
the exit strategy on both sides of the Atlantic. My observations have been purely analytical, 
and do not aim to provide any insight into specific monetary policy decisions over the next 
few  months.  My  purpose  was  to  explain  parts of  the  analytical  framework  in  which  central 
banks will have to operate, on this and that side of the Atlantic. 
Just  like  the  entry,  the  exit  will  also  call  for  close  interaction  between  the  monetary 
authorities. This might not necessarily mean coordinated action or similar measures, given 
the different situations. However, the challenges ahead are quite similar.  
Ultimately, if we want to avoid “being too late” or “being too early”, the only solution is to “be 
right on time”. And this is what we are committed to doing. 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2009
