Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Monetary policy challenges in light of the 
current financial market developments 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at Alpbach Talks, Vienna, 15 June 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ten years ago, on 1 January 1999, the euro was introduced as the common currency of 11 
Member  States  of  the  European  Union.  Today,  the  euro  is  used  by  around  330 million 
citizens  in  16  countries  and  it  has  established  itself  as  a  stable  currency,  accepted  in 
financial  markets  worldwide.  Looking  at  the  inflation  performance  over  the  first  decade  of 
Monetary Union with inflation averaging slightly more than 2% during this period, the ECB 
has fulfilled its mandate under the Maastricht Treaty, which is to maintain price stability for 
the euro area as a whole. 
Nonetheless, undoubtfully, we are currently facing the biggest challenge so far: The world is 
hit  by  a  severe  economic  and  financial  downturn,  the  deepest  since  the  beginning  of  the 
Great  Depression  in  1929.  It  poses  grave  challenges  to  the  financial  industry  and  central 
bank  community,  as  well  as  to  supervisory  and  regulatory  authorities  and  national 
governments and to the citizens at large. 
The key challenges arising from the current financial market turbulence 
Since  August  2007  the  global  financial  markets  have  experienced  extensive  corrective 
realignments. The repercussions of the turbulence were initially visible in the financial market 
in  the  form  of  dramatic  increases  in  risk  premia  and  increased  volatility  in  interest  rate 
movements.  
The outbreak of the financial market turbulence was not entirely unexpected, however. Both 
the  ECB  and  other  institutions  had  warned  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  systematic 
undervaluation of risks in the years leading up to the crisis. 
Those years were characterised by an extended period of low interest rates, low inflation and 
sustained  economic  growth,  both  globally  and  within  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time, 
liquidity  was  abundant  and  default  risks  were  considered  by  many  to  be  very  low.  This 
environment  strengthened  investors’  risk  appetite.  In  particular,  with  financial  market 
participants  expecting  this  environment  to  continue  for  quite  some  time,  risks  were 
systematically underestimated and the search for ever higher yields intensified. As a result, 
commercial banks readily granted credit for house purchases to households that otherwise 
could not have afforded it, and without adequately assessing their creditworthiness or credit 
default risk. At the same time, in an attempt to achieve higher yields, a number of innovative 
and increasingly complex financial products were offered, particularly in the United States. 
One prominent example of this was the bundling of mortgages in new and highly complex 
financial  products  and  their  resale  as  new  securities  to  third  parties  via  global  financial 
markets.  
It eventually became evident that this practice was viable only as long as house prices in the 
United  States  continued  to  increase.  When  the  many  years  of  increases  in  house  prices 
came to an end and house prices started to fall, problems soon emerged, including in the 
euro  area,  as  banks  here  were  among  the  buyers  of  these  securities.  Investors  suddenly 
began  to  doubt  the  quality  of  their  assets.  This  led  to  a  sharp  correction  in  prices  on  the 
financial  markets,  accompanied  by  a  withdrawal  of  funds  from  the  markets,  leading  to 
corresponding liquidity shortages for banks, particularly in the money market. 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 1
Response to the crisis 
From the very beginning of the crisis, the ECB has acted in a decisive manner. It has taken a 
number  of  measures  unprecedented  in  nature,  scope  and  timing.  The  ECB  has  provided 
large amounts of liquidity support to banks. By making changes to its operational framework, 
the ECB made sure that all solvent banks would have sufficient access to funding. When the 
crisis  intensified  in  September  last  year,  we  introduced  a  number  of  new  measures.  Most 
importantly, we provided banks with unlimited access to liquidity at fixed rates for up to six 
months.  The  ECB  also  expanded  its  list  of  assets  eligible  for  use  as  collateral  in  the 
Eurosystem’s credit operations. Moreover, we recently announced further measures, namely 
to provide longer term refinancing up to one year and to purchase covered bonds of up to 
EUR 60 bn. 
As  a  result  of  these  new  measures,  the  size  of  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  has 
expanded by a substantial EUR 600 billion and now stands at 16% of GDP, compared with 
10%  in  mid-2007.  The  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  have  eased  banks’  balance  sheet 
constraints and thereby certainly helped to avoid a sudden collapse in the supply of credit 
and the emergence of a systemic crisis.  
Moreover,  in  line  with  the  substantial  weakening  of  global  demand  and  economic  activity, 
inflationary pressures and risks have been diminishing. As a result, the ECB’s policy rates 
have been cut by 3.25 percentage points since the intensification of the crisis last October. 
These  rate  reductions,  together  with  the  liquidity  management  measures,  have  had  a 
significant  impact  on  money  market  interest  rates.  Since  last  October  overnight  money 
market rates have fallen even more steeply than the ECB’s policy rates. Money market rates 
in the euro area have now reached very low levels by international standards. Lower money 
market rates have also led to lower interest rates for private households and firms, although 
the decline in money market rates has so far been greater than the decline in interest rates 
on credit for households and firms.  
The fiscal authorities in the euro area have also demonstrated their capacity to react rapidly 
to exceptional circumstances. In a coordinated effort, the national governments of the euro 
area have provided support to the banking system, most notably through recapitalisation and 
guarantees for liabilities and assets. The funds provided under the package announced to 
stabilise  the  financial  sector  through  these  types  of  measure  amount  to  23%  of  the  euro 
area’s  GDP.  The  overall  fiscal  stimulus  –  through  discretionary  policy  measures  and  the 
effect of automatic stabilisers – amounts to 3.6 percentage points of GDP for 2009 and 2010.  
Overall, during the ongoing financial market turbulence, the euro area and the EU as a whole 
have proved their capacity to act decisively and promptly under difficult circumstances.  
Lessons from the crisis  
The  current  financial  crisis  has  pointed  to  a  number  of  weaknesses  that  need  to  be 
addressed if we are to avoid a similar crisis in the future. Some weaknesses are rooted in the 
current design of the international financial system. This is particularly true with regard to the 
lack  of  transparency  and  accountability  within  the  financial  system.  In  this  respect,  much 
relies on financial players themselves taking responsibility for evaluating risk more effectively 
and  increasing  transparency  as  regards  risk.  In  addition,  various  initiatives  at  national, 
European and international level aim, in particular, to improve the robustness of the financial 
system 
I would like to highlight three areas where I think change is necessary: there needs to be an 
increase in transparency, a dampening of pro-cyclicality and an improvement in institutional 
design in the field of financial supervision and regulation.  
First,  we  need  to  undergo  global  regulatory  and  supervisory  repair.  The  Basel  Committee 
has already set some milestones in this regard including the publication of the principles for 
sound liquidity risk management and supervision and its current work on strengthening the 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2009
Basel II capital framework. Work is also underway concerning the development of measures 
to  mitigate  pro-cyclicality  stemming  from  the  regulatory  frameworks,  namely  by  building 
buffers in good times that can be withdrawn in less benign conditions. In this context, let me 
recall  that  the  G20  Leaders  approved  the  recommendations  by  the  FSB  to  address 
procyclicality, which are to be implemented by the end of this year. To this aim, the Basel 
Committee  is  developing  proposals  for  countercyclical  buffers  and  ways  to  promote 
provisioning over the cycle, with the aim to come up with concrete proposals by year-end.  
Second, regulatory gaps need to be closed. In that respect, the G20 Leaders endorsed last 
April the extension of the regulatory net to all systemically important institutions, markets and 
instruments.  These  include  systemically  important  hedge  funds,  credit  rating  agencies  and 
Over-The-Counter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets.  With  the  aim  of  preventing  regulatory 
arbitrage,  the  IMF  together  with  the  FSB,  have  been  requested  to  develop,  by  autumn, 
guidelines to assess systemic importance.  
And  third, macro-prudential  supervision  has  to  be  strengthened.  This  includes  in  particular 
the  global  monitoring  of  systemic  stability  and  the  supervision  of  systemically  important 
cross-border  institutions,  while  properly  addressing  interlinkages  among  themselves,  with 
other financial and non-financial institutions and markets. In this context, I fully support the 
broadened  mandate  and  stronger  institutional  basis  given  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB). The G20 Leaders called on the re-established FSB to develop macro-prudential tools, 
together  with  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  to  identify  and  take  account  of 
macro-prudential risks across the financial system and limit the build up of systemic risk for 
regulated entities. Moreover, the envisaged cooperation between the IMF and the FSB for 
the  conduct  of  Early  Warning  Exercises  will  be  crucial  for  the  success  of  the  global 
monitoring of systemic risks.  
At  the  European  level,  the  proposal  of  the  De  Larosière  group  to  establish  a  European 
Systemic  Risk  Council  should  substantially  improve  the  assessment  of  risks  to  financial 
stability  at  the  EU  level.  In  order  for  the  new  Council  to  perform  its  tasks  in  an  optimal 
manner – in my view – three requirements must be fulfilled. First, the ECB must have timely 
access  to  the  relevant  information,  including  information  concerning  individual  institutions. 
Second, risk warnings from the new Council should be translated into effective policy action. 
And third, for the new  Council to be independent and effective in its decision-making, it is 
essential that it have a solid institutional and legal basis.  
I also think the current crisis holds some lessons for monetary policy. The crisis has shown 
us that a stable financial system is a prerequisite for price stability. Monetary policy-makers 
should  try  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  the  build-up  of  financial  bubbles  by  being  aware  of  the 
effects their policy decisions can have on the financial system. Therefore, one could argue 
that asset prices should play a greater role in monetary policy considerations. As the build-up 
of  an  asset  price  bubble  might  have  severe  economic  consequences  in  the  longer  term, 
central banks should try to deal with the bubble pre-emptively.  
Nonetheless,  the  interrelation  of  financial  stability  goes  beyond  the  pure  consideration  of 
asset  prices.  Analysing  developments  in  borrowing  and  lending,  particularly  loans  to  the 
private sector, is helpful in extracting the  relevant signals from monetary developments on 
potential financial imbalances. Consideration of these aspects must become more extensive 
and systematic in the future.  
Strengthening  the  ECB’s  role  in  financial  supervision  should  contribute  to  ensuring  that 
proper consideration is given to the possible build-up of financial imbalances when making 
monetary policy decisions. The current crisis has clearly demonstrated that risks to financial 
stability  are  accompanied  by  risks  to  price  stability.  Central  banks  must  give  even  greater 
consideration to these risks in their analyses. 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 3
The benefits of the euro in the current crisis 
As mentioned, the current crisis represents the greatest challenge for the euro so far. 2009 
will be a very difficult year. According to the most recent macroeconomic projections by ECB 
staff,  published  in  June  of  this  year,  the  euro  area  economy  is  expected  to  contract  by 
between  4.1%  and  5.1%  in  2009.  This  means,  among  other  things,  fewer  jobs,  higher 
unemployment, less investment and less exports.  
That said, we should not forget how Europe would look today without the euro. In addition to 
the  financial  market  turbulence,  the  problems  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  economic 
downturn,  we  would  be  facing  potentially  large  fluctuations  between  Europe’s  national 
currencies.  In  fact,  the  currencies  of  some  of  the  countries  outside  the  euro  area  have 
experienced considerable fluctuations during the current crisis. This is an additional source of 
uncertainty for these countries. Therefore, the turmoil has confirmed one clear advantage of 
the euro, namely that, in stormy seas, it is better to be aboard a large ship than a small boat.  
This seems to be also reflected in the fact that many central and eastern European countries 
have  expressed  the  wish  to  join  the  euro  area as  quickly  as  possible. This  is  no surprise, 
given  that  many  countries  have  already  made  progress  towards  adopting  the  euro. 
Nevertheless, all countries must first fulfil all of the relevant criteria before joining the euro 
area. 
Still, I would like to emphasise that the euro area is not a closed shop. Five new countries 
have joined since the start of Monetary Union in January 1999, with Slovakia becoming the 
newest member of the euro area in January of this year. The door is open to all those that 
meet  the  clearly  stated  and  predefined  criteria  for  membership  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. 
Conclusion 
Joseph  Schumpeter  coined  the  expression  of  the  creative  destruction  to  bring  about 
entrepreneurial  innovation  and  progress.  Schumpeter  certainly  did  not  have  in  mind  an 
economic  and  financial  crisis  of  the  severity  and  extent  we  are  experiencing  today.  But 
having  the  concept  of  Schumpeter  in  mind,  the  current  crisis  also  created  a  window  of 
opportunity  for  change  and  reform.  This  window,  however,  will  not  remain  open  forever. 
Therefore, we have to act now in bringing forward the necessary reforms in the international 
financial system to strengthen the supervisory architecture. The ECB stands ready to take up 
its part on macroprudential supervision.  
4 
 BIS Review 75/2009
