Sada Reddy: Microfinance development in Fiji 
Opening speech by Mr Sada Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 2nd Pacific 
Credit Union Congress, Nadi, 14-18 September 2009. 
 Distinguished Guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  officiate  at  the  opening  of  the  2nd 
Pacific Credit Union Congress.  
This meeting is very timely as we in Fiji are now seriously looking at our policies, institutions 
and legislations to see if they are serving the needs of our country and our people especially 
our rural population and people who are said to be unbankable.  
We are asking serious questions if our existing financial institutions, such as banks and other 
licensed finance companies, are delivering the services that we need to bring more of our 
economically inactive population in to the mainstream economy. 
Therefore,  we  are  putting  more  focus  and  emphasis  in  terms  of  policies  to  direct  greater 
access to banking and other financial services to those who currently do not have access to 
such facilities.  
These are difficult and challenging issues and many countries continue to struggle in these 
areas. There are no easy solutions but we as policymakers, have to continue to persevere so 
that economic benefits are shared more equitably and we are able to lift the living standards 
of our people.  
It is my hope that in the course of your discussions at this gathering, you will examine these 
challenges especially as it relates to credit unions. 
I would like to thank the Credit Union Foundation of Australia, the World Council of Credit 
Unions and the Fiji Credit Union League for hosting this Congress. I believe that this is the 
second gathering to be held in Fiji. Thank you for selecting Fiji as your venue. 
No  doubt  this  congress  provides  the  ideal  opportunity  for  credit  union  movements, 
governments  and  regulators  to  share  experiences  and  learn  from  one  another.  I  note  that 
represented at this gathering are credit union volunteers, regulators and professionals, not 
only from our South Pacific region but also from beyond.  
Ladies and gentlemen, we are meeting at a time when the world is grappling with the worst 
financial  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression.  As  you  know  there  are  some  positive  signs 
emerging that the worst may be over.  
However, it is expected that the recovery maybe slow and very uncertain. Therefore, it will be 
sometime before our economies will fully recover. This is particularly so for the small Island 
economies in the Pacific. 
For the benefit of the visitors let me share with you a brief overview of the Fiji economy and 
highlight some areas which were affected by the global crisis. 
Like most of the other countries the Fiji economy was also significantly affected. But not as 
badly  as  some  others.  In  addition  to  the  global  crisis,  Fiji  also  suffered  one  of  the  worst 
flooding in its history in January this year. 
When the year started we were expecting a positive growth of around 2 percent. However, 
the double effects of the global crisis and the floods led us to revise our economic forecast 
down to minus 0.3 percent.  
BIS Review 108/2009 
 1
Some  of  the  sectors  which  were  directly  affected  through  the  global  crisis  were  tourism, 
inward remittances and exports such as fish, timber, garments, bottled water and some other 
manufactured items. 
However,  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  tourism  is  now  picking  up  strongly  and  the  declines  in 
earnings  from  remittances  are  slowly  reversing.  The  other  exports,  of  course,  are  heavily 
dependent on the global recovery.  
However, as I said earlier, we are now seeing definite signs of recovery in our major trading 
partner economies, and if this continues, I am quite confident that most of our exports should 
start to recover from next year, if not sooner. 
Against  this  background  we  are  now  expecting  the  Fiji  economy  to  recover  modestly  at 
around 2 percent next year. 
Fiji’s balance of payment came under severe pressure over the last 24 months and more so 
early this year. The foreign reserves dropped very rapidly to below 2 months of imports or 
F$430m.  
However, assisted by various policies put in place since mid-April, the foreign reserves have 
recovered strongly and are over 3 months of imports or F$980m as of last Friday. One of the 
major  policies  was  the  devaluation  of  the  F$  by  20  percent  on  15th  April  this  year.  This 
devaluation became necessary as the Fiji $ appreciated significantly against two of our major 
trading partners, namely Australia and New Zealand. 
At one stage early this year, F$ was even stronger then NZ$. This was unsustainable. The 
reason for F$ to strengthen was not because of any inherent strength in the Fiji economy, but 
was largely due to the global crisis which led to NZ$ and A$ depreciating significantly against 
the US$.  
I am pleased to say that with the level of reserves now reaching a comfortable position, the 
Reserve  Bank  has  eased  credit  policy  by  lifting  the  credit  ceiling  that  was  put  in  place  in 
December 2006.  
Interest  rates  are  now  trending  downwards  with  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  at  around 
F$270m,  which  is  over  five  times  the  normal  level.  The  banking  system  liquidity  had 
tightened substantially to around F$15m in March this year. 
We are now seeing more positive investor and consumer sentiments especially with much 
improved financial conditions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, with this brief up-date on the Fiji economy let me now address some 
of the issues in relation to credit unions. 
The importance of Credit Union in economic growth 
The Credit Union movement plays a very important role in facilitating economic growth in a 
country.  You  are  more  than  an  intermediary  that  facilitates  the  mobilisation  of  savings  for 
productive use.  
You are also the trustee of the hard earned savings of your members. Efficient and effective 
use  of  the  members’  savings  will  grow  the  benefits  to  them  and  in  turn  also  grow  the 
economy.  
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  credit  union  movement  fosters  the  very  basic  principle  of 
cooperatives. I am told that the first credit union was founded on mutual cooperation of local 
farmers in Germany during the late 1840’s who agreed to pool their savings and lend to one 
another at reasonable interest rates. Underlying this business concept is the determination to 
improve each other’s living standard. The key ingredient that underlies the foundation of a 
credit union is that there must be a “common bond”.  
2 
 BIS Review 108/2009
Credit  unions  enable  members  to  own  their  own  financial  institution  that  gives  them  the 
opportunity  to  enhance  their  living  standards  through  business  entrepreneurship,  building 
family homes, enables the provision of education and meets the provident needs.  
Let me share with you some statistics on credit unions in our region. 
The  data  produced  by  the  World  Council  of  Credit  Unions  in  2008  for  the  Oceania  region 
including Australia and New Zealand is revealing.  
It showed that: 
• 
There are a total of 282 credit unions, 135 of which are outside of Australia and New 
Zealand; 
Total assets equal to around US$37 billion. Of this, Papua New Guinea accounted for 
US$222 million and Fiji US$29 million; 
Savings totaled US$27 billion whilst loans disbursed was US$25 billion; and 
In the areas of savings and loans, PNG (US$119m savings and US$63m loan) and 
Fiji (US$22m savings and US$24m loans) are dominant outside Australia and New 
Zealand.  
  These figures show the significant impact and contribution that Credit Unions can have in the 
economy through generating savings and creating wealth and providing financial services. 
However, credit unions do face a lot of challenges in terms of growth and governance. I know 
for certain, that in Fiji, we have a lot of issues in the area of credit union governance.  
I am told that the Fiji Credit Union League membership has fallen from 180 in 1991 to 45 in 
2008. It will be interesting to see the reasons behind this decline. Having said that let me also 
acknowledge that we have a number of sizable Credit Unions that are very successful and 
have grown from strength to strength over the years.  
There  are  a  number  of  issues  Credit  Unions  need  to  take  account  of  in  order  to  remain 
viable.  I  wish  to  raise  these  in  the  hope  that  it  will  stimulate  discussions  during  your 
congress. 
Let me start with governance oversight and risk management.  
The  global  financial  crisis  brought  to  the  forefront  the  issue  of  failure  in  the  governance 
oversight functions and risk management. 
The  governance  oversight  functions  of  the  board,  senior  management,  risk  management, 
internal  audit  and  compliance,  practically  failed  in  not  proactively  detecting  what  was 
happening.  
They all failed to accurately assess the liquidity issues surrounding the subprime mortgages 
and  were  ineffective  in  their  duties.  The  laxity  in  the  governance  oversight  functions  as  a 
result, cost tax payers billions of dollars in the bailout by various governments of the affected 
financial institutions and industries.  
What  happened  also  heightened  the  concern  over  unwarranted  risks. Financial  institutions 
continued to accept risks well above their required risk margin, given their resources. Since 
the crisis, the whole focus of good governance and risk management has again come to the 
forefront of doing business.  
BIS Review 108/2009 
 3
How do these issues affect Credit Unions? 
Credit  Unions,  like  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries,  are  not  immune  to  risks.  Of 
course,  there  are  certain  risks  that  would  be  assumed  within  organisations,  whilst  others 
would not.  
In your case, risk management is about managing risks that will impinge on the capital and 
earnings of your institutions. Unlike banks and finance companies, where capital injection is 
always a viable option and can be raised in the market place, I am not so sure if this is all 
that readily possible with Credit Unions, given the fact that it is the members who will need to 
fund  the  required  capital.  The  more  the  risk,  the  more  exposed  the  Credit  Union’s  capital 
base and earnings.  
What will this do? 
This  can  no  doubt  undermine  the  viability  of  a  credit  union  if  not  addressed  urgently. 
Members could lose confidence in the Credit Union. They may not place their hard earned 
savings with the institution out of fear of not deriving the intended benefits. If the credit union 
movement is sizable, it can have major destabilizing effects on the financial system. It is for 
these reasons that some countries have allowed for legislation which puts the responsibility 
of licensing and supervision of Credit Unions with the Central Bank of the Country.  
Allow me to elaborate on where the Credit Unions in Fiji stand with some of these 
issues. 
Governance structure 
Firstly,  the  legal  environment  that  embraces  credit  unions  is  very  important.  The  financial 
systems and markets have, in recent times, undergone substantial structural changes. We 
are seeing major improvements in technology and a number of complex and sophisticated 
financial products in the market place.  
With  these  changes  taking  place  around  us,  credit  unions  will  need  to  relook  at  their 
legislative environment to ensure that they do not become archaic and hence fall behind in 
developments.  
The  Credit  Union  Act  in  Fiji  was  enacted  in  July  1954.  The  Act  should  be  reviewed  and 
modernised  to  take  account  of  the  dynamic  changes  taking  place  in  the  financial  systems 
both domestically and internationally and should include new financial innovations.  
The current Act incorporates a structure that, in my view, falls far short of good accountability 
practices.  The  Act  provides  for  a  Registrar  of  Credit  Unions.  The  registrar,  I  gather,  does 
nothing other than to just register credit unions.  
We have the Fiji Credit Union League (FCUL) that mainly provides training support for credit 
unions. The FCUL does not have any legislative backing and the credit unions basically run 
their operations unsupervised by any outside agency. 
Within the Credit Unions, the Act requires the formation of a Board, a Supervisory Committee 
and a Credit Committee. The Board basically sets policies whilst the Supervisory Committee 
is meant to play the internal audit role. The Credit Committee is responsible for approving 
loan applications. These committee members, who are also members of the credit union, are 
elected by members.  
The present structure, in my view, has a number of weaknesses in terms of governance that 
needs to be looked at.  
In this regard, I am pleased to inform that the Reserve Bank of Fiji will shortly be carrying out 
a  study  to  find  out  what  needs  to  be  done  to  improve  the  governance  standards  of  credit 
unions in Fiji. This will also involve a thorough review of the Fiji Credit Union Act.  
4 
 BIS Review 108/2009
This  review  is  also  expected  to  make  recommendations  to  the  Fiji  Government  on  the 
appropriate licensing and supervision arrangements for the Credit Unions in Fiji as we move 
forward so that we have strong and thriving credit unions in Fiji.  
Fit and proper 
We  need  to  have  fit  and  proper  persons  to  manage  the  credit  unions.  The  choices  by 
members as to who should be, and who should not be, committee members may not always 
meet stringent fit and proper requirements.  
In other words, selection could be made based on friendship rather than the prudent qualities 
required  in  a  fit  and  proper  selection.  Where  inappropriate  people  are  appointed,  wrong 
decisions and mismanagement are bound to happen.  
I  mentioned  earlier  the  large  decline  in  the  number  of  credit  unions  in  Fiji.  It  is  my 
understanding 
to 
mismanagement and incompetent managers. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  Fit  and  Proper  Guidelines  to  the  financial  institutions  it 
supervises. These guidelines lay out stringent requirements for fit and proper persons and 
qualities of the board, senior management and staff of these institutions, in particular, those 
holding responsible positions.  
It is my view that the credit unions should likewise adopt fit and proper guidelines so as to 
ensure that people selected, will conduct themselves in the best interest of the members.  
in  Fiji  have  disappeared  due 
the  credit  unions 
that  many  of 
Delinquent loans 
Another issue of concern is the area of delinquent loans. I am told that the loan delinquency 
rate is quite high in Fiji. This has the impact of reducing the credit union pool of funds and the 
worse  this  is,  the  more  the  negative  perception  this  has  on  members,  who  may  in  turn 
withdraw their membership.  
Liquidity 
Liquidity  management  is  also  an  issue  where  there  have  been  experiences  of  liquidity 
shortfalls  and  hence  liquidity  risk.  This  happens  when  there  are  mismatches  in  the  assets 
and liabilities of the credit unions and in particular when there is a tendency that more loans 
are given out that can jeopardize the cash flow positions of credit unions. This is why I was 
baffled  by  the  statistics  on  Fiji  where  Fiji  credit  unions  lend  more  than  they  are  receiving 
through members’ savings. 
Technology 
Technology is another issue that has significant impact on the operations of credit unions. 
Transactions  are  of  small  value  and  the  administrative  load  can  be  cumbersome.  A  good 
computer system is needed to improve efficiency and effectiveness of cost. I am aware that 
some of the credit unions do have computer systems whilst there are others who do not. For 
those that have them, most need their system to be upgraded to a more capable system. 
Availability of data 
Data collection is a problem area. It is very difficult to study the operations of Credit Unions if 
there are no effective data on individual unions and on the industry as a whole. It will be very 
useful if the Fiji Credit Union League had a centralised data system that was able to capture 
the  operational  data  and  which can  be  used  for  analysis  by  the  Credit  Unions  themselves 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 5
and also by the public. I am sure that Fiji is not alone in this area of data collection. Your 
colleagues in the Pacific probably share the same challenge. 
Information flow and reporting to members 
On information flow and reporting to members, this is an area I gather that is currently very 
weak  and  creates  transparency  issues.  Proper,  timely  and  accurate  reporting  on  the 
operations of the credit unions to members is paramount to ensure transparency. Members 
must  not  be  kept  in  the  dark.  Dissemination  of  timely  and  accurate  information  is  a  key 
ingredient  to  good  governance  structure.  The  use  of  efficient  and  effective  technology  will 
assist in this area.  
Let me now turn to the important issue of being innovative.  
Credit  unions  must  be  innovative  in  the  provisions  of  its  services  to  compete  and  to  stay 
ahead.  Credit  unions  have  the  potential  and  structure  to  reach  people  of  all  walks  of  life, 
including the poor.  
Credit unions were founded on the premise of their outreach to the needy and low income 
earners. In order for credit unions to serve their intended target group and to grow, they need 
to  be  innovative  in  diversifying  membership  base,  their  product  range  and  use  of  new 
technology. 
There  are  many  people  in  our  countries  that  do  not  have  access  to  credit  and  financing 
facilities  that  are  offered  through  the  formal  banking  sector.  Within  the  embrace  of  the 
“common bond”, credit unions can canvas for a broader membership base by encouraging 
these people to join.  
In so doing, it is not enough for credit unions to only offer the traditional savings and term 
deposit and loan products. Savings products must be innovative enough to target the poor. 
The poor must be given innovative savings products that will enable them to abide by the 
“save first” principle before they can be given a loan. The same applies to their loan products 
where these are available for all members of the credit union, including the poor.  
Credit unions, thus, should be able to offer a wide array of facilities and amongst others – (1) 
varying  savings  and  loans  products;  (2)  debit  and  credit  cards;  (3)  money  transfers;  (4) 
leasing; (5) investment products; (6) sell investment instruments & foreign currency and (7) 
even insurance. In some countries, the list of services offered by credit unions can be quite 
large. 
Credit unions must resort to the use of technology in order to stay in competition with other 
financial institutions. Various technological innovations are available to enable the provision 
of services to the members and to the poor. For instance, networking technology with other 
credit unions, enable members to access services at any credit union.  
The use of money transfer linkages through credit unions could be another vital service in 
particular for us in the Pacific where remittances is a major contributor to our GDP.  
You  need  to  be  aware  of  technological  developments  around  you  and  stay  ahead  of  the 
game. Otherwise, competition will drive your members to other institutions. 
In  tandem  with  the  development  of  products  and  services,  including  the  use  of  new 
technology, credit unions must be an advocate of financial literacy.  
There are underprivileged out in the rural, peri-urban and urban areas that do not have  
• 
• 
• 
access to credit;  
are not familiar with the mechanism of savings & loans; 
financial & investment products; and  
6 
 BIS Review 108/2009
need to be educated on basic financial management.  
• 
Credit Unions have a primary role to play in this area and in particular, members must be 
well informed and educated in financial matters.  
Let me round off by touching a bit on the intentions of the Reserve Bank of Fiji in 
having the poor or those considered non-bankable being provided access to credit 
and financing facilities so as to help reduce poverty.  
The Reserve Bank has been in the forefront of the development of microfinance in Fiji. Since 
the RBF and Government co-hosted the first Fiji national conference on microfinance in 1998 
and  the  subsequent  formalising  of  the  microfinance  unit,  the  RBF  has  played  a  more 
promotional  approach  to  microfinance,  in  the  sense  of  open  advocacy,  advisory  to 
government and moral suasion of commercial banks to contribute to this important area.  
In  April  this  year,  we  at  the  Reserve  Bank,  decided  that  things  needed  to  change and  we 
needed to pick up the pace. We needed to be more involved if things were to move in this 
particular segment of society.  
We have formed a new department within the Bank to specifically drive the developmental 
pace of microfinance and initiatives of reaching the poor and the unbanked in Fiji. We have 
given the banks and financial institutions certain instructions to increase their involvement in 
microfinance.  
We have also encouraged the use of local resources in Fiji in sectors such as tourism. This 
should  also  facilitate  development  of  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs),  which  is  a 
potential business area for your members.  
Again,  this  would  require  you  to  think  innovatively  and  present  such  opportunities  to  your 
members. 
I am certain that the Credit Unions have a lot to offer for the poor and the unbanked in our 
countries and it is well within your reach to do so.  
Concluding remarks 
To sum up, ladies and gentlemen, I want to acknowledge the vital role played by the Credit 
Union  movements  in  meeting  the  needs  of  our  people.  The  benefits  derived  from  credit 
unions  are  manifold  as  seen  from  the  improvements  in  the  living  standards  of  members. 
Assets  are  accumulated  and  savings  are  encouraged  to  help  improve  the  livelihood  of 
members. 
Credit Unions need to take on board good governance and risk management practices so as 
to minimise losses to capital and hard earned earnings.  
The legal framework needs to be reformed to allow for modernisation and innovation. The 
governance structure is very critical to the success and growth of credit unions.  
Fit  and  proper  guidelines  should  be  followed  in  the  election  of  Committee  members. 
Members need to be kept fully informed of the operations of their credit union. Data collection 
through a centralised data system will help in better positioning the credit union industry. 
Lastly, credit unions need to be innovative in diversifying products and use of technology. We 
believe  that  the  Credit  Union  Movement  is  an  ideal  vehicle  to  reach  the  poor  and  less 
privileged and I wish to again reassure the Movement in Fiji that the RBF will partner with 
you to outreach microfinance development to this sector of our population so as to make a 
positive impact on the lives of our people.  
BIS Review 108/2009 
 7
The Reserve Bank values the contribution made by the Credit Unions in Fiji and hopes that 
the  Movement  will  grow  and  expand  in  the  future  with  the  right  kind  of  governance 
framework.  
I know that you will have a lot to discuss and share in this Congress. One of the better ways 
of success is to learn from one another’s experiences and with the attendance, like the one 
we have here today, I am sure that the outcome of this Congress will be a success.  
With those words, I wish the Congress well and it is my privilege and honour to now declare 
the 2009 Credit Union Pacific Congress officially opened. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 108/2009
