Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan 
Statement by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank's 
Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control  before  the  Committee  on  Financial 
Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 16 December 2008. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted to the Diet its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary 
Control for the second half of fiscal 2007 on June 10, 2008 and that for the first half of fiscal 
2008  on  December  12,  2008.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  present  an  overall 
review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's  exports  have  decreased  due  to  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  With  the 
deterioration  in  corporate  profits  and  households'  employment  and  income  situation, 
domestic  private  demand,  particularly  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption, 
has weakened. In sum, Japan's economic activity has been increasingly sluggish.  
Indicators  of  production,  employment,  and  private  consumption  have  all  been  weak.  The 
results  of  the  Bank's  December  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in 
Japan),  which  were  released  yesterday,  also  clearly  indicated  the  severity  of  economic 
conditions in terms of business sentiment and fixed investment plans. 
On the price front, the three-month rate of decrease in domestic corporate goods prices has 
been large, mainly due to the drop in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate 
of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) is around 2 percent against the background of 
the increase in prices of energy and food. CPI inflation is expected to moderate reflecting the 
declines in the prices of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices. 
Regarding  the  financial  side,  investors  have  become  increasingly  risk  averse  reflecting 
disruptions  in  global  financial  markets.  As  a  result,  funding  conditions  in  the  CP  and 
corporate bond markets have tightened, as indicated by the wider credit spreads on CP and 
corporate bonds and the difficulty faced by firms in issuing either. Moreover, an increasing 
number  of  firms,  not  only  small  but  also  large  ones,  have  reported  that  their  financial 
positions  are  tight  and  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  are  severe.  Thus,  financial 
conditions in Japan are rapidly becoming less accommodative on the whole.  
There  are  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices.  Global  financial  markets 
remain under intense strain, although there has been some improvement in money markets 
in response to the various measures taken so far by governments and central banks. In this 
situation, due attention should be paid to the fact that there are downside risks to economic 
activity depending on developments in global financial markets and overseas economies. In 
addition,  if  financial  conditions  in  Japan,  as  reflected  in  lending  attitudes  of  financial 
institutions and issuing conditions in the CP and corporate bond markets, should increase in 
severity, pressures acting to depress economic activity from the financial side might become 
more marked. Turning to prices, there is a possibility that the inflation rate will decline further 
if downside risks to economic activity materialize or commodity prices fall further. 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 1
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
As I have explained, the outlook for economic activity and prices is uncertain at present. In 
this  situation,  the  Bank  will  carefully  assess  the  future  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections as well as factors posing upside or 
downside  risks,  and  will  implement  monetary  policy  appropriately.  For  the  time  being,  it  is 
particularly important to pay attention to downside risks to economic activity, such as those 
that may arise from developments in the U.S. and European financial systems and in global 
financial markets and the consequent downward pressure. 
Since  early  autumn,  when  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  and  in  the  U.S.  and 
European financial systems increased in severity, the Bank has continued to make efforts, by 
employing  various  measures,  to  ensure  market  stability  and  maintain  accommodative 
financial  conditions.  Specifically,  against  the  background  of  the  worldwide  decline  in  U.S. 
dollar  liquidity,  the  Bank  introduced  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  as  part  of  the 
coordinated  measures  of  central  banks  in  September  and  thereafter  expanded  such 
operations.  As  for  yen  funds,  the  Bank  has  introduced  a  complementary  deposit  facility  to 
further facilitate the provision of sufficient liquidity, and has been providing funds for over the 
year-end with more frequency and in larger amounts than last year. In addition, the Bank has 
been  actively  purchasing  CP  and  Japanese  government  securities  under  repurchase 
agreements,  thereby  ensuring  market  stability.  Furthermore,  with  a  view  to  facilitating 
corporate  financing,  the  Bank  has  expanded  the  range  of  corporate  bonds  and  loans  on 
deeds it accepts as eligible collateral and has decided to introduce a new operation through 
which  financial  institutions  can  borrow  low-interest  funds  from  the  Bank  against  corporate 
debt. Under this new operation, there will be no explicit ceiling on the total funds available, 
although  the  maximum  loans  available  will  not  exceed  the  value  of  the  corporate  debt 
pledged as collateral. 
The Bank will continue to make efforts to ensure market stability by conducting appropriate 
money market operations such as the provision of sufficient funds during the run-up to the 
calendar and fiscal year-ends. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2009
