S Budi Rochadi: Currency operations and management 
Opening  address  by  Dr.  S.  Budi  Rochadi,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the 
SEACEN Seminar on Currency Operations and Management, Bali, 12 August 2009. 
 Distinguished Speakers, 
Honourable Guests, 
Respected Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamu’alaikum wr. wb.and Good Morning. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  SEACEN  seminar  on 
Currency Operations and Management on this beautiful island of Bali. Before I begin, I would 
like to ask you all to join our hands together and thank the Almighty because it is only due to 
His blessings that we could gather here to attend the seminar in good health and excellent 
condition. This Seminar is intended to further enhance knowledge sharing among SEACEN 
members as well as between central bankers and industry in all pertinent issues of currency 
operation and management. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
As  we  are  all  aware,  the  very  traditional  responsibility  of  a  central  bank  is  to  issue  and 
distribute  currency  to  serve  the  country’s  economy.  It  is  hardly  imaginable  a  modern 
economy  could  function  smoothly  without  any  cash  transaction.  Regardless  of  our 
achievement in advancing non-cash payment  system, cash still remains a critical payment 
instrument. 
Fulfilling  this  responsibility  is  indeed  not  a  simple  thing.  There  are  so  many  challenges  in 
assuring  that  the  society’s  need  of  adequate  currency  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality  for 
every denomination is met. This only can be achieved if we have an accurate demand for 
currency  forecasting,  a  smooth  currency  procurement,  and  a  reliable  currency  distribution 
system, which can cater any geographical condition and public preference for the currency. 
I  am  quite  sure  that  all  of  the  issuing  authorities  from  SEACEN  members  are  facing 
difficulties in conducting this task. Even though the problems could vary between countries, 
there is one thing among others that we share in common that is the accompanying problem 
with the rise in the number of population. In our case, this task is not made any easier by the 
fact  that  the  Indonesia’s  estimated  population  of  around  240  million  at  the  end  of  2008  is 
spreading in almost a thousand inhibited islands. 
Another  important  issue  that  the  central  bank  and  issuing  authority  have  to  deal  with 
considering  its  severe  impact  on  the  economy  is  the  counterfeiting  activity.  Nowadays 
counterfeiters  are  becoming  more  advanced.  To  cope  with  that  the  central  bank  needs  to 
increase  their  vigilance  by  continuously  improving  the  security  features  of  the  currency  to 
give protection and assurance to the public holding the currency. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  achieve  the  goals  mentioned  above,  the  cooperation  among  issuing  authorities  and 
currency industries should be further deepened. This cooperation will provide safeguard to 
the  proprietary 
the 
development  of  many  security 
today.  Therefore, 
governments and security businesses involved, must constantly adjust their whole range of 
currency  operation  and  management  system  from  design,  production,  distribution,  and 
destruction process. 
to  produce  national  currencies  amidst 
techniques  solely  used 
features  and  printing 
techniques 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 1
In this dynamic situation, communication and information sharing will help all members of the 
currency  community  to  better  understand  and  respond  to  the  ever  changing  environment. 
Communication  brings  knowledge,  which  in  turn  means  greater  understanding  for  the 
community  as  a  whole.  However,  communication  does  not  necessarily  mean  revealing 
information that should be kept confidential nor does it mean disclosing commercial secrets 
or proprietary information. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  this  spirit  of  communication,  I  believe  that  the  presence  of  our  fellows  from  banknote 
security industry and other related institutions in this seminar will provide us an opportunity to 
obtain more valuable information that can broaden our perspective. In addition, information 
sharing among central bankers regarding experiences in managing our respective currencies 
could help each of us to improve efficiency and effectiveness in our daily job. 
Finally,  may  I  now  take  a  great  pleasure  in  declaring  the  Seminar  open  and  wishing  this 
event a great success. Have a pleasant stay in Bali. 
Wassalamu’alaikum wr. Wb. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2009
