Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining growth through better access to 
credit 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Forum  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  on 
“Sustaining Growth Through Better Access to Credit”, Manila, 2 March 2009. 
 Magandang umaga po sa inyong lahat!  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board and my fellow central bankers, I welcome 
all  our  special  guests  and  viewers  to  the  Forum  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  on 
“Sustaining Growth Through Better Access to Credit”. 
We have with us today representatives from the different sectors of our economy including 
the Philippine Chamber of Commerce & Industry and other industry associations; companies 
of various sizes; entrepreneurs from the micro, small, and medium enterprises or what we 
call MSMEs; other government institutions; the academe which helps shape policies through 
rigorous  research  and  studies;  NGOs;  the  media  which  serves  as  our  link  to  the  general 
public; and, finally, the banks which remain the principal conduit or source of funds for those 
who do business in our country.  
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  can  look  forward  to  a  productive  exchange 
concerning  our  economy;  where  and  how  credit  can  be  accessed;  addressing  barriers  to 
credit; why achieving and maintaining good credit standing is good for your business; and the 
role of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas insofar as money, credit, and banking are concerned.  
Of  course,  we  have  no  illusion  that  this  Forum  will  be  able  to  address  all  the  issues  and 
concerns  that  will  be  raised  today.  In  fact,  we  expect  that  there  will  be  differences  of 
opinions,  of  strategies.  After  all,  the  shifts  in  the  economic  landscape  affect  industries 
differently; but if we keep an open mind, and agree to work on these issues, we can move 
forward together.  
But, there is cause for optimism. Ladies and gentlemen, your participation in this Forum is 
already a clear indication that while we may come from different segments of our society, we 
share the same goal – to keep economic activities going and growing through better access 
to credit.  
To  celebrate  this  coming  together  of  those  who  have  taken  the  time  to  participate  in  our 
Forum today, including those who are watching NBN Channel 4’s live coverage at Bangko 
Sentral’s regional offices and branches and the general public, let us give ourselves a round 
of applause!  
Indeed, given the global economic slowdown resulting from the continuing financial crisis, it 
is important that we remain united in our efforts to minimize its adverse impact on our country 
and our people.  
Ensuring the availability of market liquidity is a critical element in a comprehensive approach 
to avoiding a severe slowdown. In this connection, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has been 
implementing  a  series  of  moves  in  accordance  with  this  overall  thrust  to  provide  better 
access to credit.  
Among others, we have done the following: 
• 
First, we have reduced policy interest rate twice since December 2008 by a total of 
100 basis points. In effect, we have lowered the cost of money for banks. This paves 
the way for banks to charge lower interest rates for their loans and in effect reduce 
the overall cost of borrowing and doing business;  
BIS Review 24/2009 
 1
    Second,  we  have  reduced  the  deposit  reserve  requirements  for  banks  by  2 
percentage  points.  This  should  infuse  roughly  P60  billion  in  additional  liquidity. 
Latest information reveal that demand for money remain strong: in December 2008 
domestic  liquidity  grew  by  15.6  percent  from  the  previous  year.  This  double-digit 
growth  in  domestic  liquidity  indicates  that  there  are  funds  available  in  the  system 
which could be tapped for investment and other productive activities;  
Third, we have opened a US dollar repurchase facility. This is a preemptive move on 
our  part  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  market,  not  only  in  pesos  but  also  in  dollars. 
Relevant to this, I wish to report that our country’s gross international reserves is at 
an all-time high of $39.2 billion as of end-January 2009;  
Fourth, through the “Credit Surety Fund (CSF)” program which it conceptualized, the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has provided leadership in addressing the problem of 
our MSMEs or our micro, small, and medium entrepreneurs in getting loans for lack 
of  collateral.  The  Credit  Surety  Program  brings  together  well-managed  and  well-
capitalized  cooperatives  with  local  government  units  and  other  donors  to  provide 
surety  cover,  in  place  of  collateral,  to  guarantee  MSMEs’  bank  loans.  The  Credit 
Surety  Fund  operates  at  the  provincial  level  and  has  been  launched  in  Cavite, 
Aurora,  and  Bohol.  I  am  happy  to  report  that  more  provinces  have  expressed 
interest in joining this CSF program.  
Fifth, to provide banks better access to additional funds which they can relend to the 
public, we have increased the budget for our Peso Rediscounting Facility from P20 
billion  to  P60  billion  liberalized.  Equally  important,  we  have  liberalized  our 
rediscounting  guidelines.  Among  others,  we  have  raised  the  loan  value  of  eligible 
papers  for  rediscounting  from  80%  to  90%.  Later  on,  Deputy  Governor  Diwa 
Guinigundo  will  have  a  power  point  presentation  that  will  explain  our  liberalized 
guidelines. 
Please note that our rediscounting facility also covers microfinance loans, in accordance with 
our inclusive banking policy. In particular, I am pleased to report that as of September 2008, 
outstanding  microfinance  loans  of  over  220  banks  to  about  886,000  households  have 
reached  nearly  P7  billion.  Indeed,  our  policy  to  provide  better  access  to  credit  covers  the 
entire spectrum of our economy.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has implemented these measures to 
ensure continued normal operation of the Philippine credit markets. What we have done is to 
act pre-emptively to avoid the credit crunch in the US and Europe that has cut-off companies 
– big and small – from their traditional fund sources.  
In our case, you will be pleased to know that Philippine banks remain liquid and continue to 
increase their lending in healthy double-digit growth rates. For instance, outstanding loans of 
commercial and universal banks as of December 2008 were up 17.5 from the previous year. 
In particular, loans for production activities drove the expansion in bank lending, growing by 
18.3 percent in December while consumption loans grew by 13.4 percent. 
In other words, the Philippine banking system, which remains the primary source of funds for 
our business sector, is functioning normally and remains stable in the midst of the ongoing 
global financial turmoil.  
And so, we have the liquidity and enhanced access to credit. What we need to do now is to 
work  together  to  sustain  growth  by  stimulating  economic  activity  and  thereby  avoid  the 
negative feedback loop from the global crisis.  
We want to see firms continue to sell, households continue to spend, banks get their loans 
paid, and Government sustains its fiscal efforts to support investments on infrastructure and 
social safety nets.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2009
While  our  economic  fundamentals  here  in  the  Philippines  remain  sound,  there  is  great 
urgency in addressing the possible fall-out from the global economic and financial turmoil. In 
the  US,  President  Obama’s  government  promptly  put  together  the  first  tranche  of  their 
economic stimulus package amounting to $787 billion. Ladies and gentlemen, losing to time 
was  one  of  the  greatest  lessons  in  public  finance  of  the  Great  Depression  in  the  United 
States: when public expenditures were finally in high gear, the four-year Great Depression 
was  about  to  end.  In  hindsight,  the  deep  and  painful  dislocations  of  the  Great  Depression 
could have been mitigated if the government had responded more quickly.  
Thus,  other  countries  familiar  with  this  lesson  from  the  Great  Depression  are  moving 
alongside  the  US  Government  to  shore  up  their  respective  economies,  because  delayed 
responses could prove very costly. This includes the Philippines.  
In  particular,  our  government  has  defined  a  P330  billion  economic  stimulus  program  to 
sustain market confidence and get the economy moving more robustly.  
But  government  alone  cannot  achieve  this.  Let  us  therefore  work  together  to  support 
government’s initiatives to keep our economy growing, to continue to grow your business, to 
protect jobs and to create new employment opportunities for our people. Let us be mindful of 
the possible effects of a downturn to millions of Filipinos, especially to those who continue to 
live in poverty.  
And even as we come to terms with the reality of a global economic crisis, let us not forget 
the positive Chinese point of view that sees opportunities in every crisis. Sure, the challenges 
are big, but there are equally big opportunities in riding them out. At the end of the day, if we 
remain united, we shall be able to reap the dividends from our concerted, cooperative efforts 
together.  
And so, ladies and gentlemen, today let us renew our commitment to sustain the growth of 
our economy through better access to credit.  
Once  again,  on  behalf  of  the  Members  of  the  Monetary  Board  –  Monetary  Board  Juanita 
Amatong,  Monetary  Board  Member  Raul  Boncan,  Monetary  Board  Member  Nellie  Favis-
Villafuerte,  Monetary  Board  Member  Alfredo  Antonio,  Monetary  Board  Member  Ignacio 
Bunye  and  Monetary  Board  Member  Peter  Favila,  we  thank  all  of  you  for  accepting  our 
invitation to this Forum.  
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay tayong lahat!  
Maraming salamat po! 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 3
