Savenaca Narube: Productivity and ethics  
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
Rotaract Club of Suva’s Business Seminar, Suva, 28 February 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ms Roshika Deo, Immediate Past President of the Rotaract Club of Suva 
Members of the Rotaract Club 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Morning and a very warm welcome to everyone. 
This  is  the  second  time  that  I  have  addressed  your  Rotaract  Club  early  on  a  Saturday 
morning!  The  first  was  in  September  2007.  A  lot  has  happened  since  then  in  Fiji  and  the 
world.  Back  then  everyone  thought  that  the  sub  prime  problem  was  virtually  over  perhaps 
with  a  short  tail.  How  very  wrong  we  were.  As  you  know,  the  crisis  has  deepened  and 
widened  beyond  anyone’s  imagination.  What  is  happening  around  us  is  unprecedented. 
While  Fiji  is  isolated  from  the  financial  mess,  we  unfortunately  cannot  avoid  its  economic 
fallouts. 
Then the heavens opened up last month and flooded most of Fiji. The impact is widespread 
and  devastating.  There  is  a  lot  of  rehabilitation  work  to  complete  to  rebuild  livelihoods, 
businesses and industries.  
These  two  events  have  significantly  effected  our  livelihood  and  we  must  do  all  we  can  to 
address them. If ever a time that the country needs to work together to build our economy 
this is one of them. The economy is our bread and butter. It is our livelihood. It puts food on 
the table. It pays for our children’s education. It protects the future of our grandchildren. So 
we  should  all  play  a  part  in  building  this  economy  right  now.  We  should  avoid  the  blame 
game. We should focus all our energy in getting things done in a coherent and consistent 
fashion. 
Productivity 
If I may then ask, “What is the role of Rotaract in economic building, and perhaps on a wider 
scale, in nation building?” How are you going about executing this role?  
Productivity is an obvious way that your organisation can help lift the economy. I have talked 
at many productivity conferences. I have always emphasised that one of the easiest way to 
grow  the  economy  is  to  raise  productivity.  Fiji’s  rate  of  productivity  growth  is  extremely 
disappointing. My estimate is that if we raise productivity growth by 1 percentage point it will 
raise GDP by at nearly twice that.  
I’m very pleased that productivity is a theme of your seminar today. Productivity is first a way 
of thinking and second a mechanical process. You can have the best processes in the world 
but if the people behind them do not want to follow them productivity will suffer. If you have 
the best degree from the best university but you lack the willingness to work you will not go 
far. A good frame of mind is the first thing to have.  
Positive thinking 
I also believe that your role right now as an organisation could be on spreading a positive 
mental message that we can and will overcome our challenges. We hear of a lot of gloom 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 1
and doom all around us. I know that we have huge challenges to overcome. But we should 
all collectively say that we can overcome them. The youths of today like your Club can play a 
leading role. Youth exuberance and positivity can be very contagious. You can change how 
our decision makers and the larger community think and act by your actions. 
But  saying  that  you  should  have  positive  thinking  is  easy.  But  actually  doing  it  is  not  that 
easy. How do you think and act positively? Let me share with you how I do it. I regard myself 
as an optimist – always looking at the bright side. A few things that I do are: 
• 
When I am feeling down I always think of something coming up later that is more 
pleasant than the present task. 
When I feel stressed, I deliberately do things very slowly. 
When I feel angry or hurt by someone I call a time off. That gives me time to retain 
control. Losing control is the worse that you can do for yourself.  
I always believe that every one of us has a strength and it is just a matter of taking 
the time and the goodwill to find that out. 
Mistakes are opportunity for learning; and 
Listening to others and be flexible is a strength not a weakness. 
• 
• 
I tell you that positive thinking will take you a long way to where you want to go. It is powerful. 
Some  of  you  must  have  watched  the  recent  speech  by  US  President  Obama  to  the  Joint 
Congress  on  the  economy.  You  would  have  noted  that  he  was  rallying  everyone  to  think 
positive  saying  many  times  that  the  good  times  will  roll  again  in  America  and  everyone 
standing  up  and  applauding.  Positive  thinking  can  go  a  long  way  in  overcoming  our 
problems. 
  Capacity building 
Another  way  that  you  can  help  the  economy  is  through  training  and  building  capacity  and 
leadership.  It  is  an  excellent  thing  to  do.  Capacity  is  the  greatest  challenge  that  we  have. 
Professional staff like you continues to leave us for greener pastures abroad. We spend a lot 
of resources in training you. What can we do? Nothing much! We can only do one thing and 
that  is  to  continue  to  train  new  staff.  Leadership  training  is  very  essential.  I  commend  the 
Rotaract Club for its immense contribution to training.  
Making a difference 
Making a difference is one of your rallying calls. It is a powerful one. But making a difference 
in what and to whom? I believe that you can make a difference on many levels. Although we 
may  not  know  it,  we  do  make  a  difference  to  people’s  lives  irrespective  of  our  position  in 
society. We as parents make a difference to our children. We as managers and leaders in 
our organisation make a difference to the people that we work with. As national leaders we 
make a difference to the whole country. At these multiple levels of effectiveness the key to 
making a difference however must be at the personal level. We get that personal level right 
then we can influence people the right way. We get that wrong we are bound to fail. I always 
believe that personal victories must also precede interpersonal victories. 
Link to communities 
The other theme that strikes me as very interesting is the link between corporate Fiji and the 
communities.  This  is  an  important  theme.  Several  of  your  sessions  today  will  cover  this 
corporate responsibility. Profitability is no longer the only driving force of corporates although 
it is still important. This larger responsibility to society has grown in global attention in recent 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2009
years. Why? In my view it has to do with sustainability. Corporates now realise that we live in 
an interrelated world. No one is an island anymore. Globalisation is here to stay. What one 
country  or  corporate  does  affects  many  other  things  in  the  country  and  the  whole  world. 
Global warming is a classical example. One day if we are not careful we will all disappear 
under the waves. So whatever we do we now must ensure that we do them in a sustainable 
manner. Polluting your backyard is not sustainable. Dealing unfairly with your workers is not 
sustainable. Ignoring the community is not good corporate sense. Corporates are now linking 
more closely with the community than ever before. 
I  commend  Rotaract’s  for  its  community  work.  I  am  told  that  some  proceeds  of  your 
attendance  today  will  go  towards  buying  computers  for  Vishnu  Deo  Memorial  Primary 
School.  This  is  certainly  a  win-win  combination  –  where  the  youth  are  trained  and  the 
community benefits from the fees that you collect. 
Actions not words 
I like your vision “Take the Lead – Make it Happen”. I have always said that we just love to 
talk. We are forever setting up committees. The only growth industry now is conferences. We 
study that. We review that. We review the review and so forth. What we very much lack is 
action. It is action that makes things happen. I believe that if we all implement 50 percent of 
what we say we will do, we will be far better off than where we are today. 
How  do  we  get  result  oriented?  I  believe  that  we  must  have  the  right  incentives  first  and 
foremost. Money is not everything. There are many other effective ways to incentivise people 
than money. Secondly, we must have clear goals that are measurable. You cannot achieve 
what  you  cannot  measure.  And  lastly,  monitoring  of  the  deliverables  must  be  timely  and 
objective.  
Seminar theme 
You have chosen Productivity and Ethics as the theme of your seminar. How do you link the 
two? Are they correlated? I believe so. The climate of the work place is extremely important 
to our peace of mind and our motivation. High work standards and ethics set the right mood 
for  that  work  environment.  Everyone  is  happy.  No  one  is  victimized  or  unfairly  treated.  In 
such a place, you will find that productivity is very high. And it again starts with me—not her, 
him or they! The most powerful way to promote ethical behavior is to set a good example and 
be a role model.  
Corporate governance 
A  buzz  word  nowadays  is  good  corporate  governance.  We  must  be  all  accountable  to 
someone.  Last  week  I  helped  launch  a  book  –  “A  Voice  of  Reason  –  the  writings  of 
Savenaca Siwatibau”. Mr. Siwatibau was the first Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji. He 
was  a  strong  advocate  of  good  governance.  In  this  book,  Mr.  Siwatibau  spoke  about 
managing  subordinates,  colleagues  and  bosses;  mainstreaming  youth  into  development, 
corruption:  impediment  to  good  governance;  corporate  governance:  roles  of  directors  and 
leadership: I recommend this book to everyone.  
Concluding remarks 
There is another small book that I recommend reading – “Who Moved My Cheese?” It is a 
small book that you can finish in an hour. It talked about a time when everything is rosy. We 
are comfortable of where we are that we do not see the small changes that are happening 
around  us  until  suddenly  we  find  out  that  someone  has  moved  our  cheese.  When  this 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 3
happens to us, what do we do? Do we throw up our arms and complain how unfair life can 
be  and  why  on  earth  can  someone  dare  do  something  terrible  like  that?  I  suppose  as 
humans we will always do that.  
But we can also do another thing when we loose our cheese and that is to quickly set out to 
search  for  new  cheese.  In  life  our  fortunes  are  seldom  static.  Changes  occur.  My  final 
message  to  you  today  is  to  realise  that  nothing  stays  forever.  Be  flexible  and  be  brave  to 
leave your comfort zone to seek out new opportunities which are there to those that search 
them out.  
I wish you well in your deliberations. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2009
