Stanley Fischer: The global financial crisis – challenges confronting 
Israel  
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Annual 
Conference of the Institute for National Security Studies, Tel Aviv, 23 December 2008.  
 For more than a year the world has been confronting one of the worst financial crises in over 
seventy years. This crisis has two components: the first, financial, and the second, real – i.e., 
a significant slowdown, and possibly even a global recession. 
Both the financial and real effects of the global financial crisis on Israel's economy are clearly 
evident. I would like to stress, however, that Israel's state at the outbreak of the crisis was 
more favorable than that in most other countries. 
On the financial side the crisis is reflected in Israel not by problems in the banking system, as 
is  the  case  in  the  advanced  economies,  but  mainly  by  the  fall  in  prices  of  shares  and 
corporate bonds. At the same time, on the real side the rate of growth declined to 2.3 percent 
(annual rate) in the third quarter, and it is expected that the significant slowdown in Israel's 
growth rate will continue; according to the Bank of Israel forecast, the rate of growth will slow 
further in 2009 to 1.5 percent, or even lower in one or two quarters.  
Israel's relatively favorable situation at the outbreak of the crisis was due to responsible and 
credible  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  the  economy's  low  foreign  currency  exposure,  the 
surplus  in  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments,  the  relatively  high  level  of  the 
foreign  exchange  reserves,  and,  worthy  of  special  emphasis,  the  strength  of  the  banking 
system. 
Now,  however,  three  months  after  the  further  intensification  of  the  crisis,  the  challenges 
confronting the policymakers on both the real side and the financial side have become much 
more  difficult.  The  policymakers  face  the  task  of  maintaining  the  economy's  relatively 
favorable position and taking advantage of it to deal with the new situation. To that purpose it 
is essential that they introduce the measures needed to ensure that the economy emerges 
from the period of slowdown strengthened, and with the ability to return to the path of rapid 
and sustained growth. All this, despite the forthcoming elections and the fact that the 2009 
budget has not been approved yet. 
At  this  stage  the  Bank  of  Israel  is  taking  the  following  steps  within  the  realm  of  its 
responsibility: 
1. 
It is conducting an active interest rate policy intended to strengthen the economy's 
ability to handle the effects of the crisis. 
The  Bank  Supervision  Department  is  intensifying  and  extending  its  regular 
monitoring  of  developments  in  the  banking  system,  with  regard  to  both  the 
robustness of the system and the role of the banks as a major source of credit. From 
the beginning of 2008 to the end of October bank credit to the public increased by 
9.4 percent, i.e., at an annual rate of 12.5 percent. In the months August–October 
the rate accelerated to an annual 15 percent.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  announced  that  it  was  ready  to  help  the  banks  with  all  the 
means at its disposal, as necessary, in order to support depositors.  
The  Bank's  program  to  buy  foreign  currency  will  continue  until  the  forex  reserves 
reach the level considered appropriate under the current circumstances – between 
$40 billion and $44 billion. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 1
These measures are wanting, however, and we must act determinedly in the following areas 
too:  
1. 
A cautious but in a certain sense expansionary fiscal policy should be pursued. Thus 
in  2009,  assuming  a  growth  rate  of  1.5  percent,  the  budget  deficit  is  expected  to 
reach about 3 percent of GDP, based on the automatic stabilizers, i.e., the expected 
drop in tax revenues resulting from the slowdown in growth, on the one hand, and a 
certain  rise  in  government  expenditure  arising,  for  example,  from  an  increase  in 
unemployment,  on  the  other.  It  would  not  be  advisable  to  allow  the  deficit  to  rise 
much beyond that, because our ability to embark on an expansionary fiscal policy is 
very limited – our debt/GDP ratio is high, and the interest that the government would 
have to pay would rise significantly if its increased its borrowing. 
Nevertheless, the tax cuts planned for 2009 should proceed, in a manner consistent 
with the automatic stabilizers. 
The measures formulated by the Ministry of Finance and the Securities Authority, in 
cooperation  with  the  Bank  of  Israel,  should  be  implemented  without  delay.  This 
program  should  help  the  economy  to  weather  the  storm.  On  the  real  side  this 
includes increasing the rate of investment in the infrastructure, increasing credit to 
small and medium businesses, investing in R&D, and dealing with the labor market. 
On the financial side this includes provision of State guarantees for borrowing by the 
banking system to increase credit, the establishment of investment funds jointly with 
financial institutions to turn over nonbank credit, the establishment of credit officers 
to improve the credit turnover arrangement between bondholders and bond issuers, 
and tax incentives on investment in Israel. 
I  would  to  stress  the  measures  already  approved  directed  at  dealing  with  the 
financial side – steps intended to increase the sources of bank and nonbank credit 
for the business sector, including small and medium-sized businesses, and steps to 
stimulate foreign investment in Israel's capital market.  
2. 
3. 
On  Sunday  14  December  the  government  made  a  decision  to  support  the  proposal  put 
forward by the joint work teams of the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Israel and the Prime 
Minister's Office, regarding a "safety net" for savers close to retirement age. The Bank is in 
favor of the proposal and its immediate implementation. 
However, despite the measures approved to handle the expected economic slowdown, we 
must make even greater efforts to deal with the crisis.  
Unfortunately, it took us, the State of Israel, about three months from the sharp deterioration 
in the global financial crisis, when Lehman brothers collapsed, to formulate the actions to be 
taken and their approval by the government and the Knesset. And they have still not been 
implemented. Thus, valuable time that could have been used to the benefit of the economy 
has  been  wasted.  It  is  of  particular  importance  to  proceed  with  the  implementation  of  the 
steps  on  the  financial  side.  I  hope  there  will  be  no  further  delays  and  that  we  can  start 
making progress. This is essential to avoid eroding the economic achievements of the last 
few years and to enable us successfully to meet the challenges facing us. 
Hence,  following  the  approval  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  program  last  Monday  (15 
December), we must immediately enter the implementation stage. The financial crisis is here, 
and is not waiting for us.  
Particularly at this time, in the approach to the elections to the Knesset, we must deal with 
the  challenges  now  confronting  us  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  we  have  followed 
hitherto – a credible macroeconomic policy, effective cooperation, focusing on the target, and 
determination. This we must do, to ensure that Israel's economy comes through the current 
crisis in a good condition. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2009
