Elizabeth A Duke: Stabilizing the housing market – next steps 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Global  Association  of  Risk  Professionals’  Risk  Management 
Convention, New York, 11 February 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 In the summer of 2007, the U.S. and global economies entered a period of unprecedented 
financial  turmoil,  which  has  since  led  to  a  significant  slump  in  macroeconomic  activity. 
Problems in both the housing sector and the housing finance sector played a central role in 
precipitating  the  crisis,  and  ongoing  weakness  in  housing  activity,  along  with  persistent 
strains  in  mortgage  markets,  continue  to  inhibit  a  broader  recovery.  In  particular,  we  have 
entered a cycle where high levels of default on mortgage debt have led to a reduction in the 
availability of mortgage debt as well as a tightening of terms for it. This situation has led to 
lower levels of home sales and prices paid for homes, which, in turn, contributes to yet more 
defaults by borrowers. As financial risk managers, I am sure you are aware of the important 
steps that have already been taken to try to break this cycle, but that you also recognize the 
need to do more. My remarks today will focus on the next steps – efforts to increase demand 
for homes, efforts aimed at further reducing preventable foreclosures, and efforts aimed at 
limiting the costs imposed on households and communities by foreclosures that cannot be 
avoided. Both the government and the private sector have important roles in these efforts. 
These suggestions and recommendations are my opinion alone and do not reflect the views 
of other members of the Federal Reserve Board or any other government entity.  
The current weakness in housing markets  
Housing activity remains extraordinarily weak. Sales of new and existing homes have been 
running at a pace that is 60 percent of that seen at the peak in 2005. Single-family housing 
starts are now less than one-quarter of their peak level. With the cutbacks in construction, 
inventories of unsold new homes have declined, but the months' supply – that is, inventories 
relative to sales – is still very high by historical standards. The inventory of existing homes for 
sale is also quite elevated – and it would be even higher if not for would-be sellers that have 
withheld or withdrawn their homes from the market amid poor selling conditions. 
We have also seen sharp drops in home prices. When home prices were at their peak three 
years  ago,  most  analysts  agreed  that  housing  valuations  looked  to  be  substantially  higher 
than  warranted  by  fundamentals.  However,  home  prices  at  the  national  level  are  now  17 
percent off their peak, with some states, such as California and Florida, seeing declines on 
the  order  of  40  percent.1  These  declines  may  have  reversed  much,  or  perhaps  all,  of  the 
earlier overvaluation.  
Notwithstanding this correction, all indications are that the softness in housing activity is likely 
to persist for some time. In normal times, population growth and the attendant formation of 
new households tend to support housing demand. Indeed, by some estimates, the current 
stock of housing is not high relative to the number of housing units that would be predicted 
by long-run trends in household formation. However, the actual number of households has 
fallen well short of trend household formation. Macroeconomic conditions no doubt explain 
part of the shortfall in household formation, as, for example, younger people facing weak job 
                                                 
1   Figures based on data from LoanPerformance, a division of First American CoreLogic. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 1
prospects defer striking out on their own. More generally, the soft economy has diminished 
demand for housing among already-established households. High rates of job loss and weak 
income growth are directly reducing what some individuals can spend on housing, and the 
prospect  of  losing  a  job  or  suffering  an  income  loss  is  damping  the  housing  demand  of 
others. 
The cost and availability of mortgage credit is also bearing critically on housing demand. With 
private-label securitization markets almost completely closed, most purchases are financed 
with some form of government-supported credit. Purchasers with strong credit histories and 
sufficient down payments can obtain a "conforming" mortgage, one that can be sold to the 
housing  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs).  Loans  insured  through  the  Federal 
Housing Administration (FHA) are also available to eligible borrowers, who have historically 
been  first-time  homebuyers,  borrowers  without  significant  down  payments,  and  higher-risk 
borrowers.  In  addition,  veterans  with  eligibility  can  obtain  virtually  100  percent  financing 
through VA loans.  
However, households without access to government-supported programs are having much 
more  difficulty  obtaining  a  mortgage  than  in  the  past.  One  obstacle  is  that  the  private 
mortgage securitization markets that previously supported most non-GSE mortgage lending 
are now shut down. Subprime and near-prime mortgages – which traditionally were funded 
almost exclusively through securitization – are essentially unavailable, leaving those higher-
risk  households  that  do  not  qualify  for  FHA  programs  without  access  to  mortgage  credit. 
Prime  jumbo  mortgages  are  still  available  for  those  seeking  to  finance  a  more  expensive 
home, but lenders are being more selective, and spreads to conforming rates remain very 
high. In addition, the availability of products that complement conforming loans is impaired. 
For  example,  second  liens  are  more  difficult  and  more  expensive  to  obtain,  which  has 
deterred some households from making purchases that previously would have been financed 
by combining a conforming loan with a second lien that would cover some additional amount. 
Access to private mortgage insurance is more restricted, which holds back some households 
that lack a sufficient down payment but otherwise qualify for a conforming mortgage. 
A key factor inhibiting recovery is that the adverse conditions in the housing and mortgage 
markets have been, and continue to be, mutually reinforcing. As I am sure you are painfully 
aware,  delinquencies  on  mortgages  have  risen  sharply  in  recent  years.  By  way  of 
background, the problems began in the nonprime mortgage market. As house prices boomed 
in the middle part of this decade, mortgage originators relaxed underwriting standards and 
extended mortgages with low or no down payments to households with weak credit histories 
or that did not fully document their income. Many of these loans had low initial interest rates 
that reset to market rates after a couple of years, which resulted in a significant increase in 
the monthly payment. Had house prices continued to rise, many borrowers would have been 
able to refinance to avoid higher payments and perhaps to extract accumulated home equity 
to  use  for  future  payments.  However,  the  downturn  in  house  prices  meant  that  many 
borrowers did not have sufficient equity to refinance. Payment problems began to rise, which, 
in  turn,  led  lenders  to  tighten  standards  and  made  it  even  more  difficult  for  borrowers  to 
obtain  new  loans,  which  put  even  more  upward  pressure  on  delinquencies.  Eventually, 
investors became unwilling to fund high-risk mortgages at any price. 
While the high delinquency levels and subsequent pullback of credit for subprime loans was 
certainly  foreseeable,  what  was  less  obvious  was  the  degree  to  which  problems  in  the 
subprime market would spread to the market for prime loans. Loans in the prime loan market 
are going delinquent for all the traditional reasons: economic conditions and life events, such 
as  job  loss,  medical  problems,  and  divorce.  In  a  rising  or  even  stable  price  environment, 
these delinquencies would often be cured through refinance or sale of the property, which 
would result in low levels of actual foreclosure. However, loss of equity and tighter standards 
on  all  types  of  mortgages  mean  that  even  prime  loans  are  more  difficult  to  refinance,  and 
weak housing demand has made it difficult to sell. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2009
According  to  the  latest  data,  25  percent  of  subprime  loans  and  13  percent  of  near-prime 
loans are now seriously delinquent – that is, more than 90 days past due or in foreclosure. 
The serious delinquency rate for prime mortgages, at between 3 percent and 4 percent, is 
much  lower  than  for  nonprime  loans,  but  it  has  almost  doubled  over  the  past  year. 
Foreclosures have also risen sharply. The available data suggest that lenders initiated 2-1/4 
million  foreclosures  last  year,  more  than  double  the  number  seen  in  2006.2  While  the 
percentage of mortgages entering foreclosure is likely to increase further, the decline in the 
number of subprime loans means that this percentage will be applied to a smaller base of 
loans, which will tend to damp the overall number of foreclosures. In the past, about one-half 
of foreclosures initiated were cured through a repayment plan or some other arrangement, 
but the remaining one-half resulted in the loss of a home. The share resulting in home loss 
could well be higher now given the large numbers of distressed households and the bleak 
underlying  economic  conditions.  So,  even  if  the  number  of  foreclosures  initiated  begin  to 
drop, we are still likely to see higher levels of property taken into real estate owned (REO) as 
foreclosures initiated earlier are completed and the share of those foreclosures resulting in 
the loss of a home increases. 
Addressing the problems in housing and mortgage markets 
Several  considerations  underscore  the  need  for  policymakers  to  take  further  actions  to 
address  the  problems  in  housing  and  mortgage  markets.  To  begin,  the  weakness  in  the 
housing sector remains a significant drag on the macroeconomy and is reinforcing the strains 
in the financial system. Moreover, the wave of foreclosures has the potential to exacerbate 
the problems going forward. In past housing cycles, house prices have tended to fall below 
the level warranted by fundamentals, presumably as weak market conditions led sellers to 
make aggressive price cuts. The potential for an overcorrection of house prices in this cycle 
seems particularly acute, given the potential for foreclosures to create a glut of properties for 
sale.  And,  of  course,  further  large  declines  in  house  prices  would  accentuate  the  broader 
problems  in  the  macroeconomy  and  financial  system  through  the  channels  that  I  just 
discussed. 
In addition, foreclosures cause significant distress among the families that lose their homes. 
Whether  the  foreclosure  is  the  result  of  inadequate  underwriting  by  the  mortgage  lender, 
irresponsibility on the part of homeowner, or uncontrollable life events such as job loss, the 
result  is  the  same:  Displaced  families  with  depleted  resources  and  impaired  credit  have 
difficulty finding a new place to live. They may have to move significant distances, which may 
affect their ability to retain their jobs and disrupt other aspects of their lives as well as the 
lives of their family members.  
The effects of foreclosures extend beyond these immediate families. One in five foreclosures 
appears  to  be  affecting  renter-occupied  units.  The  families  in  these  units  may  also  be 
displaced, even if they are paying their rent on time and abiding by the terms of their lease 
agreement. In areas where foreclosures are concentrated, communities will suffer. Clusters 
of vacant properties can foster vandalism and crime, and studies have shown that they lead 
to  lower  house  prices  throughout  the  neighborhood.3  Municipal  governments  may  have  to 
                                                 
2   Estimates  of  subprime  and  near-prime  delinquency  rates  are  for  loans  in  securitized  pools,  based  on  data 
from  LoanPerformance,  a  division  of  First  American  CoreLogic.  Estimates  of  prime  delinquency  rates  are 
based on data from McDash. Estimates of foreclosures initiated based on data from the Mortgage Bankers' 
Association. 
3   See, for example, William C. Apgar, Mark Duda, and Rochelle Nawrocki Gorey (2005), "The Municipal Cost of 
Foreclosures: A Chicago Case Study," Housing Finance Policy Research Paper 2005-1 (Minneapolis, Minn.: 
Homeownership 
February), 
www.995hope.org/content/pdf/Apgar_Duda_Study_Full_Version.pdf;  and  John  P.  Harding,  Eric  Rosenblatt, 
Preservation 
Foundation, 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 3
spend more on maintaining properties and preventing crime, such as vandalism and arson, 
just when resources are stretched thin, in part because of the lower tax revenue associated 
with lower house prices. Such spending may well crowd out the provision of other types of 
public services. 
Fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  directed  at  improving  employment  conditions  and  federal 
support for housing finance will ultimately strengthen the housing market. However, we also 
need measures that directly address the foreclosure problem. In designing such measures, 
we must consider the different types of borrowers. First, there are distressed borrowers who 
can  avoid  foreclosure  through  an  appropriate  modification  of  their  loan.  Second,  there  are 
some borrowers who, due to resources or circumstance, will be unable or unwilling to sustain 
their mortgage payments even with reasonable loan adjustments from the lender or support 
from  government  programs.  In  such  cases,  foreclosures  will  happen,  and  we  need  to  limit 
both the direct costs to the borrower and the broader social costs. Of course, there is a third 
group  of  borrowers  –  those  who  are  still  successfully  meeting  their  mortgage  obligations. 
One might be tempted to view these households as a lesser concern, but we must be mindful 
that they will be more likely to shift into one of the distressed groups if we do not reduce both 
the number of foreclosures and the cost of the foreclosures that do occur. 
Reducing preventable foreclosures 
To  help  distressed  households  for  which  foreclosure  can  be  prevented,  servicers  must 
implement  effective  and  sustainable  modifications.  Key  private  and  public  steps  toward 
preventing unnecessary foreclosures have already been taken. For example, the industry-led 
Hope  Now  Alliance  –  a  coalition  of  mortgage  servicers,  lenders,  housing  counselors,  and 
investors  –  has  produced  loss  mitigation  guidelines  for  servicers.  In  addition,  Hope  Now 
members  have  agreed  to  adopt  a  streamlined  modification  program  for  certain  loans  that 
they  service  for  the  GSEs.  Among  government  efforts,  the  FHASecure  program  provided 
long-term fixed-rate mortgages to borrowers facing a rise in payments due to an interest rate 
reset. The more recent FHA "HOPE for Homeowners" (H4H) program, on whose oversight 
board I sit, allows lenders to refinance a delinquent borrower into an FHA-insured fixed-rate 
mortgage if the lender writes down the mortgage balance to create some home equity for the 
borrower and pays an up-front insurance premium. In exchange for being put "above water" 
on  the  mortgage,  the  borrower  is  required  to  share  any  equity  created  through  the 
refinancing and any subsequent appreciation of the home with the government. 
Although the pace of loan modification has picked up over the past year, more needs to be 
done. Indeed, many cases still seem to be appearing in which foreclosure is occurring even 
though both the borrower and lender would benefit from avoiding that outcome. There are 
several potential ways that the Congress and policymakers could help expand the number of 
at-risk  borrowers  who  can  obtain  assistance  and  reduce  the  incidence  of  preventable 
foreclosures. For example, the impact of the H4H program has so far been limited because 
of the terms and conditions for program loans mandated by the authorizing legislation and 
because  of  the  general  reluctance  of  servicers  and  lenders  to  write  down  the  principal  of 
delinquent  mortgages.  The  Congress  is  currently  considering  several  modifications  to  the 
H4H program that have the potential to make the program more attractive to both servicers 
and  homeowners.  These  modifications  include  eliminating  the  upfront  mortgage  premium 
that must be paid by the owner of the current mortgage and the requirement that borrowers 
share with the government a portion of any future appreciation in the property. Among other 
options that the Congress or the government might consider is reducing the interest rate that 
H4H  borrowers  pay,  either  through  a  direct  subsidy  or  through  Treasury  purchases  of  the 
                                                                                                                                                      
and  Vincent  W.  Yao  (2008),  "The  Contagion  Effect  of  Foreclosed  Properties,"  Social  Science  Research 
Network working paper 1160354 (New York: SSRN, July). 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2009
the  government  might  make  payments  directly 
relatively  illiquid  Ginnie  Mae  securities  to  which  the  borrowers'  interest  rate  is  tied.  The 
government might also consider purchasing delinquent or at-risk mortgages in bulk and then 
refinancing them into the H4H or other FHA programs. 
In addition, government funds might be used to offer some general inducement for servicers 
to modify loans at risk of default. For example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC)  has  proposed  that,  for  loans  modified  in  accordance  with  a  streamlined  process 
adapted from the protocol that the FDIC has used for IndyMac loans, the government would 
agree to absorb some of the losses on the modified loans that redefault. Another approach 
would have the government share with the servicer the cost of a reduction in the borrower's 
monthly  payment.  Alternatively, 
to 
homeowners who – because of temporary job loss or a similar event – need help meeting 
their mortgage obligations.4 Because institutional and legal obstacles may be holding back 
modifications by servicers, these plans could be effective ways to deliver assistance to some 
distressed homeowners.5  
While speed and volume in modifications are important, in my view, it is equally essential that 
the new obligations be sustainable in the long run. By "sustainable" I mean that the payment 
should be fixed for the life of the loan, it should be affordable, and it should be based upon 
verified income. In changing the terms of the mortgage, servicers may start with changing the 
interest rate or adjusting the maturity to make the payments more affordable, but they also 
need to consider whether writing down loan principal amounts make sense. Doing the latter 
may be more effective at reducing the probability of redefault.6 These design principles for 
modifications are all included in the Homeownership Preservation Policy recently adopted by 
the  Federal  Reserve  Board.7  The  Federal  Reserve  will  apply  this  policy  to  the  residential 
mortgage assets held by the special purpose vehicles established by the Federal Reserve to 
facilitate  the  acquisition  of  Bear  Stearns  by  JPMorgan  Chase  and  to  assist  the  American 
International Group, Inc. 
Although  it  is  encouraging  that  so  many  policymakers  are  focused  on  the  issue  of  loan 
modifications  and  making  thoughtful  proposals,  I  think  it  is  equally  important  that  the 
government decide how it wishes to move forward, and then do so. As long as uncertainty 
exists as to the scope and terms of the additional steps that likely will be offered, borrowers, 
lenders, and servicers will continue to hold out in hope of securing a better deal. In this case, 
the cost of delay could easily outweigh the differences in outcome between the proposals. 
For these reasons, I am pleased that the Administration is moving ahead on this front. 
                                                 
4   See,  for  example,  Chris  Foote,  Jeff  Fuhrer,  Eileen  Mauskopf,  and  Paul  Willen  (2009),  "A  Proposal  to  Help 
Distressed Homeowners: A Government Payment-Sharing Plan," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (January 
15). 
5   For  a  discussion  of  these  obstacles,  see  Larry  Cordell,  Karen  Dynan,  Andreas  Lehnert,  Nellie  Liang,  and 
Eileen  Mauskopf  (2008),  "The  Incentives  of  Mortgage  Servicers:  Myths  and  Realities,"  Finance  and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2008-46  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
November). 
6   The available evidence, though not conclusive, suggests that the homeowner's equity position is, along with 
affordability, an important determinant of default rates, for owner-occupiers as well as investors. See Shane 
Sherlund  (2008),  "The  Past,  Present,  and  Future  of  Subprime  Mortgages,"  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion  Series  2008-63  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System);  Kristopher 
Gerardi,  Christopher  L.  Foote,  and  Paul  S.  Willen  (2008),  "Negative  Equity  and  Foreclosure:  Theory  and 
Evidence,"  Public  Policy  Discussion  Papers  08-3  (Boston:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  June);  and 
Andrew Haughwout, Richard Peach, and Joseph Tracy (forthcoming), "Juvenile Delinquent Mortgages: Bad 
Credit or Bad Economy?" Journal of Urban Economics. 
7   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Board  Announces  Policy  to  Help  Avoid 
Preventable Foreclosures on Certain Residential Mortgage Assets Held, Owned, or Controlled by a Federal 
Reserve  Bank,"  press  release,  January  30;  and  Board  of  Governors  (2009),  "Homeownership  Preservation 
Policy for Residential Mortgage Assets," Board policy, January 30. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 5
Reducing costs when foreclosures cannot be prevented 
Without in any way minimizing the need for continued emphasis on foreclosure prevention, I 
don't  believe  we  can  fully  formulate  appropriate  policy  responses  to  the  crisis  unless  we 
acknowledge and address the large numbers of foreclosures that are not avoidable. We are 
likely  only  beginning  to  see  the  serious  costs  of  the  foreclosures  that  have  already  been 
initiated,  both  because  of  the  often-substantial  amount  of  time  required  to  complete  a 
foreclosure  and  because  the  costs  likely  compound  as  the  number  of  foreclosures  grows 
larger.  Moreover,  even  under  optimistic  assumptions  for  the  number  of  loan  modifications 
and  other  forms  of  private  and  public  assistance  that  may  be  realized,  the  pace  at  which 
foreclosures are initiated is likely to remain extremely elevated for some time. Just as public 
focus, experimentation, and policy debate have informed best practices with regard to loan 
modifications, we must also begin the work of developing responsible foreclosure and real 
estate  inventory  management  protocols.  Minimizing  the  amount  of  time  that  properties 
remain vacant and maximizing the price at which they are sold will serve the interests of both 
lenders and the communities. At this moment, lenders and communities alike are woefully 
under-resourced and unprepared for the volume of real estate that will need to be processed. 
Given the likely number of properties that will enter foreclosure and the time and resources 
involved  in  the  foreclosure  process,  financial  institutions  can  help  minimize  the  cost  by 
developing  clear  policies  and  procedures  for  approval  of  short  sales  and  deeds-in-lieu-of-
foreclosure.  For  homeowners  who  cannot,  or  no  longer  wish  to,  stay  in  their  homes,  such 
strategies would release them from their obligation and avoid foreclosure. Some institutions 
offer  a  so-called  fresh  start  or  cash-for-keys  program,  in  which  they  provide  a  payment  to 
consumers  in  exchange  for  voluntarily  surrendering  the  deed  to  the  home.  Such 
arrangements reduce the cost of foreclosure and effectively provide the borrower with funds 
that  can  help  offset  some  of  the  expenses  associated  with  relocation.  Other  lenders  are 
offering borrowers the option to remain in the house as renters rather than owners. Options 
such  as  these  could  be  offered  in  conjunction  with  loan  modification  programs  as  further 
inducement for borrowers to engage in loan resolution discussions. 
If  renters  occupy  the  property,  servicers  of  REO  properties  should  extend  existing  lease 
arrangements,  when  possible,  and  while  tenants  are  abiding  by  the  terms  of  their  lease. 
Some  REO  owners,  including  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  are  already  taking  steps  to 
minimize the disruption and displacement to renters living in foreclosed-upon properties.  
Vacant properties are especially problematic for communities. Ideally, lenders would identify 
early  in  the  process  whether  or  not  property  securing  delinquent  loans  is  occupied  and,  if 
occupied,  by  whom.  Lenders  might  be  provided  the  incentive  to  do  so  if  foreclosure  laws 
permitted lenders who agree to secure and maintain the property to accelerate foreclosure in 
cases  where  the  property  has  been  vacated.  If  a  property  is  likely  to  sit  vacant  for  long 
periods of time and create problems for the surrounding area, servicers might consider sale 
of  REO  properties  to,  or  partnerships  with,  responsible  third  parties,  including  local 
governments and nonprofit groups. And financial institutions should look for ways to partner 
with  community  groups  and  governments  to  support  strategies  to  stabilize  communities 
affected  by  foreclosure.  Last  summer,  the  Congress  set  aside  $3.92  billion  through  the 
Housing  and  Economic  Recovery  Act  of  2008  to  assist  state  and  local  governments  with 
REO purchases and related efforts. It is likely that such efforts will require significantly more 
funding. In addition, regulators should consider whether to review regulations regarding real 
estate held for extended periods of time on bank balance sheets to be sure that they do not 
preclude creative solutions to the foreclosure problem. 
The  last  credit  cycle  primarily  involved  loans  secured  with  commercial  property.  The 
properties liquidated by banks and the Resolution Trust Corporation weighed on commercial 
property values for years. This time we are talking about homes, and we are talking about 
neighborhoods. Whether mortgage assets are taken off banks' balance sheets, ring fenced, 
or left alone, the REO problem remains the same. Regardless of which entities actually own 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2009
the  loan  assets  –  be  they  financial  institutions,  investors,  or  government  entities  –  the 
servicers  who  represent  them  are  going  to  have  to  deal  with  large  real  estate  inventories. 
Wholesale dumping of those inventories that leads to sharply lower prices and recovery rates 
will not serve the interests of the public or the investors. But strategies to avoid dumping and 
to  maximize  the  ultimate  value  of  the  properties  could  be  beyond  the  normal  liquidity  and 
expertise resources of servicers. To avoid such an outcome, owners of the assets will need 
to  adequately  fund  servicers  or  separately  engage  property  managers.  For  example,  they 
may  need  funding  to  repair  and  improve  properties,  which  will  lead  to  higher  returns  than 
sale of those same properties in "as is" condition. They may need to offer seller financing. 
Bulk sale or land banking strategies may offer the best likely outcome. In the most recent 
credit cycle, much of the commercial inventory was sold through auction, and many of the 
buyers  realized  a  substantial  profit.  Using  today's  technology,  Internet  auctions  could 
increase the pool of potential buyers as well as price transparency.  
Conclusion 
In summary, broadly targeted policy is a central ingredient to restoring the health of the U.S. 
economy and global financial system. However, as I have discussed today, there is also a 
pressing  need  for  more  policy  measures  that  specifically  address  the  problems  in  the 
housing sector. We need considerable public support for housing finance until private credit 
and securitization markets are restarted. We need to strengthen and augment our efforts to 
reduce preventable foreclosures. In addition, we need to turn far greater attention to limiting 
the costs of foreclosures that do occur. Such efforts are not only in the interest of the affected 
families and their communities but also in the interest of the financial institutions involved and 
the  broader  economy.  Because  much  of  the  costs  do  not  occur  immediately  after  a 
foreclosure  has  been  initiated  and  can  grow  with  time,  we  must  be  forward-looking  and 
affirmatively engage in efforts to mitigate the consequences now. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 7
