Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: A decade with the euro 
Speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Conference 
“10th Anniversary of the entry of Spain into the EMU”, Bank of Spain, Madrid, 27 February 
2009. 
 Let  me  first  welcome  you  and  thank  you  for  being  here  today  at  the  Banco  de  España 
headquarters for this conference commemorating the tenth anniversary of the creation of the 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), of which Spain was a founding member. I particularly 
appreciate Professor Rojo joining me here for these opening remarks. He was the architect 
of the enormous effort of persuasion and economic and monetary policy action that secured 
Spanish  access  to  the  Union.  He  was  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  from  the  signing  of  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  until  2000,  when  the  project  had  become  a  reality  and  when,  to  many 
people’s  surprise,  the  Spanish  economy  had  successfully  completed  a  rocky  road  to 
convergence.  A  celebration  like  today’s  without  the  presence  of  somebody  so  closely 
involved in this project would have been incomplete. Thank you, Ángel.  
For a country such as Spain, which has frequently been a late arrival at defining events in 
modern history, having been a founder member of this key project of European integration is 
a  landmark.  It  demonstrates  Spaniards'  willingness  and  ability  to  contribute  actively  to 
European  construction  and,  therefore,  to  the  present  and  future  welfare  of  its  citizens. 
European integration is a dynamic project, permanently under construction, which is today 
facing  up  to  the  challenges  of  a  global  economic  recession  and  an  international  financial 
crisis of proportions unseen in many years. 
Over ten years ago, before the euro was created, there was an academic debate turning on 
the theory of optimal currency areas, which questioned whether a single interest rate and, 
therefore, a single monetary policy could possibly be appropriate for such diverse countries. 
Ten years after the birth of the euro those of us who joined EMU, and many of those who did 
not, acknowledge the enormous advantages of being inside the monetary union.  
Today, the contribution of the single currency in lessening uncertainty for economic agents is 
clear. The enormous advantages of moderate inflation, of interest rates with a limited range 
of volatility and of the fact that companies need not consider the exchange rate when buying 
and selling in an area with almost three hundred and thirty million consumers, are obvious. 
The upshot is stability, which is a valuable contribution to growth, as we have seen in other, 
similar-sized monetary areas such as the United States, and we should build on it.  
We should also celebrate the institutional success of the Eurosystem. The ECB has fulfilled 
the  goal  entrusted  to  it  by  the  Treaty,  of  keeping  inflation  expectations  anchored,  even  at 
very difficult times. And the Eurosystem is in itself a truly fascinating experiment. Those of us 
privileged to meet every fortnight in Frankfurt bear constant witness to the success of this 
undertaking, which is unique in the process of European construction. 
The  Eurosystem  blends  centralised  and  decentralised  decision-making,  reflecting  perfectly 
the common European project. On one hand the ECB takes centralised decisions for three 
hundred and thirty million citizens who have the euro as their common currency, while on the 
other,  the  Eurosystem  operates  in  a  highly  decentralised  and  co-operative  manner.  The 
National Central Banks are involved in many joint projects. But allow me to discuss one with 
which  I  have  been  closely  concerned  in  recent  years:  the  launch  and  design  of  Target  2 
securities  which,  behind  this  singular  acronym,  is  an  ambitious  project  that  will  facilitate 
securities settlement throughout Europe. This platform is being designed and constructed by 
four  central  banks:  Germany,  France,  Italy  and  Spain.  Any  pro-European  would  be  most 
satisfied to see officials of the banks from these countries working together every day on a 
common project. 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 1
Critics of the euro, who are quite frankly a minority today, try to argue that the divergences 
observed across the Monetary Union members in terms of inflation and growth during its first 
ten years have been a problem. 
But  the  figures  are  not  on  their  side.  Over  the  past  decade,  inflation  and  growth  diversity 
among  the  EMU  members  has  been  very  moderate  compared  with  what  had  previously 
occurred. And compared with other regions, this diversity, though somewhat more persistent, 
has been on the same scale as the heterogeneity across the different US regions and states, 
being the United States an example of a monetary union of approximately the same size as 
the  Euro  zone,  and  whose  viability  is  unquestioned.  Nobody  considers  that  these 
divergences would advise California to have a different currency from that of New York or 
Illinois.  What's  more,  empirical  evidence  from  EMU  shows  that  national  business  cycles 
have, with economic and monetary integration, become more synchronised. 
Admittedly,  though,  growth  and  inflation  differentials  that  we  should  reduce  have  persisted 
over this period. However, the solution to this problem should not be sought by questioning 
what  the  euro  can  do  to  reduce  these  differences.  Rather,  we  should  determine  what  we 
should  do  with  other  policies  to  narrow  them.  This  is  so  since  monetary  policy  can  do 
nothing. The best way in which it can contribute to boosting growth, employment and welfare 
is to keep inflation anchored for the area as a whole. If, as I stated, we are convinced of the 
enormous advantages of the Euro, not only in the political sphere but also in economic and 
social terms, the question to ask is what governments and national parliaments should do to 
entrench the euro further. 
And it is here that many major tasks remain. The first, which was promptly identified, was to 
look after fiscal policy. The Stability and Growth Pact and all the efforts of the Eurogroup over 
the years to maintain a coordinated and disciplined fiscal policy have been vital and should 
be  continued  in  the  future.  But  in  addition  to  continuing  along  these  lines  in  the  coming 
decade, efforts should focus on designing and adopting the necessary structural policies. 
If we observe how these divergences are perceived in the different countries, we can gain 
insight  into  the  importance  of  efforts  to  push  through  structural  reforms.  Many  in  Spain 
believe that the divergence problems witnessed in the Spanish economy in recent years are 
to  do  with  the  fact  that  certain  euro  area  countries  are  lacking  in  dynamism  and  therefore 
have much lower growth potential than we do. And it's true. Spain has a higher degree of 
privatisation  that  makes  its  economy  much  more  dynamic.  Also,  the  weight  of  public 
spending in the economy is much lower. Advances in competition in many industries affords 
higher growth potential for Spain than for other euro area countries. The problem of being in 
an area with countries with lower growth potential is that when the ECB set its interest rates 
in  the  2000-2004  period,  it  did  so  at  a  level  which,  though  arguably  high  for  these  other 
countries,  was  very  low  for  Spain.  And  that  entailed  higher  debt,  higher  inflation  and, 
therefore, a loss in competitiveness for our country. 
But look now how such divergences are seen from the other countries. The EMU countries 
that are less dynamic and with lower growth potential think that they had to deal with higher 
interest rates than were suitable for them, owing to the fact that the more dynamic countries 
had a tendency for higher inflation than them. And this is also true. Both views are true. 
The lesson we should all draw is that, on one hand, the less dynamic countries have their 
work in terms of structural reforms: more privatisation, more competition, a greater weight of 
the private sector in the economy, etc. to increase their growth potential. And, on the other, 
the countries with more inflationary tendencies should, as I said a couple of weeks ago in 
Zaragoza,  pursue  their  own  structural  reforms,  reforming  labour  institutions,  the  rental 
market, etc. so that increases in demand, arising from relatively low rates, cannot generate 
inflation. 
The celebration of these ten years is taking place just as the global macroeconomic scenario 
has undergone a deep-seated change as a result of the financial crisis, leaving it covered in 
great uncertainty and powerful recessionary tendencies. Now, those who are against a single 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2009
monetary policy underscore the uneven impact that changes in the world economy can have 
on euro area members, as these are deprived of the macroeconomic stabilisation instrument 
that national monetary policies provided. 
Once again, this is not an argument against EMU but one in favour of accelerating structural 
reforms. But let us first highlight the huge benefits of EMU precisely in the current crisis. Can 
anyone  imagine  how  the  16  euro  area  countries  would  have  weathered  the  international 
financial storm had they retained their 16 currencies? Anyone can appreciate the scale and 
seriousness  of  the  financial  problems  these  countries  would  have  faced  had  each  one 
retained its currency. 
Remember  what  happened  in  the  early  1990s  when  the  effects  of  the  US  recession  took 
some time to be felt in Europe, but eventually did so with unusual virulence. Amid the serious 
challenges  arising  from  German  reunification,  the  lack  of  a  coordinated  monetary  policy 
response on this side of the Atlantic then led to massive speculation against exchange rates 
and to a major foreign exchange crisis, which some did not hesitate to call the collapse of the 
European Monetary System. This speculation ultimately imposed enormous costs for all the 
countries involved. This will not happen again now.  
At this time of enormous uncertainty, the key institution of the Monetary Union, the ECB, has 
reacted in an exemplary fashion. In the space of five months it has managed to reduce the 
Euribor  from  5.3%  to  2%  through  changes  in  monetary  policy,  despite  the  increases  in 
spreads  arising  from  the  financial  crisis.  And  it  has  further  adopted  a  policy  of  unlimited 
liquidity provision, in coordination with other central banks, as illustrated by the agreements 
for liquidity provision in currencies other than the euro. 
The other European economic authorities have also reacted forcefully to support the financial 
system,  to  safeguard  its  functioning  and  to  stimulate  the  various  economies.  Amid  these 
global  difficulties,  cooperation  and  coordination  between  national  authorities,  particularly  in 
Europe and in EMU, is today more necessary than ever. Responses based on the adoption 
of measures designed from an eminently national standpoint are, as in the past, bound to 
fail. The response to the current difficulties assailing our economies involves more Monetary 
Union and more European Union. 
Allow me to conclude by responding to the argument currently being aired in the press on the 
uneven impact of the crisis in different economies. As I have said, referring to the differentials 
observed in the past, this problem cannot be resolved by the ECB. It is for governments and 
national  parliaments  to  adopt  the  structural  reforms  I  mentioned  earlier.  Indeed,  the  crisis 
should in fact be taken as an opportunity to carry out all these structural reforms. 
Weak growth potential, competitiveness and productivity problems, the need to find an ideal 
level of regulation and government intervention, and insufficient goods and labour markets 
flexibility are, to name but a few, some of the challenges that remain central to the welfare of 
Europeans  and  that  should,  therefore,  continue  to  feature  prominently  on  the  political 
agenda. Beyond the short term, these are the factors that determine the relative economic 
performance of the various euro area countries. 
National policies should work to increase the capacity of each national economy to adjust to 
adverse shocks and to promote productivity and the use of the different production factors. 
The  longer  the  adoption  of  the  necessary  national  policies  is  delayed,  the  greater  the 
potential  costs  will  be  in  the  face  of  adverse  events.  As  central  bankers,  it  is  for  us  to 
concentrate our efforts on maintaining price stability, providing the appropriate framework for 
sustained growth and increases in employment and welfare. But it is also for us to keep the 
economic authorities and social agents fully aware of the rules of play of a monetary union. 
Clearly, this anniversary comes at a time of great complexity in the international economy, 
from which neither the euro area nor Spain are isolated. The challenges are great and the 
uncertainty  very  high.  But  it  would  be  unfair  not  to  acknowledge  that  the  course  of  the 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 3
common project over these past ten years offers sound grounds to maintain a reasonable 
degree of optimism about our ability to face them.  
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 24/2009
