V K Sharma: Issues in capital account convertibility and lessons from 
the current financial crisis 
Inaugural address by Shri V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Joint  Reserve  Bank  of  India-Bank  of  France  Seminar  on  "Issues  in  Capital  Account 
Convertibility and Lessons from the Current Financial Crisis", held at College of Agricultural 
Banking, Pune, 2-3 April, 2009. 
The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. 
 Mr. Jean Leviol, Minister Counsellor for Economic Affairs, Embassy of France, New Delhi, 
Mr.  Gerard  Beduneau,  Director,  IBFI,  Banque  de  France,  Mrs.  Isabelle  Vaillant,  Deputy 
Director,  International  and  Economic  Relations,  Banque  de  France,  Mr.  Sanjaya  Panth, 
Senior  Resident  Representative,  IMF,  New  Delhi,  Mr.  Sandip  Ghose,  Principal,  College  of 
Agricultural Banking, Dr. R. K. Pattnaik, Advisor, Reserve Bank of India and Dear Friends, 
I welcome you all to the RBI-BdF Seminar on "Issues in Capital Account Convertibility and 
Lessons from the Current Financial Crisis". I am indeed very privileged and honoured to be 
here  in  the  midst  of  you  all  this  morning.  I  am  particularly  very  happy  to  note  that  the 
Programme  is  very  well  conceived  and  structured  what  with  all  the  material  and  relevant 
topics germane to the subject matter of the Seminar – including, no less, the recent Report of 
the BIS CGFS Working Group on “Capital Flows and Emerging Market Economies” chaired 
by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India – having been covered with 
the appropriate focus.  
The  raison  d’être  of  capital  account  convertibility,  as  a  highly  desirable  policy  goal,  is  its 
promise of most efficient allocation of capital and the benefits that it, as a result, brings both 
to capital importing and exporting countries. The classical text book and, now fairly standard, 
condition precedent to full capital account convertibility is sound, robust and resilient financial 
system  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  broad  based  convergence  of  a  country  on  key  macro-
economic parameters like inflation, nominal interest rates, current account deficit, gross fiscal 
deficit and outstanding debt as a percentage of GDP, on the other. However, significantly the 
recent financial crisis has thrown into sharp relief, as never before, the critical and important 
role  of 
that  of  shop 
floor/products/services  inflation  alone,  as  a  key  variable,  in  monetary  policy  response.  For 
what happened was unprecedented in that with monetary policy focused only on traditional 
CPI,  interest  rates  were  kept  low  in  spite  of  exploding  prices  of  assets  like  real 
estate/property,  credit  assets,  equity  and  commodities.  And  this  was  all  made  possible 
because of the huge current account surpluses in China and other EMEs, and huge private 
capital inflows into EMEs in excess of their current account deficit, getting recycled back as 
official  capital  flows  into  government  bonds  of  reserve  currency  countries,  especially  the 
USA, resulting in compression of long term yields which, in turn, translated into lower long 
term interest rates even for the riskier asset classes mentioned above. This chasing of yield, 
due to global savings glut, in turn, led to unprecedented underpricing of risk as reflected in 
the  all-time-low  risk  premia  with  junk  bond  spreads  becoming  indistinguishable  from 
investment grade debt! Such a low interest rate environment coupled with luxuriant supply of 
liquidity,  created  enabling  environment  for  excessive  leverage  and  risk  taking  so  much  so 
that American household debt exceeded the country's GDP! This, in turn, led to a sort of the 
so  called  “Ponzi  finance  culture”  where,  with  personal  savings  rate  at  close  to  zero, 
consumption spending binge was driven through withdrawal of home equity made possible 
by omni-present home equity loans rather than through incomes! Thus, the entire debt binge 
was  spent 
to  a  veritable  partial 
deindustrialization of America, as it were, with the possible exception of the services sector. 
inflation/asset  bubbles  also,  as  opposed 
in  consumption  and  not 
“asset  price” 
investment, 
leading 
to 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 1
All this while, the US growth story stayed non inflationary due primarily to cheap imports from 
China, Asia and EMEs. 
In a refreshing and instructive contrast, in an almost identical macroeconomic environment in 
the USA in the 1980s, the Volcker Fed resolutely tightened monetary policy to counter the 
potentially inflationary impact of unsustainably high fiscal and current account deficits of the 
USA as a result of which, and also the fact that, unlike this time, there was no savings glut, 
US interest rates rose almost to 18-20%! This Fed action saved the day in as much as the 
risk premia became very high ex ante avoiding, unlike in the recent crisis, underpricing of risk 
and  the  financial  meltdown  although  it  exacted  its  toll  in  the  way  of  hugely  mis-aligned 
exchange rates (with £ = $ 1, and $ 1 = ¥ 365!). But, significantly, even at these historically 
high interest rates, unlike now, the world became cagey about continuing to lend to the USA 
in US Dollars to a point that the USA almost came to issuing the so-called Reagan Bonds, 
i.e.  US  treasuries  denominated  in  Deutschemark,  Pound  Sterling  &  Yen.  Going  forward, 
however, things were normalized as a result of the Plaza Accord between G-5 countries.  
Adoption of capital account convertibility leads inevitably to the so-called “Impossible Trinity” 
which involves having to choose between an autonomous exchange rate policy and interest 
rate/monetary  policy.  In  an  increasingly  open  capital  account  context,  the  appropriate 
exchange rate regime would be a flexible exchange rate regime. This is because the flexible 
exchange rate would make the risk of foreign currency denominated borrowing by banks and 
firms  explicit.  This  would  help  discourage  the  incurrence,  and  accumulation,  of  un-hedged 
foreign currency liabilities. Indeed, the low volatility of exchange rates also leads economic 
agents  to  believe  that  the  authorities  are  insuring  them  against  the  exchange  rate  risks. 
Significantly, lack of volatility, and stability, also discourages the institutional development of 
market mechanisms such as derivatives for hedging by the economic agents. The seemingly 
fixed and stable exchange rates are a form of implicit guarantee of the authorities and hence 
a source of “moral hazard”. They tend to promote unhedged foreign currency borrowing and 
since  they  are  least  credible  at  long  horizons,  they  skew  financial  flows  towards  the  short 
end. The recent and, not so recent, currency crises in the 1990s occurred under currency 
regimes where exchange rates were either fixed or kept in a narrow/tight band. This, in turn, 
as many research studies have shown, also inhibits the flow, over the medium to long-term, 
of  foreign  capital  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Typically,  the  foreign  capital  has  preferred  the 
destinations  which  have  well-developed,  deep,  liquid  and  efficient  hedging  institutional 
structures like forex derivatives. To revisit the more relevant experience of the recent East 
Asian  Currency  Crisis,  the  cases  of  Thailand  and  Indonesia  stand  out.  In  Thailand,  banks 
were required to hedge their positions by acquiring offsetting assets in foreign currency and 
they  did  so  by  making  foreign  currency  loans  to  Domestic  Corporates  which  became  the 
repositories  of  unhedged  currency  and  interest  rate  risk  exposures.  In  Indonesia,  on  the 
other  hand,  corporates  borrowed  off-shore  directly  in  foreign  currency  and  their  such 
unhedged market exposure (both currency and interest rate), in turn, created credit risk for 
domestic banks that also extended from Domestic Currency Loans. 
If only the above East Asian countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines 
had  contended  with  this,  they  would  have  preferred  the  continuous  sensitivity  of  flexible 
exchange  rate  regime.  After  all,  the  chief  merit  of  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  is  that  it 
admits of monetary policy autonomy/discretion/independence/ sovereignty and insulates the 
domestic  economy  against  the  shocks  of  external/foreign  disturbances.  (The  example  of 
external/foreign disturbances would be the appreciation of the US dollar because of the hike 
in the US Interest Rates to respond to its domestic compulsions). As regards the down-side 
of  the  exchange  rate  volatility,  the  same  should  be  allowed  to  be  handled  by  institutional 
mechanisms such as well-developed derivatives market. (Indeed a recent study shows that 
there  was  no  statistically  significant  negative  effect  of  exchange  rate  volatility  on  external 
trade and investment after 1980s though, of course, it was found not to be so in the 1960s 
and 1970s. This happened due to wide-spread development and use of derivatives market in 
the 1980s and beyond).  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2009
the 
foregoing, 
imbalances  manifesting 
through  capital  account.  From 
Interestingly, it is significant that the recent financial crisis, caused primarily due to the huge 
official capital flows into the rich industrial countries, especially the USA, affected, first and 
foremost,  the  USA  and  other  advanced  industrial  countries  with  full  capital  account 
convertibility rather than EMEs; it affected EMEs as well but only as “an effect” through the 
transmission channel of capital account, quite unlike the previous ones like Latin American, 
Russian, East Asian crisis, where these countries were originally affected because of macro 
economic 
it 
conclusively follows that there is a very strong organic connect between open capital account 
and sound, robust and resilient financial system. For after all, even if global macro-economic 
imbalances  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  provided  an  enabling  environment  for 
excessive leverage and risk taking, it was still the responsibility of regulators and supervisors 
to have taken appropriate macro prudential measures, preemptively and proactively, rather 
than reactively, to prevent such an apocalyptic event.  
The greatest good and the highest virtue, as it were, of an open capital account is not so 
much the apparent, and oft quoted, benefit of efficient allocation of capital per se, as the fact 
that,  once  it  has  been  fully  achieved,  it  does  not  permit,  except  in  the  very  short  term, 
“unearned”  and  “unshared”  prosperity  but  delivers  “sustainable  prosperity”  only  if  it  is 
“earned”  and  “shared”  prosperity!  For  macro  economic  imbalances  need  to  be  seen  as 
sustainable, or unsustainable, with reference not only to deficits alone, but equally also, with 
respect to surpluses. For example, China's current account surplus is 10%+ of GDP and that 
of  America,  until  recently,  was  7%  of  GDP.  Such  large  deficits,  and  surpluses,  are 
unsustainable  in  the  long  term  and  capital  mobility  will  ensure  that,  in  due  course,  such 
imbalances are unwound by export of goods and services from the deficit reserve currency 
country and by import of goods and services by the surplus country.  
While capital account convertibility is a highly desirable policy goal, it entails a rigorous and 
stringent trade off in the sense that for the benefits that it brings, it also imposes a cost/price 
of prudent and responsible behaviour and the very highest of governance standards on all 
stakeholders,  especially  governments,  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  in  terms  of 
consistent  and  unwavering  pursuit  of  sound  and  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  and 
effective and credible regulation and supervision of the financial system. 
To sum up, capital account convertibility is about macro economic equilibrium, balance and 
harmony.  In  fact,  the  whole  thing  can  be  likened  to  cosmic  balance/equilibrium/harmony 
where  stars,  suns,  planets,  all  orbit  within  the  inviolable  discipline  of  their  elliptical  orbits 
which do not permit deviant behaviour beyond the shortest and the longest distance from the 
suns and stars of the orbiting planets! Any deviant behaviour/conduct, inconsistent with the 
cosmic  harmonious  balance  and  equilibrium,  will  invite  and  inflict  extremely  retributive 
backlash;  the  more  severe  and  prolonged  the  disequilibrium  and  imbalance,  the  more 
wrenching and excruciating will be the resulting pain as is currently being experienced. But 
the sobering chastising that the world has experienced in the current financial crisis, should 
stand us in good stead going forward provided all the lessons have been unforgettably learnt, 
imbibed,  assimilated  and  completely  internalized!  Perfect  replication  of  this  cosmic 
harmonious  balance  and  equilibrium  is,  therefore,  to  my  mind,  the  best  way  to  approach 
sustainable capital account convertibility framework as an ideal public policy goal.  
With  these  words,  I  close  my  inaugural  address  and  wish  the  Seminar  all  the  success  it 
deserves. Thank you so very much! 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 3
