Mario Draghi: An overview of banking in Italy 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Italian Banking Association 
Annual Meeting, Rome, 8 July 2009. 
 Credit and the banks 
Lending  to  the  private  sector  has  slowed  further.  In  April  the  change  over  three  months 
turned negative: in May it was equal to an annualized contraction of 0.9 per cent. In the last 
decade, the average annual rate of growth of lending to the private sector was 9.6 per cent. 
The  contraction  involves  credit  to  firms,  while  that  to  households  continues  to  expand, 
although at a significantly slower pace than in recent years. The slowdown in lending by the 
leading banking groups has been particularly marked. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has increased its support of banks’ liquidity in exceptional 
measure. It has also launched a plan to purchase covered bonds issued by intermediaries in 
the  euro  area  for  a  total  of  €60  billion,  with  the  main  objective  of  easing  the  financing 
conditions  for  credit  institutions  and  firms  and  of  encouraging  the  banks  to  maintain  and 
increase lending to their customers. The Bank of Italy is participating in these purchases in 
proportion to its share of the ECB’s capital. 
Following the reduction in the Eurosystem’s official rates, the interest rates on bank loans to 
Italian  households  and  firms  have  fallen  to  the  average  level  for  the  area,  except  for 
consumer credit rates, which remain higher. The increase in credit risk has translated into a 
widening  of  the  gap  in  the  cost  of  credit  between  small  and  large  firms,  with  an  adverse 
impact on those that currently have the greatest need for bank financing. 
The recession is also affecting credit quality. In the first quarter of this year, the ratio of new 
bad debts to total bank loans outstanding reached 1.6 per cent, the highest level this decade; 
it had risen to more than 3 per cent following the recession of the early 1990s. The increase 
in non-performing loans and overdue instalments prefigures a further deterioration.  
In the South of Italy, borrower risk is on average greater than in the Centre and North, but in 
March the rate of growth of bank loans in the South exceeded that in the other parts of the 
country, even though the cost of a loan was 1.7 percentage points higher on average. 
The deterioration in loan quality is increasingly affecting bank profits. In the first quarter of 
this year, the loan loss provisions of the main banking groups more than doubled, absorbing 
half their operating profits. Profits fell overall by 40 per cent; the ROE on ordinary operations 
halved to 4.5 per cent. 
The  factors  that  are  constraining  bank  profitability  today  will  become  more  intense, 
responding to the recession with the usual lags. The commitment to curbing costs must be 
intensified and the economies foreseen in business plans must be achieved more quickly. 
The banks will be decisive in determining whether the crisis we are facing is more or less 
long-lasting, more or less deep. It is necessary to reconcile prudent management and capital 
soundness with the need not to deny financial support to firms with good potential for growth 
and a real ability to weather the crisis. 
It would be dereliction of duty if the banks and the Bank of Italy were to stray from the path of 
rigorous evaluation of creditworthiness. A healthy banking system is essential to growth; it 
safeguards the savings entrusted to banks.  
However,  it  is  equally  important  that  in  deciding  on  loans  banks  use  all  the  information 
available,  that  they  supplement  statistical  scoring  methods  
which  lose  some  of  their 
predictive power at times of crisis 
with direct knowledge of customers and their real potential 
for  growth  and  profitability  in  the  long  term.  A  banking  system  with  local  roots  is  of  great 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 1
value; it needs to be exploited and where it has been lost it must be rebuilt. Banks must take 
advantage of their grass-roots knowledge of customers and avoid over-reliance on automatic 
processes. There is ample scope for improvement. Some banks, some of them large ones, 
are  beginning  to  move  in  this  direction,  reviewing  their  organizational  models  and  their 
decision-making procedures. 
What prudential supervision requires of banks 
Capital 
Italian banks’ own funds are well above the regulatory minima and have remained so even 
through  the  worst  of  the  financial  crisis.  The  capital  ratios  of  the  leading  banking  groups 
increased in the first three months of this year. 
I have said, and I say again, that a strengthening is nonetheless necessary. It is not just a 
question of maintaining strong safeguards for stability; we must compete on an equal footing 
with  the  foreign  banks  which  have  had  to  resort  to  massive  injections  of  public  money  in 
recent months; we must be prepared, as of now, to operate with a capital endowment that 
future regulations will require to be larger than at present. Above all, capital strengthening is 
indispensable  in  order  to  face  the  deterioration  in  the  macroeconomic  situation  without 
neglecting to give firms, households and the economy the support they need. 
During this phase the Bank of Italy does not allow banks to make early redemptions of capital 
instruments  without  a  plan  for  their  replacement  with  resources  of  equivalent  quality  and 
quantity. 
The quality of the Italian banks’ capital is high by international standards. We are also aware 
that  the  rigour  with  which  we  evaluate  the  inclusion  of  financial  instruments  in  regulatory 
capital has appeared, in the past, to put Italian banks at a disadvantage with respect to the 
situation  in  other  countries.  We  deliberately  maintained  this  policy,  even  when  the  market 
seemed to tolerate particularly high levels of risk.  
These  practices,  these  evaluation  criteria,  which  have  been  put  to  the  test  in  the  last  two 
years, have so far brought benefits to banks, the economy, and the public finances.  
Liquidity 
The system’s liquidity is still guaranteed by the massive injections of funds from the central 
banks.  The  oversight  policy  we  introduced  in  2007  has  helped  Italy’s  banking  system  to 
weather the severe strains of the last part of 2008 without major shocks. We continue to ask 
the banks to ensure that foreseeable outflows are covered over a broad range of maturities. 
The tools of analysis and intervention are being continually improved. The ten leading Italian 
banking groups were asked to conduct a liquidity stress test, the results of which have shown 
that the largest groups have a high resistance to stress. 
In international cooperation fora, work is under way to draw up common safeguards against 
liquidity risks. The Bank of Italy favours a system based on two instruments: on the one side, 
the  requirement  permanently  to  keep  sufficient  liquid  reserves  to  ensure  that,  even  in  the 
presence of stress, outflows are covered for an adequate period of time; on the other side, 
the maintenance of a minimum structural equilibrium between the duration of liabilities and 
that of assets. Opinion is broadly converging on these positions. 
The  one-year  financing  operation  recently  conducted  by  the  Eurosystem  has  achieved 
records both in the number of counterparties (1,121) and in the amount allotted (more than 
€442 billion). The participation of Italian banks amounted to less than 3 per cent of the total. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2009
Stress testing bank assets 
For  the  quality  of  loans,  and  more  generally  of  bank  assets,  thorough  stress  testing, 
performed  in  a  coordinated  manner  under  the  guidance  of  the  supervisory  authorities,  is 
likewise essential in order to verify the soundness of the single banks and of the system as a 
whole, to improve the transparency of their balance sheets, and to restore the credit circuit to 
normal operation. 
In  the  United  States,  in  the  weeks  immediately  following  the  publication  of  the  stress  test 
results the 19  banks  concerned  were  able, in  part  by  selling  non-strategic  assets,  to  raise 
almost  $65  billion  of  new  equity  capital  and  issue  over  $20  billion  of  bonds  without 
government guarantee. The effect spread to all the US banking sector, which jointly placed 
almost $90 billion of new shares in the quarter just ended. 
Ahead of a similar coordinated exercise planned at the European level, in recent weeks we 
completed a stress test of the Italian banking system by estimating the loan losses that would 
occur in the period 2009-10 in even more unfavourable macroeconomic conditions than the 
present ones: the portion of losses not covered by operating profit would equal about one 
fifth of the system’s end-2008 excess capital; overall, the outcome confirmed banks’ capital 
adequacy. 
For the time being, the diversity of intermediaries, methodologies that are still too varied, and 
difficulties in comparing results make it impracticable to publish the individual results of the 
stress tests under way at European level. I believe, however, that this objective cannot be 
deferred for long without delaying the necessary return of banks to the private capital market. 
Good rules, the right incentives 
Banks’ governance 
Rigorous risk management, the safeguarding of banks’ reputations, the verification of correct 
conduct  and  compliance  with  the  rules  require  reliable  and  effective  systems  of  corporate 
governance and internal controls: these, even before the Bank of Italy’s supervision, are the 
first line of defence for the stability of banks and the system as a whole. Last year we issued 
rules  with  which  banks  had  to  comply  by  30  June,  where  appropriate  by  amending  their 
bylaws. 
Bylaws require our approval; the interaction with banks has been intense. While respecting 
every bank’s autonomy in choosing its own model of governance, we stressed the need for 
consistent and uniform approaches, clear rules, and a proper balance of power. We called on 
banks  to  simplify  their  governance  structures  by  limiting  the  number  of  directors,  avoiding 
overlapping tasks and administrative bodies. We asked that the Chairman act as coordinator 
and guarantor in a dialectical relationship with top management and laid down the conditions 
for his correct activity within the executive committee, whenever this was established. For the 
first time, we requested the inclusion of independent members on the boards of directors of 
unlisted banks. 
Owing  to  the  distinctive  traits  of  the  shareholder  base  and  governance  structures  of 
cooperative  banks,  we  paid  special  attention  to  the  mechanisms  for  appointing  their 
governing  boards,  aiming  to  maintain  their  strengths  (social  responsibility,  close  ties  with 
households and the productive fabric) and curb the risk of management being excessively 
self-referential. In keeping with the spirit of mutualism and the egalitarian principle underlying 
these  banks’  structures,  we  promoted  voting  mechanisms  capable  of  giving  voice  to 
significant  minorities  among  shareholders;  favoured  an  enlargement  of  proxy  voting;  and 
suggested  other  instruments  to  enable  more  effective  participation  by  shareholders. 
Significant, if uneven, progress has been made; but more remains to be done. 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 3
Remuneration and incentives 
One  of  the  lessons  to  emerge  from  the  crisis  is  that  bad  systems  for  compensating 
management  and  those  responsible  for  key  functions  in  banks  can  favour  the  excessive 
accumulation of risks. People paid on the basis of short-term results pursue immediate gain 
without taking account of the associated risks. The result is a false accounting of profit that 
generates a deadly risk spiral. 
Starting  last  year  the  Bank  of  Italy,  first  among  the  authorities  of  the  leading  countries, 
introduced  specific  rules  on  compensation  schemes  as  part  of  the  rules  for  banks’ 
governance. In April this year the Financial Stability Board issued the principles underlying 
sound compensation practices. 
First and foremost, provision must be made for an adequate balance between the fixed and 
variable components of compensation; moreover, pay should be related to actual profits over 
the  longer  term,  taking  the  related  risks  into  proper  account.  Special  precautions  must  be 
taken to protect the integrity and status of banks’ control function; the governing bodies, and 
shareholders especially, must be involved in setting compensation policies and in verifying 
their implementation. 
The Bank of Italy has formed a task force to assess current compensation schemes and call 
for correctives when required. The supervisory area is attentive to any international practices 
that might emerge in applying the principles and recommendations recently issued. 
investment 
The prevention of money laundering 
Last  year  the  Bank  of  Italy  took  over  direct  responsibility  for  the  anti-money-laundering 
controls that had previously been carried out by the Ufficio Italiano dei Cambi.  
Cooperation with the magistracy and the Finance Police is essential to the success of the 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), to which the Bank of Italy allocates adequate resources for 
its increasingly demanding tasks. 
Anti-money-laundering  controls  have  become  a  regular  part  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  onsite 
inspections of financial institutions. In 2008 the Supervision Area and the FIU carried out 191 
inspections  at  banks, 
firms,  asset  management  companies  and  other 
intermediaries.  A  number  of  recurrent  failures  to  comply  fully  with  the  rules  were  found: 
insufficient  checking  of  customers,  incomplete  record-keeping,  inadequate  assessment  of 
anomalous transactions, poor staff training, and methods of control lacking in incisiveness. 
Sanctions, reprimands and numerous reports to the law enforcement authorities show that 
the banks underestimate the need for full compliance with the rules, for strict performance of 
their obligations. A change of attitude is necessary. Corporate bodies and officers must take 
responsibility  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  anti-money-laundering  systems.  The  control 
bodies have specific duties for which they can be called to account, including in the course of 
inspections.  
This anti-money-laundering strategy is beginning to produce effects. The number of reports 
of suspicious transactions that intermediaries transmitted to the FIU increased by 16 per cent 
to around 14,600 in 2008, and in the first four months of 2009 there was a further sharp rise 
of about 50 per cent compared with the same period of the previous year. 
Customer protection 
The  crisis  has  accentuated  the  need  for  continuing  action  to  raise  the  standards  of 
correctness and transparency in relations with the public, to resolve disputes between banks 
and customers quickly and to promote the informed use of financial instruments by savers 
and investors. The stability of the financial system hinges on customer confidence. 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2009
The Bank of Italy’s new rules on the transparency of banking and financial services represent 
a thorough overhaul with respect to the past. Customers must be provided with information 
that  is  easy  to  understand  and  effectively  useful  for  determining  whether  the  transactions 
proposed  are  in  their  interest  and  for  assessing  the  correctness  of  the  person  making  the 
proposal.  The  rules  require  intermediaries  to  institute  internal  procedures  that  guarantee 
correct conduct. 
The comments received in the course of the public consultation that was completed in May 
confirmed the validity of the reform, which will be issued this month.  
As  a  complement  to  the  civil  justice  system,  a  Banking  and  Financial  Arbitrator  has  been 
created to give customers an economical and rapid means of obtaining impartial rulings in 
disputes  over  banking  and  financial  services.  Three  boards  will  be  instituted,  one  for  the 
North of Italy, one for the Centre and one for the South. Bank customers will also be able to 
appeal  to  the  boards  through  the  branches  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  which  will  provide  the 
facilities and technical support for the Arbitrator. 
I raised the question of the fee charged on a customer’s maximum overdraft at the beginning 
of 2007, calling on the banks to abandon a practice that is almost indefensible in terms of 
transparency and efficiency. The law gave the Bank of Italy only the power to make sure that 
these  clauses  were  applied  transparently  –  not  the  power  to  replace  them  with  different 
contractual  provisions.  Repeated  acts  of  moral  suasion  were  only  effective  with  the  major 
banking  groups.  Legislative  intervention  was  necessary,  although  the  reordering  of  the 
various provisions governing relations between banks and customers remains desirable and 
is provided for in the Community law recently passed by Parliament. 
The banks must now solve the problem at the root. Let them, of their own accord and once 
and for all, supplant these complex, opaque fees with reasonable commitment fees based on 
the amount of funds made available. For the rest, everything must be brought back to the 
transparent application of interest rates. 
From  the  beginning  of  2010  the  threshold  rates  for  anti-usury  purposes  will  include  all 
accessory charges: the maximum overdraft fee, if it is still being charged, commitment fees, 
mediation fees, and any other costs in connection with the loan.  
Non-bank intermediation 
Among more than 1,000 non-bank financial intermediaries registered under Article 106 of the 
Consolidated Law on Banking and 160,000 financial agents and loan brokers, more than a 
few are marginal, fragile, of doubtful professionalism and sometimes dubious legality. In the 
public interest and in the interest of the more responsible, qualified operators, it is urgent to 
set the situation to rights. 
We  have  begun  a  rigorous  selection,  intensifying  the  checks  at  the  time  of  entry  in  the 
registers  and  those  on  continuing  satisfaction  of  the  minimum  standards  set  by  law  and 
compliance  with  the  rules.  The  Report  that  we  recently  submitted  to  Parliament  and  the 
Government gives an account of this. 
We have struck more than 11,000 financial agents from the register. In cooperation with the 
Finance Police, we have begun extensive checks in the sectors at greatest risk. Acting on 
our  proposal,  the  Ministry  for  the  Economy  and  Finance  has  deregistered  more  than  30 
financial  companies  for  which  significant  anomalies  were  found;  many  of  them  had  been 
engaged  in  providing  guarantees  and  sureties.  Controls  are  being  carried  out  on  the 
intermediaries specialized in granting loans secured by a pledge of one fifth of the borrower’s 
salary and have already given rise to sanctions. 
Recent measures of the Ministry for the Economy and Finance and the Bank of Italy have 
begun  to  make  the  criteria  for  entry  in  the  registers  more  stringent.  But  more  far-reaching 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 5
interventions  are  essential  to  update  obsolete  provisions  and  fill  regulatory  gaps.  We  are 
ready to offer the Government our technical support. 
Asset management 
The  crisis  has  exacerbated  the  longstanding  problems  of  the  Italian  asset  management 
industry. 
For  years,  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  watchwords  for  the  industry  have  been  consolidation  and 
independence. 
A competitive repositioning of the largest asset managers is under way at international level. 
Some steps towards rationalization are also beginning to be taken in Italy. Recent months 
have  seen  spin-offs  by  banking  groups  aimed  at  creating 
independent  operators. 
Consolidation can yield efficiency gains, which need to be transferred to investors in order to 
reduce the costs borne by them and fuel the resumption of investment. 
just  begun  a 
Management  companies’ 
consultation  on  new  regulations  concerning  the  management  and  coordination  exerted  by 
bank parent companies on their asset management subsidiaries. Besides clearly defining the 
strategies  they  pursue  in  the  sector,  banking  groups  will  have  to  ensure  the  genuine 
independence  of  asset  management  companies  as  regards  their  investment  choices  and 
marketing policies. 
I have repeatedly underscored the disadvantage that derives from the difference between the 
tax regime for the sector in Italy and abroad. This needs to be revised.  
full  autonomy  remains  essential.  We  have 
The reform of European supervision 
Supervisory colleges that oversee the consolidated position of international groups, uniform 
supervisory  rules  and  practices,  and  a  close  relationship  between  the  European  Central 
Bank  and  national  supervisory  authorities  are  the  three  pillars  of  future  European 
supervision. 
The proposals put forward by the de Larosière group largely meet these needs but envisage 
a complex architecture. 
A  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  in  which  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  will 
participate, will be responsible for macroprudential analysis and supervision. It is important 
that  it  be  headed  by  the  president  of  the  ECB,  that  its  activity  go  beyond  merely  warning 
about risks, that it be able to verify implementation of its recommendations and promote the 
introduction of countercyclical measures. 
Supervision  of  all  banks,  including  European  groups,  will  remain  a  national  responsibility. 
The  overall  context  must  change,  however.  The  objective  is:  common  rules,  common 
practices,  a  common  culture,  with  a  single  rulebook  applicable  throughout  Europe,  and  a 
strong coordinating role for the supervisory colleges. 
Equally important is the harmonization of depositor-guarantee schemes, of the instruments 
for intervention in crises, and of the rules for the transfer of liquidity between the units of a 
banking group. 
The Bank of Italy is already at the forefront in promoting concrete progress for the groups for 
which it is home supervisor. Joint and coordinated inspections in the various subsidiaries of a 
group, conducted together with the host-country authorities, are becoming standard practice. 
Just a few years ago, such progress was inconceivable.  
6 
 BIS Review 90/2009
Best  practices  must  be disseminated  as  supervisory  authorities  continue  to  converge.  The 
particularly incisive approach to inspections and supervision that typifies the Italian tradition 
is a valid reference point. 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 7
