Axel A Weber: The future of banking regulation 
Dinner speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Conference  on  "The  Future  of  Banking  Regulation"  organised  by  Imperial  College  London 
and the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 24 September 2009.  
 1  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  you  here  at  this  conference  dinner  which 
concludes the first day of scholarly exchange on the future of banking regulation.  
In the light of the financial crisis, the subject we are dealing with has major priority and, as 
the agenda shows, is a very broad topic in terms of the issues it covers. Under discussion 
are questions about the effects of banking regulation as well as institutional aspects of how 
banking  regulation  should  be  organised.  Above  all,  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  banking 
regulation should reflect the state of development in the financial markets, which implies that 
it  is  exposed  to  constant  change.  This  is  revealed,  not  least,  by  the  history  of  banking 
regulation, which I would like to go into briefly before turning to the prevailing deficiencies of 
banking regulation and the main challenges in strengthening financial stability. 
A brief history of banking regulation 
2  
Safeguarding financial stability – as a prerequisite for macroeconomic growth and prosperity 
–  is  the  main  driver  behind  banking  regulation.  Consequently,  calls  for  better  banking 
regulation have typically emerged in the wake of financial instability. In the post-war era, the 
collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  the  early  1970s  combined  with  the  oil  shocks  of 
1973 and 1974 raised the first severe concerns about global financial stability. This prompted 
the  central  bank  governors  of  the  G10  to  establish  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision in 1974, which eventually led to the creation of the capital adequacy standards 
Basel I and Basel II. The initial task of the Basel Committee, however, was not to harmonise 
international banking supervision, but rather to promote education, information sharing and 
research in this field. 
The need for convergence of supervisory standards, namely those of capital measures and 
capital standards, emerged as a result of the debt crisis that erupted in 1982. In particular, 
the fiscal burdens caused by the recapitalisation of international banks and IMF support to 
economies  that  were  severely  affected  by  the  debt  crisis  led  to  the  call  for  better  banking 
regulation  and  a  convergence  of  international  standards.  In  1988,  the  Basel  Committee 
published the Basel Capital Accord which had been agreed by its members. The two aims of 
this 1988 Accord were the same as those for international financial supervision ever since 
and up to the present day: first, to strengthen the stability of the international banking system, 
and,  second,  to  eliminate  or  mitigate  distortions  in  international  competition  among  banks 
due  to  differences  in  national  regulation.  Undoubtedly,  the  main  achievements  of  the  first 
Basel  Capital  Accord  were  that  it  represented  a  significant  step  towards  international 
harmonisation of banking regulation – it was later applied by more than 100 countries – and 
that, for the first time, it put the focus on the relationship between the capital that banks hold 
and the weighted risks that banks take.  
After its implementation, it was not long before Basel I came in for increasing criticism. First, 
it  did  not  adequately  cover  all  the  risks  to  which  banks  were  exposed.  Second,  the  risk 
weightings  were  presented  in  a  very  crude  form  that  was  an  inadequate  reflection  of  the 
actual underlying risks. Despite such early warning signs, it was a long road that led to the 
implementation  of  Basel  II.  In  the  interim,  financial  turbulence,  namely  the  Mexican  crisis 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 1
(1994-95) and the Asian crisis (1997-98) had further heightened the awareness among the 
G10 countries of the need for greater international cooperation in financial market oversight. 
As a consequence, the Financial Stability Forum was founded in 1999 and the first working 
groups were entrusted with drawing up appropriate measures for financial regulation. Out of 
this process the Basel II framework with its three pillars that you are all aware of was born 
and finally published in June 2004.  
Basel II was scheduled for implementation by end of 2006. However, owing to its complexity 
–  especially  with  regard  to  the  different  approaches  to  assessing  the  minimum  capital 
requirements  –  the  timetable  allowed  fairly  long  transition  periods  for  the  change  of 
supervisory regime. As a result, Basel II had not yet been fully implemented by most credit 
institutions  when  the  subprime  crisis  emerged  in  the  summer  of  2007.  In  particular,  many 
banks – including the EU ones – applied the new Basel II capital rules for the first time in 
2008. 
Consequently, we still have only a restricted knowledge, based on real data, of how Basel II 
works in practice. And, most notably, we cannot blame Basel II for the recent financial crisis. 
Nevertheless,  the  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  deficiencies  in  financial  regulation  within 
and  beyond  the  supervisory  framework  of  Basel  II  that  have  to  be  addressed  based  on  a 
thorough analysis.  
3  
Challenges in strengthening financial stability 
Banking regulation 
3.1  
The  search  for  the  underlying  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  has  been  intense.  Although  a 
definitive assessment is still outstanding, it is widely agreed that the seeds of the crisis were 
sown by a whole range of developments at the micro and macro economic levels. For this 
reason, addressing identified deficiencies in banking regulation and the supervisory process 
can  be  no  more  than  a  building  block,  albeit  a  very  important  one,  for  enhancing  the 
resilience of the global financial system. 
The  most  prominent  shortcomings  revealed  by  the  financial  crisis  fall  within  the  scope  of 
credit  risk  transfer  and  the  expansion  of  the  “originate  to  distribute”  business  model  that 
accompanied it. These deficiencies concern insufficient capital backing for securitisations as 
well as inadequate risk management within financial institutions and a lack of transparency in 
the whole transfer process. Consequently, the necessary modifications affect all three pillars 
of  Basel  II.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  responded  promptly  in  the 
light of these insights, and many reforms are already under way. More specifically, the capital 
requirements 
for  securitisations  have  already  been  raised  and  stricter  disclosure 
requirements  have  been  published.  Both  measures  will  have  to  be  implemented  by  2010. 
Moreover, the Basel Committee has strengthened the guidelines for the supervisory review 
process under pillar two of the Basel framework and thus addressed key lessons of the crisis 
with regard to governance, the management of risk concentrations, stress testing, valuation 
practices and exposures to off-balance sheet activities.  
Procyclicality 
3.2  
In  addition  to  the  measures  that  have  already  been  taken,  a  number of  quite  fundamental 
aspects of the Basel II framework have been subject to review, some of which are also under 
discussion at this conference. However,  most of these aspects concern hitherto uncharted 
fields of regulation. For that reason, further research is needed to calibrate them adequately. 
Most notably, there is an ongoing debate on the design of an adequate capital ratio in order 
to  increase  banks’  resilience  and  ability  to  absorb  losses.  This  debate  is  focusing,  in 
particular,  on  how  institutions  can  build  up  capital  buffers  during  good  economic  times  in 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2009
order  to  cushion  losses  incurred  during  poor  economic  periods.  Closely  connected  to  this 
endeavour is the debate on possible procyclical effects of Basel II. 
Undisputably,  Basel  II  acts  in  a  risk-sensitive  manner  and  therefore  responds  cyclically  to 
economic developments. However, this is a deliberate and very important feature of Basel II 
and  should  not  be  abandoned.  The  question  is,  however,  whether  or  not  Basel  II  acts 
procyclically in the sense that the increase in capital requirements in times of financial stress 
or economic downturn is such that the resulting decrease in bank lending threatens to cause 
a  downward  spiral  or  a  credit  crunch.  In  the  whole  discussion  on  procyclicality,  the 
advantages of the risk-sensitive capital requirements of Basel II should not be forgotten. This 
is also one of the main findings of the paper by Repullo and Suarez, which will be presented 
at  this  conference.  Assessing  the  procyclical  effects  of  Basel  II  in  a  dynamic  equilibrium 
model, they identify a procyclical tendency of the risk-sensitive capital requirements of Basel 
II.  However,  this  effect  has  a  pay-off  in  terms  of  the  long-term  solvency  of  the  banking 
system,  which  is  much  greater  than  under  a  Basel  I  regime  or  in  a  situation  without  any 
capital requirements. 
Although there already exists ample research on this question, there are not enough findings 
yet  for  an  appropriate  evaluation  of  whether  or  not  Basel  II  has  acted  procyclically  in  the 
current  crisis.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  new  Basel  II  capital  requirements,  as  I 
mentioned earlier, only came into effect in 2008 in most countries and that, consequently, we 
have little experience of how they work in practice. Before taking any decisions on possible 
countermeasures,  we  should  wait  for  the  results  of  the  Basel  working  group  which  is 
currently examining the potential procyclicality of Basel II. Nevertheless, possible options for 
limiting the procyclical effects of Basel II are already being compiled and research in this field 
is  under  way.  This  is  reasonable,  not  least  owing  to  the  complexity  of  the  issue  and  will 
enable  us  to  respond  quickly  when  necessary.  Possible  options  for  action  tend  towards  a 
refinement  of  the  risk-sensitive  IRB  approach  of  Basel  II.  For  example,  the  capital 
requirements could be adjusted counter cyclically using credit growth as an indicator for the 
state  of  the  economy.  In  times  of  high  credit  growth  a  surcharge  on  capital  requirements 
would  be  prescribed.  Slightly  different  is  the  proposal  Repullo  and  Suarez  make  in  their 
paper.  They  suggest  a  calibration  of  the  confidence  levels  used  in  the  Basel  formula  for 
calculating  capital  requirements.  The  proposed  calibration  is  such  that  long-term  risk  is 
constant  but  confidence  levels  are  relaxed  in  situations  where  Basel  II  tends  to  act 
procyclically. What the two mentioned approaches have in common is that the risk-sensitivity 
of Basel II is retained – a prerequisite for any sensible adaption of Basel II.  
Systemic risk control 
3.3  
Apart from observed stress in single financial institutions and market segments, the financial 
crisis has had a systemic and global dimension which has highlighted the fact that it is not 
enough to safeguard the stability of each bank individually. If we want to address the causes 
of  the  financial  crisis  in  full,  supervision  has  to  be  taken  one  step  further.  In  particular, 
systemic risk has to be identified and guarded against. This raises new questions, such as 
how  systemic  risk  can  be  identified  and  whether  the  systemic  relevance  of  an  institution 
should  be  considered  by  introducing  capital  surcharges  for  systemically  important  banks. 
Once  again  these  issues,  which  enter  new  fields  of  financial  supervision,  are  being 
addressed by researchers, and different approaches are under discussion.  
When  trying  to  identify  systemic  risk,  a  crucial  point  is  to  find  adequate  measures  for 
indicating economic stress. The paper by Huang, Zhou and Zhu which will be presented at 
this conference contains an approach for measuring the systemic risk of a financial system 
using financial market data. Compared with indicators derived from banks’ balance sheets, 
financial market data have the advantage that they are available on a timely basis and are 
forward-looking. However, market-based risk measures are much more influenced by market 
movements than balance sheet related data. Consequently its suitability has to be reviewed 
more often.  
BIS Review 115/2009 
 3
Whereas Huang, Zhou and Zhu concentrate in their paper on the identification of systemic 
risk  and  the  potential  downside  risk  to  a  group  of  major  financial  institutions,  Adrian  and 
Brunnermeier  go  one  step  further  in  the  paper  they  presented  today.  In  their  approach 
systemic risk of a financial institution is first identified and then directly incorporated into the 
regulatory framework. As justified as the intention to regulate banks and financial institutions 
according to their contribution to systemic risk may be, it is even more difficult to design and 
implement  a  rule  that  puts  this  into  practice.  Here,  too,  it  is  crucial  to  identify  appropriate 
indicators  of  the  contribution  to  systemic  risk.  The  attendant  risk  –  which  can  never  be 
eliminated entirely – is that regulation focuses in too mechanical a manner on prominent risk 
indicators while overlooking other, less obvious ones.  
Last  not  least  there  is  a  resulting  necessity  for  a  permanent  revision  of  the  regulatory 
framework that will allow supervisory authorities to respond flexibly to market developments. 
This means that the organisational aspects of global financial regulation have a key role to 
play in strengthening systemic risk control and safeguarding global financial stability. In this 
respect, the initiatives and action being taken at the European and global levels to enhance 
macroprudential  supervision  are  to  be  welcomed.  In  the  EU,  the  planned  foundation  of  a 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – consisting of representatives from central banks, 
supervisors, and the European Commission among others – is a step into the right direction. 
However, the ESRB will contribute effectively to systemic risk control only if an unpoliticised 
open  analysis  and  discussion  is  ensured.  Therefore,  central  banks  should  have  sufficient 
representation on this board and be given adequate weight. 
There  are  two  more  arguments  why  central  banks  should  play  a  key  role  in  banking 
supervision. First, the interdependence of monetary policy and the financial system means 
that  central  banks  have  a  strong  and  natural  interest  in  financial  stability.  Second,  central 
banks in most countries are strongly involved in banking supervision and can therefore bring 
their expertise to bear in this field.  
Having said that, I do not want to skim over the fact that central banks, too, have their own 
lessons to draw from the financial crisis. One of the lessons which certainly has to be learned 
is that the stability of the financial system is an essential condition in its own right which has 
to be taken into account in the conduct of monetary policy. In this context, the paper Borio 
and Zhu presented at this conference points to a very important link between monetary policy 
and  the  perception  of  risk  by  economic  agents  –  something  which  has,  so  far,  been 
neglected.  Although  more  research  is  undoubtedly  needed  before  we  can  speak  of  risk-
taking  as  a  new  channel  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process,  major  lessons  for 
monetary policy can be drawn from the findings of this paper. In particular, the conclusions 
support the call for a more symmetric monetary policy that tries to look through the financial 
cycle in stabilising monetary policy. 
4  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Safeguarding  financial  stability  has  been  the  paramount  objective  of  banking  regulation. 
Unfortunately,  it  has  usually  been  only  the  painful  experience  of  financial  crisis  which  has 
been  a  catalyst  for  implementing  the  necessary  regulatory  changes.  From  history  and  not 
least from the current financial crisis we should learn that banking regulation is exposed to 
permanent change, and so the debate on the future of banking regulation must and will go 
on. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2009
