Paul Tucker: The Turner Review Conference – comments occasioned by 
the Turner Review  
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at The Turner Review 
Conference, London, 27 March 2009. 
 The  dreadful  crisis  affecting  the  international  economy  and  financial  system  will  rightly 
prompt  a  thorough  re-examination  of  principles  and  structures:  the  “rules  of  the  game”  for 
global finance. There will be many reports. As after the 1987 stock market crash and after 
the 1990s’ EME crises, they will be rich in analysis, proposals and plans. The Turner Report 
is  an  early  distinguished  intervention,  taking  its  place  alongside,  for  example,  the  reports 
from Paul Volker’s G30 Committee and Jacques Larosière’s European group.  
We would be foolhardy not to start thinking about the shape of the system we want, and we 
should take the quick wins. But it might well be a mistake to reach early conclusions on the 
truly big issues. Before this crisis is over, we could well learn quite a lot more about which 
business models and risk management practices worked best; and about how effectively the 
current efforts to stabilise banking systems and stimulate nominal demand work to revive our 
economies. We will then be in a better position to make judgments about just how much we 
need to constrain financial activity in the future in the interests of stability.  
My  own  working  definition  of  “financial  stability”  has  long  been  as  follows.  It  is  to  do  with 
money. It starts with monetary policy being directed, of course, to ensuring that the value of 
central bank money in terms of goods and services is stable. But most money in economies 
everywhere is private money: deposits with commercial banks. In significant degree, financial 
stability  is  about  safeguarding  the  stability  of  private  money  (deposits  with  the  banking 
system)  relative  to  central  bank  money.  Prosaically,  depositors  with  banks  have  to  be 
confident that they can exchange their deposits at face value for our money – our notes; or 
that they can switch to another bank where they can be confident of that. At the level of the 
system, we need an “exchange rate” of unity for private money and central bank money. And 
we  need  wholesale  funders  of  banks  to  be  confident  of  that  too.  When  that  is  secured, 
demand for our money is low, and society reaps the efficiency benefits of the private sector 
banking system. Absent that confidence, the payments system simply would not work. And 
the supply of credit would be imperilled, as we have rediscovered to the global economy’s 
great cost. These objectives – price stability, and banking system stability – are the two key 
facets  of  stability  in  a  monetary  economy.  As  recent  events  show,  they  can  be  affected 
profoundly  by  conditions  in  capital  markets  and  in  overseas  financial  systems.  Focusing 
ultimately on the stability of our monetary system therefore clearly requires a broad view of 
financial markets more generally. 
Stability in the elemental sense I have described was profoundly threatened last autumn – 
when  the  universal  crisis  of  confidence  triggered  by  Lehmans’  failure  tore  the  fabric  of 
international commerce. That stability has been sustained owes everything to governments 
stepping  in,  effectively  being  prepared  to  borrow  from  the  future  in  order  to  prop  up  the 
banking system now. In that sense, we are, of course, “beyond Financial Stability”, insofar 
as, ordinarily, we would regard instability as a state of affairs that requires such support. 
The Turner Report rehearses the analysis of how we got to that point. It rightly places weight 
on  the  baleful  effects  of  persistent  and  cumulative  global  current  and  capital  account 
imbalances. I dearly wish that the international authorities had taken on board the lessons 
from the 1990s EME crises about the vital importance of monitoring, and where necessary 
managing,  national  balance  sheets  –  for  large  countries  as  well  as  EMEs.  It  is  striking, 
however, that other analysts, including recently from the IMF, are starting to play down the 
part  played  by  the  international  monetary  system.  I  do  not  go  along  with  that.  There  can 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 1
surely be no disputing that macroeconomic imbalances have mattered greatly to the crisis, 
as they contributed to the build up of debt and, through the compression of risk-free rates 
and risk premia, the appreciation of asset prices. But in acknowledging that, we do not have 
to  claim  that  of  themselves  such  imbalances  lead  inevitably  to  financial  instability.  A 
necessary condition, in my view, is for faultlines to exist within the financial system itself – 
and  the  deeper  they  run,  the  greater  will  be  the  threat  to  stability.  The  identification  and 
mitigation of such faultlines requires engagement with the details of the system. Those who 
argue  that  it  is  all  down  to  global  imbalances  and  that  we  did  not  need  to  know  about 
leverage via CDOs and the shadow banking system and so on are equally wrong. But the 
scale of the macroeconomic imbalances that were allowed to accumulate surely raised the 
bar  for  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  and  probably  beyond  what  was  reasonable.  We 
need to quit pointing the finger, alternatively, at global macroeconomic and financial system 
causes, and accept that it was both. The Turner Report does that. 
A few points on micro regulation  
The Report and accompanying FSA Discussion Paper’s principal focus is, of course, micro 
regulation. I have just three points to add or emphasise on that this morning. 
Effective  prudential  supervision  of  individual  firms  relies  on  the  line  supervisors  being 
prepared to substitute their views for those of management when they have good reason to 
believe  that  the  viability  or  stability  of  a  bank  otherwise  may  be  in  peril.  They  need  the 
confidence, when necessary, to face down management, and even boards; and also to be 
prepared  to  take  the  risk  of  being  overruled  on  appeal.  A  respected,  self-confident  but 
restrained line supervisor, with the forensic skills to get to the heart of things, can do a very 
great deal for stability. It is terrific that Adair and Hector are renewing the emphasis on line 
supervision. (But, by the way, when supervisors do their job, their achievements are invisible 
and they get no thanks.) 
Second,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  most  bank  failures  have  their  roots  in  large  or 
concentrated exposures. This crisis is in some respects no exception. It is, therefore, good 
news for the future that, ahead of this crisis, the EU was already planning to extend the bar 
on large credit exposures to interbank deposits. Line supervisors must additionally look for 
concentrated  exposures  to  sectors  or  instruments;  to  give  just  one  of  many  possible 
examples, large holdings of super-senior CDO tranches just might have been a pointer to the 
vulnerabilities  at  some  large  internationally  active  banks.  And  the  possibility  of  fateful 
concentrations in bank funding structures should be given similar weight. If all that requires 
more reporting by banks, it would be worth it.  
Third,  effective  prudential  supervision  is  seriously  impeded  by  complex  group  structures. 
That  was  a  headline  lesson  from  the  failure  of  BCCI  nearly  two  decades  ago;  and  EU 
Directives  were  amended  to  make  unsupervisable  structures  a  ground  for  withholding  or 
withdrawing authorisation, and so for exercising regulatory powers. But complexity is not just 
a  convenient  shield  for  wickedness.  It  can  also  make  it  hard  for  management  and 
supervisors to figure out what is going on in a perfectly honest business. The explosion of 
what I referred to a couple of years ago as Vehicular Finance, with committed credit lines 
and  reputational  risk  constituting  umbilical  cords  back  to  parent  or  sponsoring  banks,  was 
precisely  a manifestation  of  that  variety  of  obfuscatory  complexity.  Supervisors  around  the 
world should not allow it. And, related to that, as the Turner Report rightly says, supervisors 
should  get  serious  about  working  together  on  the  oversight  and  regulation  of  international 
groups. The long-standing challenges of consolidated supervision are unfinished business, 
more than thirty years after the first Basel Concordat.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/2009
Micro-to-macroprudential 
Those  issues,  and  even  more  those  of  capital  and  liquidity,  shade  into  the  debate  about 
macroprudential oversight and regulation.  
One explanation of the parlous state of the industrialised world banking system is that too 
many banks had made too many rotten individual-loan underwriting decisions. Quite plainly 
there was some of that: for example, manifestly in the US subprime market, in commercial 
property, and probably in some Leveraged Buy Outs. It would be the job of the authorities’ 
bank examiners, as they are termed elsewhere, to detect significant erosion in the quality of 
individual  portfolios  or  underwriting  standards,  and  get  it  fixed  before  it  overwhelmed  the 
system. 
Another, not mutually exclusive, explanation is that by virtue of holding large “trading” books 
that  were  marked  to  market,  banks  found  themselves  having  to  make  very  large  portfolio 
write downs in the face of sharp rises in liquidity premia in asset markets. As highly-levered 
institutions – as banks are unavoidably: deposits are debt – those mark-downs depleted their 
net worth to the point of imperilling solvency. That caused a retrenchment in the availability of 
credit, helping to plunge the world economy into recession, and so impairing traditional loan 
books, in a vicious spiral. The point of this account is that it emphasises the role of banks’ 
leverage. Combined with maturity transformation, this unavoidably makes banks brittle. And 
that  underlines  just  why  our  predecessors  placed  such  great  weight  on  the  safety  and 
soundness of banks. Indeed, the original reason for regulating capital was that an assurance 
of capital adequacy, for all but the most extreme circumstances, would make runs less likely. 
But that was hardly meant to lead to the neglect of liquidity highlighted a few years ago by 
one of my predecessors, Andrew Large, and others.  
Liquidity 
We therefore welcome the Turner Report’s exploration of “core funding”. And we very much 
support,  and  have  encouraged,  the  FSA’s  plan  that  all  banks  should  in  future  hold  a 
minimum  level  of  high-quality  government  bonds,  on  the  grounds  that  only  they  carry  a 
reasonable assurance of market liquidity in stressed conditions. I hope the same approach 
can be adopted internationally. Further, supervisors should be vigilant in ensuring that banks’ 
so-called “treasury” or “liquidity” portfolios are not concentrated in funding instruments, such 
as  FRNs,  issued  by  other  banks.  That  turns  out  to  have  been  all  too  prevalent.  And  they 
were  not  liquid  when  the  music  stopped.  Years  ago,  regulators  decided  to  deduct  banks’ 
holdings  of  each  other’s  capital-instruments,  to  avoid  the  system  as  a  whole  generating 
illusory capital. The same principle could perhaps apply in liquidity regulation. 
The authorities also need to be clear about what level of stress, and/or what proportion of 
short-term liabilities, the stock liquidity buffer must cover. That must be a judgment for the 
authorities; and it must, as the Turner Report makes clear, be more demanding than in the 
past.  But  just  as  important,  we  must  not  imagine  that  the  kind  of  modelling  that  can  be 
applied to, say, credit risk and, perhaps, to some types of market risk can sensibly be carried 
across to liquidity risk. Liquidity goes wrong when there is, in the jargon, strategic interaction: 
I  run  (or  sell)  because  I  think  you  will  etc.  Liquidity  buffers  need  to  sustain  confidence;  if 
successful, the buffer is never needed. A time series of data showing low use of a liquidity 
buffer  is  not  compelling  evidence  that  a  requirement  was  too  high.  Our  successors  must 
remember that in 10-20 years time. 
Of course, no liquidity buffer can be proof against all circumstances. Which is why central 
banks  are  in  the  business  of  providing  liquidity  insurance  to  the  system.  That  insurance 
needs to be provided on terms that do not incite imprudent liquidity risks, and that are time 
consistent, in the sense that we avoid needing to recast our regime when really difficult times 
hit. The Bank set out its approach in the paper we issued last autumn on the launch of our 
Discount  Window  Facility,  through  which  we  stand  ready  to  lend  against  a  wide  range  of 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 3
collateral  at  pre-determined  fees  to  banks  that  are  not  facing  fundamental  problems  of 
solvency or viability.  
Capital, and capital-of-last-resort 
I have talked about liquidity partly because, as our community returns to thinking about bank 
supervision in terms of stability as well as consumer protection, it needs to be centre stage 
again;  but  also  because  we  can  think  about  capital  regulation  under  the  same  broad 
headings.  What  should  count  as  capital;  what  risks  should  it  protect  against;  and  what 
happens when the system turns out not to have enough capital?  
On the definition of capital, I agree with the Turner Report that what matters to stability is 
common  equity  (and  possibly,  subject  to  further  analysis,  also  instruments  that  can 
unambiguously be converted into common equity at the option of the bank or regulator). That 
is because confidence in a bank as a going concern is crucial to the stability of its deposit 
and wholesale funding base. Subordinated debt may  well help to protect depositors in the 
event of liquidation, but it cannot absorb losses on a going-concern basis and so does little to 
avoid the incentive to run or, therefore, the slide into resolution. Nor does subordinated debt 
alter  the  position  of  retail  depositors,  who  can  look  to  the  deposit-protection  scheme, 
especially now that it provides 100% cover up to £50,000. Subordinated debt can enhance 
recoveries  made  by  the  Financial  Services  Compensation  Scheme.  But  it  is  not  directly 
stability-enhancing.  The  composition  of  regulatory  capital  was  allowed  to  become  too 
complicated.  Including  debt  instruments  is  effectively  to  allow  double  leverage.  The  Basel 
Committee is itself returning to this question.  
As with liquidity, I do not want to say much today about how to measure the risks that capital 
should cover. I applaud the Turner Report’s analysis of “trading book” risks; as discussed in 
the Bank’s Financial Stability Review a few years ago, making Value at Risk the bedrock of 
market risk requirements allows capital to fall, or leverage to rise, during periods of unusually 
low volatility. The Basel Committee are addressing this. More generally, the degree of stress 
that  capital  should  enable  banks  to  withstand,  whether  against  default  risk  or  market  risk, 
should  be  decided  by  the  authorities  not  by  individual  banks,  precisely  because  of  the 
systemic  significance  of  banks  to  the  payments  and  credit  system.  Even  when  individual 
banks  look  adequately  capitalised  taken  in  isolation,  the  aggregate  position  may  be  more 
vulnerable  taking  into  account  common  exposures  to  credit,  market  or  liquidity  risk,  and 
cross-system  exposures.  Capital  requirements  for  individual  firms  may,  therefore,  need  to 
depend on how liquidity mismatched and how leveraged the system as a whole is. 
Even so, just as with liquidity, there will be rare episodes, which we must strive to make very 
rare,  where  there  is  a  capital  deficiency  in  individually  significant  banks,  or  even  in  the 
system as a whole. And, again analogously, we therefore need ex ante policies for catering 
with that.  
There are two elements to such policies.  
First,  we  need  regimes  for  resolving  distressed  banks  in  an  orderly  way,  outside  of  the 
insolvency regime applying to ordinary companies. The UK has taken a useful step forward 
in  introducing  a  Special  Resolution  Regime  for  banks.  We  will  need  to  keep  its  provisions 
under active review. 
Large and Complex Financial Institutions present a special challenge. Nearly a decade ago, 
a joint G10/Financial Stability Group, on which I served, articulated the imponderable scale of 
the challenge of winding up such a group. The conclusion was that it lay beyond the current 
capability of the authorities internationally; but that, nevertheless, we should work together – 
providing  factbooks  on  firms  and  exchanging  information  –  to  put  ourselves  in  the  best 
possible position. None of that was done, and the FSF and G20 are, thankfully, now again 
underlining how vitally important it is. We need in particular to ensure that financial groups 
maintain information on the assets and liabilities of their legal entities; it is legal entities that 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2009
go into resolution not business divisions. Lehmans shouts that out loud and clear. We need 
to  ensure  that  banks,  however  grand  they  are,  keep  information  that  would  facilitate  rapid 
payout from deposit-protection schemes. We need banks to have contingency funding plans 
that are shared with regulators and central banks. We need, more ambitiously, to address 
Too Big To Fail. And we need to do just massively better at working together internationally.  
However much we do, I fear that the inescapable conclusion will be that we cannot rule out 
that very rarely the banking system will end up needing to be supported by some ultimate 
source of capital. If that is right, then society needs principles and policies for what might be 
called “Capital of Last Resort”, to sit alongside the Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) principles 
developed by and for central banks since the 19th century. Parts of the academic community 
have started to think about and advocate capital-insurance from the private sector, but over 
the  long  term  we  need  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  have  a  policy  for  public  sector  capital 
insurance.  At  a  high  level,  this  faces  exactly  the  challenges  of  central  bank  liquidity 
insurance.  Its  terms  must  not  incentivise  imprudent  behaviour;  and  they  must  be  time 
consistent. These were exactly the challenges faced by the Bank in articulating the terms of 
its Discount Window Facility. But the challenges are even greater in this area because the 
exit strategy from capital injections is so much more difficult; by potentially delivering control, 
capital-insurance is much more closely intertwined with issues of management; and because 
there would have to be clarity about treatment of all parts of the capital structure. 
I think that articulating and sticking to policies in this area will be one of the great challenges 
over the coming years and decades. 
Macroprudential: taming the credit cycle  
It  would  all be  a  lot  easier  if  we  could  tame  the  credit  cycle.  This  is  the  debate  about  the 
missing “macroprudential instrument”. What would be the objective; is there in principle an 
instrument; would it work in practice in a world of free capital flows? Those debates are prior 
to  questions  of  institutional  responsibility.  And  they  have  a  bearing  on  the  parallel  debate 
about the regulatory boundary, which is where I will begin. 
I start from the position that excessive leverage and maturity transformation in parts of the 
non-bank financial sector – funds, conduits, securities dealers, and so on – was predicated 
on the availability of plentiful credit on too-easy terms from the commercial banking system. 
Up  to  a  point,  the  same  goes  for  liquidity  in  asset  markets.  Of  course,  persistently  strong 
demand  for  financial  assets  –  crudely,  rising  prices  –  created  an  illusion  of  liquidity  but, 
beyond  that,  the  willingness  and  terms  on  which  “market-makers”  underpinned  liquidity 
depended  on  their  access  to  credit  to  finance  inventory.  And  the  ultimate  private  sector 
providers of such credit are commercial banks. 
One  big  question,  therefore,  is  how  far  we  could  get  in  dampening  the  credit  cycle  by 
focusing on the provision of liquidity, and so leverage, by banks to other financial firms. That 
goes to whether hedge funds and other vehicles need to be brought within the net. Frankly, it 
is hard to know whether, internationally, the regulatory community tried and failed to control 
the leverage available to the non-bank financial sector; or whether it was not really attempted 
taking  into  account  system-wide  conditions.  Either  way,  more  information  from  non-banks 
would probably be needed to make such a policy workable. 
But a second question, perhaps the biggest, is whether “dampening the credit cycle” should 
be the goal at all; or, alternatively, whether it is a realistic goal. A very slightly more modest – 
but, in truth, still demanding – objective might be to concentrate on making banks themselves 
more resilient to economic or market shocks, so that it is less likely that they expose banking 
system fragility that amplifies an economic downturn. 
A  third  big  question  is  about  instruments.  Lots  of  candidates  are  canvassed.  Dynamic 
provisioning  under  which  banks  would,  in  the  manner  of  previous  generations,  set  aside 
general provisions as loan books grew. Capital requirements that increased with the rate of 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 5
growth of balance sheets, or some measure of incipient stress. Variable margin requirements 
on the terms of credit provided to financial, or even real-economy, borrowers. 
A fourth big question is whether the chosen instrument(s), whatever it is, could be operated 
by rules or would require an element of top-down judgment. On that, I am inclined to the view 
that  our  community  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to  write  down  a  suitably  robust  rule.  I  have  two 
reasons for that. One draws a parallel with monetary policy. The history of monetary policy, 
not least in this country, is littered with failed attempts to design an optimal rule, giving way to 
efforts to constrain the discretion of policymakers making judgments. I cannot see why we 
would be any better at developing rules for financial stability. As the structure of the financial 
system evolved, we would need to adapt the rule and would probably fail to spot the need to 
do so. But there is also something about the nature of financial stability problems that makes 
“rules” implausible to me. In the upswing of the credit cycle, there is often a collective-action 
problem.  Even  though  individual  banks  may  perceive  risk  as  underpriced,  not  knowing  for 
sure whether or when the party will end they hesitate to step off the rollercoaster for fear of 
damaging  their  business  franchise.  This  is  precisely  why  it  is  the  job  of  the  authorities  to 
“take away the punchbowl as the party gets going”. I just cannot see how we could calibrate 
ex ante rules for the increase in capital requirements or whatever that would be needed to do 
that,  but  we  would  of  course  need  somehow  to  find  a  way  of  sensibly  constraining  the 
discretion at the core of the alternative approach.  
Even  if  we  could  resolve  all  those  issues,  a  fifth  big  issue  is  how  far  individual  national 
authorities  would  be  able  to  operate  in  this  field  on  their  own,  given  free  flows  of  capital 
internationally and cross-border banking. 
These  big  questions  are,  of  course,  inter-related.  Most  obviously,  how  far  we  could  get  in 
designing an instrument(s) and a process for its deployment will affect whether the objective 
should be to ameliorate the effects of economic shocks on the banks or also the effects of 
the credit-creation process on the economy. And the objective will have a bearing on whether 
it  is  host  or  home  authorities  who  need  to  constrain  a  bank’s  lending  growth.  That  is  a 
formidable agenda, and it underlines just how much there is to do.  
to  our 
final  goals  (the  so-called  “monetary 
Macroprudential: markets and infrastructure as part of the transmission mechanism 
But if we are to deliver and maintain stability, a macroprudential agenda cannot focus only on 
countercyclical  capital  (or  margin)  requirements.  We  need  to  focus  on  how  large  shocks 
might be transmitted through the financial system.  
Again, there is an analogy with monetary policy. Effective monetary policy relies upon a rich 
and subtle understanding of the structure of the economy and how our policy decisions are 
transmitted 
transmission  mechanism”). 
Equivalently,  effective  delivery  of  a  financial  stability  mandate  requires  a  rich  and  subtle 
understanding of the structure of the domestic and international financial system, and how 
developments in one part are transmitted to others. That means our range must continue to 
extend beyond banks to the capital markets and the financial infrastructure.  
The  analogy  does  not  stop  there.  In  the  monetary  sphere,  policymakers  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s urged reforms to make the real economy, especially labour markets, more flexible, as 
that  would  reduce  the  burden  on  monetary  policy  in  smoothing  cyclical  fluctuations.  The 
analogue in the financial stability sphere is that the authorities need to help to identify and, 
crucially,  remedy  faultlines  in  the  financial  system.  Whereas  for  monetary  policy  we  want 
real-economy flexibility, for financial stability we want financial system resilience. And just as 
the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  evolves,  so  the  structure  of  the  financial 
system changes. The explosion of Vehicular Finance and the development of credit trading 
are just two recent examples that affected the current crisis. We therefore need a very high-
quality,  continuous  assessment  of  emerging  vulnerabilities  in  the  system  as  a  whole,  and 
how it would behave under stress.  
6 
 BIS Review 39/2009
Internationally  the  official  community  has  not  distinguished  itself  on  that  front  over  recent 
years. Just three examples; there are more, I fear. 
First, there were too many large financial businesses for which an AAA rating was, fatally, 
more than a description of their credit standing; it constituted their business model. Examples 
include Fannie and Freddie; the Landesbanks; the US monoline insurers; the SIVs; and, if 
they can be thought to have a business model, the ABCPs. These institutions distorted the 
supply  of  credit  across  the  global  economy.  (In  the  case  of  the  monoline  insurers,  for 
structured  finance  they  were  effectively  in  the  business  of  providing  “end-of-the-world 
insurance with a settlement period of T+1”.)  
An  even  wider  group  of  private-sector  AAA  institutions  were  not  required  to  collateralise 
derivatives-related counterparty-credit exposures. The effect for the system as a whole was 
to introduce an extraordinary vulnerability to a ratings downgrade of any of these institutions 
or structures. There was, in effect, a potentially systemic cliff. 
A second serious faultline in global capital markets – arguably the greatest – was the firm 
expectation  of  “no  break  the  buck”  in  the  massive  global  Money  Market  Mutual  Fund 
industry; c. $3trn in the US, more or less the same size as commercial bank deposits. The 
failure  to  pay  par  at  a  major  US  money  fund  when  Lehman  collapsed  helped  trigger  the 
unravelling  of  confidence  across  global  markets.  Constant  net-asset  value  MMMFs  have 
perhaps been, globally, the most important non-bank banks lying outside the scope of what I 
like to call the banking Social Contract: no prudential supervision, no “deposit” insurance, no 
access  to  the  discount  window,  and  yet  nevertheless  allowed  to  conduct  maturity 
transformation and offer payments services. Although smaller in Europe than in the US, this 
industry  does  exist  over  here;  the  ECB  even  include  money  funds  in  their  definition  of 
monetary institutions and so in measures of broad money. But there is the added twist that 
during the boom a large part of their assets comprised bank CDs and conduit ABCP. In other 
words,  they  have  essentially  been  an  intermediary  between  the  banks  and  corporate 
treasurers, insurance companies etc, who fund banks at one remove. As Paul Volker’s G30 
report  concludes,  we  need  to  review  whether  or  not  to  continue  to  allow  Constant  NAV 
MMMFs; the alternative would be that they convert either into variable NAV funds (ie like any 
other mutual fund) or into regulated deposit-takers. 
A third faultline may have been the extension of mark-to-market accounting to (more or less) 
everyone  or  everything  without  attention  to  how  the  dynamics  of  the  system  as  a  whole 
would be affected. If liquidity premia can fluctuate materially, the effects on portfolio values 
can  be  material,  increasing  or  reducing  leverage  and  affecting  risk-seeking  or  shedding 
behaviour. Accounting measures then become actors rather than purely passive measures. 
This is a world away from only a small handful of dealers marking to market. My point here is 
not that marking to market is necessarily flawed, but rather that the “rules of the game” for 
global finance matter. It is really no good anyone arguing against that: the debate needs to 
move on and, thanks to the Financial Stability Forum, probably is.  
The  moral  of  this  story  is  that  the  details  of  the  structure  of  our  capital  markets  matter  to 
stability. They may matter only in the event of very low probability shocks to the system. But 
policymakers must focus on containing the impact of such tail events. Systemic resilience is 
as much a part of a macroprudential approach as countercyclical capital requirements.  
This  is  not  just  a  matter  of  picking  out  those  features  of  the  system  we  should  dislike.  It 
should  occasionally,  but  with  restraint,  be  as  much  about  what  we  do  want.  The  current 
topical issue is whether CDS contracts, or vanilla OTC contracts, should be centrally cleared 
and  exchange-traded.  Ideally  yes,  which  will  underline  the  importance  of  the  integrity  of 
central  counterparty  risk  management,  and  systemic  oversight  by  the  authorities.  But  the 
broader  issue  is  that  the  authorities  should  be  ready  to  nudge  intermediaries,  asset 
managers  and  infrastructure  providers  into  those  market-development  initiatives  that  are 
clearly desirable in the interests of stability but need not harm efficiency. 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 7
Put  another  way,  the  “plumbing”  matters.  We  have  positive  reasons,  as  well  as  negative 
ones,  for  believing  that.  Two  examples.  Fifteen  to  twenty  years  ago,  central  banks  moved 
wholesale payment systems on to a Real-Time Gross Settlement basis. Cutting through the 
details, this meant that settlement banks are no longer exposed to each other during the day 
for the payments they send each other; and, in the UK and most other countries, the central 
bank delivers this without taking unsecured intra-day credit exposures itself. Without those 
unheralded reforms, I have little doubt that last autumn’s crisis would have been calamitous 
on a scale massively exceeding the dreadful near-seizure we did experience in the money 
markets.  That  example  was  a  public  sector  initiative;  the  banks  were more  or  less  herded 
into it. But there is an equally important private sector initiative. Without the collateralisation 
of  OTC-derivative  counterparty  credit  exposures,  the  credit  spillovers  from  firm  and  fund 
failures around the world would surely have been much greater.  
What those two examples demonstrate is that the authorities and practitioners can get things 
right – when we focus on what will matter in bad states of the world.  
Summary 
The  Turner  Report  makes  a  big  contribution  to  developing  the  agenda  for  reforming  the 
global  financial  system,  including  on  macroprudential  oversight.  If  anything,  I  may  have 
added to that agenda this morning.  
We need to undertake serious research and analysis on whether we can develop a macro 
instrument for taming the credit cycle.  
But,  in  making  the  system  more  resilient,  we  cannot  rely  solely  on  bank  capital  or  loan 
market requirements. That endeavour – heading-off incipient stress, and keeping the “rules 
of the game” up to date and fit for purpose – requires high-quality surveillance of the system 
as a whole, bringing together analysis, experience and intelligence on markets, the macro 
environment,  the  infrastructure,  firms.  We  have  to  identify  and  address  faultlines.  The 
system’s strengths and weak points “morph” over time. One era’s solution may be today’s or 
tomorrow’s faultline: Fannie Mae is an example of that. And, for when those efforts fail, we 
need to be clearer about how the authorities will intervene to preserve stability, and whether 
we  can  construct  a  “capital  of  last  resort”  policy  that  does  not  create  perverse  incentives 
during “peacetime”.  
Surveillance, building system resilience, crisis management. A macroprudential approach to 
stability has to do rather more than bring together a central bank’s macroeconomists and a 
micro  regulator’s  line  supervisors. What  lies in  between  matters  hugely:  markets,  payment 
systems, the plumbing. I should like to think that, amongst others, central banks can bring 
something  to  this,  drawing  on  our  conjunctural  expertise,  but  also  on  our  operational 
presence  in  money  and  bond  markets  and  at  the  heart  of  the  payments  and  settlements 
system. Certainly the Bank will engage actively with the FSA, HMT, overseas central banks, 
and the industry in designing new “rules of the game” for the global financial system.  
8 
 BIS Review 39/2009
