Jean-Claude Trichet: Introductory remarks at the signing ceremony for 
the T2S Memorandum of Understanding 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the signing 
ceremony for the T2S Memorandum of Understanding, Frankfurt, 16 July 2009. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We are gathered here today to mark the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on T2S 
between the Eurosystem and the CSDs of Europe for the next stage of the T2S project.  
T2S  will  create  a  single  European,  borderless,  settlement  platform,  offering  highly  secure 
delivery  versus  payment  for  the  settlement  of  securities,  using  central  bank  money.  By 
combining cash and securities settlements in one shared platform, it will create a single pool 
of securities available to market users through their chosen CSD, irrespective of the location 
of  the  issuer,  the  security  or  the  settlement  counterparty.  As  a  result,  cross-border 
transactions will become as simple as domestic ones. Through economies of scale, the cost 
of settlement on both a domestic and cross-border basis will be substantially reduced. 
Like an airport servicing various airlines, T2S will provide a basic public infrastructure that 
can be leveraged by CSDs to offer, for example, a mix of value-added products and services 
to their customers. By creating a single pool of securities that is accessible from any CSD 
regardless of its location, it will naturally lead to more competition in the settlement industry, 
more transparent and efficient pricing, and create new opportunities for cross-border trading 
venues. On top of this – and this has moved more to the forefront in recent months – through 
its  reduced  liquidity  needs  and  its  operational  robustness,  T2S  will  also  contribute  to  the 
stability of the financial system. Overall, this dynamic process is likely to create substantial 
gains for the European financial industry. 
Furthermore, by helping to overcome the fragmentation in the European market for securities 
settlement,  T2S  reinforces  many  other  European  Union  initiatives,  such  as  the  Code  of 
Conduct for clearing and settlement, the Giovannini harmonisation process and of course the 
MiFiD Directive. In this way, T2S helps to drive forward the single market objectives set out 
by the Lisbon agenda. 
Today’s signing of the Memorandum of Understanding, which sets out the mutual obligations 
of the Eurosystem and CSDs, brings us another step closer towards realising this goal. The 
presence here of settlement houses operating not only in the euro area but also from across 
Europe, is evidence of the widespread support in the market for the project. Not only have 
the CSDs of all euro area countries signed the Memorandum of Understanding, but also the 
CSDs of seven EU countries outside the euro area – Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Romania, Sweden and the UK – and two CSDs from countries outside the EU – Iceland and 
Switzerland.  Furthermore,  the  CSDs  of  Denmark,  Lithuania  and  Sweden  have  –  with  the 
consent  of  their  central  bank  and  with  the  support  of  their  markets  –  also  confirmed  their 
intention to provide for settlement of their national currency in T2S, in addition to settlements 
in euro. 
We  are  grateful  for  the  support  of  the  CSDs  and  market  participants  more  widely.  This 
support has helped us to define a product which is fully in line with market needs. I am aware 
that it translated through all levels of the institutions – political as well as operational levels – 
and it has generated a momentum which makes me confident that we will also achieve the 
future milestones of the T2S project in good time. 
In the coming months, many of the key decisions will have to be made in preparation for the 
start of the Development Phase of the project which is scheduled for early next year. The 
signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  will  therefore  pave  the  way  for  these 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 1
decisions.  We  will  need  to  discuss  not  only  the  governance  of  the  platform  and  the 
contractual relations between the Eurosystem and the CSDs, but also of course the pricing 
structure. I am confident that the discussions will be as diverse and fruitful as they have been 
so far, and that today marks another important milestone for the success of T2S project.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2009
