Mario Draghi: Financial Stability Board – various initiatives 
Statement by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, to the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, 25 
April 2009. 
 In  the  last  several  weeks  we  have  witnessed  a  modest  revival  in  market  confidence.  It 
appears that the worst scenarios regarding prospects for the global economy and financial 
system are no longer quite so prominent in the minds of market participants. This offers us a 
unique window of opportunity both for short-term actions to stabilise institutions and promote 
credit  extension,  and  for  implementing  measures  to  strengthen  the  system  for  the  longer 
term. 
Our main challenge is to break the negative feedback loop between the financial system and 
the real economy. Repairing the balance sheets of financial institutions is a key part of this, 
and  authorities  have  taken  a  range  of  actions  to  inject  capital  into  banks,  guarantee  their 
liabilities  and  reduce  or  remove  their  exposures  to  bad  assets.  The  ultimate  objective  of 
these measures should be to create an environment in which banks are able to repair their 
balance  sheets  through  sustainable  earnings  growth  and  raise  the  capital  they  need  from 
private  markets  at  a  relatively  low  cost.  This  also  means  providing  enough  transparency 
about risk exposures to allow the market to confidently distinguish strong from weak banks, 
and reducing market uncertainties on the future treatment of different classes of claimants. 
Regulatory stress tests are a central part of this process, as are efforts to improve disclosure. 
Another  important  part  of  breaking  the  feedback  loop  is  to  take  steps  to  maintain  credit 
extension to creditworthy borrowers. This has involved, and will continue to involve, a role for 
public sector balance sheets, including central bank lending and a variety of programmes by 
fiscal  authorities.  Steps  to  restart  securitisation  markets,  with  improved  transparency  and 
incentive structures building on the lessons of the crisis, can also help to restore credit flows, 
while  enabling  banks  to  clear  their  warehoused  assets.  Governments  can  help  here  by 
supporting  transparency  and  standardisation  initiatives  in  the  private  sector.  In  the  short 
term, another useful step might be providing guarantees or wraps for the senior tranches of 
new securitisation issues that conform to strengthened standards of transparency. 
As we take steps to revive credit markets, we should be especially mindful of the need to 
maintain  an  integrated  global  financial  system.  Cross-border  financial  flows  have  fallen 
dramatically, among both advanced and emerging economies. This would not be a concern 
to  the  extent  that  it  merely  reflected  a  broader  process  of  deleveraging  and  reduced  risk-
taking.  But  we  should  guard  against  actions  that  unnecessarily  reinforce  this  trend  and 
reverse the long-term progress towards global financial integration. For example, actions to 
support  banking  systems  should  not  distinguish  between  domestic  and  foreign-owned 
institutions,  nor  should  credit  be  diverted  to  domestic  borrowers  through  subsidies  or 
inappropriate regulatory incentives. 
Stabilising  the  financial  sector  also  includes  establishing  greater  clarity  on  what  the 
regulatory framework will look like in the longer term. Even as we implement measures to 
build  a  stronger,  better  capitalised  financial  system,  banks  and  their  investors  need  to  be 
reassured as to their prospects for pursuing profitable business models going forward. This 
means allowing room for innovation and flexibility, without short-changing fundamental policy 
goals such as controlling leverage and enhancing consumer protection.  
Thanks to the work of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and others, the broad outlines of 
this  future  regulatory  environment  are  now  much  clearer  than  they  were  a  year  ago.  The 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF) –  predecessor to the FSB – and its member bodies made 
several recommendations for strengthening the system over the past year. This represents 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 1
an enormous effort in terms of international policy development and the priority now must be 
on national implementation. 
This work has encompassed actions to: 
• 
Strengthen prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management,  with 
key proposals and work underway to strengthen the Basel II framework and enhance 
supervisory guidance. 
Strengthen the operational infrastructure for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, 
with  central  counterparty  clearing  for  OTC  credit  derivatives  now  launched  in  the 
United States and in Europe. 
Enhance  transparency  and  valuation,  with  consistent  guidance  now  issued  by 
accounting standards setters in a number of areas. 
Improve  the  role  and  use  of  credit  ratings,  with  a  revised  Code  of  Conduct 
Fundamentals for Credit Rating Agencies issued by the International Organization of 
Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  last  year  and  substantial  implementation  by  the 
rating agencies. 
Strengthen information exchange among authorities, with supervisory colleges now 
established for most global banks. 
And  finally,  actions  to  strengthen  arrangements  to  deal  with  financial  stress, 
including  through  the  FSF  Principles  for  Cross-border  Cooperation  on  Crisis 
Management  (published  this  month),  and  the  new  Core  Principles  for  Effective 
Deposit Insurance Systems, now out for public comment. 
     Work  has  been  also  underway  to  mitigate  procyclicality  in  the  financial  system,  with 
recommendations issued by the FSF earlier this month covering the bank capital framework, 
loan  loss  provisioning  practices,  and  ways  of  dampening  the  adverse  interaction  between 
leverage and valuation. And the  FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices, also 
published  this  month,  will  align  compensation-related  incentives  with  the  long-term 
profitability of firms. 
These efforts will help us to avoid similar crises in the future. But the policy agenda is not 
complete  and  we  must  sustain  momentum  to  continue  to  develop  and  implement  strong 
regulatory, supervisory and other policies in the interest of financial stability. 
Indeed, work has not stopped since the London Summit. For instance, there is a substantial 
work programme underway in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision on capital and 
procyclicality,  and  we  are  setting  in  train  work  with  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
(BIS) on macroprudential tools. In addition, three areas in which critical work is taking place 
are (i) accounting and valuation, (ii) hedge funds, and (iii) other systemically relevant entities 
and products. 
On accounting issues, the London Summit welcomed the recommendations of the FSF’s 
procyclicality  report,  and  G20  Leaders  called  for  “accounting  standard  setters  to  work 
urgently with supervisors and regulators to improve standards on valuation and provisioning 
and achieve a single set of high-quality global accounting standards.” In this respect,  
• 
The  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  decided  this  week  to  adopt 
approaches consistent with the recent guidance on fair value for illiquid markets and 
fair  value  disclosure  from  the  US  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB). 
While  the  IASB  decided  not  to  implement  the  FASB  staff’s  approach  to  credit  loss 
impairment for available-for-sale debt securities, it did decide to work with the FASB 
to  issue  this  year  a  converged  proposal  to  dramatically  simplify  their  standards  for 
financial instruments, which is expected to include a common credit loss impairment 
approach for loans and debt securities. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2009
 The IASB-FASB Financial Crisis Advisory Group has called on both standard setters 
to  work  with  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  to  address  the  provisioning  and 
valuation recommendations of the FSB and the G20. A working group to be run by 
the Basel Committee is being established to develop positions. 
On hedge funds, the FSB has been tasked with working with national authorities to develop 
and  implement  coherent  approaches  to  regulation  and  oversight  of  hedge  fund  managers. 
We will also be working with IOSCO to develop mechanisms for cooperation and information 
sharing between relevant authorities on hedge fund exposures. 
• 
IOSCO,  along  with  a  number  of  national  authorities,  is  reviewing  its  approach  to 
oversight of hedge funds. IOSCO released a consultative document on this issue in 
late  March  and  has  held  consultative  meetings 
recently.  Final  policy 
recommendations are expected in the summer. 
The FSB is working to have the hedge fund industry bodies bring forward proposals 
for high quality global best practice standards for hedge fund managers. These are 
now expected in May. The various interested bodies will assess their adequacy and 
report in the fall. 
 Three distinct efforts are underway internationally on other systemically relevant entities 
and products: 
• 
The  Joint  Forum  is  advancing  its  project  on  the  differentiated  nature  and  scope  of 
regulation.  It  covers  four  areas:  (i)  consolidation  and  group-wide  approach,  which 
deals with non-regulated entities within groups; (ii) hedge funds (other funds, such as 
money  market  funds,  will  be  considered  at  a  later  stage);  (iii)  mortgage  originators 
and brokers and other intermediaries; and (iv) risk transfer mechanisms, focusing on 
credit risk transfer instruments and associated markets. 
This  group  is  drawing  on  IOSCO’s  work  on  unregulated  markets  and  products, 
focused  on  securitised  products  and  credit  derivatives  markets  –  a  consultative 
document in this area will be put out in the next days. 
The IMF and the BIS are advancing their work on methodologies to quantify systemic 
risk  and  identify  systemically  relevant  institutions  and  activities.  There  will  be 
discussion in the weeks ahead on the expectations for joint delivery for the fall. 
  All the above address a few of the areas for actions highlighted during the London Summit. 
In addition, 
• 
On  supervisory  colleges,  the  FSB  is  reviewing  progress  in  the  establishment  and 
operation  of  the  colleges.  It  is  expected  that  colleges  for  all  selected  large  and 
complex groups will have been established by June.  
On cross-border crisis management, firm-by-firm groups will be established shortly to 
review contingency planning for the institutions that have FSB supervisory colleges.  
The G20 also called on the FSB and standard setters to assess and raise supervisory 
and  regulatory  standards  and  codes,  drawing  efficiently  on  existing  processes  –
including  the  joint  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP). 
Three related objectives under this headings include (i) fostering greater adherence 
to international standards; (ii) helping to identify jurisdictions that lag behind in terms 
of their implementation of these standards; and (iv) supporting a peer review process 
among FSB members. 
  The FSB, with its expanded mandate and membership, is well placed to carry through and 
build on these various initiatives. In all of these areas, the FSB will work to promote better 
coordination  among  national  authorities,  international  institutions  and  standard  setting 
bodies. 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 3
