Ivan Iskrov: Bulgarian National Bank – independence, predictability and 
transparency 
Speech by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, before the 41st National 
Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria on the occasion of his election for a second term of 
office, Sofia, 26 August 2009. 
 Ms. Speaker, Ladies and Gentlemen MPs, 
Allow me first and foremost to thank you for the enormous trust and the strong support you 
just now gave to the Central Bank and its Governor, Ivan Iskrov. I don’t know of any head of 
any public institution that has so far enjoyed such a vast parliamentary vote of confidence 
with the support of 195 MPs. This result exceeds the 165 votes in support of my nomination 
in the previous 40th National Assembly. 
When  a  week  ago  I  shared  with  the  person  closest  to  me  that  I  had  decided  to  use  the 
parliamentary  case  of  Mr.  Nenovsky  to  submit  myself  to  a  confidence  vote  by  the  41st 
National Assembly, I heard the following: “Isn't this step rather too risky, besides the Prime 
Minister  publicly  announced  that  he  did  not  approve  of  the  procedure  but  he  respects  the 
BNB as an institution, and highly values you as a governor and wishes you to continue on 
the post?" I replied that no one could predict the possible deliberations and how the 240 MPs 
would  vote,  but  that  I  was  nonetheless  obliged  to  ask  for  their  confidence.  Or  else  on  9th 
October this year I leave! 
Because,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  I  have  repeatedly  shared  with  my  colleagues  at  the 
Bank, when requiring the tasks to be performed with 100% precision, rather than in a slap-
dash manner, we in the central bank have an asset even more valuable than its international 
reserves.  This  key  asset  is  the  reputation  of  the  BNB  and  of  each  of  its  employees.  I 
promised to your colleagues of the 39th National Assembly that I would never take part in 
fruitless  discussions,  neither  would  I  refute  any  possible  silly  allegations  of  dishonourable 
people  or  of  unqualified  “know-it-all”  experts.  The  people  around  me,  however,  know  how 
painful it was for me to bear any stupidity or slander, not for my own credibility but for the 
confidence the Bulgarian society should have in our National Bank. 
The  BNB  is  de  jure  and  de  facto  the  most  independent  public  institution;  it  owes  its 
independence to you – the elected representatives of the people, and reports only and solely 
to  you,  to  the  Bulgarian  National  Assembly.  Therefore  I  felt  I  needed  to  have  again 
assurance of your confidence after such a long and fierce pre-election competition. 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen MPs, 
Only two months ago in this hall I reiterated, and I would like now to reconfirm, the three key 
principles  I  have  abided  by  since  2003,  for  which  I  will  try  hard  to  be  remembered  as 
characterizing my work at the central bank – independence, predictability and transparency. 
Throughout my whole first term of office I followed these principles, and today I would like 
again to state that my second term of office will be governed by the same principles. I have 
permitted  no  political  interference  in  the  activities  of  the  Bank,  which  is  a  fundamental 
principle underlying the Law on the BNB and the Treaty on the accession of Bulgaria to the 
EU. I will not allow any political meddling in the work of the BNB in my next term of office. I 
highly appreciate the first words of the newly elected Speaker of the 41st National Assembly 
at our first meeting: „Mr. Iskrov, we are well aware of the Law on the BNB, of BNB’s key role 
for the financial stability in the country, and in spite of our disagreement with the early timing 
of your reelection, no one questions the independence of the central bank. This is a question 
of principle, on which there is no argument”. These were Ms. Tsacheva’s first words, and I 
am really grateful to her for them. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 1
Independence  should  certainly  not  be  an  excuse  for  idleness  or  work  not  done.  I  would 
emphasise once again, just as I have so far worked with two Bulgarian Governments and all 
legitimate political parties and their representatives regardless of the political spectrum they 
belong to, so they too can count on BNB’s expert advice and support in the future. Every one 
of you is welcome to the Central Bank to discuss any issues as long as this is in the interest 
of the stability of our country, and the banking system in particular. 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, finally and in the context of everything said by me and by the 
speakers  before  me  during  this  debate,  I  believe  that  now  the  most  important  thing  as 
regards the country’ macroeconomic and financial policy is preserving stability and ensuring 
predictability; predictability, because the global financial and economic crisis has shown that 
countries,  which  follow  stability-oriented  and  consistent  macroeconomic  policies  are  going 
less  painfully  through  this  difficult  for  all  countries  period.  The  BNB’s  role  is  to  secure  the 
country’s  price  and  financial  stability  and  the  soundness  of  our  strictly  regulated  banking 
system. Over the next six years the focus of my work will be on preserving and maintaining 
the  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  country  by  keeping  the  fixed  exchange  rate  and  the 
currency board arrangement. The currency board will continue as the foundations underlying 
the stability and economic growth in Bulgaria. Second comes preserving and maintaining the 
stability of the banking system. Over the last two years, we have been witnessing globally the 
catastrophic  consequences  of  poorly  regulated  and  supervised  banking  and  financial 
institutions. Bulgaria too was affected, but unlike some other countries it stayed outside the 
centre  of  the  storm  due  to  the  consistently  implemented  conservative  model  of  licensing 
policy, supervision and regulation of the banking sector. Over the next years, supervision and 
regulation within EU will change and improve significantly with the ECB and NCBs playing an 
important role. Being part of ESCB, BNB is going to take an active part in the process. Third, 
the next six years will be crucial to accomplishing one of the country’s major commitments 
stemming  from  the  EU  accession  Treaty,  namely  the  adoption  of  the  euro  as  a  national 
currency. The preparation for this has been a priority for the BNB over the past six years with 
a significant part of the work in legal, technical and operational terms having already been 
completed. This task will continue as a major priority in the next six years. Adopting the singe 
currency by an EU member state is not and cannot be a unilateral decision. In addition to 
fulfilling the Maastricht criteria, we should also be able to convince all our EU partners of our 
readiness and capacity to be part of the euro area. This is why the BNB and its Governor 
need the utmost confidence; this is why I resigned to make it easiest for the Parliament to 
take a decision. 
In conclusion, demonstrating effectively compliance with the principle of predictability, I am 
going to submit to the Office of the Speaker of the National Assembly a nomination for the 
election of a Deputy Governor in charge of the Issue Department as this Deputy Governor’s 
term  of  office  expires  on  October  22.  I  appeal  for  this  decision  to  be  made  this  week,  if 
possible, for the sake of assuaging all concerns regarding BNB's governance. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you very much for the confidence I’ve been given. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2009
