Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report Update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, 22 January 
2009.  
 Good morning. We are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the January Monetary 
Policy Report Update, which we published this morning.  
The  outlook  for  the  global  economy  has  deteriorated  since  the  October  Monetary  Policy 
Report,  with  the  intensifying  financial  crisis  spilling  over  into  real  economic  activity. 
Heightened  uncertainty  is  undermining  business  and  household  confidence  worldwide  and 
further eroding domestic demand. Major advanced economies, including Canada's, are now 
in recession, and emerging-market economies are increasingly affected. Commodity prices – 
especially energy prices – have fallen as a result of substantially weaker global demand.  
Stabilization of the global financial system is a precondition for economic recovery. To that 
end, governments and central banks are taking bold and concerted policy actions. There are 
signs  that  these  extraordinary  measures  are  starting  to  gain  traction,  although  it  will  take 
some time for financial conditions to normalize. In addition, considerable monetary and fiscal 
policy stimulus is being provided worldwide. 
Canadian  exports  are  down  sharply,  and  domestic  demand  is  shrinking  as  a  result  of 
declines in real income, household wealth, and confidence. Canada's economy is projected 
to contract through mid-2009, with real GDP dropping by 1.2 per cent this year on an annual 
average basis. As policy actions begin to take hold in Canada and globally, and with support 
from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar, real GDP is expected to rebound, growing 
by 3.8 per cent in 2010.  
A wider output gap through 2009 and modest decreases in housing prices should cause core 
CPI  inflation  to  ease,  bottoming  at  1.1  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Total  CPI  inflation  is 
expected to dip below zero for two quarters in 2009, reflecting year-on-year drops in energy 
prices. With inflation expectations well-anchored, total and core inflation should return to the 
2 per cent target in the first half of 2011 as the economy returns to potential.  
Global developments pose significant upside and downside risks to the inflation projection. 
On the upside, the global economy could be stronger, if global fiscal stimulus turns out to be 
more  expansionary  than  expected,  or  if  aggressive  policy  actions  taken  across  major 
economies  restore  confidence  more  quickly  than  projected.  On  the  downside,  the  global 
recession could be deeper and more protracted because financial conditions take longer to 
normalize. The Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced. 
Against this background, the Bank lowered its policy rate by 50 basis points on Tuesday to 1 
per cent, bringing the cumulative monetary policy easing to 350 basis points since December 
2007. Guided by Canada's inflation-targeting framework, we will continue to monitor carefully 
economic and financial developments in judging to what extent further monetary stimulus will 
be  required  to  achieve  the  2  per  cent  target  over  the  medium  term.  Low,  stable,  and 
predictable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make to long-term economic 
growth and financial stability. 
BIS Review 7/2009 
 1
