Zdeněk Tůma: Frontiers of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  Forecasting 
Dinner 2009, Czech National Bank, Prague, 12 February 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
I had the opportunity to speak on the occasion of the Forecasting Dinner several times, but 
this year is rather special in one respect and that is the global economic crisis, in the midst of 
which we are right now. Severity of the crisis brings new challenges to central bankers which 
result in unconventional methods of the monetary policy conduct. Indeed, the policy interest 
rates  in  the  United  States  reached  effectively  zero  and  the  European  Central  Bank  is 
expected  to  lower  its  policy  interest  rate  to  historically  low  level  soon.  Global  economic 
outlook  is  worsening  and  the  latest  macroeconomic  forecast  of  the  Czech  National  Bank 
expects  the  economic  growth  to  be  around  zero  this  year  and  only  roughly  one  percent 
growth in the year 2010. Accordingly, we expect inflation to hit almost zero in summer this 
year but return close to the Czech National Bank inflation target of 2% in the first half of the 
year 2010. Challenges we face as central bankers lead me tonight to talk about frontiers of 
monetary  policy,  issues  that  have  been  heavily  discussed  among  central  bankers  recently 
but are not completely resolved yet. 
The  first  frontier,  I  would  like  to  mention  tonight,  is  the  reaction  of  monetary  policy  to 
observed changes in asset prices, of course, in order to prevent creation of asset bubbles in 
equity  or  real  estate  markets.  Many  economists  and  economic  journalists  argued  recently 
that  if  the  central  banks  reacted  to  the  sharply  rising  asset  prices  between  years  2003  – 
2007, the bubble in equity and real estate markets would not have developed and we would 
not be where we are today. It is not that the policy reaction to asset prices was not discussed 
among the central bankers during those years, but there is one crucial constraint on our side 
and that is that the reaction is in reality dramatically difficult. Donald Kohn, Vice Chairman of 
the Federal Reserve pointed out recently that in order to be successful in this respect three 
tough conditions must be met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely 
fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have 
a high probability that it will help to check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, 
the  expected  improvement  in  future  economic  performance  that  would  result  from  the 
curtailment of the bubble must be sufficiently great.1 Based on those he expressed a view, 
which I share, that while the recent experience may have made us a bit more confident about 
detecting bubbles, it has not resolved the problem of doing so in a timely manner, nor has it 
shown that small-to-modest policy actions will reliably and materially dampen speculation. An 
extra policy reaction to changes in asset prices thus still remains questionable. 
The second frontier to be mentioned tonight is related to the monetary policy implementation, 
current situation on the money market and financial stability of the banking sector. For years 
the monetary policy implementation was not an issue and central banks were able to tighten 
the short-term money market interest rates such as for instance 3M PRIBOR closely to the 
key policy rate. Unfortunately, this changed in August 2007 for the US interest rates when 
the 3M LIBOR for the US dollar denominated funds started to deviate significantly from the 
Federal  Reserve  target  for  funds.  A  year  later  following  the  second  round  of  the  financial 
crises  that  peaked  during  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  also  the  Czech  short-term 
money  market rates started to elevate well above our policy rate, the two week repo rate. 
                                                 
1   Quoted from speech of Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn: “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited” at the 
Cato’s Institute 26th Annual Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, D.C., on November 19, 2008. 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 1
What we know is that all these movements were caused by principal uncertainty among the 
commercial banks worrying about their solvency and financial stability. The banks were not 
sure among themselves about to what extent they were hit by the collapse of the market with 
asset-backed  securities  and  consequently  about  their  counterparts’  ability  to  stay  in  the 
business over a longer period than one day. Central banks reacted and extended the money 
market operations in order to narrow spreads between the market rates and key policy rates. 
For instance, the Czech National Bank introduced a new liquidity providing repo operation 
despite  the  fact  that  the  money  market  as  a  whole  operates  with  huge  surplus  and  on 
average the Czech National Bank has to withdraw roughly 400 billions Czech crowns from 
the money market to be able to control the market interest rates. While introduction of this 
new operation made the money market participants less nervous, unusual spread between 
the market rates and the key policy rate still persists. This is not only the case of the Czech 
economy  or  other  Central  European  economies  but  we  observe  the  same  also  in  the 
eurozone.  Commercial  banks  operating  in  the  eurozone  are  willing  to  borrow  around  250 
billions Euro from the European Central Bank paying the key policy rate and at the end of the 
same day to deposit the same money at the European Central Bank being paid the discount 
rate, which is 1 percentage point less, but the spread between the short-term money market 
rates  and  the  key  policy  rate  still  persists.  Magnitude  of  the  commercial  banks’  position 
compared with the European Central Bank shows how huge the uncertainty has been. Only 
restoration of confidence about solvency and financial stability among commercial banks can 
most probably solve this problem. 
The third frontier we are concerned about is connected to the emergency liquidity assistance. 
Under standard circumstances central banks provide liquidity to commercial banks only. In 
case  of  an  urgent  need  a  commercial  bank  may  ask  the  central  bank  for  an  emergency 
credit.  What  we  see  in  the  United  States  today  is  an  attempt  to  extend  this  emergency 
assistance beyond the banking system and provide liquidity against collateral to non-banking 
firms. On one hand, one understands the effort of the Federal Reserve to provide funding 
also to the non-banking sector of the economy when the traditional channels are freezing. On 
the  other  hand,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  effectively  printing  money  against  collateral  with 
uncertain value and there are concerns when and how the Federal Reserve will close and 
null  these  operations  to  avoid  potential  inflationary  consequences.  It  is  argued  that  similar 
operations should be done rather by the Ministry of Finance against issuance of the public 
debt.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  probably  aware  of  the  delicacy  of  current  situation  and 
Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  recently  tried  to  assure  the  economic  society  that  the  Federal 
Reserve is prepared to close the respective funding windows when necessary.2 However, a 
question that remains to be answered is how this will work in reality? 
Ladies and Gentlemen, instead of a conclusion let me please assure you that in spite of all 
the frontiers we face today the Czech National Bank does its business as usual and we will 
do whatever is necessary to meet our ultimate objective of price stability. Finally, I would like 
to wish to all of us for the year 2009 to be less challenging than the previous one. 
                                                 
2   See  speech  of  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke:  “Crisis  and  the  Policy  Response”  at  the  Stamp  Lecture,  London 
School of Economics, London, on January 13, 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2009
