Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Figaro magazine 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  Le 
Figaro Magazine conducted by Mr Ghislain de Montalembert, 23 January 2009. 
 Le Figaro Magazine: On 15 February, the European Central Bank (ECB) decided to cut its 
main interest rate by 50 basis points to a historical low. Is this a sign that the recession is 
worsening? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: I indicated, on behalf of the Governing Council, that we had observed 
a further decline in inflationary pressures – linked, in particular, to a slowdown of economic 
activity – which justified a further cut of our interest rate by 0.5%. Overall, in the space of 
three months, we have lowered our rates by 225 basis points, which is a significant amount. 
Each  of  our  decisions  is  made  with  the  will  of  the  Council  in  mind;  that  is,  to  provide  our 
fellow  citizens  with  medium-term  price  stability  that  is  in  accordance  with  our  definition: 
“below, but close to, 2%”. 
Le  Figaro  Magazine:  In  your  opinion,  have  the  priorities  changed?  After  the  fight  against 
inflation, which was brought back to 1.6% in the euro area, is it not imperative to stimulate 
growth? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  sustainable  growth  and 
sustainable  job  creation.  There  is  no  contradiction  between  price  stability  and  growth.  We 
have put our rates at 2% because the risks to price stability have fallen significantly and this 
decision was justified in order to continue to firmly anchor medium-term inflation forecasts at 
less  than  2%,  to  avoid  inflation,  but  close  to  2%,  to  protect  ourselves  from  any  danger  of 
deflation, knowing that this risk does not exist at present in Europe. As I have explained by 
recounting the work of the Governing Council, this decision supports sustainable growth and 
job creation and contributes to financial stability. 
Le Figaro Magazine: The ECB's resourcefulness has been a positive surprise in the last few 
months... 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Maybe  it  is  the  impression  of  journalists  which  has  changed!  You 
know  that  we  have  an  impressive  track  record  of  intervening  vis-à-vis  the  refinancing  of 
commercial banks. When the shock of 11 September 2001 happened, it took half a day for 
the  ECB  to  decide  to  provide  the  European  financial  system  with  abundant  liquidity  on  12 
September.  The  crisis,  still  ongoing,  since  9  August  2007  led  to  us  taking  even  more 
impressive  decisions  almost  immediately,  for  example  the  decision  to provide  the  financial 
system with a 24-hour loan of EUR 95 billion in the summer of 2007. This decision appears 
to have strongly increased the ECB’s global and European visibility. We were the first central 
bank to react immediately when the international financial turbulence first appeared. Today, 
the Eurosystem provides considerable support to the European financial system, since we 
refinance, with full allotment and at fixed rates, the euro area’s commercial banks in a week, 
a month, three months and six months. This was something that was unthinkable before the 
financial turbulence intensified. I would also like to underline the speed with which the public 
authorities  as  a  whole,  including  governments  and  parliaments,  reacted.  Together,  they 
showed that Europe was able to take decisions, even in the most difficult circumstances. 
Le Figaro Magazine: The Financial Times named you “Personality of the year” in 2007. Do 
you see this as a way of getting back at those who criticised the ECB’s “psychorigidity” in the 
past? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: These criticisms turned out to have no basis, as we saw, and have, it 
seems to me, largely disappeared. Those who systematically sung the praises of the most 
accommodative monetary policies have come to realise, over the last 18 months, that this 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 1
was too simplistic a view. The ECB’s Governing Council does what the Treaty on European 
Union asks it to do, on behalf of 329 million European citizens in the euro area. While I was 
Governor of the Banque de France, there was also a public debate on the decisions of the 
Monetary  Policy  Council,  which  some  70%  of  French  citizens  approved,  across  all  public 
sensibilities. I have noticed that public support for the ECB's policy of price stability is also 
very strong and is an element of trust which is important for the economy as a whole. 
Le Figaro Magazine: Was the euro not responsible, in part, for inflation? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  On  the  contrary.  Over  the  last  ten  years,  we  have  managed  to 
maintain a stable rise in prices of 2.2% per annum on average in the euro area. This is a 
good result given the spectacular rise in the prices of raw materials and energy which has 
been recorded over this period. Nevertheless, it is true that, when the euro was introduced, a 
few  sectors  in  some  European  economies  tried  to  take  advantage  of  the  changeover  to 
increase certain prices abnormally. This led to an average rise of around 0.2% at the time of 
the changeover. In the case of France, Christian Noyer explained this phenomenon, which is 
insignificant in the life of the euro thus far, outstandingly well. It has become clear that we 
have done  what has been necessary to guarantee price stability in the euro area. We will 
have very low inflation for some months in the course of 2009, and I already predict some 
people saying to us that it will be too low! This is a result of the fall in oil prices, as it was the 
high inflation in 2008 which resulted from their rise. 
Le  Figaro  Magazine:  The  euro  celebrated  its  ten-year  anniversary  on  1  January  2009. 
Without it, where would we be? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro is evidently an advantage for those democracies that have 
chosen to adopt it. It has proven its stability, its resistance to shocks and its resilience in the 
face  of  financial  and  economic  turmoil.  Once  again,  I  would  say,  as  we  have  faced  many 
tests  over  the  last  ten  years:  the  bursting  of  the  internet  bubble,  the  Asian  crisis,  the  raw 
materials and oil price shock... In ten years, the euro has been a key factor in achieving the 
Single European Market and has provided a shield against international turmoil.  
Le Figaro Magazine: Is the euro, therefore, a total success? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  It  is  a  big  success.  We  have  given  European  citizens  a  single 
currency which is in line with what was promised: a currency which retains its value, which 
inspires confidence, a stable currency, at least as stable as the legacy currencies. Ten years 
ago, many believed this promise could not be fulfilled.  
Le Figaro Magazine: In terms of job creation, has the euro kept its promise? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: It is not correct to say, as some have done, that the euro has acted 
against job creation. On the contrary, in the first ten years of the euro, the number of people 
in work increased by approximately 16 million, which is at least 3 million more than in the 
USA in the same period. We have also created many more jobs than we did in the decades 
preceding the euro, in Europe as well as in France. 
Le  Figaro  Magazine:  Can  the  euro  hope  to  one  day  take  the  place  of  the  dollar  as  an 
exchange and reserve currency? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  The  single  currency  has  not  been  created  to  compete  with  the  US 
dollar, nor has it been created to replace it. On the contrary, I am convinced that active and 
confident  monetary  cooperation  with  the  United  States  is  important  for  the  stability  and 
prosperity of the world today. I strongly disagree with those who say that the euro has been 
created to compete with the US dollar. Let’s be clear: the ECB is not campaigning for the 
international use of the euro. We are letting the economic and financial players make up their 
own minds, without trying to influence them. 
Le Figaro Magazine: With regard to the crisis, some European countries – such as France – 
today allow themselves discrepancies, notably budgetary discrepancies, with the Maastricht 
criteria. Do you blame them? 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2009
Jean-Claude Trichet: An area with a single currency which unites 16 sovereign states, each 
with their own budgetary policies, must respect the principle of a close collegial coordination 
and monitoring of budgetary policies, in which the Commission plays an important role. The 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  been  revised  in  the  last  few  years  and  European  countries 
agreed  unanimously  on  the  new  rules.  The  ECB  requires  that  these  rules  are  respected, 
especially  since  they  authorise,  given  the  exceptional  circumstances  that  we  are  currently 
experiencing, a certain room for manoeuvre for those countries which have the possibility to 
do  so.  Our  recommendation  is  therefore  extremely  clear:  let  us  respect  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  and  know  how  to  use  all  its  room  for  manoeuvre...  but  only  its  room  for 
manoeuvre. 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 3
