Marion Williams: The nexus between regulation and compliance and the 
financial meltdown of 2008 
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at a Compliance 
Education  Seminar,  hosted  by  the  Barbados  International  Business  Association  (BIBA)  in 
association  with  The  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  Barbados  (ICAB),  Bridgetown, 
9 July 2009. 
 First let me congratulate ICAB and BIBA for having the foresight to hold this seminar. The 
topic of compliance is a very relevant one in today’s environment where it has been forcibly 
brought home to professionals across the globe the need to be vigilant in their activities and 
to guide clients in the direction of prudence and care in operations. 
I will touch briefly on three aspects of the nexus between compliance and regulation in the 
context of the global financial problems. Adequacy or inadequacy of financial guidelines and 
rules, observance of operational rules and appropriate codes of behaviour. 
Compliance and appropriate regulation must go hand in hand. That is, we must first ensure 
that  our  rules  and  guidelines  are  relevant  and  effective.  We  must  then  ensure  that 
compliance with them is observed. Having accepted that, we must however concede that the 
current global financial crisis which started in the US was not a result of non-compliance. In 
the  case  of  the  sub-prime  crisis,  other  deficiencies  were  more  important.  The  BIS  in  its 
annual  report  notes  that  these  deficiencies  include  “problems  with  incentives,  flaws  in 
techniques  to  measure,  price  and  manage  risk  and  the  corporate  governance  structures 
used to monitor it, and failings of the regulatory system”. They suggested too, that there was 
a  willingness  to  mistake  the  complexity  of  the  system  for  sophistication  and  that  historical 
performance was being relied upon to measure price and manage risk. 
Given that the past is not always a good guide to the future, particularly in an environment 
where new techniques and instruments were constantly being introduced, this was a serious 
error in judgement. 
The  problems  in  the  international  financial  markets  of  2008  have  taught  us  many  lessons. 
The most important lesson is that changes in the regulatory environment must keep up with 
changes in the financial landscape, in terms of instruments, institutions and approaches to 
the delivery of financial services. 
Firstly, the financial failures of 2008 which followed the sub-prime crisis clearly illustrated the 
need for a wider coverage of the financial sector beyond commercial banks and for stricter 
coverage  of  the  financial  entities  which  actually  were  regulated.  In  terms  of  the  existing 
regulations, capital criteria were inadequate. Indeed in the financial meltdown many banks 
had  to  be  recapitalized  by  Government  and  by  the  private  sector.  Yet  many  of  the  impact 
studies of the Basel II guidelines which had been conducted up to that time, had shown that 
for  developed  country  markets  the  Basel  II  guidelines  would  have  led  to  lower  capital 
requirements for most banks. Conversely, it is now believed that capitalization levels of most 
major  banks  have  to  be  increased  –  significantly  in  some  cases,  and  many  have  already 
taken steps to do so. Despite acceptance of this need, there is also increasing acceptance of 
the fact that capital levels cannot save a bank when a crisis hits. Operational probity is more 
important in preventing its occurrence. 
It  is  also  generally  agreed  that  one  of  the  most  important considerations  in  ensuring  good 
financial management is that risk assessment guidelines must be adequately implemented. 
Market risk assessments should have indicated that the rapid growth of the sub-prime market 
and the manner in which risks were assumed, carried inherent dangers. Investment banks 
were, it is true, sensitive to risks such as exchange rate risks and interest rate risks but were 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 1
not sufficiently sensitive to credit risks or market risks particularly systemic risks. Though the 
Basel II guidelines, to its credit, placed a great deal of emphasis on credit risk, for the most 
part these guidelines were not in place in the US and the regulators there had only partially 
accepted them and only for the largest banks. 
It  is  also  well  known  that  the  scope  of  regulatory  oversight  of  the  investment  banks  was 
inadequate. Indeed, so much so that when the Federal Reserve Bank started to bail them out 
they were hard pressed to find the appropriate legislation under which to do so. Investment 
banks  were  very  highly  leveraged  and  it  became  clear  as  the  drama  unfolded  that  going 
forward  the  extent  of  permissible  leverage  needed  to  be  controlled,  a  concern  that  is  now 
beginning  to  find  itself  in  modifications  being  made  to  guidelines  being  developed  for 
financial institutions. 
The situation was allowed to develop partly because there was a belief in the self-correcting 
mechanisms  of  the  market  and  a  belief  that  there  should  be  as  little  interference  in  the 
market  as  possible.  This  idea  of  the  supremacy  of  the  market  finds  itself  increasingly 
challenged today as the market has proven that it is often unable to correct itself. 
While we cannot go overboard and reject the importance of market mechanisms, as they are 
fundamental to much of the pricing in the financial world, in the aftermath of the crisis we do 
need to ask ourselves what the continuing role of self-regulation should be. In the regulatory 
world, it is still generally believed that the idea of self-regulation is a useful one, but that it 
cannot be totally relied upon. 
Many  self-regulatory  bodies  began  in  an  environment  where  they  set  the  rules  which 
governed them. In time it became clear that this was not enough and oversight bodies were 
established in most jurisdictions to oversee the implementation of the rules and to provide a 
forum for appeal to a higher body. 
Regulation however requires a sensitivity to the stage of development of the market and to 
the  norms  of  market  behaviour,  and  emerging  and  embryonic  markets  may  require  that  a 
balance be struck between the need for markets to achieve rapid development and the need 
for these markets to remain stable. Most developed country markets did not have a highly 
controlled regulatory environment into which  they launched themselves. Emerging markets 
seem to be managing to achieve this balance as evident by the relative stability of markets in 
Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Professional bodies have become very important contributors to the stability of the regulatory 
framework and guidelines issued by many professional bodies have tended to become the 
accepted  norm.  Indeed  the  term  “Generally  Accepted”  is  a  term  used  to  describe  GAAP 
guidelines  or  principles.  As  the  world  became  more  globalised  efforts  have  intensified  to 
make  guidelines  and  principles  in  each  area  of  discipline  internationally  acceptable,  since 
companies  and  institutions  were  now  operating  globally.  The  merging  of  accounting  rules 
and IAS, FASB and GAAP into IFRS regulations are an example of this global trend. In this 
way  self-regulatory  organizations  and  professional  organizations  have  had  a  tremendous 
impact  on  the  regulatory  world  in  promoting  uniformity,  reliability  and  comparability  of 
information  across  the  globe.  Today  regulatory  guidelines  and  guidance  notes  issued  by 
professional bodies governing operations across the globe on a broad range of topics have 
been widely encouraged and accepted. 
However,  compliance  with  guidelines  can  become  an  issue  in  itself  –  as  I  am  sure  this 
seminar has illustrated as entities and countries are at different stages of development. Even 
the Basel guidelines, particularly Basel II guidelines are a case in point. Because of the wide 
differences in levels of development and sophistication, it was necessary to have 3 levels of 
Basel II, standardized and IRB and Advanced IRB. 
Generally, because compliance is voluntary, what has happened is that reputational risk is 
increasingly  being  used  as  an  enforcement  tool  and  has  become  very  important,  since  a 
statement by an international organisation that an entity or even a country is not compliant is 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2009
itself a damaging statement. This was taken to inordinate lengths at the time of the OECD 
saga  in  1999  in  respect  of  offshore  financial  centres  to  the  detriment  of  the  Caribbean. 
Barbados was more fortunate in 2009. However, while Barbados was in the top tier of the 
recent  list  of  financial  centres  issued  by  G20,  and  therefore  had  no  problem,  the  principle 
being applied was one of encouraging compliance through the power of reputational risk. As 
a consequence many countries within the region have hastened to put corrective actions in 
place. 
It now becomes clear that insurance companies are now being more closely monitored as 
entities  which  have  significant  potential  for  impacting  financial  system  stability.  Following 
developments in the US, we in the Caribbean have realized this to our chagrin. Indeed one of 
the  results  of  this  realization  was  an  extension  of  support  by  Government  to  a  major 
insurance company in the US and more recently in Trinidad and Tobago in not too dissimilar 
circumstances. 
Indeed,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  BIS  has  included  a  unit  in  its  office  in  Basel  for 
monitoring  the  financial  stability  of  insurance  companies,  entities  which  were  not  formerly 
included in the financial institutions covered by the BIS. 
Other developments in terms of the widening scope of regulation are evident from the fact 
that whereas central banks in most developed economies previously had stated objectives of 
price stability and monetary stability, today many Central Banks who primarily focussed on a 
price stability objective are widening their expressed mandates to include financial stability. 
However, as a consequence some Central Banks are concerned that there is a disconnect 
between the responsibility for maintaining financial stability and the dependence on others for 
oversight  of  a  number  of  financial  entities  which  can  influence  that  stability.  However,  the 
Jacques De Larossière Report presented recently to the IMF comes down squarely on the 
side of placing responsibility for financial stability on the Central Banks. 
These  developments  underscore  the  importance  of  the  synergies  between  regulation  and 
compliance. We cannot defer compliance until all the needed revisions to oversight systems 
are  put  in  place.  It  must  be  a  simultaneous  task.  We  must  work  with  what  we  have  even 
though there is need for adjustments. We must ensure that the guidelines we issue continue 
to  be  relevant  and  are  framed  to  best  achieve  the  desired  objectives.  Given  the  rapid 
changes  in  technologies  and  instruments  now  available  we  must  be  sure  that  we  are 
targeting the correct regulatory goals. 
Much  of  my  presentation  has  tended  to  deal  with  compliance  in  financial  institutions. 
However I am aware that today’s seminar is a joint seminar with Institute of Accountants, so 
your concerns will not only be about financial firms. 
Compliance  in  the  corporate  world  will  be  high  on  your  agendas.  In  this  regard,  if  I  may 
comment  on  some  general  lessons  to  be  learned  by  most  professional  coming  out  of  the 
global  financial  crisis,  it  is  that  codes  of  behaviour  are  important  but  minute  regulation  is 
almost impossible. For example, I am not sure that there is any particular rule that should say 
to a lender that it is inappropriate to require from a borrower monthly payments which exceed 
the monthly income of that borrower. This was happening in the sub-prime mortgage market. 
It  was  influenced  by  the  fact  that  the  lenders’  compensation  was  based  on  the  volume  of 
credit he originated and not on the quality of the credit. It would seem that general codes of 
behaviour  rather  than  explicit  rules  are  important  here  since  one  cannot  anticipate  every 
situation, nor can we devise a rule for every possible eventuality. 
In  the  Caribbean  and  in  Barbados  in  particular,  generally  speaking  our  commercial  banks 
and  finance  companies  have  been  quite  compliant.  Banks  and  finance  companies  in 
Barbados have tended to be well regulated and have observed the guidelines issued by the 
Central Bank. In addition the Board of the Central Bank at the end of 2008 took the decision 
to position itself to extend some aspects of regulation and consequently access to liquidity 
support facilities to finance companies as well, so we have broadened our coverage. 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 3
To  conclude,  the  nexus  between  regulation  and  compliance  is  a  mutually  supportive  one. 
Regulations, guidelines, standards and codes must first be appropriate, relevant and up-to-
date  but  compliance  with  the  guidelines  is  critical  to  the  reliability,  comparability  and 
international  acceptance  of  financial  statements  and  for  verifying  the  financial  status  of 
companies in the corporate world generally, but especially in the financial world. 
Barbados has done relatively well in this regard. Our recent challenges have originated from 
outside, but the overall level of compliance has been for the most part, exemplary. However, 
we must be vigilant, and it is important that this is so of the entire corporate world. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2009
