 Marion Williams: Barbados’ financial system and insurance sector 
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados 
Association of Insurers and Financial Advisers (BARAIFA), Bridgetown, 20 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
Mr.  Chairman,  Madam  President  Mrs.  Lorena  Best  and  Past  President  Mr.  Wilton  Gale, 
Mrs. Shirley Clarke, Agents and Financial Advisers, Distinguished Life Underwriters. 
When last I spoke with you in early 2008, we were only just beginning to see the fallout from 
the collapse of the US sub-prime market. While at the time we expected there to be some 
(limited) effects on demand and financing conditions, our more immediate concern related to 
the  inflationary  impact  of  record-high  international  commodity  prices  and  oil  prices  in 
particular. 
Since  then,  however,  circumstances  have  changed  dramatically,  and  for  the  worse.  It  has 
become  clear  that  we  are  entrenched  in  a  global  financial  crisis  and  economic  downturn, 
stemming from an acute crisis of confidence. The only upside (if one can call it that) to the 
situation would be that depressed world demand has helped to stabilise international prices 
and curb inflationary pressures. 
Current  global  conditions  therefore  pose  obvious  challenges  for  Barbados,  as  economic 
downturns  in  our  major  trading  partners  and  the  ongoing  turmoil  in  international  financial 
markets continue to filter through to the domestic economy. 
Macroeconomic developments 
I  think  that  everyone  in  this  room  is  aware  that  the  year  2009  will  be  a  difficult  year  for 
Barbados, for the Caribbean and the world. With the global economy slowing significantly, 
and most of Europe and North America in recession; with China experiencing half the rate of 
growth  than  is  customary  and  South  East  Asia,  India,  Australia  and  New  Zealand 
experiencing significant downturns, or in recession, the expectation is that this must have a 
significant negative impact on Barbados and the Caribbean. 
The questions that most of us want answered are: How badly is it likely to affect us? How 
long will it last and what can we do to mitigate its impact? What pre-emptive action can we 
take,  collectively  as  a  government  or  individually?  For  BARAIFA  members  I  would  expect 
that one of your main interests would be about how the insurance market will be affected and 
what are the prospects for the insurance business going forward. 
As we all know by now, the softening of global demand, amid tight financial conditions, has 
triggered  economic  downturns  in  our  key  source  markets  for  tourism.  Barbados  is  a  very 
open economy and because of the structure of our economy, we are more sensitive to the 
economic  performance  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  Since  tourist  travel  is  spent  out  of 
discretionary  income,  Barbados  is  very  dependent  on  the  economic  performance  of  its 
source markets. 
The UK, our leading source market, has been in recession since the middle of 2008, while 
the US (our second most important market) has officially been in a recession since the end of 
2007,  as  reflected  in  significant  job  losses  and  declining  real  output.  Indeed,  in  February 
2009, the US unemployment rate reached levels not seen since the recession of the early 
eighties, while the estimated growth in real GDP for 2008 was the lowest since 2001, when 
the September 11th terrorist attacks curtailed growth. Although Canada, another key market, 
has remained relatively buoyant, there are signs of increasing spillover effects from the US 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 1
downturn on that economy. The local tourism industry is therefore currently experiencing a 
significant downturn, which has negatively affected activity in a number of auxiliary services. 
Foreign exchange receipts from tourism are likely to be further impacted by huge discounts 
offered by hotels to encourage visitor travel. Profits in the industry are likely to be adversely 
affected,  even  in  circumstances  where  in  some  cases  occupancy  has  not  been  severely 
impacted. Despite shorter work weeks, which is a means of mitigating the macroeconomic as 
well as the social impact, this is likely to lead to higher unemployment. 
After tourism, the international business and financial services (IBFS) sector is the second-
most  significant  contributor  to  Barbados’  foreign  exchange  earnings  and  it  too  has  been 
struggling to maintain profitability in the current climate. In 2008, many entities in the offshore 
sector were adversely impacted by the dramatic fall in stock and bond prices and by the near 
collapse of the mortgage market in the US. Many lost significant value on their assets and 
profits  in  the  sector  fell,  adversely  affecting  government  revenues  which  depend  on  the 
sector for over 50% of corporate profits, but also dampening the prospects of any significant 
increase in new registrations in the sector in 2009. 
In addition, the recent developments in Antigua, with respect to Stanford International Bank 
and its related companies, have the potential for deterring potential investors into Barbados, 
as  in  the  minds  of  some  investors,  the  Caribbean  is  seen  as  one  geographical  area.  It  is 
therefore  important  to  mount  a  campaign  to  distinguish  Barbados  as  a  domicile  with  high 
standards  and  competent  oversight  systems.  The  Central  Bank  assisted  in  aggressive 
marketing of the jurisdiction in 1999-2000 and was active in differentiating Barbados from the 
less positively regarded kinds of jurisdictions and we propose to mount such a programme 
again through an increase in the number of articles in journals covering the financial services 
sector in Barbados. This is particularly important in the context of the distrust in the financial 
system  and  the  growing  complaints  about  the  special  tax  systems  which  obtain  in 
international  financial  centres  like  Barbados.  While  the  global  financial  collapse,  with  its 
impact on the entire financial system has nothing to do with offshore financial centres as they 
are commonly called; it is convenient to find scapegoats and to point fingers at others rather 
than at oneself. In addition, with many countries’ government accounts under strain, it is also 
timely  to  refer  to  the  revenue  forgone  by  the  incorporation  of  international  companies  in 
offshore financial centres, forgetting for the time being the expansion of the corporations that 
this facilitated. 
As a consequence of all these developments, the international business sector in Barbados 
and elsewhere is likely to have to defend its existence and to use its networks across the 
world  to  make  the  point  of  the  important  contribution  it  makes  to  global  growth.  It  will  be 
important  to  make  the  point  that  it was  the  traditional  banks  and  investment  houses  –  the 
household names – that failed in the US and had to be sold, liquidated or bailed out. 
Additionally, the authorities have been seeking on an on-going basis to expand this network 
to include major emerging and developing economies such as China, India and Brazil, using 
Barbados as a conduit jurisdiction for OECD entities wishing to invest in these markets. 
Although  manufacturing  and  agriculture  are  no  longer  as  significant  as  they  once  were  in 
terms  of  their  overall  contribution  to  GDP,  Barbados’  exports  of  manufactured  and 
agricultural products continue to earn valuable foreign exchange. This too is being buffeted 
by  the  effects  of  the  global  crisis.  With  the  global  slowdown  affecting  the  main  export 
markets, exports of goods and services have been constrained. 
Developments in financial markets 
As the negative effects of the meltdown weakened the US financial system, the magnitude of 
its  severity  became  apparent  as  it  spread  to  other  advanced  economies  and  led  to  the 
collapse of major global financial institutions. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 The monetary authorities in the main advanced economies have responded aggressively in a 
bid  to  ease conditions, with  the  US  Fed  Funds  rate  and  the  BOE  bank  rate  reaching  new 
historical lows. This has resulted in the extremely low interest rate environment that currently 
prevails internationally. 
Amid  the  collapse  of  the  credit  markets  in  the  US  and  waning  business  confidence  there, 
external  financing  conditions  tightened,  and  private  capital  inflows  to  Barbados  slowed, 
shrinking the capital and financial account surplus to the point where it is no longer sufficient 
to finance the deficit on the current account. Consequently, we have seen a reduction in the 
stock of net international reserves (NIR). 
The Bank has not sat idly by during this upheaval and has even been somewhat aggressive 
in its response. We have so far lowered the minimum deposit rate by a cumulative 225 basis 
points. Our policy rate now stands at 3.00% compared to the 5.25% it was when the extent of 
the international economic upheaval first became clear in 2007. In fact, the Bank instituted its 
first  interest  rate  reduction  in  November  2007  and  has  gradually  lowered  not  just  the 
minimum deposit rate, but also the discount rate and has implemented a repurchase facility 
to provide even further assistance should any commercial banks face liquidity constraints. 
In line with our interventions, the market seems to be responding in kind, as evidenced by 
lower deposit rates and consequently lower lending rates. The prime lending rate now stands 
at 9.00% compared to 10.15% at the end of 2007 while the rate on 3-month treasury bills has 
declined  to  3.84%,  a  full  100  basis  points  below  where  it  was  at  the  start  of  the  Bank’s 
intervention. The rates on new government debentures and treasury notes have also been 
falling. 
This current environment may present some difficulties with respect to the search for strong 
returns, and I would like to take this opportunity to encourage the financially savvy amongst 
us to continue to embrace the challenge to create new and attractive investment instruments. 
There are always projects in need of financing and, in light of the lower cost of borrowing, it is 
perhaps the time for these projects to turn to institutional investors for their funding. 
Impact on the domestic economy 
As can be expected the deteriorating economic conditions in Barbados’ main trading partners 
are being reflected in the performance of key sectors of the domestic economy. In addition to 
the tourism industry, the impact on the construction sector is a matter of concern in light of its 
critical  role  in  supporting  employment.  Overall  therefore,  domestic  economic  activity  has 
slowed  markedly  in  response  to  the  global  slowdown,  following  five  consecutive  years  of 
above-average growth. This has been reflected in a reversal of employment trends and led to 
an uptick in unemployment. 
Economic prospects 
Looking forward, the international prospects for 2009 are not very encouraging. The IMF is 
projecting  a  deceleration  in  global  growth  this  year  to  just  half  a  percent.  This  is  in  sharp 
contrast  to  growth  of  5.2%  and  3.4%  respectively,  in  2007  and  2008.  Furthermore, 
projections  of  a  gradual  recovery  in  2010  are  extremely  tentative.  With  the  slowing  of 
economic activity in Barbados’ main trading partners expected to continue through the end of 
2009, and possibly beyond, a downturn in the domestic economy is anticipated. 
Tourist  arrivals  are  set  to  fall,  with  knock-on  effects  on  the  wholesale  and  retail, 
transportation,  storage  and  communication  and  business  and  other  services  sectors.  In 
addition, even with Government’s efforts to fast-track projects, there is likely to be a reduction 
in  commercial  and  residential  activity,  particularly  given  the  unfavourable  conditions  for 
accessing external project financing. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 3
Commensurate with the downturn in real economic activity, the unemployment rate should 
trend upwards. On the upside, the moderation in global demand should continue to have a 
stabilising  effect  on  international  commodity  prices,  which  in  turn  should  subdue  domestic 
inflation. 
The  lower  commodity  prices  should  also  translate  into  a  lower  import  bill  and  a  smaller 
current  account  deficit,  though  this  outcome  is  likely  to  be  tempered  by  the  expected 
reduction in exports. In addition, the surplus on the capital and financial account balance is 
expected to increase, given the proceeds from the Government’s bond issue on the Trinidad 
and  Tobago  market.  Despite  these  improvements,  the  surplus  on  the  capital  and  financial 
account may still be sufficient to offset the current account deficit and therefore we expect a 
decline in the net international reserves (NIR). 
The prevailing low interest rate environment is likely to characterise the financial system for 
some  time  yet.  A  positive  outcome  of  this  is  that  it  would  facilitate  Government  borrowing 
from the domestic market to finance what is forecasted to be a larger fiscal deficit relative to 
2008.  This  deterioration  is  to  be  expected  given  the  Government’s  plans  to  apply  various 
forms of fiscal stimulus, including fast-tracking construction projects already in the pipeline. 
Nonetheless,  the  fiscal  authorities  will  face  significant  challenges  meeting  the  demands  of 
their  countercyclical  policy,  but  at  the  same  time,  prevent  a  significant  deterioration  in  the 
fiscal accounts. This task is made even more challenging, given that the economic downturn 
is likely to result in a noticeable slowdown in the growth of tax revenue. 
As members of BARAIFA, I am sure that you are particularly interested in the likely impact of 
all these developments on the insurance sector. 
As you are all aware the very public difficulties of the largest insurer in the world AIG in the 
US  continues  to  bombard  the  airwaves  every  day.  Despite  this  there  continues  to  be  a 
demand for insurance in the US. Indeed insurance is the kind of product that is not as fully 
impacted  by  the  economic  climate,  as  say,  travel.  There  is  an  element  of  demand  for 
insurance  that  actually  rises  when  risks  increase.  There  is  also  the  savings  element  of 
insurance which falls with an economic downturn. The extent to which the insurance industry 
will be impacted will depend on which of these influences predominates. 
In the Caribbean, we have had our troubles as the drama unfolding in the insurance sector in 
Trinidad impacts the rest of the Caribbean. However, the demand for insurance will continue 
to be strong because of the nature of the product. Customers will continue to want protection 
and the greater the risk, the greater will be the demand. The savings element of insurance 
does have a discretionary component and that aspect, to the extent that there are competing 
instruments for investment, may have to be marketed more aggressively in order to maintain 
its  market  share.  However,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  drama  unfolding  in  the 
Caribbean is any worse than the AIG saga in the US. There is nothing to suggest that it will 
adversely impact the industry as an industry in Barbados. 
While there are areas in which statutory requirements were short of the targets in the case in 
point,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  this  is  industry  wide.  Indeed,  even  in  the 
circumstances,  one  has  to  take  into  consideration  the  overall  assets  of  the  affected 
organisations where they are involved in multiple activities. While one cannot excuse non-
compliance  the  fact  is  that  the  assets  of  the  group  in  Barbados  are  multiple  times  the 
statutory  deficit.  We  must  focus  on  the  facts  and  evaluate  them  for  ourselves.  For  many 
years it has been known, for example, that foreign direct investment is less volatile and more 
reliable  than  portfolio  investment  and  that  is  less  susceptible  to  sudden  flight.  There  is 
nothing to suggest that these age-old tenets do not hold in today’s world. 
On a more  general level, many of the problems in the insurance industry in the US arose 
from insuring credit default risk and from the credit default swaps and credit derivatives which 
served to make it difficult to identify where risks really lay and by whom it was ultimately held. 
In  addition,  much  of  the  risk  was  laid  off  in  the  banking  sector  so  that  the  fortunes  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 banking  industry  and  the  insurance  industry  in  the  US  became  intertwined.  The  domestic 
insurance industry in Barbados is not engaged in credit default insurance on any significant 
scale, so that the fortunes of insurance companies are not as exposed to this type of activity. 
It  is  important  that  Barbados  does  not  allow  confidence  in  its  institutions  to  be  shaken  by 
these developments. 
What is particularly clear is that the period of aggressive expansion in the financial sector will 
be put on pause and that the year 2009 and possibly 2010 will be years of consolidation and 
grounding, and of more circumspect activity by the financial sector. It will be a period when 
opportunities  can  be  grasped  by  those  who  are  cash  rich  and  when  new  buyers  will  take 
advantage of situational opportunities. 
At the product level, hybrid financial products have increased and the definition of what is an 
insurance  product  and  what  is  not  is  becoming  blurred.  This  will  have  challenges  for 
regulators who will have to become familiar with these variants on the market and determine 
where they fall and whether they are truly insurance products. This lack of clarity does not 
become problematic in good times, but for purposes of evaluation of portfolio risk there will 
be  a  need  to  determine  the  insurance  and  the savings  element  of  such  hybrids.  We  must 
however  position  ourselves  to  deal  with  these  complexities  not  by  barring  them  but  by 
adjusting  our  systems  to  accommodate  them.  Innovative  thought  and  design  of  new 
instruments  should  be  welcomed  but  we  need  to  keep  pace  sufficiently  to  assess  the  risk 
involved and therefore the regulatory implications. 
It is the management of the enterprise that is the first base for deciding how an enterprise is 
run, and if it is in line with the industry standards. The organisation itself and its management 
have the responsibility to ensure that it is following good management practices. 
As  we  move  into  the  year  ahead  the  economy  is  expected  to  go  into  a  down  turn  and 
negative  growth  is  possible.  In  this  regard,  the  extent  of  international  pressures,  the  pre-
emptive measures we take and the speed of our responses, both in the public and private 
sectors, will determine how quickly the recovery comes. However, we began by saying that 
Barbados  is  an  open  economy  and  cannot  therefore  fully  insulate  itself  from  international 
developments.  We  will  however  need  to  work  harder  to  stay  where  we  are.  If  we  make 
extraordinary  efforts  we  may  be  able  to  buck  the  global  trend.  In  the  insurance  sector 
Barbados premiums per capita are ranked high both on a regional and a global basis and the 
level  of  insurance  penetration  is  high.  The  sector  therefore  approaches  the  downturn  in  a 
strong position. 
In  this  environment  there  is  an  advisory  role  here  also  for  insurance  professionals. 
Customers  will  need  financial  advice  more  than  ever.  It  is  an  opportunity  for  the  trained 
insurance  professional  to  give  advice  to  his  customers  on  their  financial  management.  It 
builds relationships, helps the customer to make the right decisions and opens opportunities 
for future business with the now better informed customer. In every circumstance we must 
look for the opportunity. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  leave  you  with  some  words  of  encouragement.  Although  the 
challenges that lay ahead seem a bit daunting, Barbados’ financial system is currently well 
positioned to cope with them. Furthermore, the Bank continues to stand ready to do all within 
its power to ensure that we ride this global crisis out with as minimal damage as possible. 
With  the  continued  solid  cooperation  of  the  other  regulators  and  the  wider  financial 
community,  we  expect  that,  despite  a  couple  hiccups,  the  Barbadian  financial  system  will 
continue  to  be  recognised  for  its  soundness  and  stability  and  the  insurance  sector  will 
continue to thrive. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 5
