Stefan Ingves: The current economic situation 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Avanza  Bank, 
Stockholm, 5 May 2009. 
 The  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meeting  published  yesterday  show  how  we  Executive 
Board  members  reasoned  when  we  decided  to  cut  the  repo  rate  to  0.5  per  cent  at  our 
monetary policy meeting on 20 April. Today I intend to give my views on economic activity 
and monetary policy. he central points I wish to take up are: 
• 
The reasons for the global financial crisis and the ensuing recession in Sweden and 
the world.  
The economic policy measures taken globally and in Sweden to stimulate the supply 
of credit and cushion the economic downswing.  
The most recent developments in the Swedish and international economies.  
My  arguments  for  cutting  the  repo  rate  to  0.5  per  cent,  the  repo  rate  path  and 
possible new unconventional monetary policy measures. 
  The financial crisis is a consequence of several factors 
High saving in China and oil-producing countries has contributed to low interest rates 
and credit expansion in a number of countries 
From  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  up  to  2005  the  US  current  account  deficit  increased 
substantially.  The  main  explanation  for  this  was  a  reduction  in  saving  among  households. 
The  US  current  account  deficit  is  counterbalanced  by  a  surplus  above  all  in  China  and  a 
number  of  oil-producing  countries  where  saving  is  high.  These  countries  have  sought  a 
return  on  their  financial  capital  abroad  by  investing,  for  instance,  in  US  treasuries.  The 
increased demand for US treasury bonds has for a long time been pushing down long-term 
interest rates in the United States. In addition, the US central bank conducted expansionary 
monetary policy in connection with the recession at the beginning of the 2000s and in the 
years  immediately  following.  The  low  interest  rates  have  stimulated  consumption  and 
investment in the United States. They contributed in particular to house prices rising more 
quickly than household incomes. The rising stock market and house prices contributed to a 
reduction in household saving, which largely explains the rising current account deficit until 
the housing market bubble burst. However, the problems of a previously overheated housing 
market  are  not  limited  to  the  United  States,  they  can  also  be  found  in  a  number  of  other 
countries. 
New forms of borrowing, including subprime loans, contributed to overheating in the 
US housing market 
During  the  years  2004  and  2005  new  loan  forms  became  increasingly  common  in  the 
housing  market  in  the  United  States,  not  least  subprime  loans.  Subprime  loans  are  loans 
aimed at households with low incomes. Often the lenders used very low interest rates during 
the first two years of the loan as an enticement. However, after this period the interest rates 
rose  substantially.  It  is  likely  that  the  credit  assessment  of  the  households  was  not  too 
comprehensive. The lenders expected that house prices would continue to rise, increasing 
the  value  of  the  collateral,  an  assumption  which  meant  that  the  risk  to  the  lenders  was 
assessed  as  slight.  The  strong  increase  in  the  new  forms  of  mortgages  contributed  to  the 
overheating in the housing market.  
BIS Review 56/2009 
 1
Another factor that can also be assumed to have contributed to the housing market bubble in 
the  United  States  is  the  US  housing  policy,  which  since  the  mid-1990s  had  become 
increasingly  aimed  at  extending  house  ownership  among  households.  For  example,  the 
semi-nationalised  mortgage  institutions  Freddie  Mac  and  Fannie  Mae  were  to  offer  a 
particular  share  of  their  total  lending  to  low-income  families.  This  contributed  to  many 
households receiving loans despite having an uncertain ability to repay. The credit expansion 
that was seen in the United States can also be seen in a number of other countries. 
In  autumn  2005  the  housing  market  bubble  in  the  United  States  burst  and  house  prices 
began  to  fall.  As  the  value  of  the  households’  most  important  collateral  fell,  an  increasing 
number of households could no longer renew their subprime loans at the same low interest 
rate. The lenders had tightened the credit terms. The interest rate shock that followed meant 
that  an  increasing  number  of  households  experienced  problems  in  paying,  which  in  turn 
pushed  down  house  prices  even  further.  This  occurred  as  an  increasing  number  of 
households and banks were forced to sell the houses at compulsory auctions at a lower price 
than before.  
The problems with subprime loans spread to other parts of the world economy 
The subprime loans were repackaged into new investment instruments which were later sold 
to investors in other countries. As it became increasingly evident that these securities were 
probably substantially overvalued, it came to light that a number of banks had suffered large 
losses. The uncertainty over which banks had suffered the largest losses made the banks 
unwilling  to  lend  to  one  another.  The  financial  crisis  escalated  when  the  US  government 
decided in autumn 2008 to allow US investment bank Lehman Brothers to fail. The unease 
on  the  global  financial  markets  increased  and  the  financial  crisis  that  had  started  in  the 
United States developed into a global crisis. 
The supervision in the financial markets has been insufficient 
With hindsight, we can observe that many investors took excessive risks. The risk price they 
had calculated on was too low. It can also be noted that the credit rating agencies gave the 
new financial products too high ratings because they had not taken sufficient account of the 
risk that it would not be possible to sell these products in the market. At the same time, the 
supervision of the financial markets did not give sufficient consideration to the problems that 
can arise when a house price bubble bursts. The remuneration structure in the private sector 
has  moreover  encouraged  short-term  thinking  and  substantial  risk-taking.  However,  all  of 
these problems are partly related to the good access to venture capital that has been created 
by high saving in some parts of the world. 
Credit granting has slowed down in a number of countries and the financial crisis has 
contributed to the recession in the world economy 
The  problems  in  the  housing  market  and  the  financial  crisis  that  arose  have  led  to  credit 
terms being tightened in some of the world’s larger economies. The difficulties in obtaining 
loans  have  contributed  to  a  number  of  companies  experiencing  difficulty  in  financing  their 
investment, and have subdued household consumption.  
Falling stock market prices and house prices have contributed to household wealth declining 
rapidly in many countries. This also slows down consumption and investment. The financial 
crisis  has  contributed  to  GDP  in  the  world  as  a  whole  declining  this  year  and  to 
unemployment rising in most countries. The Riksbank’s assessment is that the recession in 
the global economy in 2008-2009 will be the worst since the post-war period.  
2 
 BIS Review 56/2009
Extensive economic policy measures have been taken 
In contrast to the way that economic policy was conducted at the end of the 1920s and the 
beginning of the 1930s, the authorities have on this occasion acted quickly and forcefully. 
Central banks have acted quickly 
In the United States the policy rate has been cut from 5.25 per cent in autumn 2007 to 0.25 
per cent. The European Central Bank has cut its policy rate from 4.25 per cent in autumn 
2008 to 1.25 per cent and the Riksbank has cut the repo rate from 4.75 per cent to 0.5 per 
cent. A number of other central banks have implemented similar monetary policy easing with 
the  aim  of  stimulating  demand  and  alleviating  the  repercussions  of  the  financial  crisis  on 
production and employment. 
In addition to the interest rate cuts, some central banks have implemented what is known as 
unconventional  measures.  The  purpose  has  been  to  secure  the  supply  of  credit  and  to 
counteract  the  threats  to  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability.  The  central  banks  have 
contributed  large  liquidity  injections,  that  is,  lent  money  to  the  banks  against  collateral. 
Several  central  banks  have  also  provided  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  individual 
institutions. The Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and a number of other central 
banks  have  also  lent  money  to  other  central  banks  through  what  are  known  as  swap 
agreements  to  increase  the  access  to  foreign  currencies  in  some  other  countries. 
Governments  have  offered  guarantees  and  capital  injections  to  reduce  the  risk  of  further 
bankruptcies in the domestic banking sector.  
Another important measure to reinforce confidence in the world economy is the decision at 
the  G20  meeting  in  London  at  the  beginning  of  April  to  increase  the  IMF’s  resources  to 
provide assistance to emerging economies experiencing problems. 
The  measures  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments  around  the  world  so  far  have 
contributed to reducing the pressure on the interbank markets. Without these measures we 
would  probably  have  faced  a  financial  meltdown.  One  sign  that  the  crisis  is  no  longer  as 
acute is that what are known as TED spreads have fallen in Sweden, as well as the United 
States and the euro area. The TED spread is the difference between a three-month interbank 
rate  and  a  three-month  treasury  bill  rate.  The  spreads  are  now  back  at  around  the  levels 
prevailing immediately prior to the worsening of the crisis in autumn 2008. But the financial 
markets  are  still  functioning  much  less  efficiently  than  normal.  It  is  also  still  difficult  for 
companies to finance themselves in the capital market. Moreover, the liquidity injection from 
the  central  banks  does  not  solve  the  banks’  capital  problems.  For  this  reason  it  is  not 
surprising that the international discussion is currently aimed more at solvency than liquidity. 
It would be very much appreciated if many countries could begin to distinguish bad banks 
from good ones in an effective and transparent manner. 
In  Sweden,  too,  we  have  implemented  a  large  number  of  unconventional  measures  to 
safeguard financial stability and mitigate the negative effects of the financial crisis. During the 
second half of 2008 the Riksbank increased its lending to the banks by more than SEK 450 
billion. Almost SEK 200 billion of this was comprised of loans in US dollars. This has largely 
been financed by means of swap agreements with the Federal Reserve in the United States. 
Our  own  foreign  exchange  reserve  was  not  sufficiently  large  to  manage  such  extensive 
lending in dollars. The increased lending has meant that the Riksbank’s balance sheet has 
grown since summer 2008 from around SEK 200 billion to around SEK 600 billion.  
We have also changed our collateral requirements for lending to the banks so that the banks 
can offer more types of security as collateral and thus more easily sustain their functions in 
the  market.  We  have  provided  special  liquidity  assistance  to  Kaupthing  and  Carnegie  to 
safeguard financial stability and the functioning of the financial markets. We have decided to 
lend at longer maturities, with variable interest rates and with smaller supplements. We have 
also extended the number of counterparties in our lending. In addition, we have signed swap 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 3
agreements  with  Iceland,  Estonia  and  Latvia  to  support  crisis  management  in  these 
countries.  
Developments in the Baltic are important to the Swedish financial sector. Here the economic 
downturn has been particularly severe and the necessary adjustments have not been made. 
In  other  words,  there  are  substantial  risks  in  our  neighbouring  area  and  if  things  go  very 
badly the Swedish financial sector will suffer negative effects. However, the measures taken 
by the Riksbank and by government authorities have had a positive effect on the supply of 
credit in Sweden. So far there are few signs that companies have been affected by a credit 
crunch  over  and  above  the  credit  tightening  caused  by  a  deep  recession.  As  the  banking 
sector is a very important part of the way monetary policy affects the economy, it is essential 
to closely follow developments in the credit market. Indirectly it also means that it is important 
that the Swedish banks attend to their problems in the Baltic both forcefully and quickly. This 
is  to  avoid  the  domestic  transmission  mechanism  being  disturbed  by  the  international 
uncertainty. Here monetary policy and financial stability merge.  
The  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish 
financial 
supervisory  authority)  have  also  taken  measures  to  alleviate  the  financial  crisis.  The 
Government  has  raised  the  state  deposit  guarantee  and  extended  it  to  cover  all  types  of 
deposits in accounts, it has introduced a guarantee programme, established a stability fund 
and decided on means of capital injections to the banks.  
Large fiscal policy stimulus packages 
Governments in many countries have presented substantial fiscal policy stimulus packages, 
which  have  been  supported  by  the  countries’  parliaments.  Large  packages  have  been 
presented  in  China,  Japan  and  the  United  States,  but  there  is  substantial  fiscal  policy 
expansion even in a number of European countries. These include Sweden, where there is 
greater  scope,  in  the  form  of  strong  public  finances  to  begin  with,  than  in  most  other 
countries. However, it is difficult to determine exactly what effects the fiscal policy measures 
will have on individual countries and on the global economy. In addition to the positive effects 
from  the  recently  decided  measures,  growth  is  being  stimulated  by  what  is  known  as  the 
automatic stabilisers. This concerns public expenditure linked to the economic situation, for 
instance,  expenditure  for  support  to  the  unemployed,  which  automatically  rises  when 
economic  activity  deteriorates.  In  general,  these  stabilisers  are  much  more  important  in 
Europe than in, for instance, the United States, as the public sector’s share of the economy 
is greater there than in the United States.  
Economic activity in the world economy and in Sweden has deteriorated rapidly since 
the February monetary policy meeting 
Rapid deterioration in global economic activity at the end of last year 
Global economic activity deteriorated rapidly at the end of last year. GDP fell by around 1.5 
per cent between the third and fourth quarters of last year in both the United States and the 
euro area. GDP fell by around 3 per cent in Japan and by just over 5 per cent in Korea. In 
Sweden, GDP fell by just over 2 per cent. At the same time, world trade has more or less 
collapsed. In addition to a decline in demand, world trade is also affected by supply shocks 
related to funding problems in the form of fewer trade credits. A rapid decline in world trade 
naturally affects a small, trade-dependent economy like Sweden’s. 
However, there have recently been some positive signals abroad 
Around a month or so ago it was difficult to see any positive tendencies at all in the world 
economy. However, since the end of March the situation has brightened marginally as the 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2009
bad  news  has  been  followed  by  some  positive  news.  In  the  United  States  a  number  of 
confidence  indicators  are  pointing  upwards,  there  are  some  signs  of  stabilisation  in  the 
housing market and in household consumption. It is as yet too early to talk of a stabilisation 
in the US economy, particularly given that the labour market is continuing to weaken rapidly. 
However, there are signs that the rate of the downturn may be slackening.  
The Riksbank cut the repo rate further in April to attain the inflation target and to 
counteract the fall in production and employment  
Weaker growth is predicted 
The economic downturn in the world and in Sweden at the end of last year was greater than 
expected in the February Monetary Policy Report. Indicators point to developments still being 
weak at the beginning of the current year. There are still risks that the development of the 
global economy will be weaker than the Riksbank is predicting as a result of self-reinforcing 
contagion effects between the weak real economy and undercapitalised financial systems. It 
is  also  important  to  remember  that  different  countries  have  different  capacities  and 
willingness to resolve the problems in the financial sector. They have also been affected to 
different  degrees  by  the  decline  in  world  trade.  The  countries  that  have  quickly  taken 
concrete  measures  will  probably  come  out  of  the  recession  first.  This  indicates  that  the 
recovery will not be synchronised.  
In Sweden we are now assuming that GDP will fall almost as much as during the crisis in the 
1990s.  At  that  time  the  crisis  was  domestically-generated  with  financial  imbalances,  high 
nominal interest rates and an overvalued currency. On this occasion much of the disruption 
comes from outside. Public finances are in a good condition to begin with, interest rates are 
low  and  we  will  probably  continue  to  have  a  current  account  surplus.  At  the  same  time, 
exports  are  declining  rapidly,  which  has  negative  repercussions  on  investment.  Household 
consumption  is  subdued  by  the  deterioration  in  the  labour  market  and  an  increase  in 
precautionary saving. The outcomes and confidence indicators in recent months emphasise 
the weak developments. 
The recession is assessed to be unusually deep, which affects the supply of credit. Although 
corporate borrowing is still increasing, loan terms for companies have been tightened. There 
are  also  signs  that  there  has  been  some  substitution  from  market  borrowing  to  bank 
borrowing. It is the larger companies that are experiencing the biggest problems with funding 
in  the  market  and  taking  up  a  rising  share  of  bank  loans,  which  contributes  to  smaller 
companies seeing themselves at a disadvantage. There are now clear risks that increased 
credit losses will subdue the banks’ lending to companies. There is also a risk that small and 
medium-sized companies will be pushed aside. 
Funding  difficulties  and  weak  international  demand  have  led  to  companies  revising  down 
their investment plans.  
All in all, this points to the Swedish economy being weaker than was expected in February. It 
means  that  resource  utilisation  will  be  lower  than  normal  during  2009-2011.  This  entails  a 
risk  that  inflation  could  be  lower  than  the  monetary  policy  target.  In  addition,  inflation 
expectations have fallen and are slightly below 2 per cent two years ahead.  
The  repo  rate  and  the  repo  rate  path  need  to  be  lower  to  counteract  the  weak  resource 
utilisation and inflationary pressures. This is why the repo rate was cut to 0.5 per cent and 
the Riksbank considers there is some probability of a further cut in the future. The future repo 
rate path has also been lowered and the interest rate forecast now points to a very low repo 
rate during a relatively long period of time. The repo rate is expected to remain at a low level 
until the beginning of 2011. 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 5
The economic policy measures that have already been taken and are expected to be taken 
in  the  future  will  contribute  to  a  recovery  abroad  and  in  Sweden  as  the  global  financial 
system begins to function better. At the same time, a weak krona stimulates the economy. 
GDP growth is expected to be positive but relatively low in 2010. However, the labour market 
will lag behind and employment will not begin to rise until 2011.  
Inflation measured in terms of the consumer price index will fall very rapidly in 2009. This is 
primarily  because  the  Riksbank’s  substantial  interest  rate  cuts  at  the  end  of  2008  and  the 
beginning of 2009 reduced households’ housing costs. If the effects of unchanged mortgage 
rates are excluded, inflation will develop in a more stable manner and be close to the target 
of 2 per cent for most of the forecast period. It is weak productivity developments and the 
weak krona that will contribute to holding up inflation despite the economic recession.  
If the Swedish economy risks deteriorating more than expected, it may be necessary 
to implement further unconventional measures 
The future direction for monetary policy will depend, as usual, on how new information on 
economic developments abroad and in Sweden will affect the prospects for economic activity 
and inflation in Sweden. 
If the economic situation deteriorates further it is possible to use monetary policy easing to 
further stimulate the economy. But there are also reasons for further consideration of what is 
an  appropriate  level  for  the  repo  rate.  If  the  repo  rate  were  to  become  too  low  the 
transmission  mechanism  might  become  less  effective.  This  is  because  some  market  rates 
are lower than the repo rate. When the repo rate approaches zero, these interest rates would 
no longer be able to follow. A too low repo rate could also create costs in the financial sector 
as the result of, for instance, a reduction in the banks’ margins. There is thus a risk that the 
functioning of the financial markets will deteriorate if the repo rate is cut further. In this case 
monetary policy will not have the intended effect. 
However, the Riksbank can stimulate the economy further in other ways without needing to 
cut  the  repo  rate  to  zero.  The  most  important  measure  concerns  ensuring  that  the  real 
interest rate, that is, the repo rate adjusted for inflation expectations, is sufficiently low. This 
can  be  done  by  influencing  inflation  expectations,  which  is  made  easier  as  we  have  a 
numerical  inflation  target  and  we  publish  forecasts  for  both  the  inflation  rate  and  the  repo 
rate. We can, for instance, announce that we are going to hold a low repo rate for a longer 
period than we assumed at the monetary policy meeting in April and show how the inflation 
path  will  then  approach  2  per  cent  more  quickly  than  otherwise.  This  would  raise  inflation 
expectations.  
A  further  possibility  would  be  for  the  Riksbank  to  contribute  to  pushing  down  the  rate  on 
government  bonds,  housing  bonds  or  commercial  paper  by  purchases  in  these  markets. 
There  may  also  arise  a  portfolio  balance  effect  if  other  market  participants’  demand  for 
corporate  bonds,  for  instance,  were  to  rise  as  a  result  of  the  Riksbank's  purchase  of 
government bonds. However, there is reason to await a more detailed analysis of the need 
for,  and  possibilities  with,  these  measures.  There  are  also  a  number  of  legal  issues 
surrounding this type of measure that must be taken into account before such measures are 
implemented.  
At  the  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  I  did  not  consider  that  it  was  yet  time  to  do 
anything  other  than  cut  the  repo  rate.  What  the  Riksbank  must  consider  further  ahead  is 
whether  economic  developments  require  further  interest  rate  cuts  and  whether  the  current 
monetary policy then needs to be supported by more unconventional methods. We must be 
prepared to be able to implement an alternative monetary policy if developments should so 
require. However, one should be aware that the situation in the financial markets differs in 
different countries, which means that not all central banks choose to take exactly the same 
measures. 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2009
I  would  also  like  to  mention  in  this  context  that  the  Riksbank  is  not  the  only  institution 
involved with regard to managing the alternative measures to improve the functioning of the 
financial markets. It is important in this situation to analyse the financial structure in Sweden 
and how one wishes this to look in the future. The measures will to some extent govern the 
structure of the financial sector when the crisis is over.  
There is also a discussion on whether the Riksbank should try to weaken the krona directly in 
a  situation where  the  repo  rate  cannot  be  cut  further.  I  would  like  to emphasise  that  such 
measures are not under consideration. 
If inflation risks rising more quickly than expected in the future, monetary policy will 
have to be tightened sooner than is indicated by the repo rate path 
It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the  Riksbank  has  changed  over  to  very  expansionary 
monetary  policy  over  the  past  six  months.  The  real  interest  rate  is  expected  to  be  very 
negative  throughout  the  forecast  period.  This  entails  a  powerful  stimulus  of  the  Swedish 
economy. The discussion is currently dominated by the question of how we should manage 
monetary  policy  in  the  prevailing  recession.  As  monetary  policy  is  forward-looking,  it  is 
important not to overlook the potential inflationary impulses now being built in for the future. 
Price impulses from a weak krona and from high unit labour costs are two such factors. If the 
global  economy  recovers  more  quickly  than  we  are  predicting,  this  will  also  contribute  to 
making monetary policy less expansionary.  
Before further measures are taken, there are thus many reasons to evaluate the effects of all 
of the measures taken so far, and to evaluate the new information on economic activity and 
the financial market situation that is received. 
 
 
Continued financial crisis
Difference between 3-month interbank rate and expected
policy rate (basis spread), basis points
Sweden
Euro area
USA
United Kingdom
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Jan/ 07 Apr/ 07 Jul/ 07 Oct/ 07 Jan/ 08 Apr/ 08 Jul/ 08 Oct/ 08 Jan/ 09 Apr/ 09
 400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 BIS Review 56/2009 
 7
Economic downturn worsens in Sweden
GDP, quarterly changes in per cent calculated as annual rate, 
seasonally-adjusted data
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
February
April
80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
 Repo rate cut to 0.5 per 
cent
(cid:132) Economic downturn worsening
(cid:132) Low repo rate for long period of 
time
(cid:132) Positive growth in 2010
   8 
 BIS Review 56/2009
Low repo rate for long period of time
Per cent, quarterly averages
90%
75%
50%
Repo rate
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Note. The uncertainty interval does not take into account the zero bound. 
Source: The Riksbank
  BIS Review 56/2009 
 9
