Radovan Jelašić: Development of the municipal bond market in Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  NALED  – 
National Alliance for Local Economic Development, Belgrade, 13 May 2009. 
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia. 
We in the National Bank have long been advocating the development of bond markets by not 
only the government and local government bodies, but by other issuers as well. It is the crisis 
period  that  shows  best  that  bankcentric  systems  –  elsewhere  and  in  Europe,  but  more 
poignantly  in  Serbia  where  banks  account  for  over  90%  of  the  financial  sector  –  face 
significant  challenges,  such  as:  a)  how  to  refinance  loans  due  for  repayment,  b)  how  to 
obtain fresh capital in the market, and c) how to preserve public trust in the banking system. 
Of course, one should also think in terms of catering for the needs of our clients since a bank 
is not an end in itself but represents a transmission mechanism between those who save and 
those who need the money. 
Inefficacy of the banking sector necessarily affects the overall economy, and bank debtors 
are  no  exception.  Allow  me  to  illustrate  this  idea  by  the  following  example:  Even  if  the 
European Central Bank cuts its policy rate (which, at the moment, measures 1.0% only), that 
does  not  necessarily  mean  that  banks  will  automatically  have  access  to  cheaper  funding 
especially if the risk premium for banks is increased. Bank clients would in such a situation 
have  two  options:  a)  to  take  more  expensive  loans  from  banks,  or  b)  to  bypass  banks 
altogether and borrow directly in the capital market by issuing own securities. 
As  the  NBS  is  also  entrusted  with  the  supervision  of  insurance  companies  and  voluntary 
pension  funds,  urgent  development  of  the  securities  market,  including  securities  issued  by 
local government bodies, is of our utmost interest. Such development is also in the interest of 
commercial banks since securities operations are a typical segment of investment banking 
operations – issuing securities without undertaking credit risk. For that particular reason, the 
NBS is of the opinion that amid numerous projects and proposals relating to the development 
of the capital market, it is high time a concrete project was finally undertaken. 
Some of the major prerequisites for the successful implementation of such a project are as 
follows: 
1. 
Local  government  bodies  should  have  their  own  sources  of  income  instead  of 
relying  on  the  “transfer  of  funds”  which  can  be  received  exclusively  from  state 
bodies; the laws need to be amended as “states will be states” and our government 
can  easily  change  its  stance  at  one  time  or  another,  i.e.  the  amount  of  money  it 
decides to transfer to local government bodies;  
Local government bodies should have stable sources of income and not depend on 
the current supply-demand situation. However, the sources of income are specified 
by the state and governed by its legislation. For example: “remuneration for building 
plot  development”  would  bring  RSD  13.8  billion  versus  “income  tax”  which  would 
bring RSD 2.7 billion into the state coffers so the state needs to amend its laws and 
local government bodies to specify a different source of income as their main source 
of revenue;  
Audited  annual  financial  reports  –  transparency  of  operations  –  within  the  sole 
authority of the city;  
Efficient market of government securities should be within the sole authority of the 
state.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 1
But let me to prove to you that this issue is equally important to the NBS as it is to the local 
government  bodies  by  saying  that  the  NBS  shall  take  all  necessary  measures  within  its 
sphere of competence to achieve maximum results to this effect. Potential investors in these 
securities, i.e. voluntary pension funds and insurance companies have been eagerly awaiting 
the placement of such securities on the market. 
And  money  is  plentiful!  RSD  91  billion  has  been  invested  by  banks  in  NBS  securities  and 
RSD 22.4 billion in government bonds. Hence, it is not always necessary to think in terms of 
borrowing in foreign financial markets as we are awash with dinar liquidity which could be 
invested in high quality dinar securities at market interest rates. But before we can set up and 
develop the market and begin investing in securities, everybody concerned needs to do their 
homework and do it well. 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2009
