Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Inflation and deflation risks – how to recognise 
them? How to avoid them? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  XXI  Villa  Mondragone  International  Economic  Seminar  “Global  Crisis  and  Long 
Term  Growth:  A  New  Capitalism  Ahead?”,  Tor  Vergata  Economic  Foundation  and  CEIS  – 
Centre for Economic and International Studies, University of Rome, Rome, 24 June 2009. 
 Introduction1
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  this  conference  in  Villa 
Mondragone.  It’s  a  honour  to  give  the  “Riccardo  Faini  Lecture”.  Riccardo  was  not  only  a 
great Colleague, at the IMF and at the Italian Treasury, but also a friend. 
The  international  economy  is  going  through  one  of  the  worst  recessions  in  generations. 
Demand  and  output  have  fallen  sharply  and  synchronously  in  many  developed  and 
developing economies. Unemployment has drifted up. Global trade has shrunk for the first 
time in almost three decades, leading some to talk about incipient ‘de-globalisation’. Spare 
capacity  has  grown,  dampening  inflationary  pressures  –  in  central  bank  speak,  downside 
risks to price developments have emerged – and fears of a sustained period of deflation are 
spreading. 
On  the  other  hand,  unprecedented  recessionary  forces  have  elicited  an  unprecedented 
policy  response.  Monetary  policy  has  been  swiftly  loosened,  both  with  conventional  and 
unconventional  tools.  Governments  have  embraced  aggressive  fiscal  expansions.  The 
speedy reactions have surprised many observers, leading some to argue that inflation, not 
deflation,  is  the  spectre  that  we  have  to  fear  over  the  next  few  years.  The  worry  is  that 
abundant liquidity combined with high fiscal deficits may trigger inflation once a recovery is 
underway, if policy-makers are unable or unwilling to reverse the policy stimulus on time. 
The debate between those who consider that inflation represents the main risk for advanced 
economies over the next few years and those who instead believe that deflation is the most 
immediate  threat,  has  polarised,  especially  in  the  United  States.  It  has  also  had  an 
interesting echo here in Europe.2   
Both concerns are legitimate. To some extent, the fact that informed observers can maintain 
both views simultaneously can be seen as a sign that monetary policy is managing to walk 
the fine line between the two risks. The debate neatly encapsulates the trade-off currently 
facing  policy-makers.  They  have  to  choose  between  short-term  adjustments  to  strong 
recessionary  forces  and  long-term  macroeconomic  stability.  A  key  challenge  is  how  to 
calibrate the policy response in the face of these forces: too timid a reaction may be costly in 
the near term, but an overreaction may sow the seeds of the next crisis. I will argue that a 
policy  action  that  aims  to  ensure  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  medium  term  requires  a 
                                                 
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  Lorenzo  Cappiello,  Gianluigi  Ferrucci,  Dieter  Gerdesmeier,  Matthieu  Darracq  Paeries, 
Juan Angel Garcia, Jacob Ejsing for their contributions. The opinions reflect only those of the author. 
In the United States, the debate is well captured by the two editorials that appeared in the New York Times on 
4 May 2009: one by Paul Krugman arguing that Japan-style deflation loomed; and the other by Allan Meltzer 
fearing a return of 1970s inflation: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/04/opinion/. See also The Economist of 9 
May 2009, page 15. The risk of global deflation has been pointed out in several articles by Nouriel Roubini 
(www.rgemonitor.com).  Inflation  risks  in  Europe  and  globally  were  flagged  by  German  Chancellor  Angela 
Merkel in a speech in Berlin on 2 June 2009  
(http://www.bundesregierung.de/nn_1498/Content/DE/Rede/2009/06/2009-06-02-merkel-insm.html). 
2  
 BIS Review 81/2009 
 1
thorough  examination  of  the  risks,  in  much  the  same  way  as  a  disease  calls  for  a  sound 
diagnosis if it is to be properly treated.  
I  will  start  the  discussion  by  explaining  how  deflationary  risks  should  be  monitored  and 
assessed by central banks, in particular with respect to the current situation. I will then turn to 
inflation expectations, over the short and medium term, to assess in particular how well they 
are anchored to the objective of price stability. Then I will consider how monetary and credit 
aggregates  can  be  of  use  in  the  current  conditions  to  assess  the  balance  of  risks.  I  will 
conclude with the monetary policy actions required to ensure price stability in an environment 
subject to downward and upward pressures to price stability. 
Short-term deflation risks 
1. 
To discuss deflation risks in the euro area, it is useful to begin with a definition. Deflation is a 
decline  in  the  general  level  of  prices  as  measured  by  an  index  of  consumer  prices.3  This 
decline affects most, if not all, prices in the economy. It has to be persistent – and last for an 
extended  period  of  time,  say,  at  least  a  year.  And  it  has  to  be  entrenched  in  agents’ 
expectations. 
As the chart (slide 2) indicates, euro area inflation - measured in terms of rate of change of 
the price level over the previous 12 months - has declined sharply from a peak of 4% in July 
of last year to 0% in May, the lowest rate since the beginning of Monetary Union. It is widely 
expected to dip into negative territory this month and is likely to remain there for most of the 
summer. However, although such rates of inflation are clearly below our definition of price 
stability, they do not exemplify deflation as we have just defined it.4 For one thing, this spell 
of negative inflation is mainly driven by price developments in two sectors, energy and food, 
and  it  is  the  temporary  result  of  the  steep  rises  and  sharp  falls  in  oil  and  food  commodity 
prices last year. Excluding energy and food, there is little sign of widespread price cuts so 
far; the rate of inflation remains between 1% and 2%. 
Overall, there are no signs of a generalised reduction in prices. Chart 3 shows the share of 
HICP items experiencing price falls, year on year. In terms of expenditure weights, around 
20% of the HICP items reported negative annual growth rates in May 2009. This share has 
increased  recently  but  it  remains  not  so  distant  from  the  average  of  the  last  decade. 
Excluding food and energy, the share was lower at 14%. 
The  share  of  items  with  negative  inflation  is  subject  to  significant  volatility,  partly  owing  to 
seasonal  factors,  such  as  sales  in  the  shops  at  certain  times  of  the  year.  This  makes  the 
measure more difficult to interpret. However, it is possible to take account of these factors by 
comparing the proportion of items with negative inflation rates in any given month with the 
historical average for the same month. As you can see from chart 4, the share of items with 
negative  inflation  rates  (excluding  energy  and  food)  in  the  year  to  May  was  only  a  touch 
higher  than  the  historical  average,  further  confirming  that  there  have  been  no  widespread 
price cuts so far. 
Let me dwell on this point. Chart 5 shows the distribution of the annual rates of change in all 
the  items  included  in  the  HICP  basket,  weighted  by  their  expenditure  share.  This  also 
suggests that price cuts are not generalised, but are concentrated on few items. In May this 
year the bulk of the distribution – around two- thirds – showed inflation rates above 1%, with 
some  items  (heat  energy)  recording  an  inflation  rate  above  10%.  The  items  with  negative 
                                                 
3   Throughout this speech,  when I mention euro area inflation, I  will always refer to the measure provided by 
Eurostat’s HICP, unless I specify otherwise. 
4   See also Bini Smaghi, L. (2008), “Careful with (the “d”) words!”, The European Colloquia Series, Venice, 25 
November 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2009
inflation  rates  are  those  such  as  clothes  or  electronic  devices,  which  undergo  constant 
quality improvements. A few items, mainly related to oil, recorded very strong price cuts. 
To  check  whether  price  cuts  are  generalised  beyond  food  and  energy,  we  could  look  at 
measures  that  exclude  such  items.  These  –  the  so-called  measures  of  exclusion-based 
underlying inflation – can be constructed in several ways. I won’t go into the technical details 
here. Let’s just take the lowest and the highest at any point in time and construct a range. 
This range is shown as the shaded area of Chart 6, together with the headline inflation rate. 
The  range  has  come  down  from  the  peak  and  is  at  or  below  1.8%.  Although  this  level  is 
below the ECB definition of price stability, it is not exceptionally low and is actually higher 
than in 1998/1999, when underlying measures fell around 1%. 
International  organisations,  private  forecasters  and  indeed  the  ECB  expect  this  spell  of 
negative inflation to be reversed, as suggested by inflation forecasts for 2009 and 2010. This 
can be seen, for example, from slide 7. It plots the latest HICP inflation forecasts from the 
Euro Zone Barometer – a publication that produces macroeconomic and financial forecasts 
every month from a number of major economic forecasters in Europe. In this month’s edition, 
forecasters expect the spell of negative inflation in 2009 to last on average for a few months. 
Looking  at  the  range  of  individual  responses  (which  is  shown  as  a  shaded  area),  there  is 
some  disagreement  between  the  highest  and  lowest  forecast.  But  even  in  the  lowest 
forecast, the period with negative inflation rate is expected to last no more than two quarters. 
Furthermore,  according  to  the  same  survey,  inflation  projections  for  2010  have  been 
gradually revised downwards since January 2009 as economic conditions have deteriorated. 
This phenomenon is illustrated in slide 8, as a month-to-month shift to the left of the inflation 
forecasts. Nevertheless, the median projection still remains above 1%. 
So, if there is no evidence of a generalised and persistent fall in the price level in the latest 
inflation outturns, what is underpinning current deflationary fears? As I see it, when people 
think  about  deflation,  they  have  in  mind  two  possible  scenarios.  The  first  is  that  the 
accumulation of economic slack due to the recession may exacerbate downside risks to price 
developments, which in turn may lead to outright deflation as monetary policy loses traction 
in stabilising output. The second scenario is that a spell of negative headline inflation rates – 
perhaps  due  to  the  temporary  impact  of  energy  and  food  prices  –  might  dislodge  inflation 
expectations. Let me discuss these scenarios in turn. 
The Phillips curve provides a useful framework for assessing the impact of growing economic 
slack  and  inflation  expectations  on  price  developments.  In  its  most  basic  form,  this  theory 
posits  that  the  inflation  rate  depends  positively  on  the  expected  rate  of  inflation  and 
negatively  on  the  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy,  as  measured,  for  example,  by  the 
difference between the supply potential of the economy and aggregate output, in other words 
the output gap. With euro area GDP falling at an annual rate of 4.8% in the first quarter of 
2009  and  unemployment  rising  to  9.2%  in  April,  there  is  little  doubt  that  spare  capacity  is 
high.  This  should  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  But  how  strong  is  this  downward 
pressure, and can it determine deflationary risks for the euro area? 
Precise estimates of the Phillips curve for the euro area are subject to controversy. They vary 
depending  on  the  specification,  the  precise  measures  of  the  output  gap  and  expectations 
used,  and  the  time  frame  considered.  However,  the  general  indication  from  the  existing 
studies  is  that,  on  average,  relatively  large  and  persistent  changes  in  the  output  gap  are 
needed to affect euro area inflation.5 In comparative terms, these changes are much larger 
than, for example, in the US and the UK. A simple plot (slide 9) of the evolution of various 
measures  of  the  output  gap  against  that  of  inflation  for  the  euro  area  confirms  that 
                                                 
5   See, for example, Musso, Stracca and van Dijkx (2007). 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 3
movements in various measures of economic slack have played a fairly modest role in the 
inflation process in the euro area in recent years.6  
The same Phillips curve analysis suggests that changes in inflation expectations play a major 
role  in  shaping  inflation  developments,  anchoring  inflation  and  potentially  mitigating  the 
harmful outcomes resulting from temporary shocks. In such a setting, expectations pin down 
the  level  of  inflation  in  the  long  run,  while  changes  in  the  output  gap  lead  to  short-run 
accelerations or decelerations of inflation around that level. 
There are many caveats to using a Phillips curve framework to relate inflation developments 
to economic slack – for instance, measures of both inflation expectations and the output gap 
are subject to considerable uncertainty, non-linearities may arise, and the relationship may 
change over time. Moreover, the actual impact of slowing real economic activity on inflation 
depends  crucially  on  the  nature  of  the  economic  downturn,  the  types  of  shock  hitting  the 
economy, their magnitude and duration. Wage and price rigidities may also contribute to help 
to moderate inflationary responses to changing economic conditions in the short run. 
Overall,  the  current  weakness  in  real  economic  activity  would  be  expected  to  dampen 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  euro  area  but  not  to  lead  to  outright  deflation.  The  approach 
underscores that while economic slack may contribute to movements of inflation in the short 
run, well-anchored inflation expectations are a crucial determinant in the inflation process.  
Inflation expectations 
2. 
Inflation expectations cannot be observed directly, but approximate measures can be derived 
indirectly  in  three  different  ways:  asking  a  sample  of  consumers,  surveying  professional 
forecasters and extracting information from financial markets. Let me elaborate. 
The  European  Commission  conducts  a  poll  every  month  in  which  it  seeks  consumers’ 
opinions on inflation developments in the euro area, in particular their perceptions of current 
inflation developments and their expectations for the next 12 months. These two measures 
are plotted in Chart 10, together with actual inflation. Consumers’ expectations have declined 
strongly in recent months, reaching a record low in May (the survey started in 1985). Most 
respondents thought that prices would either remain unchanged or fall in the next 12 months. 
But this is not really the same as expecting deflation.  
The second way of measuring inflation expectations is via the ECB’s Survey of Professional 
Forecasters.  It  suggests  that  most  respondents  regard  deflation  as  unlikely.  In  the  second 
quarter of 2009, none of the 50 participants reported a negative point estimate for 2009, and 
two participants reported a point estimate below zero for 2010. 
Together with point estimates, participants are also asked to assess the likelihood of future 
inflation falling within given ranges. Averaging the individual responses provides a summary 
of their assessment. As Chart 11 shows, in the most recent survey, respondents assigned an 
overall 18% probability that annual inflation will be negative in 2009 (left side of the chart), 
which is significantly higher than in previous rounds. In 2010 (right side of the chart), there 
was a 6% probability associated with negative inflation; higher than in the previous rounds 
but still relatively contained. 
Participants  are  also  asked  to  provide  their  projections  about  inflation  five  years  ahead, 
which can be taken as a measure of medium-term inflation expectations and hence of the 
credibility  of  the  central  bank.  These  have  remained  firmly  anchored,  as  the  next  chart 
                                                 
6   Real-time  estimates  of  the  output  gap,  which  is  an  unobserved  variable,  are  generally  surrounded  by 
uncertainty.  This  is  the  reason  why  a  range  of  output  gap  estimates  is  reported.  However,  the  uncertainty 
might be particularly large at the current juncture as it is especially difficult to determine whether the steep falls 
in output also dampen potential growth. There is no clear-cut solution to this problem. 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2009
indicates (slide 12). All survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations stood at 
1.9% in April. 
Financial  instruments  are  the  third  way  of  obtaining  information  about  market  participants’ 
inflation expectations. They also contain information about inflation risks, since investors not 
only  demand  compensation  for  the  level  of  expected  inflation  but  also  for  bearing  the  risk 
associated with the inflation outlook. In practice, yields on inflation-linked bonds are used as 
a  basis  to  derive  indicators  of  inflation  expectations.7  However,  since  the  beginning  of  the 
crisis,  bond  markets  have  been  exposed  to  significant  disturbances  that  have  made  the 
measurement  of  inflation  expectations  and  the  associated  risks  more  difficult  than  usual. 
Thus,  it  is  useful  to  complement  this  measure  with  expectations  extracted  from  inflation 
derivatives.  In  particular,  inflation-linked  swap  rates  provide  a  measure  of  the  expected 
inflation rates at short horizons (one and two years ahead, for example).8  
One-year inflation swap rates fell sharply in the second half of 2008 (slide 13), following the 
decline in oil prices and the worsened macroeconomic outlook, and remained between 0.0% 
and 0.5% until recently. However, they have returned to levels above 1% since early April 
2009. The chart also displays market uncertainty about the future inflation outcomes in the 
euro  area,  represented  by  the  coloured  areas.  Unsurprisingly,  uncertainty  has  increased 
since  October  2008.  Furthermore,  in  line  with  developments  in  point  expectations,  the 
probability associated with negative inflation readings within a 12-month horizon increased in 
the months following October 2008, as indicated by the shaded areas below the zero line, 
but has declined somewhat in recent months. 
The  evolution  of  the  term  structure  of  inflation  expectations  suggests  a  similar  pattern  of 
gradual  adjustment  at  slightly 
inflation 
expectations have moved in tandem with shorter inflation expectations. Yet, the fact that they 
have never become negative, and that they are now back at levels ‘close to, but below, 2%’ – 
which is the ECB’s definition of price stability – offers further ‘comfort’ for monetary policy. It 
should be kept in mind that the liquidity of shorter-term inflation swaps is somewhat inferior to 
longer-horizon contracts, and the readings should thus be interpreted with appropriate care. 
In contrast to developments in short-term inflation expectations, long-term euro area inflation 
expectations  and  the  associated  risks  have  remained  relatively  stable  (slide  15).  For 
example,  the  five-year  forward  break-even  inflation  rate  (BEIR)  five  years  ahead  has 
fluctuated  between  2.0%  and  2.5%.  Moreover,  a  decomposition  of  BEIRs  into  inflation 
expectations and related premia suggests nonetheless that the term structure of inflation risk 
premia  in  the  euro  area  is  upward  sloping  and  its  fluctuations  are  the  main  driver  of 
fluctuations  in  BEIRs,  with  (long-term)  inflation  expectations  anchored  at  levels  consistent 
with price stability.9  
Recent research has also shown that there are substantial differences in the determinants of 
short  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  derived  from  BEIRs  in  the  euro  area.10  In 
longer  horizons  (slide  14).  Two-year-ahead 
                                                 
7   See Ejsing, J., J.A. Garcia and T. Werner (2007) “The term structure of euro area break-even inflation rates: 
the impact of seasonality”, ECB Working Paper No 830; Gurkaynak, R., B. Sack and J. Wright (2009), “The 
TIPS yield curve and Inflation Compensation”, American Economics Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.” 
8   Other inflation derivatives allow investors to hedge against inflation rates exceeding certain threshold (inflation 
cap)  or  being  below  a  certain  level  (inflation  floor)  and  thereby  convey  information  about  the  value  of  the 
perceived  risk  of  hitting  those  thresholds  by  estimating  option-implied  densities  and  measures  of  perceived 
market uncertainty. Since the lowest maturity of caps and floors are two years (in some cases three years), 
the  volatility  is  an  average  of  the  one  and  two-year  (and  three-year)  caplet  volatility.  On  average  the  term 
structure of volatility is relatively flat, making this a reasonable approximation for the one-year volatility. 
9   Hördahl, P. and O. Tristani (2007) “Inflation risk premia in the term structure of interest rates”, ECB Working 
Paper Series No 734, and Garcia, J. A., and T. Werner (2009), “Inflation risks and inflation risk premia”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, forthcoming. 
10   Ciccarelli, M. and J.A. Garcia (2009), “What drives euro area break-even inflation rates?”, ECB Working Paper 
Series No 996. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 5
particular, actual inflation readings are the main reason for movements in short-term BEIRs, 
but  play  no  role  in  explaining  long-term  ones.  Thus,  the  expected  brief  spell  of  negative 
overall inflation in the coming months does not seem to have no noticeable impact on longer-
term BEIRs, thereby supporting the idea of well-anchored expectations in the euro area. At 
least so far. 
Overall, the evidence suggests that the euro area is a long way from generalised, persistent 
and expected deflation. The severity of the recession points to inflation remaining low in the 
next two years or so, but this is not expected to lead to the emergence of outright deflation. 
In any case, continuous monitoring is needed, as history shows ‘that deflation and deflation 
expectations can take root surprisingly quickly’.11  
The  overall  assessment  is  supported  by  a  number  of  other  indicators,  in  particular  by 
developments  in  the  labour  market.  In  early  2009,  wage  growth  remained  fairly  robust, 
although this may partly reflect hysteresis (slide 16). In particular, the annual growth rate of 
compensation per employee fell to 1.9% in 2009Q1, down from 2.8% in the fourth quarter.12 
Similarly, the rally in commodity prices will help to offset downward pressures on consumer 
prices.  For  instance,  since  the  beginning  of  2009  oil  prices  have  more  than  doubled  even 
when measured in euro. 
Monetary indicators 
3. 
While economic analyses already provide a clear indication of the short to medium-term risks 
of a deflationary scenario, it might be helpful to compare them with the signals emanating 
from the monetary analysis. This notion is explicitly recognised in the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy, where monetary trends provide information on price developments over the medium 
to longer term and serve as a means of cross-checking the short to medium-term indications 
for risks to price stability coming from economic analyses.  
The positive and often almost one-to-one relationship between inflation and monetary growth 
over longer horizons is perhaps one of the best documented results in economics and has 
been  confirmed  in  a  variety  of  empirical  studies,  both  across  time  and  across  countries.13 
However, a critical test for any kind of analysis is whether an assessment of the data against 
the principles of the strategy can be translated into practical and relevant policy advice. As 
regards monetary analysis, this boils down to whether it is possible to separate in real time 
the  important  signal  for  future  inflation  embedded  in  the  trends  of  monetary  developments 
from the inevitable noise in the actual monetary data.  
At  the  ECB,  many  measures  of  monetary  liquidity  are  investigated  and  assessed  for  the 
implied risks to price stability. It is worth mentioning in this context that the various measures 
should not be regarded as mutually exclusive but rather as providing an encompassing view. 
An obvious  measure characterising the rate of  monetary expansion consists of the annual 
growth  rate  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3,  a  measure  that  tends  to  attract  most 
attention in the public debate.  
                                                 
11   IMF  (2003)  “Deflation:  Determinants,  Risks,  and  Policy  Options  –  Findings  of  an  Interdepartmental  Task 
Force”, p 15. 
12   The  steep  drop  in  the  growth  rate  in  compensation  per  employee  in  2009Q1  is  mainly  driven  by  strong 
downward developments in Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Belgium. Note that, combined with the recent 
release  of  productivity  growth  (-3.6%),  unit  labour  costs  growth  increased  further,  from  4.5%  in  2008Q4  to 
5.7% in 2009Q1, marking a new record high since the start of EMU. 
13   See, for instance, McCandless, G. T. and W. E. Weber (1995), Some Monetary Facts, Federal Reserve of 
Minneapolis  Review,  Vol.  19,  No.  3,  pp.  2–11  or,  for  an  alternative  approach,  Benati,  L.  (2009),  Long  Run 
Evidence on Money Growth and Inflation, ECB Working Paper, No 1027. 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2009
As we can see in Chart 17, annual M3 growth decelerated further in the first quarter of 2009 
compared with previous quarters. Together with the parallel deceleration in loan growth, this 
points  to  a  lower  pace  of  underlying  monetary  dynamics  and  thus  moderate  inflationary 
pressures. However, in times of financial turmoil and economic uncertainties, the behaviour 
of  money  holders,  borrowers  and  lenders  may  give  rise  to  sudden changes  in  money  and 
credit  dynamics,  and  the  backward-looking  nature  of  annual  growth  rates  may  then  not 
immediately provide a reliable signal for current dynamics. 
Looking forward, a complementary perspective, however, would focus less on the analysis of 
growth rates and more on the level of excess money accumulated in the past. The level of 
excess monetary liquidity that may have built up during a boom phase can be reabsorbed 
through a de-leveraging process. More precisely, over the medium term, the deceleration in 
the pace of money growth may lead to a direct unwinding of accumulated monetary liquidity 
(i.e.  via  de-leveraging  in  a  number  of  sectors  of  the  economy),  thereby  dampening  price 
pressures.  However,  a  protracted  destruction  of  monetary  liquidity  would  most  likely  have 
adverse effects on the real economy and increase the risk of deflation. On the other hand, if 
the excess monetary liquidity is not reabsorbed via de-leveraging, then the existing liquidity 
accumulation of recent years would still be available once the economy improves and may 
then lead to spending and inflationary pressures over the medium to longer term. 
Another  useful  monetary  indicator  is  provided  by  the  growth  rates  of  M1.  In  contrast  to 
developments  in  M3,  the  growth  rate  of  the  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  has  –  after  a 
trough  in  the  third  quarter  of  2008  –  started  to  rise  again,  and  reached  5.3%  in  the  first 
quarter of 2009. While M1 developments usually prove inferior to M3 developments in terms 
of  their  information  content  about  future  inflation,  in  the  case  of  the  euro  area  they  have 
traditionally exhibited good leading indicator properties for future real GDP growth. Taken per 
se,  such  a  development  would  also  speak  against  a  deflationary  scenario  and  might  offer 
valuable insights into the timing of the recovery. 
To  conclude,  monetary  indicators  provide  important  information  to  try  understanding  the 
likelihood of different scenarios ahead. In this respect, the real-time problem which is always 
prevalent in monetary analysis – but also in other types of analysis – becomes more serious 
in a financial crisis.  
Short and long term policy responses to the crisis 
4. 
There  are  inevitable  challenges  associated  with  policy  actions  in  times  of  crisis.  Central 
banks  around  the  world  have  embarked  on  untested  areas  of  monetary  policy-making. 
Expansionary fiscal policies and government interventions to stabilise the financial sector are 
expected  to  dramatically  increase  public  debt.  This  could  pose  a  severe  threat  to  the 
sustainability  of  public  finances  and  eventually  to  macroeconomic  stability.  To  preserve 
macroeconomic stability over the medium term, there is a need for careful monitoring of the 
policy stimulus over the policy-relevant horizon, combined with well-designed exit strategies 
from non-standard policy-making. 
The design and calibration of the ECB’s monetary policy response to the crisis has taken into 
account not only the short term deflationary risks but also the longer-term inflation risks that 
could eventually result from the policy measures implemented with a view to counteract the 
former risks. Since the financial crisis escalated in September 2008, the ECB has reacted to 
emerging downside risks to price stability with both conventional and unconventional actions. 
Conventional policy action has led to reduce the ECB’s key policy interest rates to a level 
that is unprecedented. In parallel, a wide range of non-standard measures has been put in 
place, mainly to stabilise the money market.  
With  policy  rates  at  record  lows  and  additional  liquidity-providing  measures  adopted  in  so 
many countries, we are all well aware of the possibility of inflation risks ahead and the need 
for a credible and well-designed exit strategy. Retaining such exceptional policy measures 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 7
for too long might aggravate the upside risks to price stability and sow the seeds of future 
imbalances in financial markets. Getting the timing right in withdrawing excess liquidity will be 
key to a non-inflationary recovery. Generally speaking, the more difficult it is to reverse non-
standard  operations,  the  greater  the  risk  is  of  being  behind  the  curve  when  the 
macroeconomic and financial market situation improves. 
For the central bank to maintain price stability over the medium term, we know that monetary 
policy must not be overburdened with other objectives: it needs to be conducted within an 
institutional  framework  which  rules  out  any  type  of  fiscal  dominance.  I  do  not  need  to 
elaborate  further  on  how  profligate  fiscal  policy  can  eventually  produce  inflationary 
pressures.  A  ‘lax’  fiscal  authority  which  seeks  to  avoid  the  short-term  political  costs 
associated  with  enforcing  fiscal  discipline  could  be  tempted  to  finance  its  budget  through 
money  creation.  Indeed,  inflation  erodes  the  real  value  of  public  debt.  However,  such  an 
outcome can be ruled out in the euro area because of the existing institutional arrangements. 
The Treaty establishing the European Community assigns responsibility for monetary policy 
to  the  ECB  and  unambiguously  entrusts  it  with  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability. To fulfil this responsibility effectively, the ECB and the national central banks have 
been granted a high degree of independence. 
Under Article 101(1) of the Treaty, central banks are also prohibited from extending credit to, 
or  purchasing  public  debt  instruments  directly  from,  the  primary  market.  By  preserving  the 
financial  independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  and  the  integrity  of  their  balance 
sheet, this prohibition makes monetary policy more credible. In the same vein, the prohibition 
also helps to strengthen fiscal discipline and thereby to promote the smooth functioning of 
Monetary  Union.  The  Stability  and Growth  Pact  (SGP)  is  an  additional  measure  to  ensure 
fiscal discipline and the long-term sustainability of public finances.  
To  conclude,  the  ECB  is  committed  to  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability, 
which has been defined as a rate of increase of the general price level of less than 2% but 
close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  This  requires  a  constant  monitoring  of  all  inflationary 
risks,  both  upward  and  downward,  on  the  basis  of  a  series  of  indicators  and  analytical 
instruments. Ultimately, the firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains the best way to 
check the appropriateness of monetary policy in an uncertain environment. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
8 
 BIS Review 81/2009
    9
BIS Review 81/2009 
     10 
 BIS Review 81/2009
    11
BIS Review 81/2009 
     12 
 BIS Review 81/2009
    13
BIS Review 81/2009 
     14 
 BIS Review 81/2009
    BIS Review 81/2009 
 15
   BIS Review 81/2009
 16 
 