Nout Wellink: The future of supervision 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the FSI High Level Seminar, Cape Town, 29 January 
2009. 
 I would like to share with you my views on the future of supervision. Even though we are still 
in the midst of a financial crisis and the situation continues to evolve, it is not too early to 
assess some of the lessons for supervisors learned from the crisis so far. I have a sense that 
the broad direction of supervision in the future will be “back to basics”. In light of the lessons 
learned  over  the  past  two  years,  setting  a  strong  foundation  for  supervision  is  becoming 
more important than ever. I would like to discuss the initiatives taken by the Basel Committee 
to help establish this sound basis for supervision, risk management and capital adequacy, as 
well as implementation of sound standards over the long run. I would like to start, however, 
with  the  basics,  and  for  the  supervisory  community  this  means  the  Core  Principles  for 
Effective Bank Supervision. 
Core Principles for Effective Bank Supervision 
The Core Principles represent the basic philosophy of banking supervision, the foundation on 
which  any  strong  supervisory  function  is  built.  In  2006  the  Committee  updated  the  Core 
Principles and their assessment Methodology to make sure that they reflected the changes in 
the  global  banking  environment.  A  number  of  glaring  risk  management  deficiencies  during 
this  crisis  were  lapses  in  some  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  governance  and  risk 
management.  The  Committee  certainly  cannot  claim  to  be  prophetic  in  stressing  these 
fundamentals  –  failure  to  adhere  to  the  basics is  often  at  the  core  of banking  problems  in 
most crises. 
Let me give you a few examples of the Core Principles’ relevance in light of lessons learned 
from  the  crisis.  One  of  the  revised  Core  Principles  stresses  the  importance  of  sound 
corporate  governance  and  the  essential  need  for  strong  risk  management  processes.  The 
guidance  states  that  a  bank’s  board  must  have,  collectively,  a  sound  knowledge  of  the 
activities undertaken by the firm. This collective familiarity among the boards of some of the 
largest banks was strikingly absent. Another revised core principle discusses the importance 
of high quality risk management information that should be reviewed regularly by the board 
and  senior  management.  This  includes  the  ability  to  understand  the  implications  and 
limitations of such information. Yet another example: proper risk identification and evaluation, 
that is, the ability to know what your firm-wide exposures are in the first place so that they 
could  be  managed  and  controlled  effectively.  In  this  regard,  the  assessment  criteria 
concerning  credit  risks  were  revised  to  make  clear  that  they  include  counterparty  risks 
associated with various financial instruments.  
Before  we  look  to  see  what  the  future  holds  for  risk  management  or  supervision,  it  is 
essential  that  bankers and  supervisors  first  make  sure  that  a  sound foundation  is  firmly  in 
place. For supervisors, this foundation is the core principles. 
Current areas of supervisory focus 
Let me now say a few words about weaknesses that came to light during the crisis and which 
are likely to influence bank supervision in the future. The first of these relates to the need for 
supervisors  to  take  a  broader  system-wide  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision.  While 
strong  supervision  of  individual  banking  institutions  remains  essential,  supervisors  need  to 
devote more resources to understanding interactions among banks as well as between the 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 1
banking  sector  and  other  financial  sectors.  The  Basel  Committee  will  be  exploring  the 
practical ways to implement such a “macroprudential approach”. This more comprehensive 
approach  to  supervision  and  regulation  will  help  reduce  systemic  risk  more  broadly.  It  will 
also enable supervisors to focus their limited resources on those supervisory and regulatory 
activities  that  contribute  most  towards  making  the  domestic  banking  and  regional  financial 
system more resilient to stress. 
Another topic of high interest relates to “regulatory gaps”. The crisis has revealed that non-
deposit  taking  institutions  could  be  a  major  source  of  systemic  risks.  The  first  step  for 
financial sector supervisors is to identify any regulatory gaps in their financial systems. The 
next  is  to  employ  the  suitable  supervisory  response,  which  may  range  from  traditional 
prudential tools, such as capital requirements, to enhanced disclosure and transparency. We 
need  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  these  issues  so  that  the  activity  of  the  unregulated  or  under-
regulated players – such as mortgage brokers, mortgage companies, hedge funds or others 
– are subject to adequate oversight commensurate with their potential to pose systemic risk. 
This in turn will reduce pressure on the core banking sector and help prevent a lowering of 
bank standards or practices in good times. 
The question of whether or to what extent supervision is necessary is a difficult one. To give 
one example relative to this region, the Basel Committee has already started to reflect on the 
supervision  of  deposit-taking,  microfinance  institutions.  We  recognise  that  some  of  these 
institutions  may  be  regulated  differently  from  banks  as  long  as  they  do  not  hold,  in  the 
aggregate, a significant proportion of deposits in a financial system. But at the same time, 
these organisations need some form of regulation commensurate to the type and size of their 
transactions.  Through  the  Committee’s  International  Liaison  Group,  we  are  working  on 
illustrating what forms regulation can take, keeping in mind the diversity of the sector. 
A third area of supervisory focus relates to cross-border cooperation. This is not a new area 
–  the  Committee  was  founded  to  promote  cross-border  coordination  and  cooperation.  We 
recently completed a preliminary review of issues associated with the resolution of complex 
global  banking  organisations.  This  showed  that  existing  national  crisis  management  and 
resolution  arrangements  are  not  designed  to  deal  specifically  with  cross-border  banking 
crises. The Committee will deepen its analysis of the current crisis and the implications for 
resolving individual and groups of banks having cross-border operations. We will continue to 
promote  pragmatic  information  sharing  and  the  use  of  supervisory  colleges  to  ensure  that 
there  are  no  gaps  in  the  supervisory  framework  of  banks  during  both  normal  times  and 
periods of stress. 
Capital adequacy 
The  crisis  has  shown  that  a  strong  capital  base  is  critical  to  bank  resilience  and  broader 
financial stability. The Basel II capital framework remains a top priority for the Committee as 
it provides incentives for banks to improve their firm-wide governance and risk management. 
Basel II should also help improve the quality of supervision and enhance market discipline. 
As you may know, the Committee recently issued a package of consultative documents to 
strengthen  the  three  pillars  of  the  Basel  II  capital  framework.  The  enhancements  we  have 
proposed for the Pillar 2 supervisory review process should help strengthen the basics of risk 
management and supervision. Among other things, the supplemental guidance covers some 
basic  governance  issues  that  were  found  lacking  during  the  crisis.  The  need  for  firm-wide 
governance  and  risk  management  is  one  example.  There  have  been  some  very  helpful 
initiatives  from  the  private  sector,  such  as  from  the  IIF  and  the  CRMPG,  that  aim  to 
strengthen risk management. Pillar 2 plays a critical role in helping supervisors ensure that 
these efforts are in fact implemented over the long term. 
Another issue the Committee is currently addressing is procyclicality, or the possibility that 
regulatory requirements amplify an economic cycle. Procyclicality is a difficult issue as there 
are other factors at play – such as valuation practices, loan loss provisioning or margining 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2009
practices  –  and  banking  tends  to  be  a  cyclical  business  irrespective  of  regulatory 
requirements. More generally, human behaviour is inherently procyclical. 
Failure to adequately capture risk and other unexpected developments – risk concentrations 
is  one  example  –  can  contribute  to  procyclicality.  This  is  why  the  move  to  Basel  II  is  so 
important.  Improving  the  coverage  of  exposures,  like  liquidity  lines  to  off-balance  sheet 
conduits, will reduce the risk that surprises in risk management and capital adequacy cause 
a retrenchment at the worst possible time in the cycle. 
With  these  difficult  issues  in  mind,  the  Basel  Committee  has  begun  a  comprehensive  top-
down review of the potential procyclicality of the Basel II framework. We need to retain the 
benefits of risk-sensitivity and differentiation across institutions. But we also need to mitigate 
the  risk  that  excessive  cyclicality  of  the  minimum  capital  requirement  magnifies  the 
procyclicality of the financial system. The Committee is evaluating a range of measures that 
would  help  address  procyclicality  but  could  also  have  a  countercyclical  influence.  For 
example, we are looking at ways to promote a high quality capital buffer that a bank would 
increase in good times and be allowed to dip into in difficult times. Also under discussion is 
the  use  of  a  simple,  supplemental  measure  to  reinforce  the  risk-based  ratio.  This  could 
constrain the amount of leverage banks could have in good times and therefore also contain 
the degree of deleveraging in bad times.  
Sound standards and effective implementation 
Now let me say a few words about the importance of sound standards and, in particular, their 
implementation. Developing sound global standards in a thoughtful, inclusive manner is just 
the first step in the process toward the ultimate goal of better risk management  and more 
effective  supervision.  The  involvement  of  the  wider  supervisory  community  in  developing 
sound global standards is a collective enterprise not limited to the 13 countries represented 
on  the  Committee:  there  are  representatives  from  more  than  20  other  countries  that 
participate directly in a variety of Basel Committee subgroups. The number of jurisdictions 
involved in the Committee’s work is even higher when taking into account those participating 
in their capacity of representatives of a larger group. A few examples I can point to include 
the  Banking  Commission  of  the  West  African  Monetary  Union,  EMEAP  in  Asia,  and  the 
Association of Supervisors of Banks of the Americas – ASBA. 
The International Liaison Group – the ILG – serves as the Committee’s main channel to liaise 
regularly  with  senior  non-member  supervisors,  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  The  West 
African Monetary Union and the South African Reserve Bank are members of the ILG. This 
approach is meant to be a two-way street: it is an efficient way for the Committee to get input 
from  these  regions  as  well  as  to  disseminate  information  to  the  members.  Even  if  all 
supervisors  cannot  participate  directly  in  the  work  of  the  Committee,  all  are  given  the 
opportunity to comment before our products are final. The issues the ILG is currently working 
on were suggested by the non-Basel Committee members. These issues include risk-based 
supervision, provisioning and microfinance, which I touched on earlier. This helps the entire 
supervisory community to have a common understanding of the issues. 
The  development  of  sound  standards  is  only  the  first  step  and  the  critical  next  step  is 
implementation.  Supervisors  must  diligently  implement  the  standards  and  consistently 
ensure  that  banks  are  adhering  to  and  practicing  the  standards.  This  is  another  of  the 
lessons  learned  during  the  crisis.  Sound  fundamental  principles  of  credit  and  liquidity  risk 
were not practiced. To help improve implementation of our sound guidance and standards, 
the Committee has broadened the mandate of the Accord Implementation Group. The new 
Standards  Implementation  Group  (SIG)  will  continue  to  concentrate  on  issues  relating  to 
Basel II implementation but will also focus on all risk management guidance and standards. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 3
Conclusion 
I hope my remarks this morning have given you a sense of the direction in which supervision 
is moving. The stress witnessed over the past two years revealed major weaknesses in risk 
management or supervision that were not previously identified. There have certainly been a 
number of lessons that can already be drawn from this crisis. For supervisors, this includes 
greater  focus  on  taking  a  system-wide  approach  to  supervision  and  identifying  potential 
regulatory gaps. It has also reinforced the Committee’s longstanding commitment to cross-
border  cooperation.  The  crisis  has  focused  the  spotlight  on  capital  adequacy  and  strong 
liquidity and has spurred extensive consideration of ways to mitigate procyclicality. 
The financial crisis has also exposed many egregious examples where bankers have strayed 
from the basic principles of risk management and supervisors did not sufficiently follow-up to 
ensure  implementation.  Getting  “back  to  basics”  means  banks  and  supervisors  need  to 
ensure risk governance and supervisory frameworks are underpinned by a strong foundation. 
In the case of supervisors, these are the Basel Core Principles. The crisis has reminded us 
of the importance of sound standards and has underscored that this must be accompanied 
by implementation and rigorous supervisory follow-up. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2009
