Axel A Weber: What role is economic and monetary union playing in 
mitigating the impact of the global crisis? 
Dinner speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
964th Wilton Park Conference, Eltville-Erbach, 17 March 2009. 
 Introduction  
1  
Dear Mr Lamont, ladies and gentlemen  
It is a very great pleasure for me to welcome you all to this conference dinner in Eltville.  
I hope that you are enjoying your stay at the Bundesbank’s training centre. Eltville is a nice 
place to be: it has a picturesque location in the heart of the Rheingau region, which is well 
known for its mild climate throughout the year.  
Eltville is called the town of wine, sparkling wine and roses. As regards the quality of the local 
wines,  you  will  have  the  opportunity  to  taste  them,  especially  here  tonight  in  the  Baron 
Knyphausen  wine  estate.  As  for  the  bloom  of  roses,  you  have  certainly  come  too  early. 
Times are not rosy in general, however.  
Indeed, we are currently experiencing a global economic crisis. What originally began as a 
crisis on financial markets has spilled over to the real economy in industrialised, emerging 
and developing countries.  
According to World Bank estimates, the global economy is likely to shrink this year for the 
first  time  since  the  Second  World  War.  For  the  euro  area,  ECB  experts  expect  GDP  to 
decline  by  2.2  %  to  3.2  %  this  year.  Taking  into  account  the  fact  that  non-euro  area  EU 
economies  are  also  expected  to  perform  more  or  less  poorly,  the  topic  of  this  conference 
“How can growth in the European Union be restored?” is indeed a crucial one.  
In my remarks, I would like to focus on the following questions. What is the impact of the 
financial crisis on European monetary integration and what role has EMU and, in particular, 
the Eurosystem been playing in mitigating the impact of the financial crisis?  
Let me start with the second question.  
What role has the Eurosystem been playing in mitigating the financial crisis? 
2  
The  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  are  dealing  in  many  ways  with  the  effects  of  the 
financial crisis. They are participating in relevant international fora and organisations and are, 
albeit  to  a  varying  extent,  involved  in  banking  supervision  issues  at  the  national  level, 
including  rescue  action  for  troubled  financial  institutions.  This  evening  I  would  like  to 
concentrate on two other major issues: liquidity operations and monetary policy.  
The subprime crisis in the US has often been referred to as the trigger for the financial crisis, 
but  the  root  causes  of  the  current  crisis  lie  deeper.  In  a  nutshell,  we  experienced  an 
enormous credit boom during a period before, characterised by an extreme undervaluation of 
risk. This was supported by favourable macro-economic conditions – not least, interest rates 
that were too low for too long.  
Excessive risk-taking was further encouraged by a lack of transparency and market failures 
in  the  process  of  credit  risk  transfer.  Pro-cyclicality  in  the  institutional  design  of  financial 
markets, such as capital adequacy rules, accounting rules and remuneration schemes, also 
encouraged  extreme  leverage  in  the  financial  system  while  they  are  now  contributing  to  a 
fatal  deleveraging.  When  the  famous  “wake-up  call”  occurred,  financial  markets  panicked 
and suffered a massive liquidity shock.  
BIS Review 31/2009 
 1
From the onset of the crisis, in August 2007, the Eurosystem began supporting the financial 
system, especially in terms of frontloading liquidity provision during minimum reserve periods 
and extending the average duration of its open market operations. These measures helped 
financial institutions through a period of unprecedented high volatility on inter-bank markets.  
However, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the ensuing “earthquake” of September 
2008, the Eurosystem had to extend its liquidity operations vigorously in order to keep euro 
area money markets alive.  
Several  measures  were  taken  in  order  to  calm  the  markets,  of  which  the  temporary 
guarantee of full allotment at fixed rates has been the most important. Furthermore, we have 
temporarily widened the scope of eligible collateral and we have stepped up providing relief 
to  euro  area  financial  institutions  via  currency  swap  arrangements  with  liquidity  in  foreign 
currencies.  
Taken all together, these measures have resulted in the Eurosystem assuming the role of the 
central counterparty in the money market. While this has saved euro area financial markets 
from breakdown, it is obvious that playing this role is something that cannot and should not 
last forever.  
However, the other post-Lehman measures are staying in place for the time being owing to 
the ongoing vulnerability of the money markets. In particular, the Governing Council of the 
ECB has declared that it will continue the fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for 
as long as needed and, in any case, beyond the end of 2009.  
While  volatility  in  euro  money  markets  is  still  very  elevated,  we  can  observe  that  some 
relevant  risk-  spread  indicators  are  trending  back  to  –  let  us  call it  –  “Pre-Lehman”  levels. 
Expecting  “pre-crisis”-levels  to  make  a  comeback  –  the  time  when  risk  was  significantly 
underestimated – is neither realistic nor desirable.  
However,  sustainable  relaxation  in  the  inter-bank  money  markets  requires  a  sustainable 
return of confidence in the financial markets. In order to achieve this aim, it is necessary that 
the process of restoring banks’ balance sheets continues, supported by public stabilisation 
funds.  
EMU and the financial crisis 
3  
For European monetary union, the financial crisis is certainly posing the greatest challenge in 
its history.  
When we recently celebrated the tenth anniversary of the single currency’s inception, it was 
often  stated  that  the  first  ten  years  of  the  euro  were  a  success  story  with  regard  to  price 
stability, trade and financial integration in Europe. However, it was also stated that the years 
ahead are likely to become even more challenging.  
One  could  say  that  EMU  is  reaching  puberty  –  if  you  have  children,  you  will  know  what  I 
mean.  
Nonetheless, the value of monetary union has never been greater than during the financial 
crisis. Try to imagine what would have happened without the single currency!  
Probably,  foreign  exchange  markets  within  the  single  market  would  have  been  driven  by 
speculative  activities.  Think  of  what  happened  in  the  early  1990s.  Currency  fluctuations 
would aggravate both the financial crisis and real economic tensions – and do not forget the 
political turbulence implied by such currency tensions.  
It  has  been  clear  from  the  beginning  of  monetary  union  that  there  has  been  a  greater 
emphasis on the responsibility for fiscal policies, wage policies and structural policies, which 
remains at the national level. In a nutshell, monetary union requires flexible labour markets 
and sound public finances – this holds true especially during times of crisis. With regard to 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2009
fiscal  policy,  respecting  the  provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  pact  is  of  the  essence. 
What is needed is a credible and strong commitment to reducing excessive deficits and to 
returning to the path of consolidation.  
Rising CDS premia on sovereign bonds have induced speculation about potential defaults on 
the  part  of  EMU  countries.  Any  concerns  in  this  regard  are  unfounded  and  only  purely 
hypothetical.  
While it is in general welcome that financial markets punish unsustainable public finances, it 
has  to  be  acknowledged  that  even  euro  area  member  states  with  high  yield  spreads  are 
currently facing favourable refinancing conditions given the unprecedented low interest rates.  
It  should  be  emphasised  that  the  “no-bail-out”  rule,  as  stipulated  in  the  EC  Treaty,  is  an 
indispensable instrument for preventing moral hazard behaviour by the member states. With 
that in mind, issuing blank cheques would definitely be the wrong course of action.  
Yet, EMU is our common destiny. If any kind of help for a member state were necessary in 
the improbable case of an extreme emergency, the clear conditionality of such support would 
be essential in order to comply with the Treaty.  
As regards recent speculation about a potential EMU split-off, I am convinced that – apart 
from the absence of any legal framework for this – it would make no sense economically for 
any member state to use an exit option. This is due to the huge costs that such an exit would 
entail.  
Metaphorically speaking, as ECB President Trichet correctly put it, “in stormy seas it’s better 
to be on a large ship than in a small boat”. Having said that, it is no wonder that many of 
those in small boats are currently seeking to dock to the large ship.  
To  achieve  this,  it  has  never  been  more  evident  than  now  that  full  compliance  with  the 
convergence criteria of the Maastricht Treaty is absolutely indispensable with respect to any 
EMU enlargement.  
Concluding remarks  
4  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude.  
Central  banks  around  the  world  are  trying  to  mitigate  the  negative  impact  of  the  financial 
crisis  in  cooperation  with  other  national  and  international  institutions.  With  regard  to  the 
Eurosystem, it should have become clear that we will do all that is necessary and possible to 
restore financial and economic stability in the euro area.  
Ten  years  after  its  introduction,  the  euro  is  facing  its  greatest  challenge.  I  firmly  believe, 
however, that it will do fine.  
Thank you for attention. 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 3
