Elizabeth A Duke: Containing the crisis and promoting economic 
recovery 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Women in Housing and Finance Annual Meeting, Washington DC, 
15 June 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 When I joined the Board of Governors last August, the other Board members were already 
formulating  monetary  policy  to  limit  the  economy-wide  consequences  of  a  very  substantial 
housing downturn and actively responding to a severe financial crisis.  
In September, the crisis intensified when the collapse and subsequent bankruptcy of Lehman 
Brothers triggered a sequence of events that brought credit markets – and in particular, the 
commercial  paper  (CP)  market  and  interbank  funding  market  –  to  a  near  standstill.1  The 
enormity of these events – and their potential implications for the economy – should not be 
underestimated.  Credit  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  undertaking  of  almost  all  production 
activities in the economy and a large portion of expenditure activities as well. The breakdown 
of credit markets that followed the collapse of Lehman, if left unchecked, could have meant a 
very significant contraction in economic activity. Indeed, you may have heard the anecdote 
soon  after  the  Lehman  collapse  about  Chairman  Bernanke  being  asked,  "Well,  what  if  we 
don't do anything?" To which he replied, "There will be no economy on Monday." 
Policymakers in the United States and the world certainly did not follow the course of "not 
doing anything," either with regard to the events of last September or more generally through 
the  financial  crisis.  Policymakers  in  the  Congress,  the  Department  of  the  Treasury,  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  and  the  Federal  Reserve  –  and  their 
counterparts abroad – were well aware of the dire implications that a lack of access to credit 
would  have  had  on  economic  outcomes.  And  they  were  extremely  active  in  formulating 
policies aimed at alleviating pressures in credit markets so as to ensure that the economy 
continued to function. 
What I would like to do today – now nine months after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and 
the  tumultuous  events  that  followed  –  is  to  look  back  on  the  policies  that  have  been 
implemented  throughout  the  financial  crisis  and  consider  how  well  they  have  worked  to 
lessen the broader impact of financial market disruptions. Of course, it is too early to gauge 
the influence of policy on the economy's evolution through the financial crisis. It is difficult to 
do this with precision in general, and it is especially difficult to undertake analysis so soon 
after the events have occurred with so little data since the policy implementation. However, 
what we can do is look at how conditions in specific financial markets, and credit volumes 
more generally, have evolved, and ask whether this information is at least suggestive that the 
policies that we have implemented have worked to avert a far more severe and detrimental 
outcome.  
I will talk first about programs aimed at conditions in specific markets and the responses of 
those markets. I will then move to a discussion of credit aggregates more generally. I will use 
                                                 
1   Losses on Lehman Brothers' debt securities that resulted from the investment bank's bankruptcy caused one 
money market mutual fund to "break the buck," with others also rumored to do so. This situation led to a rapid 
escalation  in  money  market  mutual  fund  outflows  such  that  short-term  funding  markets  for  businesses  and 
municipalities  essentially  froze.  Interbank  funding  markets  also  stopped  functioning,  and  overnight  rates 
soared to extraordinarily high levels. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 1
the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data for four major credit types – residential mortgages, 
consumer credit, commercial real estate lending, and commercial and industrial loans – to 
compare credit aggregates in the current cycle to previous recessions generally considered 
to  be  credit-crunch  periods.  In  particular,  I  will  compare  credit  in  the  current  crisis  to  the 
1990-1991 episode that, as you might remember, also included a financial crisis. To preview 
my  conclusions,  I  confess  that  I  was  actually  rather  startled  by  the  pattern  of  the  data.  I 
originally started to look at these data to determine how much worse the credit contraction in 
this episode was compared with previous episodes. Instead, the data suggest that the actual 
credit contraction in this episode has been quite subdued compared with what might have 
been  expected.  So  I  do  think  that  policies  have  helped  maintain  the  flow  of  credit  to 
businesses and households.  
How well have policies to contain the crisis worked? A market-by-market perspective 
The policy responses to the financial crisis have been substantial and have occurred on all 
fronts.  Fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  policies  relating  to  government 
guarantees  and  safety  nets,  such  as  deposit  insurance,  have  been  used  to  improve 
conditions in the financial sector. In discussing these policies and how they appear to have 
worked (or will likely work in the case of more-recent policies), I will start with policies and 
programs  implemented  by  the  Federal  Reserve  before  moving  to  policies  implemented  by 
the government generally.  
Apart from traditional monetary policy, the goal of which is to strengthen aggregate demand, 
the  ultimate  goal  of  the  other  policies  is  to  maintain  credit  availability  to  households  and 
businesses. In the more immediate term, these policies are focused on relieving stresses in 
particular  markets  or  strengthening  the  financial  condition  of  specific,  or  classes  of, 
institutions.  
Traditional interest rate methods of monetary policy 
The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  responded  to  the  financial  crisis  by 
aggressively easing short-term interest rates, beginning in September 2007. At its December 
2008 meeting, the Committee reduced its target for the federal funds rate close to its lower 
bound,  setting  a  range  between  0  and  1/4  percent.  With  inflation  expected  to  remain 
subdued for some time, the FOMC has indicated that short-term interest rates are likely to 
remain low for an extended period. By communicating this expectation, the FOMC reinforced 
market beliefs that its policy is likely to remain on hold, thereby putting downward pressure 
on  longer-term  rates,  which  have  the  greatest  effects  on  spending  behavior.  This  sort  of 
communication can be very useful in stimulating borrowing and spending by businesses and 
households and promoting growth in economic activity. 
Balance sheet and credit-easing policies 
In addition to easing the traditional interest rate instrument of monetary policy, the Federal 
Reserve has been supporting credit markets through an expansion of the asset side of its 
balance  sheet.  This  approach  –  described  as  credit  easing  –  is  conceptually  distinct  from 
quantitative easing, the policy approach used by the Bank of Japan from 2001 through 2006. 
Credit easing and quantitative easing both share the feature that they involve the expansion 
of  the  central  bank's  balance  sheet.  That  said,  the  ways  in  which  the  policy  approaches 
expand the balance sheet – and act to stimulate lending – are different.  
Quantitative easing can be thought of as an expansion of the central bank's balance sheet 
with no intentional change in its composition. That is, the central bank undertakes more open 
market operations with the objective of expanding bank reserve balances, which the banking 
system  should  then  use  to  make  new  loans and  buy  additional  securities.  However,  when 
credit  spreads  are  very  wide,  as  they  are  at  present,  and  the  credit  markets  are  quite 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2009
dysfunctional, it becomes less likely that new loans and additional securities purchases will 
result from increasing bank reserve balances.  
In  contrast,  credit  easing  focuses  on  the  mix  of  loans  and  securities  that  the  central  bank 
holds as assets on its balance sheet as a means to reduce credit spreads and improve the 
functioning  of  private  credit  markets.  The  ultimate  objective  is  improvement  in  the  credit 
conditions  faced  by  households  and  businesses.  In  this  respect,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
focused on improving functioning in the credit markets that are severely disrupted and that 
are key sources of funding for financial firms, nonfinancial firms, and households.  
Figure 1 graphs the asset side of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, which has expanded 
substantially  since  the  end  of  the  third  quarter  of  2008.  Federal  Reserve  initiatives  with 
regard to the expansion of the asset side of its balance sheet can be grouped by the markets 
those initiatives are intended to help: (1) targeted actions to prevent the failure or substantial 
weakening of specific systemically important institutions, which are shown by the red area; 
(2)  liquidity  programs  for  financial  institutions,  which  are  shown  by  the  light  blue  area;  (3) 
lending  to  support  the  functioning  of  key  financial  markets,  which  are  shown  by  the  green 
area; and (4) large-scale purchases of high-quality assets, which are shown by the pink area. 
Targeted actions aimed at specific systemically important institutions. 
1. 
Targeted  actions  to  prevent  the  failure  or  substantial  weakening  of  specific  systemically 
important  institutions  include  the  first  Maiden  Lane  transaction  in  March  2008,  which 
extended  support  to  facilitate  the  merger  of  Bear  Stearns  and  JPMorgan  Chase.  It  also 
includes  loans  and  facilities  supporting  American  International  Group  (AIG).  These  actions 
were driven by concerns that the disorderly failure of a large, complex, interconnected firm 
would impose significant losses on creditors, including other financial firms, dislocate a wide 
range of financial markets, and impede the flow of credit to households and businesses.2 To 
be  sure,  in  no  sense  were  these  actions  taken  to  protect  the  affected  firms'  managers  or 
shareholders  from  the  costs  of  past  mistakes.  Although  I  was  not  present  for  the  Bear 
Stearns transaction, I can tell you that the decisions regarding loans to AIG were extremely 
difficult and uncomfortable. But at the time, the Federal Reserve was the only government 
entity  with  authority  to  act,  and  the  tremendous  risks  to  the  financial  system  and  the  real 
economy implied by the failure of a large, complex, interconnected firm made the option of 
not acting unthinkable. 
Liquidity programs for financial institutions.  
2.  
Since  the  onset  of  the crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  modified existing  facilities  and 
implemented a number of new ones to provide liquidity to sound financial institutions in an 
environment  in  which  interbank  funding  markets  and  repurchase  agreement,  or  repo, 
markets (for securities other than Treasury securities) are severely disrupted.  
For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  improved  banks'  access  to  short-term  credit  by 
temporarily  relaxing  the  terms  on  the  discount  window  and  by  expanding  –  through  the 
introduction  of  the  Term  Auction  Facility  and  the  establishment  of  reciprocal  currency 
arrangements  (liquidity  swap  lines)  with  foreign  central  banks  –  the  range  of  programs 
through  which  it  can  lend  to  depository  institutions.3  Ultimately,  the  objective  of  liquidity 
                                                 
2   Losses sustained by other financial firms could then erode their financial strength, limiting their ability to play 
their  intermediation  role  or  even  cause  them  to  fail,  thereby  reinforcing  financial  pressures.  In  addition,  the 
disorderly  failure  of  a  large,  complex,  interconnected  firm  could  undermine  confidence  in  the  U.S.  financial 
sector more broadly, potentially triggering a widespread withdrawal of funding by investors and an additional 
tightening of credit conditions, which would, in turn, cause a further reduction in economic activity. 
3   Specifically,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  relaxed  the  terms  on  the  discount  window  by  lowering  the  spread 
between the discount rate and the target federal funds rate from 100 to  25 basis  points and extending the 
maturity on discount window loans, which now have a maximum duration of 90 days. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 3
programs  is  to  facilitate  the  intermediation  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses.  The 
immediate  goal  of  such  facilities,  however,  is  the  reduction  of  stresses  in  the  interbank 
funding market. The significant narrowing since the start of this year in important measures 
of stress in this market – specifically, Libor-OIS spreads, shown in the left panel of figure 2 – 
together with diminished usage of these facilities – shown to the right – suggest that some 
easing in this market has occurred in line with the implementation and expansion of these 
initiatives.  
In a similar manner, the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) and Primary Dealer Credit 
Facility (PDCF) provide liquidity to primary dealers to allow them to perform their function of 
making  markets  to  support  their  customers'  needs  to  buy,  sell,  and  issue  securities.4  The 
immediate goal of these facilities was the reduction of stresses in repo markets for securities 
other than Treasury securities. The narrowing of spreads between repo rates on agency and 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and Treasury general collateral repo rates – shown in the 
left panel of figure 3 – together with diminished usage of the TSLF and PDCF – shown to the 
right – suggest that stresses in this market have eased since November.  
Lending to support key financial markets. 
3. 
Credit-easing  policies  have  also  been  targeted  at  improving  conditions  in  key  financial 
markets  –  specifically,  markets  for  commercial  paper,  asset-backed  securities  (ABS),  and 
commercial mortgage backed securities (CMBS).  
Money  market  mutual  funds  have  significant  investments  in  CP.  When  Lehman  Brothers 
failed, it caused at least one money market mutual fund to "break the buck," leading to a run 
on  money  market  funds.  Three  facilities  –  the  Asset-Backed  Commercial  Paper  Money 
Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility and the Money 
Market Investor Funding Facility – were created to restore the functioning of CP markets and 
allow  money  market  mutual  funds  to  manage  through  the  volatility.5  Conditions  in  the  CP 
market  have  improved  markedly  since  the  introduction  of  the  various  Federal  Reserve 
facilities  aimed  at  fostering  market  liquidity.  CP  spreads  –  shown  in  the  left-hand  panel  of 
figure 4 – have declined sharply since these facilities went into effect. As with the bank and 
primary dealer-oriented facilities, when spreads narrowed, usage subsided, as shown in the 
right-hand panel. While usage has declined significantly, market participants tell us that the 
backstop provided by the facilities continues to bolster market confidence. 
The Term Auction Lending Facility (TALF) was created as a joint endeavor of the Federal 
Reserve and Treasury to support economic activity by making credit more readily available 
for consumers and businesses. The facility provides loans with maturities of up to five years 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
The  Term  Auction  Facility  provides  credit  to  depository  institutions  through  an  auction  mechanism,  and 
liquidity swap lines provide U.S. dollar funding indirectly to foreign banks whose liquidity demands ultimately 
affect  U.S.  financial  markets.  Both  of  these  initiatives  have  been  expanded  several  times  during  the  crisis, 
most notably when market turmoil reached a peak in September last year. 
4   The TSLF was established in March 2008 as some large investment banks faced increasingly severe liquidity 
pressures, which began to limit their ability to hold inventories of financial assets and thereby make markets. 
The TSLF allows primary dealers to borrow Treasury securities from the Federal Reserve for one-month terms 
against less-liquid collateral, which they can then use as collateral to borrow cash from private counterparties. 
The PDCF was established shortly after as a backstop source of liquidity for primary dealers. 
5   The  Asset-Backed  Commercial  Paper  Money  Market  Mutual  Fund  Liquidity  Facility  finances  purchases  of 
high-quality asset-backed commercial paper by U.S. depository institutions and bank holding companies from 
money market mutual funds, and the Money Market Investor Funding Facility provides liquidity to U.S. money 
market mutual funds and certain other money market investors. Both facilities are aimed at assisting money 
market  mutual  funds  that  hold  CP  to  meet  investor  redemption  demands,  thereby  increasing  these  funds' 
willingness  to  invest  in  money  market  instruments.  The  Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility  was  set  up  to 
provide a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of CP through a specially created limited liability company, which 
could purchase three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2009
to investors to help finance their acquisitions of certain ABS and CMBS. The program was 
announced in late 2008 at a time when ABS and CMBS markets had essentially shut down, 
which  thereby  threatened  to  limit  credit  availability  to  households  and  businesses.  Initially, 
eligible collateral included newly issued triple-A-rated ABS  backed by a variety of  loans to 
consumers and small businesses. Recently, the Board announced that triple-A-rated newly 
issued and legacy CMBS would also be accepted as collateral.6  
Conditions in the markets for consumer ABS have improved notably since the beginning of 
this year and more recently have improved in the markets for CMBS. Estimates of spreads 
on triple-A-rated consumer ABS have narrowed between 70 to 80 percent from peak levels in 
December 2008. Estimates of spreads on triple-A-rated CMBS have also moved down since 
March, although such spreads remain well above their levels observed a year ago.7 While 
the  now  familiar  improvement  in  spreads  is  good  news,  the  real  story  of  TALF  is  in  new 
issuance,  shown  in  figure  5.  Remembering  that  these  securities  are  used  to  finance  new 
loans, look at the virtual shutdown of securitization that occurred starting last fall in the credit 
card, auto, student loan, and commercial real estate markets. The TALF began operation in 
March. For the first two months, TALF lending and associated ABS issuance was fairly low, 
in part because investors were unfamiliar with the program, but investor interest picked up 
considerably in May and June and consumer ABS issuance has returned to levels near those 
seen before the disruption of ABS markets last fall. In addition, some ABS issues have come 
to market outside of the TALF, and these are taking place at greatly improved spreads. We 
hope to see similar improvements in the CMBS market later this summer when the first TALF 
loans collateralized by newly issued and legacy CMBS are expected. 
Large-scale purchases of high-quality assets. 
4.  
Credit-easing  policies  have  also  been  implemented  through  the  purchase  of  high-quality 
assets  aimed  at  improving  mortgage  lending  and  housing  markets  as  well  as  overall 
conditions  in  private  credit  markets.  In  November  2008,  the  Federal  Reserve  announced 
plans  to  purchase  a  total  of  up  to  $1.25  trillion  of  agency  MBS  and  up  to  $200  billion  of 
agency debt by the end of the year, and in March 2009, the Federal Reserve announced that 
it may also buy up to $300 billion of Treasury securities by the fall.8  
The  program  appears  to  be  having  its  intended  effect.  Yields  on  mortgages  relative  to 
Treasury yields have come down since November 2008. As shown in figure 6, the 30-year 
fixed  mortgage  rate  relative  to  the  5-year  constant  maturity  Treasury  rate  benchmark  has 
declined  about  1-1/4  percentage  points  since  the  first  MBS  purchase  program  was 
announced.  Indeed,  today  mortgage  spreads  are  a  lot  closer  to  their  mean  for  2000-2007 
                                                 
6   The types of collateral eligible under TALF are: the highest investment-grade-rated tranches of ABS issued on 
or after January 1, 2009, for which the underlying credit exposures are auto loans, student loans, credit card 
loans,  equipment  loans,  floor  plan  loans,  insurance-premium  finance  loans,  small  business  loans  fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Small Business Administration, and receivables related to 
residential mortgage servicing advances or commercial mortgage loans; the highest investment-grade-rated 
tranches of CMBS issued on or after January 1, 2009; and certain high-quality CMBS issued before January 
1, 2009. 
7   The observed narrowing of spreads likely represents both direct and indirect benefits of the TALF to financial 
markets. The direct benefit is the increased demand for the specific types of securities that are eligible for the 
TALF, which has likely contributed to the observed reduction in spreads. The indirect benefits are the increase 
in  the  general  level  of  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  which  has  almost  certainly  contributed  to  the 
narrowing of risk premiums in a wide variety of markets, including cash markets – such as the corporate bond 
and leveraged loan markets – as well as markets for a range of structured products. 
8   As of June 10, the Federal Reserve held $427 billion of agency MBS and $84 billion of agency debt (of which 
almost all was purchased since late November) and $622 billion of Treasury securities (of which $210 billion 
was purchased since March). 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 5
than they were in November. That said, mortgage rates have recently risen with the increase 
in Treasury rates.  
Fiscal policy: Emergency Economic Stabilization Act 
In October 2008, the Congress passed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA), 
which  enabled  a  series  of  initiatives  to  provide  confidence  in  the  financial  system  and  to 
strengthen market stability. The ultimate goal of all these initiatives was to increase the flow 
of financing to U.S. businesses and consumers and to support the U.S. economy.  
Lending  activities  require  both  capital  and  liquidity.  While  the  Federal  Reserve  had  been 
providing  liquidity,  equity  markets  were  virtually  closed  to  financial  firms  last  fall.  Using 
authorities  and  funding  provided  by  EESA,  the  Treasury's  Capital  Purchase  Program 
provides government capital investments to banks in good condition. Since last fall, nearly 
$200 billion has been invested under this program.  
Confidence in the U.S. banking system has also been supported by temporary extensions of 
government safety net policies. A component of EESA was the temporary raising of the basic 
limit on federal deposit insurance coverage from $100,000 to $250,000 per depositor. In line 
with  this  change,  the  FDIC  also  announced  the  provision  of  full  coverage  of  noninterest 
bearing  deposit  transaction  accounts  under  its  temporary  Transaction  Account  Guarantee 
Program. In addition, the FDIC began guaranteeing newly issued senior unsecured debt of 
banks,  thrifts,  and  certain  holding  companies  under  the  Temporary  Liquidity  Guarantee 
Program (TLGP).9 Since late April, some banks have issued debt outside of the TLGP, albeit 
with spreads of several percentage points higher than debt issued under the program. This 
activity  suggests  that  the  TLGP  is  providing  an  important source  of  support  to  the  funding 
needs of banks, thrifts, and their parent companies.  
The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
In  February  of  this  year,  the  Federal  Reserve,  as  part  of  the  Treasury's  Financial  Stability 
Plan,  initiated  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  (SCAP)  to  evaluate  whether 
large U.S. banking institutions would need to raise a temporary capital buffer to be able to 
withstand  losses  in  a  more  challenging  economic  environment  than  generally  anticipated. 
The  SCAP  determined  the  capital  buffer  by  estimating  losses  and  internal  resources  to 
absorb losses at the 19 largest U.S. banking institutions. The scenario used to estimate the 
buffer  was  more  adverse  than  that  expected  by  the  consensus  of  private  forecasters.  The 
exercise  was  conducted  by  more  than  150  examiners,  analysts,  economists,  accountants, 
attorneys, and other professionals from the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of 
the Currency, and the FDIC.  
When completed, the assessment indicated that additional capital buffers – with a total value 
of $185 billion – were required by 10 out of the 19 institutions to maintain Tier 1 capital in 
excess of 6 percent of total assets and Tier 1 common equity capital in excess of 4 percent 
under  the  more  adverse  scenario.  Of  the  $185  billion,  the  equivalent  of  $110  billion  had 
already been raised or committed prior to the announcement of the results in early May. And 
since  the  announcement,  these  firms  have  raised  about  $50  billion  from  equity  offerings, 
preferred stock conversions, and asset sales. I believe the early success shown by firms in 
accessing private capital demonstrates the improvement in  market confidence provided by 
the SCAP exercise. With renewed access to nongovernment debt and private capital, many 
                                                 
9   Since  the  TGLP  went  into  effect  in  November  2008,  $265  billion  in  debt  has  been  issued  by  30  parent 
companies and 37 firms, with spreads over Treasury securities in recent months remaining on the order of 1/4 
to 3/4 percent, depending on the maturity. 
6 
 BIS Review 78/2009
institutions have announced intentions to repay the government preferred stock issued under 
the CPP. 
How well have policies to contain the crisis worked? An aggregate credit perspective 
So far I have discussed evidence that programs directed at dysfunction in specific markets 
has been successful in alleviating stresses in those markets. But the ultimate goal of those 
policies as well as those aimed at strengthening financial institutions is to improve the flow of 
credit to households and businesses. I now want to look at this ultimate goal by examining 
how  credit  volumes  have  evolved  over  this  current  business  cycle  downturn  relative  to 
previous  downturns,  as  identified  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  (NBER) 
Business Cycle Dating Committee. I will do this using the Federal Reserve's Flow of Funds 
data.  In  most  instances,  I  will  focus  only  on  those  downturns  associated  with  credit 
crunches.10  
A credit crunch, according to the White House Council of Economic Advisers, "occurs when 
the  supply  of  credit  is  restricted  below  the  range  usually  identified  with  prevailing  market 
interest rates and the profitability of investment projects."11 Judging whether a credit crunch 
is  happening  in  real  time  –  and,  to  some  extent,  even  in  hindsight  –  is  not  easy.  It  is 
extremely difficult to sort out the relative importance on the flow of credit of reduced demand 
due  to  weaker  economic  activity,  reduced  supply  because  borrowers  appear  less 
creditworthy,  or  reduced  supply  because  lenders  face  pressures,  such  as  a  shortage  of 
capital, that restrain them from extending credit. In other words, while demand considerations 
could certainly result in a decline in credit flows, a reduction in the supply of credit – caused 
either  by  bank  balance  sheet  pressures  or  by  banks  being  reluctant  to  lend  to  less-
creditworthy  borrowers  –  could  produce  the  same  result.  Anecdotal  evidence  and  some 
academic  research  suggest  that  the  recessions  that  followed  the  business  cycle  peaks  in 
1969, 1973, 1981, and 1990 were credit-crunch recessions.12 Clearly, the current downturn – 
specifically, that  following  the  December  2007  business  cycle  peak  – is  also considered  a 
credit-crunch recession. 
How has credit evolved during this business cycle? 
Growth of the broad credit aggregates. 
In looking at the evolution of credit in both the current and past business cycle downturns, I 
will  look  at  four  major  types  of  credit:  home  mortgages,  commercial  mortgages,  consumer 
credit, and nonfinancial business credit. Figure 7 presents four-quarter growth rates for each 
credit type from 1952 to 2008, where the shaded areas denote NBER recession periods. As 
can  be  seen  from  the  figure,  credit  growth  typically  declined  prior  to  and  during  economic 
downturns, and this time-series pattern is readily apparent in the current downturn in all four 
panels.  
                                                 
10   In  these  cases,  however,  accompanying  charts  (figures  A.1  and  A.2)  that  show  the  paths  of  credit  over 
business cycle downturns in both credit-crunch and non-credit-crunch recessions are available online. 
11   Council of Economic Advisers (1992), Economic Report of the President (Washington: Government Printing 
Office), p. 46. 
12   More specifically, the business cycle peaks occurred in 1969:Q4, 1973:Q4, 1981:Q3, and 1990:Q3. Kaufman 
(1991) cites credit crunches that occurred in 1959, 1969-70, the mid-1970s, 1981-82, and 1990-91. See Henry 
Kaufman (1991), "Credit Crunches: The Deregulators Were Wrong," Wall Street Journal, October 9. Also see 
Albert  M.  Wojnilower  (1980),  "The  Central  Role  of  Credit  Crunches  in  Recent  Financial  History,"  Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 11, pp. 277-340. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 7
In the current downturn, the reduction in lending growth that stands out as being the most 
"out of the ordinary" is that of home mortgages, which is shown in the top-left panel. Home 
mortgage  volumes  actually  contracted  for  the  first  time  in  the  Flow  of  Fund's  50-plus  year 
history over the four quarters ended 2008:Q4, after having always maintained growth above 
4 percent. In terms of being an outlier relative to past business cycles, the current experience 
for  home  mortgages  is  similar  to  that  of  commercial  mortgages  in  the  1990-91  recession, 
which is shown in the top-right panel.  
In  the  downturn  following  the  1990  business  cycle  peak,  commercial  mortgage  volumes 
contracted after having never contracted (in nominal terms) before that. This downturn also 
included  a  financial  crisis,  although  then  it  was  due  to  commercial  real  estate  rather  than 
residential real estate, as it is now. Given the similarities between these two business cycle 
downturns, it seems interesting to compare them. 
(bottom-left  panel),  commercial  mortgages 
A comparison of the current downturn with the one that followed the 1990:Q3 peak. 
Figure  8,  which  shows  the  same  credit  types  as  figure  7,  provides  "butterfly"  charts  for 
inflation-adjusted levels of four different types of lending – home mortgages (top-left panel), 
consumer  credit 
(top-right  panel),  and 
nonfinancial business credit (bottom-right panel) – over the current downturn and the 1990-
91 recession. The series in the charts have been normalized to 100 at each business cycle 
peak, which is also marked with the vertical bar.13 Normalized lending data for quarters prior 
to and after each business cycle peak are color-coded to each peak. Data associated with 
the  1990:Q3  peak  are  shown  using  thick  dark  green  lines,  and  data  associated  with  the 
recent 2007:Q4 peak are shown using thick red lines. Activity to the left represents the 16 
quarters  leading  up  to  the  peak,  and  the  activity  to  the  right  represents  the  8  quarters 
following the peak. A steeper line to the left of the vertical bar implies higher credit growth 
prior to the peak; a more negatively sloped line to the right implies a larger reduction in credit 
during the downturn.  
The right side of the chart considers commercial mortgages and nonfinancial business credit. 
Both of these lending aggregates expanded more rapidly in the lead up to the 2007 business 
cycle peak than in the lead up to the 1990 peak, and both also contracted (or continued to 
contract)  immediately  after  the  1990  business  cycle  peak.  Until  recently,  neither  lending 
aggregate  had  declined  in  the  current  downturn,  but  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year, 
nonfinancial business credit contracted quite sharply.  
For consumer credit (in the lower-left panel), it matters – in the lead up to the most recent 
business cycle peak – how we measure it. Without home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) and 
home equity loans, the increase in consumer credit in the lead up to the 1990 and the 2007 
business cycle peaks are broadly similar. If we include all HELOCs and home equity loans, 
which can be used in a similar way to consumer credit, then lending in the lead up to the 
2007  business  cycle  peak  –  represented  by  the  thin  red  line  –  increases  more  notably.14 
Consumer  credit  contracted  in  the  1990-91  recession  but  has  remained  broadly  flat  in  the 
current downturn, albeit with a slight downward drift in more recent quarters.  
For home mortgages, shown in the top-left panel, lending expanded similarly in the lead up 
to both the 1990 and the 2007 business cycle peaks. In contrast to the other types of credit, 
                                                 
13   The normalization of each series is also made so that the difference between the level of a lending series at 
any date and the level at the business cycle peak has a percentage interpretation. For example, if a line has a 
value of 80 at some date before or after the business cycle peak, it means that the level of the category of 
lending that the line represents is 20 percent below the level of lending at the business cycle peak. Likewise, if 
a  line  has  a  value  of  110  at  some  date,  it  means  that  the  level  of  the  category  of  lending  that  the  line 
represents is 10 percent above the level of lending at the peak of the business cycle. 
14   Note that cash-out refinancing – like HELOCs and home equity loans – can also be used in a similar way to 
consumer credit, which is not included in the chart. 
8 
 BIS Review 78/2009
this type of lending did not contract in the 1990-91 recession but has contracted since the 
peak of this cycle.  
Apart  from  home  mortgages,  the  drop-off  in  credit  in  the  1990-91  recession  was  notably 
more severe than what has been experienced so far in the current downturn. There are two 
possible reasons why this might happen. One is that demand for credit turned down more 
sharply in the 1990-91 recession than in the current downturn, but I do not think that this is 
the reason. The slowdown in economic activity in the 1990-91 recession was nowhere near 
as  severe  (either  in  terms  of  depth  or  duration)  as  it  has  been  to  date  in  the  current 
recession, which the NBER still considers to be ongoing. This difference in economic activity 
across  the  two  recessions  suggests  that  it  is  unlikely  that  credit  demand  contracted  more 
sharply in the 1990-91 recession than in the current downturn. The other possible reason, 
which I think more likely, is that credit supply conditions have been a little more favorable – 
albeit  still  stressful  –  in  the  most  recent  downturn  relative  to  those  during  the  1990-91 
recession. I believe this difference does reflect policy. That is, all the facilities and programs 
laid  out  earlier  have  acted  to  shore  up  the  financial  sector  and  to  prevent  a  notably  more 
severe contraction in credit than we have seen.  
Given the stark differences between the paths of credit in the current recession compared 
with those of 1990-91, I want to see if the same patterns hold true in comparison with other 
credit-crunch recessions. 
A comparison of the current downturn with other credit-crunch recessions that occurred 
within the past 40 years. 
Figure 9  provides  butterfly  charts  for  the  same  four  inflation-adjusted  levels  of  credit  as 
shown in figure 8, now shown with the last five business cycle peaks that preceded credit-
crunch recessions – specifically, the business cycle peaks in 1969, 1973, 1981, 1990, and 
2007. Data associated with the most recent peak continue to be shown by thick red lines. 
Data associated with the 1990 peak are now shown by thinner dark green lines.15  
Figure 9 indicates that, with the exception of housing, lending over the current downturn does 
not  appear  particularly  weak  or  subdued  relative  to  other  downturns.  Indeed,  for  all 
categories of lending other than home mortgage lending (shown in the top-left panel), there 
are at least two other downturns for which the paths of lending after the business cycle peak 
lie below that following 2007:Q4 (that is, the drop-off in credit was more pronounced). Even 
for  home  mortgages,  the  decline  in  lending  is  not  tremendously  large  relative  to  the 
experience  of  past  business  cycle  downturns.  In  contrast,  over  the  1990-91  recession, 
lending, with the exception of home mortgages, experienced either the largest or the second-
largest contraction of all credit-crunch-associated downturns.  
This  feature  is  even  more  prominent  when  lending  only  by  depositories  is  considered. 
Figure 10  has  the  same  format  as  figure 9  but  presents  time-series  data  on  lending  by 
depository  institutions  only  –  that  is,  commercial  banks,  savings  institutions,  and  credit 
unions.16 Figure 10 indicates that lending by depositories over the current downturn does not 
appear particularly weak or subdued relative to other downturns. Indeed, for all components 
of credit other than home mortgages, the path of lending in the current downturn lies toward 
the upper end of the range of outcomes for past business cycle downturns. Of course, some 
of the observed lending by depositories in the current downturn does reflect the safety-valve 
role played by financial intermediaries in the financial system – that is, households and, in 
particular,  businesses  drawing  on  existing  lines  of  bank  credit  when  alternative  sources  of 
finance  have  become  more  difficult  to  obtain.  Finally,  when  home  mortgages  made  by 
                                                 
15   A  set  of  charts  (figures  A.1  and  A.2)  are  provided  online  that  also  include  the  paths  of  credit  around  the 
business cycle peaks preceding non-credit-crunch recessions. 
16   Note that the data for depositories shown in figure  also use the Flow of Funds Accounts. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 9
depositories only is considered, the path of lending lies within the range of outcomes for past 
business cycle downturns (albeit toward the lower part of the envelope). 
Given the enormity of some of the events of the past year, the findings of these business 
cycle  comparisons  may  seem  somewhat  surprising.  However,  as  was  evident  from  the 
facilities  and  programs  discussed  earlier,  policy  has  been  extremely  active  in  the  current 
credit crisis, especially with respect to the banking sector. 
Given  the  similarities  between  home  mortgages  in  the  current  downturn  and  commercial 
mortgages in the 1990-91 recession, as well as the commonality that both recessions were 
characterized by a financial system crisis, the outcomes for lending in the 1990-91 recession 
could be thought of as a possible scenario for lending in the current downturn in the absence 
of any policy response. That said, the likely path of lending in the current downturn without 
any  policy  response  would  have  been  notably  more  contractionary  than  in  the  1990-91 
recession given that the earlier episode – while characterized by a financial crisis – did not 
face as extreme an episode as the one experienced last September. 
Conclusion  
Today I have reviewed developments in specific financial markets following the introduction 
of  Federal  Reserve  and  other  agency  facilities  and  programs,  and  have  considered  the 
evolution of the major categories of credit in both the current economic downturn and past 
downturns.  This  assessment  of  the  data  suggests  that  these  government  programs  have 
been broadly successful in relieving stresses in the key credit markets. This success is also 
reflected  in  aggregate  credit  data,  which  indicate  that  most  categories  of  household  and 
nonfinancial-firm lending in the current recession do not appear especially weak relative to 
past recessions. Given the enormity of events over the past year, this result is a surprising 
but reassuring early indication that the combined policies have been successful at shoring up 
credit despite these events.  
A note of caution is in order however. In the past, economic downturns were deepened or 
prolonged by the premature withdrawal of monetary or fiscal stimulus. To the extent that the 
severity of the current downturn has thus far been mitigated by extraordinary credit support, 
a  significantly  weaker  path  of  lending  –  and  thereby  economic  activity  –  could  very  likely 
occur  if  policy  support  for  the  financial  sector  is  withdrawn  too  soon.  In  this  case, 
stigmatization  of  support  tools  such  as  liquidity  programs,  direct  lending  programs,  or 
government capital injections that make participants unwilling to use such programs will have 
the same effect as a direct policy withdrawal of the programs. And while the path of credit in 
this cycle compared with others is encouraging, the downturn in credit evident in the most 
recent quarter provides a reminder that conditions are still far from normal. 
10 
 BIS Review 78/2009
  BIS Review 78/2009 
  11
  12 
 BIS Review 78/2009
  BIS Review 78/2009 
 13
  14 
 BIS Review 78/2009
  15
BIS Review 78/2009 
   BIS Review 78/2009
 16 
 