Jean-Claude Trichet: Ten years of the euro – successes and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Osnabrück, 
12 February 2009. 
Introduction 
 Dear President Pöttering, Dear Dr. Hentschel, Ladies and gentlemen, 
I thank you for inviting me to Osnabrück. Today I’m going to speak to you in German. That is 
for me both a pleasure and a challenge. I’m pleased to have come here, for the Osnabrück 
region is the home of Hans-Gert Pöttering. I have got to know, and have come to hold in high 
esteem, Hans-Gert Pöttering as President of the European Parliament. As the President of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  I  am  a  regular  guest  at  the  Parliament.  For  us  at  the  ECB, 
relations with the directly elected representatives of the people of Europe are very important.  
Osnabrück is also a suitable place for a speech on European integration. Its epithet is the 
“city of peace”. It was here and in Münster that the Peace of Westphalia was negotiated. It 
was the basis for peace in Europe in 1648 after the Thirty Years’ War. Today it is European 
integration that forms the basis for prosperity and peace in Europe during the last 60 years. 
Main part 
The euro is the most visible symbol of European unification. Economic and Monetary Union 
is  the  field  in  which  integration  has  progressed  the  most.  The  euro  is  the  currency  now 
shared by 329 million people in 16 countries. Ten years ago – on 1 January 1999 – it was 
introduced in the then 11 countries of the euro area. Ten years is a short time in history. But 
it represents a good opportunity to talk about successes and challenges – the subject of my 
address tonight.  
I wish to consider this theme by asking three questions:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
I intend to refer to a series of current issues relating to the global financial market turbulence 
and economic developments in the euro area. 
The first question: 
How successful is the euro? 
What is the euro’s role in the current financial market turbulence? 
What challenges lie ahead for the single currency? 
How successful is the euro? 
The  euro  is  a  stable  currency  and  is  an  important  contribution  to  the  completion  of  the 
Europe’s single market. That’s why it is a success. After all, it helps to secure prosperity in 
the participating states. 
Stability of the euro 
Let  me  first  of  all  consider  the  theme  of  stability.  Before  the  euro  was  set  up  there  were 
reservations about the stability of the future single currency, including in Germany. The first 
ten years have shown that these fears were unfounded. The euro is just as stable as its most 
stable predecessors, which were merged into it. That applies of course also to the Deutsche 
Mark. “The euro will be as strong as the Mark”, it was said. That promise has been kept. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 1
A glance at the inflation rates in the euro’s first decade makes this clear: the average annual 
inflation  rate  in  the  euro  area  in  the  ten  years  since  the  introduction  of  the  currency  was 
2.2%. By comparison, the average annual rate of inflation in Germany in the 1990s, before 
the euro was introduced, was also 2.2%. In the 1980s, the rate was 2.9%, in the 1970s 4.9%. 
In other words, in terms of stability, the euro does not need to shy away from any comparison 
with the Deutsche Mark and other legacy currencies. 
At 2.2% per year since 1999 average inflation was somewhat above the level that the ECB’s 
Governing Council has defined as price stability: an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% in 
the euro area, over the medium term. Nevertheless, the result remains good, for the first ten 
years were anything but calm. In particular, we had an oil price shock, which was certainly 
comparable  with  that  of  the  1970s.  Between  early  2002  and  mid-2008,  crude  oil  prices  in 
dollar  terms  rose  by  nearly  600%.  In  the  case  of  food  prices  as  well,  we  faced  price 
pressures: at the beginning of the decade, and in particular in 2007 and 2008 by the global 
rise in food prices. 
Despite  these  shocks  and  short-lived  erratic  price  movements,  inflation  rates  remained 
generally low. Above all, inflation expectations were and are firmly anchored at a level in line 
with  our  definition  of  price  stability.  In  other  words,  economic  agents  and  financial  market 
participants  expect  the  ECB  to  ensure  price  stability  over  the  medium  and  long  term 
whatever the amplitude of the short-term impact of the various shocks it has to cope with. 
They trust our commitment to stability. This is expressed most clearly by the issue of euro-
denominated bonds with a maturity of 30 and even 50 years, the yields of which stand at a 
remarkably  moderate  level.  For  example,  a  50-year  French  government  bond  maturing  in 
2055  currently  yields  4.1%.  This  implies  confidence  into  the  stability  of  the  euro  –  in  its 
function as a store of value – extending beyond more than one generation. 
Cash changeover and price increases 
I know that in Germany and in other countries in the euro area the introduction of euro cash 
in 2002 was “associated” with price increases. Was the euro “a Teuro”? There were some 
price increases in the course of the cash conversion. The statistics office of the European 
Union – Eurostat – estimates that the cash conversion added between 0.12% and 0.29% to 
the inflation rate in the euro area in 2002. This was overall small in 2002 and negligible over 
the ten years of the euro. Also to be noted is the discrepancy between the “felt” inflation and 
the  actual,  statistically  measured  inflation.  This  discrepancy  cannot  be  attributed  to  a 
measuring error in the consumer price statistics. These statistics are of high quality. 
There  are  some  reasons  for  the  deviation  between  “felt”  and  measured  inflation  after  the 
cash conversion. For example, price increases occurred particularly in the case of frequently 
bought goods and services usually paid for in cash. Such prices are more strongly “felt” than 
prices for products which are only bought from time to time, for example, cars or computers. 
It is also possible that consumers are still comparing current euro prices with prices in the 
national currencies before 2002. This “frozen price memory” leads to distorted comparisons. 
It  also  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  that  the  introduction  of  euro  cash  in  January  2002 
coincided  with  increases  –  caused  by  external  factors  –  in  energy  and  food  prices  and  in 
indirect  taxes.  They  were  not  at  all  related  to  the  euro.  In  the  public  perception,  however, 
they were associated with the cash changeover. 
Institutional foundations of the euro  
Many  observers  did  not  think  the  ECB  could  ensure  price  stability  and  anchor  inflation 
expectations.  Indeed,  the  ECB  is  a  young  central  bank  which,  together  with  the  national 
central banks in the Eurosystem, has assumed responsibility for a new currency, the euro, in 
a  new  economic  and  currency  area,  the  euro  area.  Therefore  it  could  not  be  taken  for 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2009
granted  that  the  euro  would  be  able  to  establish  itself  so  quickly  as  a  stable  and 
internationally recognised currency. 
This was only possible because the ECB and the national central banks of the Eurosystem 
have solid institutional foundations. These foundations are the treaty negotiated in Maastricht 
in 1991 and the Statute of the ESCB. The Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB are clear: the 
primary objective of the Eurosystem is to ensure price stability. The ECB and the national 
central banks of the Eurosystem are independent so that they can pursue this goal. Neither 
the ECB, nor the national central banks, nor the members of their decision-making bodies 
may  seek  or  receive  any  instructions  from  anybody.  This  applies  to  European  as  well  as 
national institutions. They, for their part, are obliged to respect the principle of central bank 
independence. 
The priority given to price stability and the independence of the central bank are the results 
of a long, historical learning process in monetary policy. It is theoretically well founded and 
empirically proven that independent central banks are better able to ensure low inflation rates 
than those which are subject to political influence. Independence guarantees above all that 
central banks can focus on securing price stability over the medium and long term and are 
not exposed to short-term political influences, or to vested interests’ pressures. 
In Germany the primary mandate of price stability and the independence of the central bank, 
as  embodied  by  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  have  a  long  tradition.  This  tradition  and  the 
Statute of the Bundesbank – which also inspired other central banks’ statutes in Europe – 
were one of the major forces behind the Treaty of Maastricht and the Statute of the ESCB. I 
have  myself  been  the  governor  of  the  independent  Banque  de  France  during  these  ten 
years. The independence was granted in January 1994, five years before the euro. During 
these five years I was particularly proud that our primary goal, price stability, was reached in 
line with our definition – below 2% – and was fully compatible with price stability in Germany 
during  the  same  five-year  period.  It  can  be  said  that,  with  the  creation  of  the  euro,  the 
stability culture has been “Europeanised” and given the legal face of an international treaty 
European stability consensus 
The primary mandate of price stability and the independence of central banks as laid down in 
the Maastricht Treaty, are an expression of a stability consensus which has grown in Europe 
– even worldwide – in recent decades. There exists today a general awareness of the fact 
that stable prices are indeed a fundamental condition for sustainable economic growth and 
employment.  
The  priority  for  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  the 
independence  of  the  ECB  enjoy  broad  support  from  the  people  of  Europe.  In  surveys  of 
citizens  throughout  the  euro  area,  an  overwhelming  majority  regard  price  stability  as  an 
important  goal.  An  overwhelming  majority  believe  it  important  that  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem are independent of governments in order to achieve this goal. This support from 
our  fellow  citizens  in  the  Euro  area  matters  greatly  to  the  ECB.  It  shows  that  the  stability 
consensus  is  overwhelmingly  shared  among  the  public  to  which,  as  an  independent 
institution, we are ultimately accountable.  
The euro as a contribution to the completion of the single European market  
The  guarantee  of  price  stability  for  the  now  329  million  Europeans  in  the  euro  area  is  the 
main reason why the euro has been a success story in its first ten years. But it is not the only 
reason. Let me briefly mention another important reason: the introduction of the euro was an 
important contribution to the completion of the single European market. The advantages of 
the single market could be better exploited by the common currency. Trade and capital ties 
between euro countries have grown.  
I’d like to mention a few examples:  
BIS Review 16/2009 
 3
    The  cross-border  trade  in  goods  and  services  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  by 
about 10 percentage points in relation to GDP since the introduction of the single 
currency.  This  can  be partly  attributed  to  the euro.  Trade  between  individual  euro 
countries now accounts for about half of their total exports and imports. At the same 
time,  extra  euro  area  trade  developed  very  dynamically  as  well.  Increasing  trade 
integration within the monetary union did not come at the expense of trade with third 
countries. Hence, there is no “fortress Europe”. 
The  euro  has  promoted  competition,  price  transparency  and  the  convergence  of 
prices, and has lowered transaction costs and eliminated exchange rate risk.  
The  euro  has  boosted  direct  investment  within  the  euro  area.  Mergers  between 
companies in the euro area have risen noticeably.  
The  euro  has  also  led  to  a  marked  increase  in  cross-border  security  investments 
within the euro area. This is only one example of the contribution made by the single 
currency to the integration of the financial markets in Europe. It’s not over yet. The 
ECB and the Eurosystem strongly support a further integration of Europe’s financial 
markets. 
These  developments  show  that  the  euro  is  an  important  catalyst  for  the  completion  of  the 
single European market. The logic of “one market, one currency” was a substantial impetus 
for monetary integration in Europe. It has proved to be correct.  
The euro, monetary policy and employment 
Priority  for  price  stability,  which  is  a  necessary  precondition  for  sustainable  growth  and 
employment, in the euro area did not come by any means at the expense of employment. 
This is reflected in a number again: between the introduction of the euro in 1999 and 2008, 
the number of persons employed in the euro area increased by more than 16 million. In the 
years before, from 1990 to 1998, the increase in persons employed was less than 6 million. 
These new jobs in the euro area were not created by the euro. There is no direct relationship 
because the change in employment is affected by many factors. But it is a confirmation that a 
monetary policy oriented towards price stability is fully compatible with job creation. 
I would like to come now to my second question:  
What is the role of the euro amid the current financial market turbulence?  
The question makes clear that the global environment in which we operate has completely 
changed in the past 18 months.  
Global financial market turbulence and the economic downturn 
We  are  currently  in  an  extraordinary  situation.  It  is  marked  by  an  intensification  and 
broadening of the global financial market turbulence – in particular since September last year 
– and a sharp downturn in the world economy. The tensions have increasingly spilled over 
from the financial sector to the real economy. Their negative effects can be felt worldwide. 
Since the end of 2008 virtually all economies – both of the industrialised countries and the 
emerging markets – have been moving in the same direction. This considerably contributes 
to the scale of the present downturn. 
This economic downturn has also affected the euro area. Foreign demand for exports from 
the euro area has fallen. Very low confidence and tight financing conditions have adversely 
affected domestic demand. On the basis of our current analysis, we see persistent weakness 
in economic activity in the euro area over the coming quarters. The financial market tensions 
have a further impact on the global and domestic economy. The economic prospects are still 
marked by an exceptionally high degree of uncertainty. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2009
Reaction of the ECB and European governments  
The ECB reacted quickly and flexibly to the financial market turmoil. On 9 August 2007 we 
were the first central bank worldwide to recognise the tensions on the money market and to 
take important steps in the context of our liquidity management. With a very flexible liquidity 
management we ensured that solvent banks did not get into difficulties because of liquidity 
constraints. This has been the case in particular since September 2008 after intensification of 
the financial turmoil, which led to a very sharp rise in tensions.  
When  reacting  to  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the  ECB  has  always  differentiated  between 
liquidity  management  on  the  money  market  and  its  monetary  policy  stance  ensuring  price 
stability.  We  lowered  the  key  interest  rates  when  there  was  increasing  evidence  of 
inflationary pressures diminishing. The decline in the inflation rates is due mainly to falling 
commodity prices and a significant slowdown in economic activity. Against this background, 
the Governing Council of the ECB lowered the key interest rates by 2.25% between October 
2008 and January 2009. This is an unprecedented reduction in such a short period. In this 
way we have taken account of the easing inflationary pressures in the light of the economic 
downturn. 
The governments in Europe have also reacted rapidly, resolutely and in a coordinated way to 
the  financial  market  upheaval:  they  have  prevented  banks  from  collapsing.  And  they 
extended  a  line  of  defence  against  a  possible  systemic  solvency  risk,  especially  through 
credit  guarantees  and  recapitalisation  measures.  This  prevented  a  systemic  crisis  and 
created  a  basis  for  fresh  confidence.  These  efforts  of  the  central  banks  and  of  the 
governments  are  aiming  at  permitting  the  banks  to  live  up  to  their  role  in  the  economy  by 
resuming lending to economic agents.  
Reasons for a medium-term economic recovery  
2009 will be a very difficult year. I have already said this on various occasions. I see however 
at least four reasons why we can be confident that the world economy and the industrialised 
nations will recover:  
• 
The  vigorous  reactions  of  central  banks  and  governments  to  the  extraordinary 
situation  –  not  only  in  Europe,  but  worldwide  –  will  progressively  produce  their 
effects.  They  may  not  yet  have  been  sufficiently  taken  into  account  in  the 
expectations of private sector participants.  
The  growth  potential  of  the  emerging  market  economies,  for  example,  in  Asia,  is 
considerable.  Their  current  deceleration  of  growth  is  temporary.  Many  of  these 
countries have an enormous potential to develop domestic demand.  
Technological progress is very rapid and will continue and even accelerate. It is a 
major source of future long term growth.  
Prices for oil and other commodities have fallen sharply since mid-2008. Their rise 
was an important factor in the current economic weakness. Their present low levels 
will be an expansionary contribution to the global economy 
   For these reasons it seems to be a reasonable working hypothesis that after an exceptionally 
difficult 2009 we will see an economic recovery in 2010. 
Lessons of the financial market turmoil  
An economic recovery must not however be a reason for returning to “business as usual”. 
Lessons  must  be  learnt  from  the  financial  market  turbulence.  This  work  is  still  under  way. 
Many  national,  European  and  international  institutions  and  bodies  are  discussing  the 
conclusions to be drawn for the financial system. The global financial system must become 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 5
more resilient in order to avoid such episodes in the future. I would like to name three key 
words, which point to the need for change: 
• 
short-termism in the financial sector. A far too short time horizon for many actors in 
the  financial  system  has  contributed,  among  other  things,  to  an  excessive  risk 
appetite. That’s why, for instance, the compensation systems and risk management 
of the banks need to be profoundly improved. 
The  transparency  of  the  financial  markets.  Full  information  on  all  institutions, 
instruments and markets of relevance to financial stability is of the essence. 
The  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system.  In  the  financial  system  there  is  a 
tendency to accept excessive risks in good times. In a downturn, sharp movements 
occur in the opposite direction. Here, among other things, banks face the question of 
adequate capital requirements. 
  Current developments and the euro’s role 
Against the background of the current developments, let me say a few words about the role 
of  the  euro.  The  last  few  months  have  shown  us  an  important  advantage  of  the  euro:  in 
stormy seas it’s better to be on a large ship than in a small boat.  
In history – also in the economic history – it’s always a speculation to ask “What if…?” I want 
to do it nevertheless, because there are very well-founded hypotheses. One such hypothesis 
is: in addition to the financial market turmoil, the banking sector problems and an economic 
downturn, there would most likely be severe currency upheavals in Europe without the euro. 
We would likely face strong, erratic fluctuations between Europe’s national currencies. 
I call to mind in this context the crisis in the European Monetary System in 1992 and 1993. It 
was triggered, among other things, by a difficult European and international environment. We 
saw  sharp  tensions  between  individual  national  currencies.  This  led  to  abrupt  shifts  in 
competitiveness between individual countries. The European Union’s internal market and in 
particular the free movement of capital were subject to tension.  
Without the euro we would be facing similar difficulties today. The central banks would be in 
demand  as  crisis  managers  on  an  additional  front.  The  euro  does  offer  protection  from 
distortions in the currency field which would worsen the current situation already marked by 
the financial markets’ turbulences and the global economic downturn. 
The commitment to the single currency of its founding fathers was visionary and trailblazing. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  we  can  see  the  introduction  of  the  euro  ten  years  ago  as  a 
prescient,  forward-looking  response  by  Europe  to  the  challenges  and  risks  of  the  present 
world.  
I would now like to consider my third question:  
What challenges lie ahead for the single currency?  
Despite  all  the  achievements,  this  is  not  the  time  for  complacency.  There  are  important 
challenges. The most important and most direct is of course to tackle the financial market 
turbulence  and  the  economic  downturn.  But  there  are  also  challenges  which  go  beyond 
tackling the current situation. But they are related to it in part.  
I would like to consider three challenges briefly: the securing of sound government finances, 
structural reforms in the euro countries and the expansion of the euro area. 
Securing of sound government finances  
Sound  government  finances  are  critical.  They  complement  the  ECB’s  stability-oriented 
monetary policy. They prevent the fiscal policies of one country in the euro area from having 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2009
negative effects on other countries. Beyond that, sound finances make a national economy 
more flexible. They are part of a growth-friendly environment.  
The fiscal policies of the Member States should promote the smooth functioning of Europe’s 
Economic and Monetary Union. The Stability and Growth Pact is the instrument to guarantee 
this. The Pact is the most important pillar in the economic union. It supports the monetary 
union. 
The strict and credible implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is essential. Against 
the  background  of  the  current  economic  developments,  it  offers  the  necessary  flexibility. 
Shortfalls in tax revenues and additional expenditure arising automatically from the economic 
situation support the economy. Where there is room for manoeuvre, additional fiscal policy 
measures can be effective. They should be timely, targeted and temporary, and take account 
of the respective country-specific situation with regard to state finances.  
Notwithstanding  all  budgetary  measures  for  supporting  the  economy  in  the  short  term,  we 
need  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  fiscal  policy  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Public 
confidence in the soundness of state finances must not be undermined as this would also 
impair the effectiveness of the economic policy measures. Therefore, “exit strategies” from 
the current fiscal stimuli should be already thought of. 
Structural reforms  
Structural  reforms  in  the  countries  of  the  euro  area  are  very  important  for  two  reasons  in 
particular. They are necessary in order to enhance the flexibility and resilience of the euro 
area  economy  and  to  increase  its  growth  potential.  Such  structural  reforms  relate  to  the 
markets for goods and services, and the labour market.  
Reforms of the goods and service markets should strengthen competition and accelerate an 
effective  restructuring.  An  example  of  successful  reform  is  the  telecommunications  sector, 
where  liberalisation  has  enhanced  competition,  increased  the  variety  of  products  and 
lowered prices, to the benefit of consumers. Labour market reforms should have two goals: 
to promote appropriate wage-setting and to facilitate labour mobility – the mobility between 
sectors of the economy and between regions. 
Flexible  job  markets  are  important  particularly  in  a  monetary  union.  Exchange  rate 
adjustments  are  not  possible  in  response  to  economic  developments  and  changes  in 
competitiveness.  Therefore,  wage  policy  in  the  individual  countries  bears  a  special 
responsibility.  It  largely  determines  labour  costs  and  thus  a  country’s  competitiveness.  It 
must take into account productivity, the employment situation and the competitiveness of the 
respective country. The relative cost competitiveness of the various economies in the euro 
area has to be monitored very closely.  
The present situation should be a catalyst, pushing further forward structural reforms in the 
euro  countries.  The  EU’s  Lisbon  strategy  –  which  aims  to  make  Europe’s  economy  more 
dynamic  and  competitive  –  and  the  completion  of  the  internal  market,  for  example  in  the 
services  sector,  are  very  important  items  on  the  European  agenda  which  should  not  be 
forgotten in the present circumstances. 
Enlargement of the euro area  
Many of the challenges confronting the ECB are shared with other central banks, such as the 
US  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  These  include 
overcoming  the  financial  market  disruption  and  the  economic  downturn.  Over  the  longer 
term, there is globalisation, with the rise of emerging market economies such as China and 
India,  the  rapid  advances  in  science  and  technology  and  the  ageing  of  our  population.  All 
these phenomena affect the economic environment in which central banks conduct monetary 
policy.  
BIS Review 16/2009 
 7
The enlargement of the currency area for which we bear responsibility is a challenge specific 
to  the  ECB.  No  other  central  bank  operates  in  an  economic  and  monetary  area  whose 
expansion  forms  part  of  a  structured  integration  process.  No  other  central  bank  regularly 
integrates new institutions, as the Eurosystem does. With each addition to the euro area, the 
Eurosystem incorporates a national central bank in the “monetary team”, which consists of 
the ECB – the “captain” – and all the national central banks of the euro area countries. 
The euro was introduced ten years ago into 11 EU Member States as a single currency. At 
that time, the euro area had 292 million inhabitants. Today it comprises 16 countries with a 
total  of  329  million  inhabitants.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  five  new  members  have  joined: 
Greece,  Slovenia,  Malta,  Cyprus  and,  on  1  January  of  this  year,  Slovakia.  Slovenia  and 
Slovakia were the first former communist countries from central Europe to join. Their entry 
bears witness to their transformation over the past two decades.  
The accession of five countries in ten years also reflects the openness of the euro area. We 
are not a “closed shop”. The euro area is open to all Member States of the European Union. 
To  join,  a  Member  State  has  to  fulfil  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria.  These  relate  to 
inflation, long-term interest rates, exchange rates and state finances. 
The  sustainable  fulfilment  of  the  convergence  criteria  before  introducing  the  euro  is  in  the 
interest of the countries concerned and of the euro area as a whole. Countries should not 
introduce  the  euro  without  having  first  achieved  the  necessary  economic  convergence.  A 
high degree of sustainable economic convergence is required, so that they can be integrated 
smoothly into the euro area.  
The  convergence  criteria  are  thus an  important  part  of  the  stability-oriented  set  of  rules of 
Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  ECB  and  the  European  Commission  report 
regularly on the extent to which EU Member States outside the euro area are meeting the 
criteria.  They  serve  to  maintain  the  credibility  and  functioning  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
When we look back over the first ten years of the euro, then we can do this with satisfaction. 
The  sceptical  forecasts  before  its  birth  have  not  materialised.  The  euro  is  a  historic 
achievement. Its first ten years have been a success. This is also seen, noticeably so, from 
outside  our  continent.  Europe  can  be  very  proud  of  what  it  has  achieved.  The  euro  has 
brought many benefits but as I already said, this is no the time for complacency. We have 
many  challenges  to  cope  with  in  the  years  to  come.  Some  are  shared  with  the  other 
important central banks in the world, like responding to the present economic and financial 
global situation and drawing all the lessons from the present turmoil. Other challenges are 
specific to the Eurosystem, like the completion of the single market with a single currency 
and  a  successful  enlargement.  The  people  of  Germany  as  well  as  all  329  million  fellow 
citizens in the euro area, can count on the ECB and on the Eurosystem. You can count on us 
to continue providing a solid and reliable anchor of stability and confidence. Particularly in the 
current environment both these elements are essential.  
I thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 16/2009
