Caleb M Fundanga: The central bank, the media and the legislature – can 
they work together?  
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 35th anniversary 
of the Central Bank of Swaziland, Mbabame, 21 May 2009. 
 Governor M.G. Dlamini,  
Fellow Central Bank Governors,  
Your Excellencies the Members of the Diplomatic Corps,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
And May I simply Say All Protocol Observed,  
Mr. Chairman, it is indeed a great pleasure for me to be with you today as we commemorate 
the  35th  Anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Swaziland.  I  consider  it  a  great  honour  and 
privilege,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  indeed  on  my  own  behalf,  to  have  been 
invited to give a keynote speech at this historic event.  
Mr.  Chairman,  allow  me  to  first  of  all  congratulate  the  Central  Bank  of  Swaziland,  the 
Government and all other stakeholders for having come a long way in promoting the effective 
conduct of monetary policy in this great country over the last 35 years. We at the Bank of 
Zambia have noted the important role that the Central Bank of Swaziland has played not only 
in the development of the Swazi economy, but in enriching the knowledge of central bankers 
throughout  the  region,  through  its  participation  in  the  regional  groupings  such  as  the 
Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governor’s  in  SADC.  Therefore,  as  you  celebrate  this  great 
milestone, we join you in anticipating further progress and effectiveness in the execution of 
your mandate.  
Mr. Chairman, the central theme of my address today is the important role that information 
plays in economics in general and in financial markets in particular. In 1970, some 39 years 
ago,  or  4  years  before  the  establishment  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Swaziland,  an  economist 
called George Akerlof published a paper called “The Market for Lemons.” By lemons he was 
referring to used cars in the United States of America. Akerlof, who would later win the Nobel 
Prize  in  Economics  for  his  work,  demonstrated  how  information  asymmetries  between  two 
contracting parties, a used car seller and a used car buyer, could lead to an inability of the 
car dealer to sell cars. More broadly, the moral of his story was that information asymmetries 
that allowed for no credible assessment of value of a given transaction, could lead to market 
collapse – in this instance the market for used cars.  
Mr. Chairman, if we fast forward to the year 2008, and to the current financial crisis, we note 
that asymmetries in information between financial institutions, this time relating to the extent 
of  exposure  to  and  value  of  complex  derivative  products,  led  to  a  freezing  up  of  credit 
markets,  the  eventual  collapse  of  some  important  financial  institutions,  and  the  near 
meltdown of the entire financial system. In these events we can see the insights of Akerlof in 
his 1970 paper.  
Mr. Chairman, the near collapse of the financial system has in turn led to a rapid and deep 
global recession – the sharpest since World War II and the first in which all regions of the 
world were suffering a downturn in fortunes at the same time. This downturn may well have 
its most devastating impact on poor countries, particularly in Africa – who incidentally were 
not responsible for the crisis. It is worth asking the question that if the basic insights on the 
powerful impact that a lack of information could have on markets was known as far back as 
1970  –  why  were  these  lessons  not  assimilated  into  the  policy  making  tool  kit  of  central 
banks or in the financial architecture of our economies?  
BIS Review 95/2009 
 1
Mr Chairman, I have no doubt that perhaps a large part of the answer to this question is in 
the  fact  that  the  1970s  had  a  very  different  financial  environment  when  compared  to  our 
current  environment.  As  the  financial  markets  developed,  driven  by  technological  and 
financial innovation and the deregulation of financial services, financial institutions were able 
to  price  and  sell  risks  through  ever  more  complex  financial  products.  The  very  nature  of 
complexity  of  these  products  created  the  asymmetries  in  information  that  has  proved 
catastrophic to the world economy.  
However, I wish to focus on another reason why Akerlof’s insight was never fully absorbed 
by policy makers and the public: I believe that we allowed the workings of the financial sector 
to become more and more divorced from key stakeholders such as the legislature, who had 
the  responsibility  of  enacting  regulations  governing  the  financial  sector,  and  the  public  for 
whom the media was an important source of information – and so our fate was sealed.  
Mr. Chairman, clearly Africa was not the source of the financial crisis, but it is being impacted 
by the crisis and there are many who believe that Africa may well bear the long term costs of 
the global economic downturn – if the broad gains of the past years are reversed and the 
productive capacities (e.g. human and social capital) are destroyed due to worsening health 
and education outcomes. From this perspective, the role of the legislature and the media in 
ensuring the African governments make the right policy choices in dealing with the crisis will 
be  critical  in  determining  how  well  African  economies  weather  and  recover  from  the  crisis 
once it is over – as all crises do come to an end.  
In this regard let me offer one simple example of how critical the role of the legislature and 
the  media  may  be:  The  conventional  wisdom  is  that  one  important  way  in  which  African 
economies can ensure that they are able to limit long-term damage to their economies is to 
ensure that they do not indulge in policy reversals for short term gain that sacrifice the long-
term growth prospects.  
Mr.  Chairman,  policy  reversals  are  more  likely  to  occur  in  an  environment  in  which 
information  flows  and  understanding  is  poor  between  economic  managers  such  as  central 
bankers  on one  side  and  the  legislature  and  the  media  on  the  other.  Populism  can  wreak 
havoc on good economic policy making. In this regard Africa does not need to rehash the 
false  choice  of  market  versus  the  state  –  both  are  part  of  the  fabric  of  society  and  the 
economy.  Furthermore,  calls  have  been  heard  that  African  Governments  should  also 
nationalise banks and purchase car companies as the developed economies, the owners of 
capitalism, have done. These are ultimately dangerous calls as the nature of our individual 
economies matters in determining the appropriate remedy for our economic ills.  
It is for this reason that my address today is entitled “The Central Bank, the Media, and the 
Legislature:  Can  they  Work  Together?”  My  simple  answer  is  that  they  can,  and  that  they 
must – particularly in the unprecedented circumstances in which we find ourselves in today.  
Mr. Chairman, before I outline how the Bank of Zambia has engaged both the media and the 
legislature and the positive results that we believe we have reaped, allow me to state very 
quickly how a strong relationship between the media, the legislature and the central bank is a 
modern feature of central banking.  
Mr  Chairman,  the  role of  modern  central  banks  revolves  around  three  key  functions:  price 
stability;  financial  system  stability;  and  the  maintenance  of  the  payment  system.  Price 
stability has the greatest weight in the goals of most central banks. Advances in economic 
theory and computing power as well as the developments in financial markets have greatly 
enhanced  our  understanding  of  the  economy  and  our  ability  to  understand  and  forecast 
inflation.  Central  banks  act  to  influence  inflation  some  periods  into  the  future  –  a  period 
determined  by  the  individual  characteristics  of  the  economy  in  question.  Today  we 
understand this process as targeting inflation expectations of households and firms – either 
implicitly or explicitly. Central to the success of such a strategy is the extent to which central 
banks have credible monetary policy frameworks and key pillars in such a framework are the 
ability  to  communicate  policy  in  a  predictable  and  intelligible  way  to  the  public  –  with  the 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2009
media  playing  an  important  role  in  this  process  –  and  the  notion  of  accountability  to  an 
appropriate body whether this is the Minister of Finance, the legislature or both bodies.  
Mr.  Chairman,  by  publicising  the  actions  of  the  central  bank,  the  media  has  become  an 
important  agent  in  facilitating  the  desired  behavioural  response  of  economic  agents  to 
monetary  policy  actions  of  the  central  bank.  Due  to  the  critical  role  of  the  media  in  the 
successful execution of public policy, the central bank needs to have a clear communications 
policy that supports the goals of the Central Bank. One of the major goals of communication 
policy,  for  instance,  is  to  help  anchor  inflation  expectation  by  promoting  credibility  and 
understanding of monetary policy. Indeed a notable change in central banking over the past 
15  years  has  been  a  world-wide  movement  toward  increased  communication  by  central 
banks  about  their  policy  decisions,  the  targets  that  they  seek  to  achieve  through  those 
decisions, and their view of the economy's likely future evolution.  
Mr.  Chairman,  It  is  argued  that  increased  willingness  to  share  the  central  bank's  own 
assumptions about future policy with the public has increased the predictability of policy, in 
ways that have improved central bank's ability to achieve their stabilization objectives. Public 
information serves the dual role of conveying fundamental information as well as serving as a 
focal point for better coordination. As financial markets become more efficient in a country, 
and as the economy becomes more open, the central bank’s communication policy needs to 
adapt to these on-going changes.  
Furthermore,  given  the  complexity  of  formulating  monetary  policy  and  getting  accurate 
projections, the role of the media and other financial commentators is not devoid of risk to the 
central bank’s credibility particularly, in challenging economic times. It is therefore, important 
for central banks to ensure that where projections on the future path of key macroeconomic 
variables are provided, these have to be set out in conditional forms and linked to incoming 
information with an assessment of the balance of risks.  
Mr.  Chairman,  turning  to  the  role  of  the  legislature,  it  is  important  to  note  that  legislative 
oversight of monetary policy has a long history in many countries. In this respect, the USA 
provides a good case in point of a country with strong legislative oversight over the central 
bank’s operation. Congressional oversight of the Federal Reserve goes back to the founding 
of  the  central  bank  in  1913.  However,  the  nature  and  purpose  of  oversight  has  changed 
overtime. Since 1978, the Federal Reserve has been subject to biannual oversight hearings 
before  the  Senate  and  House  banking  committees.  Several  other  countries  have  similar 
arrangements where the central bank periodically appears before a committee of parliament.  
Parliament  in  New  Zealand  also  has  a  role  in  monitoring  the  Bank's  conduct  of  policy.  By 
statute, each Monetary Policy Statement is referred to Parliament's Finance and Expenditure 
Committee. That Committee, with the assistance of its own professional adviser, can choose 
to extensively scrutinise the extent to which policy was, and has been, conducted consistent 
with the Policy Targets Agreement. Additionally, the Office of the Auditor General – an agent 
of Parliament, is also able to commission quite extensive investigations into the activities of 
the  Bank.  Similarly,  the  Australian  Parliament  undertakes  particularly  close  scrutiny  of 
interest-rate issues and associated economic policy through the Reserve Bank’s appearance 
before  the  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and 
Public  Administration.  This  is  the  main  mechanism  through  which  the  Reserve  Bank  is 
accountable to the people of Australia.  
As with the case of the media, the central bank’s interface with the legislature needs to be 
managed  strategically,  so  as  to  enhance  the  former’s  credibility  to  the  public  which,  as 
discussed earlier, is a necessary condition for effective transmission of monetary policy.  
Mr.  Chairman,  turning  to  Zambia,  some  seven  years  ago  we  at  the  Bank  of  Zambia 
commenced media seminars in which we invited a cross-section of participants from media 
institutions to explain our monetary policy to them. We also used these seminars to educate 
members  of  the  media  on  basic  economic  concepts.  This  exercise  was  to  a  great  extent 
driven by our alarm at the level of misunderstanding of monetary policy issues and decisions 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 3
by the media, and their failure to communicate discussions on monetary policy effectively to 
the  public  without  simply  copying  or  paraphrasing  a  press  statement  or  simply  printing 
opposing quotes from favoured commentators on economic issues.  
I  must  admit  here  that  initially  this  seemed  to  cause  more  harm  than  good  –  a  little 
knowledge truly did seem a dangerous thing now that we had opened ourselves up to the 
media. The greater access to central bank officials and information, e.g. through our website, 
without the full understanding of issues on the part of journalists seemed to fuel erroneous 
stories. However, our perseverance over time has meant that the level of understanding and 
quality  of  questions  has  improved  significantly.  As  a  result,  the  level  of  reporting  has  also 
improved – although much work still needs to be done. Today issues surrounding the causes 
and likely impact of the global financial and economic crisis have been covered in a more 
balanced  way  with  a  greater  thoughtfulness  on  the  economic  linkages  and  Government 
policy – as well as with increased reference to related developments around the world.  
Mr.  Chairman,  following  on  from  the  media  seminars,  six  years  ago  the  Bank  of  Zambia 
began conducting seminars for members of Parliament – particularly members of oversight 
committees such as the Committee of Economic and Labour Affairs and the Public Accounts 
Committee. Again, what we have seen is a greater appreciation by members of Parliament of 
the challenges facing the central bank in the implementation of monetary policy in particular 
and economic policy in general because the central bank is often called upon to comment on 
the Government’s economic policies as well.  
We have tried to consolidate the gains from these seminars through the holding of quarterly 
media briefings as well as efforts to place as much information as possible on our website 
http://www.boz.zm.  An  example  of  the  benefits  of  this  improved  dialogue  is  the  recent 
developments  in  the  Zambian  economy  related  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  Between  July 
2008  and  March  2009,  the  Zambian  Kwacha  depreciated  by  about  65%  against  the  US 
dollar. However, unlike in other periods of extreme volatility in the exchange rate, although 
the Minister of Finance was asked to make a statement on the exchange rate – an important 
aspect of accountability – he was able to deliver a strong message that an adjustment in the 
exchange rate under such conditions of stress was an important way in which the economy 
could  adjust  to  external  shocks.  There  were  no  (loud)  clamours  for  the  re-imposition  of 
exchange controls. We believe that our efforts to communicate our policies more effectively 
to  the  public  and  members  of  Parliament  and  the  media  and  Parliamentarians  improved 
understanding of the economic landscape was an important reason for this observation.  
Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by recapping some of my main points: The role of formulating 
and  implementing  monetary  policy  is  very  challenging  and  often  attracts  a  lot  of  public 
interest.  If  not  well  addressed,  this  external  pressure  can  distract  the  focus  of  the  central 
bank. It is therefore, imperative that the central bank strategically manages its relationships 
with key stakeholders to promote mutual benefit.  
Media  coverage  of  monetary  policy  actions  is  a  central  channel  of  a  central  bank’s 
communication with the wider public, and thus an important factor for its credibility and policy 
effectiveness. The evidence suggests that communication can be an important and powerful 
part of the central bank's toolkit since it has the ability to move financial markets, to enhance 
the predictability of monetary policy decisions, and potentially to help achieve central banks' 
macroeconomic objectives.  
Unlike  the  media,  the  legislature’s  oversight  over  the  operations  of  the  central  bank  is 
normally  enforced  by  statutory  provisions.  However,  it  is  equally  important  for  the  central 
bank to proactively engage the two stakeholders in a way that maximises the transmission of 
accurate information to the market as well as promotes the transparency, accountability and 
credibility of the central bank.  
Finally,  I  thank  you  all  for  your  attention  and  would  like  to  reiterate  my  gratitude,  Mr. 
Chairman, for inviting me to share in your celebrations. I thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2009
