Njuguna Ndung’u: Next generation risk management 
Speaking notes by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, Thomson 
Reuters Risk Management Forum “Next generation risk management”, Nairobi, 23 July 2009. 
 Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  my  distinct  pleasure  to  be  joining  you  this  evening  at  this  important  Forum.  I  would 
therefore wish to express my gratitude to Thomson Reuters, the convenors of this event for 
the invitation. 
The timing of the Forum is apt in view of the prominence that risk management has gained in 
financial  circles  over  the  last  few  years.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  only  served  to 
underscore the importance of scaling up risk management practices and appropriate pricing 
of risk to counter dynamics in the global financial markets. 
I  am  therefore  pleased  to  see  a  diverse  gathering  of  financial  sector  players  this  evening. 
Thomson  Reuters  also  brings  a  vast  repertoire  of  international  experience  on  risk 
management that we are keen to draw upon. 
Whereas  risk  management  has  been  prominent  on  the  radar  of  financial  institutions  and 
markets, the global financial crisis has unearthed serious shortcomings in risk management 
practices. And furthermore, coming from the centre, this has been disastrous. 
One  of  the  cardinal  causes  of  the  crisis  is  now  widely  agreed  to  be  deficiencies  in  risk 
assessment and pricing of complex products. These complex products were indeed at the 
heart of the crisis. Markets failed to price these products appropriately and deficiencies in the 
regulatory architecture precipitated excessive risk taking. 
It  is  imperative  that  market  players  and  regulators  reflect  on  reviewing  risk  management 
practices. I am therefore confident that the local experiences to be shared tonight and the 
international experiences to be gleaned will only serve to enrich this discourse. 
The  Central  Bank,  can  share  the  perspectives  on  Risk  Management  from  a  regulator’s 
viewpoint. The Central Bank of Kenya has over the last five years promoted the inculcation of 
a risk management culture in the Kenyan banking sector. 
The  Central  Bank  has  also  adopted  a  risk-based  supervisory  approach.  This  approach  is 
premised  on  the  overarching  objective  of  proactively  addressing  threats  to  financial  sector 
stability. Maintaining the stability of the banking sector is indeed one of the core mandates of 
the Central Bank. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  banking  sector  has,  to  a  reasonable  extent,  embraced  risk 
management.  This  is  perhaps  one  of  the  key  reasons  behind  the  relative  stability  of  the 
Kenyan banking sector in the recent past inspite of local and global turbulences. 
However challenges remain as the Kenyan banking sector embraces risk management. The 
first  challenge  relates  to  the  implementation  cost,  particularly  amongst  medium  and  small 
banks. Human resource competences are also a constraint. The other key challenge we note 
from  our  regulatory  seat  is  the  view  by  some  institutions  of  risk  management  from  just  a 
compliance perspective. 
These  are  not  insurmountable  challenges  and  market  players  should  pool  resources  and 
efforts to address them. In this regard, the Central Bank will work with the banking sector to 
entrench risk management. The Bank will also leverage on the Kenya School of Monetary 
Studies (KSMS) to provide capacity building programs on risk management for the sector. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 1
I would also urge banks not to view risk management just from a compliance perspective but 
also  as  a  business  imperative.  Entrenchment  of  risk  management  enables  institutions  to 
effectively price their products in line with their risk profile. This will not only enhance their 
competitiveness but also maximize shareholder value. But information must be available to 
provide assessment on the risk profile. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  will  therefore  continue  with  its  efforts  to  enhance  risk 
management in banks. This drive will be supplemented by initiatives to scale-up surveillance 
at  the  system-wide  level.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank’s  existing  early  warning  system  will  be 
scaled up to incorporate both macro and micro prudential indicators of financial stability. 
Other measures that the Central Bank will take to strengthen it’s supervisory tools include: 
• 
Stepping  up  supervisory  co-operation  and  co-ordination  with  domestic  and  foreign 
financial sector regulators. This is particularly pertinent as Kenyan banks extend their 
reach  locally  and  regionally  and  also  as  products  developed  encourage  other 
regulators to come into the picture. 
Encouraging  the  adoption  of  forward  looking  techniques  by  banks  in  their  risk 
management framework. This is particularly in regard to the use of stress testing. This 
measure  will  however  be  accompanied  by  “market  education”  to  ensure  that  the 
results are not misinterpreted. 
 My role this evening was just to set the stage for the lively interactions on risk management 
that will follow shortly. The Central Bank is certainly open to considering ideas that can push 
forward the risk management frontier. It now remains for me to wish you fruitful deliberations 
and a pleasant evening. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2009
