Alan Bollard: Coping with global financial and economic stresses  
Address  by  Mr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Canterbury, 30 January 2009.  
Paper by Mr Alan Bollard and Mr Tim Ng for the above-mentioned speech. 
The original speech, which all the figures and tables can be found on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s website.  
 The great turbulence  
1.  
The  period  known  as  the  Great  Moderation  has  ended.  That  era,  roughly  dating  from  the 
mid-1980s to the mid-2000s, was characterised by strong growth, low and stable inflation, 
and internationalisation of trade and financial flows. By the end, it was also associated with 
very large imbalances of savings and investment, and a consequently very large increase in 
the  stocks  of  credit  outstanding.  These  imbalances  and  excessive  credit  stocks  remain 
evident at the household, business and national levels.  
The  process  of  correction  to  these  imbalances  has  revealed  vulnerabilities  in  the  world’s 
major  financial  institutions  and  financial  systems.  The  supply  of  credit  is  under  severe 
contractionary pressure, putting immense pressure on economic activity everywhere. Central 
banks,  financial  regulators  and  governments  around  the  world  have  taken,  and  are 
continuing to take, extraordinary action to limit the damage to the financial system and global 
economy.  
This speech looks at what the next few years may bring. I first review the story so far, in the 
international and domestic economies. I then look at how the correction process might play 
out  over  the  coming  year  or  so.  New  Zealand  is  better-placed  than  many  of  our  trading 
partners to weather the crisis. This is for both structural reasons, and also because of the 
remedial  policy  actions  we  have  already  taken  and  are  positioned  to  take  if  necessary. 
Finally, I discuss the road ahead. I look at how New Zealand households, firms and banks 
can be expected to cope with the stresses, and how we will use policy to smooth the ride 
where we can.  
The story so far  
2.  
Since the onset of the crisis in 2007 there has been a rapid-fire succession of extraordinary 
events  and  policy  interventions.  Some  of  the  higher-profile  triggers  of  market  volatility  are 
shown in Figure 1, overlaid upon the spread between US short-term interbank interest rates 
and the market’s expectation of future official interest rates. Normally this spread is close to 
zero. The difference from zero is a measure of the level of financial market dysfunction. As 
Figure  1  shows,  this  measure  of  dysfunction  waxed  and  waned  considerably  through  the 
period, but was substantial throughout. 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 1
Figure 1. Disruptive events and the US 3-month LIBOR-OIS spread 
 Source: Bloomberg 
This  is  but  a  small  fraction  of  everything  that  has  been  relevant,  for  obvious  reasons  of 
space. In the rest of this section I try to knit it together into a single story, probably risking 
oversimplification along the way. The narrative here is necessarily linear, but that obscures 
many  important  feedbacks  and  interactions.  These  feedbacks  are  a  very  real  part  of 
understanding and coping with the turmoil. 
It is no accident that the massive simultaneous surges in the prices of commodities, equities, 
housing and other real estate around the world since the mid-2000s until 2007 matches the 
surge  in  credit.  In  hindsight,  this  correlation  can  be  explained  fairly  simply  as  the  mutual 
reinforcement of a number of powerful factors. Emerging market countries, especially in Asia, 
ran high rates of national savings out of the earnings from strong export-led growth. As world 
oil prices surged, national savings in oil exporting countries also increased rapidly. Finally, 
the developed world ran fairly loose monetary policy as part of the recovery from the 2000-01 
recession. In this environment, the premium charged for credit risk fell to low levels through 
the middle part of the decade (Figure 2). The growth in asset prices in the latter part of this 
period increased capacity for secured borrowing, adding further stimulus for credit growth.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2009
Figure 2. Spread between US 10-year sub-investment grade corporate bond yields and 
US government bond yields 
Source: Datastream 
Figure 3. Credit-to-GDP ratio 
  Sources: IMF, Datastream. 
Together, these factors enabled the funding of an extraordinary rate and diversity of financial 
innovation and credit creation in the developed world, and very substantial increases in the 
ratios of credit to GDP in developed countries, particularly the UK (Figure 3).  
BIS Review 11/2009 
 3
Also fuelling the credit growth through the period was a shift of the major US and European 
banks  away  from  the  traditional  “originate  to  hold”  banking  model  towards  an  “originate  to 
distribute” model, which for a range of reasons was seen as more profitable. In “originate to 
hold”, mortgage and other credit originations typically stay on the originating bank’s balance 
sheet until maturity. In “originate to distribute”, the credit originations are securitised and sold, 
removing  them  from  the  originating  bank’s  balance  sheet.  A  typical  securitisation  would 
involve,  along  the  way,  the  creation  and  sale  of  derivatives  based  on  the  securitised 
exposures,  further  increasing  the  fee-earning  potential  of  the  underlying  origination  in  an 
environment of voracious demand for risk.  
“Originate to distribute” enabled a greater amount of credit creation to be supported by the 
same amount of financial system capital. It also made it harder for the institutions involved in 
the process of credit supply and derivative creation to assess their credit risk exposure and 
price  it,  because  of  the  greater  number  of  independent  institutions  involved,  and  the 
complexity of the transactions and instruments. The institutions involved came to depend on 
credit rating agencies for the apparently simple risk summary contained in a credit rating.  
In  the  event,  the  rapid  growth  and  diversity  of  financial  institutions  and  products  ran  well 
ahead  of  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  understand  their  risk  positions,  of  rating 
agencies to translate the new exposures that were created, and of regulators to ensure that 
financial  institutions  were  managing  risk  prudently.  Long-standing,  well-conceived  banking 
practices  were  abandoned  as  financial  institutions  focused  on  maximising  short-term 
profitability. The mutually reinforcing strengths of real and financial demand showed up first 
in  rising  prices  in  the  commodity  and  asset  markets.  As  debt-funded  consumption  and 
investment in the developed world surged, generalised inflation pressure began rising.  
As suggested in Figure 1, the first obvious signs of credit over-extension appeared in mid-
2007, as credit impairment on US subprime mortgage exposures began to surface. Money 
market spreads rose quickly in the US and Europe as frictions emerged in the cash markets. 
Soon, the credit quality and liquidity of other types of asset-backed securities and derivative 
instruments became subject to doubt. The frictions spread further and markets in which risk 
is traded away became dysfunctional. Financial institutions became increasingly unwilling to 
deal with each other as uncertainty about who was exposed, and how badly, became more 
and more enlarged.  
As 2008 progressed, it became obvious that the financial dysfunction was taking a lot longer 
to clear than expected. Innovative products with strong credit ratings proved less than robust. 
Unanticipated  concentrations  and  correlations  of  risk  were  suddenly  revealed  –  including 
within the largest global banks and credit insurers. The substantial increase in the diversity 
and  sophistication  of  financial  products  and  institutions  turned  out  not  to  have  reduced 
systemic  risk  through  diversification.  The  fragmentation  of  risk  had  not  enabled  individual 
institutions efficiently to isolate, hedge and transfer risk. Understanding of risk had become 
lost  in  translation  as  risk  was  traded  across  institutions  and  national  borders.  Measured 
regulatory  capital  that  had  seemed  bountiful  up  until  2007,  now  looked  thoroughly 
inadequate.  
When  risks  began  to  crystallise  and  losses  emerge,  the  destabilising  triggers  of  ratings 
downgrades,  asset  price  declines  and  market  illiquidity  turned  out  to  have  more  viciously 
compounding  effects  on  credit  availability  than  anticipated.  The  willingness  of  financial 
institutions  to  deal  with  each  other  broke  down.  The  continued  operation  of  the  global 
financial  system  turned  out  to  depend  on  a  far  larger  number  of  individual  markets  and 
institutions  than  had  been  assumed.  Liquidity  bottlenecks  in  some  arcane  products  and 
markets, such as monoline bond insurance, became suddenly obvious.  
US and European financial system conditions deteriorated significantly in the second half of 
2008, especially following the failure of the major US investment bank, Lehman Brothers, in 
mid-September. Other sizeable financial institutions in the US and Europe – including AIG, 
the world’s largest insurance company at the time – failed or were restructured during this 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2009
time. Confidence and the sense of rational discrimination by investors and depositors among 
Northern Hemisphere financial institutions evaporated.  
The feedback between increasingly restricted credit and the slowdown in the housing market 
and  general  economic  conditions  became  much  more  significant.  Drastically  revised 
prospects for world growth produced a commodity price slump (Figure 4).  
By the end of the year, world equity markets had lost in the order of US$30 trillion – half their 
value (Figure 5). Real house prices in the US and the UK had fallen from their peaks by a 
third  and  a  quarter  respectively,  with  still  no  sign  of  deceleration  in  their  rates  of  descent 
(Figure 6).  
Figure 4. The cycle in international commodity prices 
 
Sources: Bloomberg, Reuters 
 BIS Review 11/2009 
 5
Figure 5. Equity prices 
Source: Bloomberg. 
Figure 6. Real house prices 
  Sources: National data sources, Datastream, RBNZ estimates. 
The synchronisation of equity market cycles across the world has been remarkable, not least 
because it has included parts of the world with financial systems less directly affected by the 
problems  in  the  US  and  Europe,  such  as  most  of  Asia.  The  degree  of  synchronisation  in 
house  prices,  though,  is  even  more  historically  unique.  It  has  occurred  mainly,  but  not 
entirely,  in  the  major  English-speaking  countries  (including  New  Zealand  and  Australia), 
where the increase in household leverage was particularly enthusiastic.  
6 
 BIS Review 11/2009
Combining the plunges in value of these two major asset classes implies that households, 
businesses and sovereign wealth funds all lost massive amounts of wealth. The fall in US 
house  prices  alone  suggests  a  typical  loss  of  half  the  wealth  of  households  in  their  prime 
earning years – more than US$50,000 for every US homeowner, or US$4 trillion in total.1  
The international policy response 
Through the turmoil, the authorities in the major Northern Hemisphere economies escalated 
their responses, as it became clear that successive interventions were at best only holding 
back the tide.  
The  initial  response  to  the  deterioration  in  liquidity  conditions  in  2007  was  an  increase  in 
central bank money market operations, designed to increase the volume and availability of 
cash  in  the  banking  system.  Variously,  central  banks  widened  the  range  of  collateral  they 
would accept in return for cash, relaxed the conditions on which they would grant emergency 
lending, encouraged banks to use emergency lending facilities, and arranged swap lines with 
each other to ease foreign exchange shortages in offshore markets. 
Troubled financial institutions had to be rescued with the use of public funds, in cases where 
the  institution’s  failure  was  deemed  to  be  a  threat  to  the  stability  of  the  system.  The  UK 
government announced a blanket guarantee of all deposits of Northern Rock, the mortgage 
lender,  in  September  2007.  Major  US  investment  bank  Bear  Stearns  was  acquired  by  JP 
Morgan Chase with financial assistance from the US Federal Reserve in a deal announced in 
March 2008. 
Subsequently, as the problem widened and developed into widespread public concern about 
the  fundamental  solvency  of  some  major  financial  institutions,  governments  in  many 
countries moved to restore confidence with more sweeping measures. The coverage limits 
under deposit insurance schemes were extended or, in some countries, removed altogether. 
System-wide guarantees of other bank liabilities were introduced also.  
In the second half of 2008, central banks responded to the intensifying risks to the economic 
activity  with  rapid  reductions  in  official  interest  rates,  in  some  cases  coordinated.  Many 
governments announced large fiscal stimulus packages. 
The large-scale nationalisations of the financial system and acquisition of financial risk in the 
Northern  Hemisphere  have  distorted  incentives,  and  this  will  have  to  be  addressed  in  the 
future.  More  immediately,  the  expansion  in  the  public  balance  sheet,  combined  with  the 
financing  burden  of  the  fiscal  stimulus  packages,  have  reduced  fiscal  resilience  and 
constrained  the  scope  for  future  fiscal  action.  The  elevated  risks  to  fiscal  and  external 
sustainability  are  already  being  priced  and  watched  closely  by  sovereign  credit  rating 
agencies.  The  ratings  of  a  number  of  Northern  Hemisphere  countries  have  already  been 
downgraded.  
The New Zealand version 
The emergence of money market frictions in the US and Europe in the second half of 2007 
spilled  over  onto  New  Zealand  shores  instantly.  The  spread  between  local  short-term 
interbank  interest  rates  and  expectations  of  official  rates  rose,  reflecting  the  increased 
premium on liquidity worldwide. However, although there was a degree of friction in trading 
conditions, money generally continued to flow.  
As a precaution, the Reserve Bank introduced a range of measures to expand the scope of 
our money market operations, along the lines of those taken by central banks elsewhere, in 
order to ease the liquidity pressures that had emerged in the local interbank market. As the 
                                                 
1   Baker and Rosnick (2008). 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 7
international turmoil continued into 2008 and deepened, we broadened our liquidity facilities 
further,  primarily  as  a  precaution  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  could  handle  any 
additional liquidity pressures were they to arise.  
The  international  financial  turmoil  arrived  at  a  time  when  a  number  of  local  finance 
companies  were  already  under  pressure,  largely  due  to  credit  weaknesses  specific  to  that 
sector  and  to  particular  institutions.  The  failure  rate  in  the  non-bank  deposit-taking  sector 
increased as funding became more difficult to obtain. However, the solvency of the core New 
Zealand  financial  system  was  not  in  doubt,  and  still  is  not.  We  stepped  up  our  usual 
prudential  supervision  activities  with  banks,  both  to  increase  the  chances  of  detecting 
problems and to ensure that banks themselves were doing everything they could to mitigate 
their liquidity and other risks. 
Table  1  lists  the  major  changes  to  Reserve  Bank’s  liquidity  facilities  and  liquidity 
management processes to date.2  
Table 1. Changes to New Zealand liquidity management arrangements 
Announcement 
date 
2007 
Measure 
23 Aug  Eligibility  of  New  Zealand  bank  bills  for  acceptance  in  the  overnight 
reverse repurchase facility  
2008 
     7 May  Eligibility  of  AAA-rated  New  Zealand 
residential  mortgage-backed 
securities and New Zealand wider government sector debt for acceptance 
in Reserve Bank liquidity operations  
Extension  of  the  maximum  term  of  the  overnight  reverse  repurchase 
facility from one day to 30 days 
Eligibility  of  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  in  Reserve  Bank 
liquidity operations prior to the securities receiving formal ratings 
 9 Oct 
7 Nov 
29 Oct  Establishment of reciprocal currency swap line with United States Federal 
Reserve 
Introduction of Term Auction Facility for injection of cash for terms up to 
12 months 
Introduction of Reserve Bank bill tender 
 
12 Dec  Eligibility  of  highly  rated  New  Zealand  corporate  securities  and  New 
liquidity 
in  Reserve  Bank 
Zealand  dollar  asset-backed  securities 
operations 
 
The Australian and New Zealand Governments also introduced guarantees of bank liabilities 
around the time that they were introduced offshore. In the New Zealand case, it was seen as 
prudent to ensure that depositors remain confident in an environment of extreme global risk 
aversion  and  uncertainty.  The  guarantee  of  wholesale  liabilities  was  a  precaution  to 
maximise the ability of local institutions to participate in international funding markets while 
they remained disrupted.  
                                                 
2   See  Nield  (2008)  for  more  explanation  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  recent  changes  to  liquidity  management 
arrangements. 
8 
 BIS Review 11/2009
In our monetary policy operations, we monitored the weakening in the domestic economy for 
signs of pressure coming from the international credit turmoil. Domestically it was clear that 
the  economy  was  weakening  from  the  housing  downturn,  although  there  were  offsetting 
factors from commodity prices remaining fairly high and the Asian and Australian economies 
remaining  fairly  robust,  until  quite  late.  The  Reserve  Bank  began  cutting  the  OCR  in  July 
2008, in response to the weight of accumulated evidence pointing to reduced need for tight 
monetary  policy.  This  was  despite  headline  CPI  inflation  having  reached  4  percent  for  the 
year to June 2008, mainly due to the influence of record high petrol prices.  
During  the  worst  months  of  2008,  as  the  rate  of  deterioration  in  the  outlook  sharply 
increased, we cut the OCR in steps that are very large by the usual standards of monetary 
policy operation (Figure 7). The rapid abatement of medium-term inflation pressure in New 
Zealand  was  such  that  we  saw,  and  still  see,  a  period  of  monetary  stimulus  as  now 
warranted to keep inflation consistent with the target.  
Figure 7. New Zealand Official Cash Rate 
Source: RBNZ. 
 The road ahead  
3.  
We are now in a period where financial, monetary and regulatory policymakers around the 
world  are  fully  occupied  in  understanding  the  mess,  and  in  making  the  transition  back  to 
more normal economic conditions as orderly as possible. At the same time, underlying the 
cyclical  volatility  and  noise  are  longer-run  structural  shifts  and  trends  that  policy  needs  to 
allow to come through.  
Booms and busts 
The extraordinary surges then collapses in global credit, asset and commodity prices all now 
resemble, with the benefit of hindsight, overshoots followed by undershoots. The reversal in 
the  price  of  credit  and  tightening  in  credit  availability  has  been  extremely  abrupt.  Most 
countries  are  not  yet  seeing  slowing  credit  volume  growth,  due  to  the  masking  effect  of 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 9
drawdowns of existing credit lines. However, major international financial markets and banks 
are now much less willing, or completely unable, to provide new funding, even at very high 
spreads  and  with  various  forms  of  government  support.  Anomalous  pricing  and  the 
breakdown  of  normal  arbitrage  between  markets  is  widespread.  These  are  not  normal 
conditions, but an over-correction that should reverse over time as confidence and capacity 
to trade return. 
If history is a guide, housing and equity markets will also overshoot, or may have already. 
Housebuilding  activity  in  the  US  has  essentially  ground  to  a  halt,  but  the  US  population 
continues  to  grow  and  needs  somewhere  to  live.  Some  overshoot  of  house  prices  on  the 
downside  is  probably  unavoidable  to  restart  demand  for  housing  and,  eventually,  new 
investment.  The  question  is  how  to  limit  the  downside’s  extent.  Similarly,  while  there  is 
undoubtedly an overhang of investment at inflated asset prices to be worked off, equity price 
falls below fair value are how markets typically work to generate opportunities too attractive 
to pass up. 
Finally, the commodity price rise and fall is very large. Oil prices alone quadrupled between 
2004 and 2007, before crashing back to the 2004 levels where they are currently. Explaining 
price movements, let alone gleaning the medium term trend in prices, is very difficult in liquid 
markets  with  limited  short  run  supply  elasticity.  On  balance,  the  underlying  trend  in  real 
commodity  prices  over  coming  decades  is  probably  still  upward.  Financial  market  hubris 
during the upswing, and its opposite in the downswing, probably played a significant role in 
amplifying the cycle.  
The  fundamentals  of  supply  and  demand  continue  to  argue  compellingly  for  underlying 
strength in prices. For dairy products, for example, we still believe emerging market incomes 
will grow strongly over the medium term, underpinning growth in demand for protein and a 
more Westernised diet. For hard commodities, the physical and technological constraints on 
supply  seem  difficult  to  surmount.  Whatever  the  case,  large  swings  in  commodity  prices 
seem likely to remain with us in coming years, as supply and demand pressures lever more 
strongly on limited inventory buffers.  
Very noisy signals in credit, asset and commodity prices have resulted in what now look like 
material misallocations of resources in a range of industries over the past few years. Here in 
New Zealand, there has been a dairy land price boom, which has spurred large amounts of 
investment  in  dairy-related  industries,  in  some  cases  highly  leveraged.  The  house  price 
boom does not seem to have left us (or Australia) with a significant oversupply of housing 
(unlike  the  US,  for  example).  It  has,  though,  produced  a  large  increase  in  household  and 
developer leverage.  
The global recession 
Comparisons of the present world recession to previous recessions, and even to the Great 
Depression  of  the  1930s,  are  rife.  To  be  clear,  the  state  of  the  global  economy  and  the 
outlook  are  very  serious,  but  we  are  nowhere  near  Depression-level  economic  conditions. 
That said, we can certainly learn from the Depression experience.3 Then, as now, the global 
financial  system  became  seriously  incapacitated.  Concerns  about  the  state  of  the 
international economy came in waves. In the present case, markets would take heart from 
announcements  of  major  official  intervention,  such  as  the  bailout  of  the  major  investment 
bank  Bear  Stearns  in  the  US,  to  be  followed  by  new  bouts  of  adverse  news  and  further 
reversals of confidence, such as in response to the non-bailout of Lehman Brothers.  
                                                 
3   See Reddell and Sleeman (2008) for an overview of economic conditions in New Zealand at the time of the 
Depression and other periods of major economic weakness. 
10 
 BIS Review 11/2009
However, in macroeconomic terms the outlook is considerably better. In world growth terms 
we are somewhat below the early 1980s recession – that is, worse than the growth troughs 
in  the  early  1990s  and  early  2000s  (see  Figure  8).  Unemployment  rates  will  certainly 
continue  to  rise,  but  peak  well  short  of  the  levels  reached  in  the  Depression.  Then, 
unemployment  rates  rose  well  above  20  percent  in  many  cases.  Policy  frameworks  were 
much  less  well-equipped  to  handle  the  slump.  In  some  cases,  policy  responses  such  as 
tightening  of  some  fiscal  settings  and  trade  protectionism,  and  prevailing  macroeconomic 
management frameworks such as maintenance of the gold standard, seriously exacerbated 
the initial problems.  
Figure 8. World GDP growth since 1970, and IMF forecasts for 2009-2010 
 Sources: IMF, Datastream. 
Compared to previous global recessions, the current one has some distinguishing features. It 
originated  in  the  US  financial  system  and  quickly  spread  to  the  European  one,  eventually 
spreading across most regions of the world – but by different means. In the European case, 
the  financial  system  vulnerabilities  were  both  directly  generated  by  US-originated  credit 
exposures, as well as through a sharp reappraisal of the consequences of the credit boom 
and adverse relaxation of credit standards within Europe itself. Elsewhere, and especially in 
Asia,  the  transmission  has  been  through  more  conventional  trade  and  commodity  price 
channels, as the East Asian financial systems, including the capacity of the official sector to 
withstand financial shocks, have remained fairly robust.  
To date, Asian and many other emerging market economies have been less affected than in 
previous  episodes.  This  resilience  so  far  is  very  different  from  the  crises  of  the  past  two 
decades. However, the adverse impact of the developed world recession on Asian exports 
and  investment  is  now  showing  quite  strongly.  It  is  not  clear  how  severe  the  impact  may 
ultimately be.  
BIS Review 11/2009 
 11
What is needed for stability to return to the world financial system? 
Two fundamental conditions are needed for conditions in the global financial system to return 
to normal. First, housing markets in the US and UK need to stabilise. As suggested earlier, 
there is a natural limit to how far housing market activity can fall. Second, sufficient capital as 
a buffer against risk and as a base for growth needs to be restored to Northern Hemisphere 
financial institutions. The sufficiency of capital then needs to be transparently observed by all 
in the market in order for confidence to return and normal financial trading to resume. This 
latter process may well drag on beyond this year.  
So far, the running total of credit losses declared by US and European financial institutions 
since the crisis began still exceeds the amount of new capital raised (Figure 9). And, there 
remains uncertainty about the level of losses still to be crystallised, or still to be generated as 
a result of the recession. Financial institutions and authorities face the formidable challenge 
of establishing credible estimates of the losses still to be borne and the exposures still to be 
covered, and then finding the new capital to get the financial system back on its feet.  
Figure 9. Cumulative credit losses by region and total new capital raised 
 Source: Bloomberg 
Meanwhile,  the  massive  fall  in  household  wealth  since  2007,  with  largely  unchanged 
household debt, means that the financial outlook for households across the developed world 
(especially  those  who  “leveraged  up”  in  the  boom  phase)  is  now  much  less  healthy, 
especially in view of the increased threat of unemployment and the reduced fiscal strength of 
government.  Households  are  likely  to  respond  to  this  in  two  ways  –  first,  by  cutting  back 
consumption  and  investment  and  increasing  savings;  second,  by  selling  assets  to  pay  off 
liabilities.  
Both processes will keep downward pressure on asset prices and drag on economic activity 
for many years, probably beyond the return of normal financial market conditions. Much more 
cheap credit than was sustainable was taken up over many years, not only by the Northern 
Hemisphere financial sector and household sector but also certain elements of the corporate 
sector (the US auto industry, for example). In the early part of the process, the impairment of 
the financial system will actually force the household and corporate sectors to reduce debt, 
12 
 BIS Review 11/2009
as  the  opportunities  for  leveraged  investment  in  housing  and  other  assets  will  be  much 
reduced. This increased propensity to save may blunt the impact one might otherwise expect 
from fiscal and monetary policy stimulus.  
Finally,  external  surplus-running  emerging  markets,  especially  in  Asia,  will  have  strategic 
consumption and investment choices to make. Their broad development strategy in the early 
to  mid-2000s  was  to  grow  national  income  by  exporting  cheap  consumer  goods  to 
developed,  largely  deficit-running,  economies.  This  strategy  will  now  be  less  viable  given 
household  and  national  financial  retrenchment,  and  pressure  on  exchange  rates  to  fall  to 
assist in the reduction of imbalances, in the West. Asian governments will need to generate 
large increases in consumption and domestic investment demand, to replace the gap left by 
exports, if they are to continue growing at the high rates needed to meet their national and 
social development objectives.  
The net financial flow from East to West that characterised the middle part of this decade will 
as a consequence need to fall somewhat, even if it doesn’t reverse. As the large emerging 
markets  such  as  China  and  India  continue  to  develop  amid  these  large  shifts  in  global 
economic and financial currents, the reduced dependence of the world on consumption and 
investment in the West and consequent shift of political power will accelerate.  
New Zealand’s position 
New  Zealand,  like  the  rest  of  the  Asia-Pacific,  has  thus  far  held  up  better  than  many 
developed  economies.  The  global  financial  crisis  hit  the  Northern  Hemisphere  first,  and 
hardest.  The  transmission  of  the  shock  to  us  through  Asia  and  Australia  –  which  together 
account for half our trade in goods – has been slower than the transmission from the US to 
Europe.  However,  we  haven’t  escaped  unscathed  either  financially  or  economically.  New 
Zealand  investors  have  lost  money.  Sectors  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  exposed  to 
external demand have weakened sharply.  
A  few  factors  count  in  New  Zealand’s  favour.  The  parts  of  the  US  and  European  capital 
markets that have been most damaged are investment banking, hedge funds, private equity, 
sovereign  wealth  funds,  and  stock,  bond  and  derivatives  markets.  New  Zealand’s  direct 
exposure to these parts of the international capital markets, and to complex derivatives or 
structured credit products, is very light. Our banking system is well-capitalised, vanilla, and 
mortgage lending is generally on good credit quality. The large Australian banking groups, of 
which  the  major  New  Zealand  banks  are  a  part,  are  now  among  the  largest  and  highest-
credit-quality banks in the world. 
Also,  our  established  track  record  for  transparency  in  our  regulatory  institutions,  sound 
management of the public accounts, and forward-looking monetary policy are well-regarded 
internationally. Through this episode, we have attracted relatively little adverse attention in 
financial markets. 
Finally, New Zealand’s freely floating exchange rate is an effective buffer against the current, 
internationally  sourced,  shock.  The  downturn  in  international  commodity  prices,  as  well  as 
international  investor  risk  aversion  and  the  contraction  of  liquidity  in  the  global  financial 
system, have led the value of the New Zealand dollar to fall against all the major currencies 
(Figure 10). This has been especially the case against the Japanese yen – the currency of a 
country that typically runs a current account surplus, unlike the others in the New Zealand 
TWI.  Not  only  does  depreciation  cushion  the  incomes  of  sectors  exporting  goods  and 
services  priced  in  foreign  currency,  it  also  acts  powerfully  and  in  the  right  direction  to 
encourage the reduction of national debt and re-balancing of sectoral demand that is needed 
in New Zealand, as a deficit-running country. As a small, open economy with flexible product 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 13
and labour markets, we should be better positioned than many others to re-orient production 
and income generation in response. 
Figure 10. New Zealand TWI4
 Source: RBNZ. 
However,  there  are  also  some  negative  features  about  New  Zealand’s  situation.  Our 
exposure  to  the  global  commodities  trade  is  particularly  evident  now,  with  the  commodity 
price  volatility  currently.  The  overall  impact  on  New  Zealand  depends  on  the  balance 
between  imported  (oil)  and  exported  (agricultural)  commodity  prices.  Usually  commodity 
price rises and falls see the New Zealand terms of trade rise and fall more or less in concert, 
because  of the  greater proportion  of  commodities  on  the  export  side  than  the  import  side. 
This  is  the pattern  we are  seeing currently,  with  the  terms  of  trade  having  fallen about  10 
percent so far since early 2008.  
With  open  capital  borders,  defensive  monetary  or  financial  system  policy  actions  taken  by 
bigger  economies  can  cause  collateral  damage  to  smaller  ones.  Guarantees  of  financial 
institution liabilities, or provision of official credit facilities, inevitably have to have boundaries, 
to  limit  the  risk  of  the  sovereign  granting  the  guarantee  or  credit.  But  in  an  environment 
where  depositors  and  investors  are  panicky,  and  the  appetite  or  capacity  to  take  risk  is 
limited,  the  boundary  will  inevitably  generate  a  rush  of  funds  to  the  safe  side,  putting 
pressure  on  governments,  even  in  countries  with  safe  financial  systems,  to  “match”  the 
actions taken abroad. We saw this illustrated clearly in October last year with the extension 
of government guarantees of bank liabilities overseas.  
                                                 
4   The TWI shown in this Figure is a 50:50 trade-to-GDP weighted TWI calculated from 1990 onwards. It is the 
same as the official TWI after 1999, but differs from the official TWI before 1999 because simple bilateral trade 
weights were used in the official TWI at that time. The analytical measure is preferred to the official measure 
for analytical purposes, because it is calculated consistently over history. 
14 
 BIS Review 11/2009
Finally, even though our banking system is vanilla in terms of credit risk, it has vulnerabilities 
resulting from the need to fund domestic lending activities by offshore borrowing. As is well 
known, New Zealand has been running a large external deficit for some time, mirrored by a 
severe household savings imbalance. This imbalance grew even larger during the credit and 
house price boom. The banks have been funding this shortfall of domestic savings mostly 
with  short-term  debt  (“commercial  paper”)  issues,  which  need  to  be  renewed  every  few 
months. The increase in New Zealand’s external vulnerability was the reason for Standard 
and  Poor’s  placing  New  Zealand’s  foreign  currency  credit  rating  on  “negative  outlook”, 
increasing the focus on the economy’s adjustment to the imbalances and the role of fiscal 
policy in supporting it.  
The banks hedge most of the foreign exchange risk on their offshore liabilities, so we do not 
face  the  risk  of  dangerous  escalation  of  the  burden  of  foreign-currency  liabilities  if  the 
exchange rate falls, as often happens in emerging market crises. However, the debt still does 
have  to  be  renewed.  Part  of  the  price  of  that  renewal,  when  offshore  investors  are  both 
skittish and there is little cash around, is that the terms must become more attractive to the 
investors,  through  some  combination  of  a  lower  exchange  rate  and  higher  premiums  on 
credit to New Zealand.  
The  New  Zealand  economy  will  be  trading  through  a  world  economic  and  financial 
environment that will be extremely weak for most or all of this year, at least. The impact of 
the  sudden  worsening  of  international  economic  conditions  and  substantial  monetary 
stimulus  late  last  year  will  not  become  clear  for  some  quarters.  The  large  fiscal  stimulus 
packages announced in our major trading partners do not take effect until later in the year, 
with  lags  from  there  until  spending  responds.  In  the  near  term,  there  will  be  considerable 
downward  pressure  on  the  domestic  downturn  already  well  underway,  with  weakness  in 
household expenditure, the export sector and activity likely to persist through the year.  
Coping at the business and household level 
In light of this weakness and uncertainty about what the year holds, New Zealand businesses 
and  households  are  understandably  behaving  cautiously.  They  are  reducing  expenses, 
increasing savings and otherwise shoring up balance sheets. The availability of government-
guaranteed savings vehicles at relatively attractive interest rates, certainly compared to those 
elsewhere, is probably encouraging this behaviour. However, the shutters on spending have 
not  come  down  completely.  Overall,  we  are  seeing  a  broadly  rational  response  to  the 
difficulties we face.  
The massive financial downdrafts hitting the economy this year will force a mix of pricing and 
wage-setting restraint, moderated employment plans, and higher hurdles for new investment. 
Within  this,  the  precise  coping  strategies  taken  will  vary  across  the  economy’s  sectors, 
depending on the particular shape of domestic and external forces playing out in each.  
None of this will be easy. Business and labour will be challenged by the need to be realistic 
about the painful adjustment ahead, without undermining our collective ability to respond to 
the recovery in demand when it arrives. The more that the domestically-generated part of the 
economy’s cost structure can be kept under control, the less pressure there will be for the 
burden to show up in reduced employment and output. 
Banks  also  will  need  to  play  their  part.  Lending  policies  have  turned  conservative  and 
cautious, which is normal banking behaviour in risky times. However, just as the banks have 
done very well in New Zealand in good times, so they have a key role to play in tough times. 
They are a critical part of the mechanism by which monetary policy stimulus gets through to 
the wider economy. While continuing to manage their risk prudently, the banks’ challenge will 
be  to  continue  lending  on  sound  business  proposals,  to  keep  working  to  develop  stable 
sources  of  funding  from  depositors  and  the  financial  markets,  and  to  keep  passing  on  to 
lending rates the cuts in wholesale interest rates.  
BIS Review 11/2009 
 15
rates 
interest 
through 
transmission  mechanism 
What if things get worse? 
What if things get markedly worse? For the Reserve Bank at least, as for other New Zealand 
authorities and our colleagues abroad, the first priority for the coming year will be to remain 
ready to respond. Further adverse news is likely and further remedial interventions may well 
be necessary.  
Lest there be any doubt, the tool box is by no means empty. We have done a lot already and 
it will take some time for these actions to have their full effects, but we are entering the year 
well-positioned on the monetary policy, liquidity management and prudential policy fronts.  
If  we  need  to,  there  is  still  room  for  us  to  cut  the  OCR  further  in  response  to  adverse 
economic  developments.  The  Policy  Targets  Agreement  provides  ample  scope  to  respond 
consistent with our inflation target. Although there remain local financial market frictions, the 
conventional  monetary 
is  working 
adequately.  We  remain  confident  that  we  will  be  able  to  keep  future  inflation  tracking 
satisfactorily, with inflation expectations anchored, and both well clear of the danger zone of 
deflation.  
This contrasts with the position of, say, the US and the UK, where official interest rates have 
been  cut  to  levels  close  to  zero,  and  where  the  capacity  of  banks  to  lend  is  seriously 
constrained. Japan, of course, has had several recent years of experience in this position. 
Japan still has very low inflation and the difficult challenge of stimulating the economy with 
little means of imparting conventional monetary stimulus. These authorities are now pursuing 
other means of reducing the cost of borrowing in the economy. It is possible we may learn 
from them new techniques to manage the range of effective short and longer-term interest 
rates.  
The  depth  and  scalability  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  money  market  operations  and  liquidity 
facilities have served and positioned us well through the current episode.  
The  expanded  facilities  –  especially  the  acceptance  of  residential  mortgage-backed 
securities as collateral and the Term Auction Facility – give us substantial capacity to scale 
up the volume of cash in the system if required.  
Prudential policy will continue to put priority on ensuring that banks adequately manage the 
risks  associated  with  rolling  over  their  debt  funding.  Consultation  on  a  proposed  new 
prudential regime for the management of liquidity risk by registered banks closed at the end 
of  last  year,  and  the  Reserve  Bank  aims  to  finalise  the  new  policy  in  this  area  by  around 
March 2009. We expect the finalised policy to reinforce incentives for banks to lengthen the 
maturity  of  their  funding,  and  hence  reduce  their  future  vulnerability  to  short-term  funding 
risks. We will be further advancing our work programme with our Australian counterparts on 
improving regulation and supervision of banks with trans-Tasman operations.  
Finally,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  not  the  only  agency  with  a  role  to  play  in  stabilising  the 
economy. Fiscal policy is sharing some of the burden of the shock by stimulating spending, 
and New Zealand’s fiscal position is stronger than that in many other countries. Regulatory 
policy has the potential to address identifiable problems in a targeted way, though of course 
longer-term structural adjustments and re-allocations of resources need to be allowed to take 
place.  
Conclusions 
4.  
Last year might have seemed like a blizzard of outlandish news, large-scale economic and 
financial  policy  interventions,  and  confusing  messages.  We  are  in  the  middle  of  a  major 
international shock, currently developing from financial turbulence into economic recession.  
Our banking system remains well-capitalised. Widespread credit problems have not suddenly 
appeared.  However,  we  have  not  escaped  the  impact  of  the  massive  tightening  in  credit 
16 
 BIS Review 11/2009
conditions internationally. In our case, the tightening has exposed vulnerabilities associated 
with  household  and  external  indebtedness.  The  global  recession  is  also  now  affecting  us 
through trade channels and a slump in world commodity prices. 
The remedial efforts we have taken in New Zealand have probably been about as successful 
as  might  be  expected.  We  eased  monetary  policy  substantially  and  very  rapidly.  Inflation 
remains under control, following the largest international commodity and asset price surge for 
decades. We greatly expanded our liquidity facilities. Cash continues to circulate, in the face 
of enormous pressure to hoard it.  
We  continue  to  develop  our  monetary  policy,  liquidity  management  and  prudential  policy 
tools and to consider how the mix of tools might best be applied. This includes working with 
other government agencies to promote overall stability. Sometimes our tools can be treated 
independently, sometimes they work together, and sometimes they work against each other, 
necessitating judgement about the right balance.  
Issues remain. This episode has shown that apparently isolated risks can suddenly correlate, 
threatening  the  stability  of  the  system.  Central  bank  liquidity  operations  and  the  impact  of 
monetary policy will be blunted if credit markets do not work and financial institutions cannot 
lend. Scarce liquidity makes banks’ short-term funding vulnerabilities painfully evident. Debt 
loads that looked sustainable during good times are less sustainable under crisis conditions. 
In  the  medium  term,  prices  and  quantities  will adjust  to  correct  imbalances.  However,  that 
process  can  be  very  rocky  for  exposed  players,  with  real  economic  costs.  Perhaps  the 
foremost  lesson  of  the  Depression  experience  is  that  a  sequence  of  setbacks  should  be 
anticipated.  
In  responding  to  the  urgency  of  cyclical  stabilisation,  we  need  to  recognise  the  underlying 
large structural adjustments underway. The debt build-up will take years to prune back down 
to sustainable and prudent levels.  
It is by no means clear how the international financial system will be organised in the future. 
The  institutions  and  tools  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision  may  well  undergo  far-
reaching change. We need to understand better how financial risks can reinforce each other 
and harm the macro-economy. 
Households, firms and banks will naturally be very cautious during this process. However, we 
should also be watchful for the opportunities, and mindful of the risks of defeatism. Within the 
Western  world,  New  Zealand’s  economy  and  financial  system  are  relatively  well-placed  to 
weather the adjustment. Our challenge will be to remain well-positioned to take advantage of 
the  economic  recovery  when  it  arrives  –  possibly  suddenly  and  strongly,  which  has  been 
New  Zealand’s  experience  in  the  past.  Households  and  firms  should  not  pull  down  the 
shutters, and banks should continue to lend on sound business propositions.  
References 
Baker,  D  and  Rosnick,  D  (2008)  The  impact  of  the  housing  crash  on  family  wealth,  July, 
Center for Economic and Policy Research. Downloaded at www.cepr.net 
Nield,  I  (2008)  “Evolution  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  liquidity  facilities”,  Reserve  Bank  Bulletin, 
71(4), pp. 5-17. 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 17
