Mary C Nkosi: Promoting the development and regulation of capital 
markets in Malawi 
Speech by Mrs Mary C Nkosi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the official 
launch of African Alliance, Blantyre, 14 January 2009. 
 The Chairman of Malawi Stock Exchange; 
Board Members of African Alliance; 
Chief Executive Officer of African Alliance Malawi & officials from African Alliance Group; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is an honour to be at the official launch of African Alliance Securities Ltd. As you are all 
aware,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  is  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  authority  and  is 
therefore  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  promoting  the  development  and  regulation  of 
capital  markets,  amongst  others.  This  is  done  through  exercising  entry  control,  on-going 
supervision, policy development, enhancing competition and market development, consumer 
education and protection, and exit administration. In this connection therefore, we are very 
pleased to be here to witness the birth of a new baby (the media often refers to such new 
babies as “new kid on the block”). For the benefit of the audience, African Alliance Malawi 
was licensed in September 2008. 
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, we have observed in the recent times the favourable 
macroeconomic condition in the country and this has been instrumental in spearheading the 
expansion of capital market operations. The financial market has experienced rapid growth of 
market  intermediary  businesses  and  public  participation  witnessed  by  oversubscriptions 
during  initial  public  offerings  (IPO).  The  Bank  has  received  a  number  of  enquiries  and 
applications  geared  towards  carrying  out  brokerage,  asset  management  and  advisory 
services  besides  banking.  The  recent  developments  are  an  indication  of  potential  and 
existing resources that need to be channelled from surplus units to deficit units and this is 
therefore an opportunity and also a challenge to all intermediary market players to facilitate 
the movement of these funds.  
Mr  Chairman,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  on  the  supervisory  side,  the  Reserve  Bank  shall 
continue to carry out its responsibilities to achieve its mission of ensuring the existence of a 
fair,  safe,  sound  and  stable  non-bank  financial  services  industry  in  Malawi  in  line  with 
international supervisory standards. Critical in this regard and in order to protect investors, 
the Bank shall only allow eligible market players to operate on the market. It is expected that 
the  players  will  conduct  themselves  in  line  with  expected  professional  standards  and 
conduct.  I  want  to  assure  you  that  the  Reserve  Bank  will  perform  its  work  with 
professionalism,  integrity,  impartiality  and  in  a  friendly  and  cooperative  manner  without 
compromising  its  authority  or  mandate.  Our  core  strategic  objectives  which  represent 
essential elements of our mission shall continue to evolve around developing capital markets 
and  enhancing  stakeholder  confidence;  providing  a  quality,  professional  supervisory  and 
regulatory service; ensuring the existence of an all inclusive and regulated financial sector; 
and fostering a competitive, cost effective environment in the financial industry. The aim is to 
safeguard the financial sector and facilitate economic development through broadening and 
deepening of the capital market. 
In order to enhance the regulation and supervision of capital markets in line with international 
developments and standards, the Reserve Bank initiated the formulation of a new legislation, 
the draft Securities Bill. The Bill intends to repeal the Capital Market Development Act No 17 
of 1990 (CMDA) which is considered to be less comprehensive in terms of coverage. The Bill 
is  currently  awaiting  enactment  by  Parliament.  These  legislative  reforms  including  the 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 1
“Retirement  Funds  Bill”  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  new  and  extra  resources  in  the 
securities market that will require your expertise to tap them on. 
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, the coming in of an additional player onto the market 
will  bring  competition,  increase  trading  activity  and  improve  price  discovery  which  is  an 
important function of an organized stock market. African Alliance Securities Ltd brings with 
them a dimension of “research” on the listed companies, which appears to be one of their 
fundamental skills, which has been erratic on the market. Thus we believe that credible and 
high quality research will keep investors more informed about the opportunities on the stock 
market and therefore stimulate well informed trading activity. We expect healthy competition 
whose benefits will trickle down to the investors and consumers of financial services. 
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, before I end my speech, let me take this opportunity to 
express a concern. Last year (2008), the Reserve Bank received reports of fraud relating to 
share certificates allegedly perpetrated by senior members of the brokerage houses. Clearly, 
the  reports  tarnished  the  image  of  the  market.  While  the  market  did  not  suffer  severe 
damage, we wish to advise all players to ensure that there are internal controls within your 
institutions, to adhere to best corporate governance standards and to ensure that procedures 
are  followed  when  handling  clients’  funds.  Let  me  appeal  to  African  Alliance  and  all  other 
market professionals to continually invest in their employees to ensure high standards in the 
market. Lastly, but not least, I wish to advise all capital market professionals to timely comply 
with the requirements of the Capital Market Development Act and its subsidiary legislation. 
Mr  Chairman,  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  these  few  remarks,  I  wish  to  officially  welcome 
African Alliance Malawi to the Malawi Capital market and wish them the best of success. 
I thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2009
