Daniel K Tarullo: Regulatory restructuring 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 23 July 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman  Dodd,  Ranking  Member  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate the opportunity to discuss how to improve the U.S. financial regulatory system so 
as  to  contain  systemic  risk  and  to  address  the  related  problem  of  too-big-to-fail  financial 
institutions. Experience over the past two years clearly demonstrates that the United States 
needs a comprehensive strategy to help prevent financial crises and to mitigate the effects of 
crises that may occur.  
The roots of this crisis lie in part in the fact that regulatory powers and capacities lagged the 
increasingly tight integration of conventional lending activities with the issuance, trading, and 
financing  of  securities.  This  crisis  did  not  begin  with  depositor  runs  on  banks,  but  with 
investor  runs  on  firms  that  financed  their  holdings  of  securities  in  the  wholesale  money 
markets.  An  effective  agenda  for  containing  systemic  risk  thus  requires  adjustments  by  all 
our  financial  regulatory  agencies  under  existing  authorities.  It  also  invites  action  by  the 
Congress to fill existing gaps in regulation, remove impediments to consolidated oversight of 
complex  institutions,  and  provide  the  instruments  necessary  to  cope  with  serious  financial 
problems that do arise. 
In keeping with the Committee's interest today in a systemic risk agenda, I will identify some 
of  the  key  administrative  and  legislative  elements  that  should  be  a  part  of  that  agenda. 
Ensuring  that  all  systemically  important  financial  institutions  are  subject  to  effective 
consolidated  supervision  is  a  critical  first  step.  Second,  a  more  macroprudential  outlook  – 
that is, one that takes into account the safety and soundness of the financial system as a 
whole, as well as individual institutions – needs to be incorporated into the supervision and 
regulation  of  these  firms  and  financial  institutions  more  generally.  Third,  better  and  more 
formal mechanisms should be established to help identify, monitor, and address potential or 
emerging systemic risks across the financial system as a whole, including gaps in regulatory 
or  supervisory  coverage 
that  could  present  systemic  risks.  A  council  with  broad 
representation  across  agencies  and  departments  concerned  with  financial  supervision  and 
regulation  is  one  approach  to  this  goal.  Fourth,  a  new  resolution  process  for  systemically 
important nonbank financial firms should be created that would allow the government to wind 
down  a  troubled  systemically  important  firm  in  an  orderly  manner.  Fifth,  all  systemically 
important  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  should  be  subject  to  consistent 
and robust oversight and prudential standards.   
The role of the Federal Reserve in a reoriented financial regulatory system derives, in our 
view, directly from its position as the nation's central bank. Financial stability is integral to the 
achievement of maximum employment and price stability, the dual mandate that Congress 
has  conferred  on  the  Federal  Reserve  as  its  objectives  in the  conduct  of  monetary  policy. 
Indeed, there are some important synergies between systemic risk regulation and monetary 
policy,  as  insights  garnered  from  each  of  those  functions  informs  the  performance  of  the 
other.  Close  familiarity  with  private  credit  relationships,  particularly  among  the  largest 
financial institutions and through critical payment and settlement systems, makes monetary 
policy makers better able to anticipate how their actions will affect the economy. Conversely, 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 1
the  substantial  economic  analysis  that  accompanies  monetary  policy  decisions  can  reveal 
potential vulnerabilities of financial institutions. 
While the improvements in the financial regulatory framework outlined above would involve 
some expansion of Federal Reserve responsibilities, that expansion would be an incremental 
and  natural  extension  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  existing  supervisory  and  regulatory 
responsibilities, reflecting the important relationship between financial stability and the roles 
of a central bank. An effective and comprehensive agenda for addressing systemic risk will 
also  require  new  responsibilities for  other  federal  agencies  and  departments,  including  the 
Treasury,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  Commodity  Futures  Trading 
Commission (CFTC), and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 
Consolidated supervision of systemically important financial institutions 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  risks  to  the  financial  system  can 
arise not only in the banking sector, but also from the activities of other financial firms – such 
as  investment  banks  or  insurance organizations  –  that  traditionally  have  not  been  subject, 
either by law or in practice, to the type of regulation and consolidated supervision applicable 
to bank holding companies. While effective consolidated supervision of potentially systemic 
firms is not, by itself, sufficient to foster financial stability, it certainly is a necessary condition. 
The Administration's recent proposal for strengthening the financial system would subject all 
systemically important financial institutions to the same framework for prudential supervision 
on  the  same  consolidated  or  group-wide  basis  that  currently  applies  to  bank  holding 
companies. In doing so, it would also prevent systemically important firms that have become 
bank holding companies during the crisis from reversing this change and escaping prudential 
supervision in calmer financial times. While this proposal is an important piece of an agenda 
to  contain  systemic  risk  and  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  it  would  not  actually  entail  a 
significant expansion of the Federal Reserve's mandate. 
The proposal would entail two tasks – first identifying, and then effectively supervising, these 
systemically important institutions. As to supervision, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 
(BHCA) designates the Federal Reserve as the consolidated supervisor of all bank holding 
companies.  That act provides the Federal Reserve a range of tools to understand, monitor 
and, when appropriate, restrain the risks associated with an organization's consolidated or 
group-wide  activities.  Under  this  framework,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  the  authority  to 
establish consolidated capital requirements for bank holding companies. In addition, subject 
to certain limits I will discuss later, the act permits the Federal Reserve to obtain reports from 
and  conduct  examinations  of  a  bank  holding  company  and  any  of  its  subsidiaries.  It  also 
grants authority to require the organization or its subsidiaries to alter their risk-management 
practices or take other actions to address risks that threaten the safety and soundness of the 
organization. 
Under  the  BHCA,  the  Federal  Reserve  already  supervises  some  of  the  largest  and  most 
complex financial institutions in the world. In the course of the financial crisis, several large 
financial  firms  that  previously  were  not  subject  to  mandatory  consolidated  supervision  – 
including Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and American Express – became bank holding 
companies, in part to assure market participants that they were subject to robust prudential 
supervision on a consolidated basis. While the number of additional financial institutions that 
would be subject to supervision under the Administration's approach would of course depend 
on  standards  or  guidelines  adopted  by  the  Congress,  the  criteria  offered  by  the 
Administration suggest to us that the initial number of newly regulated firms would probably 
be  relatively  limited.  One  important  feature  of  this  approach  is  that  it  provides  ongoing 
authority to identify and supervise other firms that may become systemically important in the 
future, whether through organic growth or the migration of activities from regulated entities. 
Determining precisely which firms would meet these criteria will require considerable analysis 
of  the  linkages  between  firms  and  markets,  drawing  as  much  or  more  on  economic  and 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2009
financial  analysis  as  on  bank  supervisory  expertise.  Financial  institutions  are  systemically 
important if  the failure of the firm to meet its obligations to creditors and customers would 
have significant adverse consequences for the financial system and the broader economy. At 
any point in time, the systemic importance of an individual firm depends on a wide range of 
factors. Obviously, the consequences of a firm's failure are more likely to be severe if the firm 
is large, taking account of both its on- and off-balance sheet activities.  But size is far from 
the only relevant consideration. The impact of a firm's financial distress depends also on the 
degree to which it is interconnected, either receiving funding from, or providing funding to, 
other  potentially  systemically  important  firms,  as  well  as  on  whether  it  performs  crucial 
services that cannot easily or quickly be executed by other financial institutions.  In addition, 
the impact varies over time: the more fragile the overall financial backdrop and the condition 
of  other  financial  institutions,  the  more  likely  a  given  firm  is  to  be  judged  systemically 
important. If the ability of the financial system to absorb adverse shocks is low, the threshold 
for  systemic  importance  will  more  easily  be  reached.  Judging  whether  a  financial  firm  is 
systemically important is thus not a straightforward task, especially because a determination 
must  be  based  on  an  assessment  of  whether  the  firm's  failure  would  likely  have  systemic 
effects during a future stress event, the precise parameters of which cannot be fully known. 
For supervision of firms identified as systemically important to be effective, we will need to 
build on lessons learned from the current crisis and on changes we are already undertaking 
in light of the broader range of financial firms that have come under our supervision in the 
last  year.  In  October,  we  issued  new  consolidated  supervision  guidance  for  bank  holding 
companies that provides for supervisory objectives and actions to be calibrated more directly 
to  the  systemic  significance  of  individual  institutions  and  bolsters  supervisory  expectations 
with  respect  to  the  corporate  governance,  risk  management,  and  internal  controls  of  the 
largest,  most  complex  organizations.1  We  are  also  adapting  our  internal  organization  of 
supervisory  activities  to  take  better  advantage  of  the  information  and  insight  that  the 
economic  and  financial  analytic  capacities  of  the  Federal  Reserve  can  bring  to  bear  in 
financial regulation. 
The recently completed Supervisory Capital Assessment Process (SCAP) reflects some of 
these  changes  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  system  for  prudential  supervision  of  the  largest 
banking  organizations.   This  unprecedented  process  specifically  incorporated  forward-
looking, cross-firm, and aggregate analyses of the 19 largest bank holding companies, which 
together control a majority of the assets and loans within the financial system. Importantly, 
supervisors  in  the  SCAP  defined  a  uniform  set  of  parameters  to  apply  to  each  firm  being 
evaluated, which allowed us to evaluate on a consistent basis the expected performance of 
the  firms,  drawing  on  individual  firm  information  and  independently  estimated  outcomes 
using  supervisory  models.  Drawing  on  this  experience,  we  will  conduct  horizontal 
examinations  on  a  periodic  basis  to  assess  key  operations,  risks,  and  risk-management 
activities of large institutions.  
We  also  plan  to  create  a  quantitative  surveillance  program  for  large,  complex  financial 
organizations that will use supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, and market-
based  indicators  to  identify  developing  strains  and  imbalances  that  may  affect  multiple 
institutions,  as  well  as  emerging  risks  to  specific  firms.  Periodic  scenario  analyses  across 
large firms will enhance our understanding of the potential impact of adverse changes in the 
operating environment on individual firms and on the system as a whole. This work will be 
performed by a multi-disciplinary group composed of our economic and market researchers, 
supervisors, market operations specialists, and accounting and legal experts. This program 
                                                 
1   See Supervision and Regulation Letter 08-9, "Consolidated Supervision of Bank Holding Companies and 
the  Combined  U.S.  Operations  of  Foreign  Banking  Organizations,"  and  the  associated  interagency 
guidance.  
BIS Review 92/2009 
 3
will  be  distinct  from  the  activities  of  on-site  examination  teams  so  as  to  provide  an 
independent supervisory perspective, as well as to complement the work of those teams. 
To  be  fully  effective,  consolidated  supervisors  must  have  clear  authority  to  monitor  and 
address safety and soundness concerns and systemic risks in all parts of an organization, 
working  in  coordination  with  other  supervisors  wherever  possible.  As  the  crisis  has 
demonstrated,  the  assessment  of  nonbank  activities  is  essential  to  understanding  the 
linkages  between  depository  and  nondepository  subsidiaries  and  the  risk-profile  of  the 
organization as a whole. The Administration's proposal would make useful modifications to 
the provisions added to the law in 1999 that limit the ability of the Federal Reserve to monitor 
and address risks within an organization and its subsidiaries on a group-wide basis.2  
A macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation 
The  existing  framework  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  banking  organizations  is 
focused primarily on the safety and soundness of individual organizations, particularly their 
insured depository institutions. As the Administration's proposal recognizes, the resiliency of 
the  financial  system  could  be  improved  by  incorporating  a  more  explicit  macroprudential 
approach  to  supervision  and  regulation.  A  macroprudential  outlook,  which  considers 
interlinkages  and  interdependencies  among  firms  and  markets  that  could  threaten  the 
financial  system  in  a  crisis,  complements  the  current  microprudential  orientation  of  bank 
supervision and regulation.  
Indeed,  a  more  macroprudential  focus  is  essential  in  light  of  the  potential  for  explicit 
regulatory  identification  of  systemically  important  firms  to  exacerbate  the  "too  big  to  fail" 
problem.   Unless  countervailing  steps  are  taken,  the  belief  by  market  participants  that  a 
particular  firm  is  too  big  to  fail,  and  that  shareholders  and  creditors  of  the  firm  may  be 
partially or fully protected from the consequences of a failure, has many undesirable effects. 
It materially weakens the incentive of shareholders and creditors of the firm to restrain the 
firm's risk-taking, provides incentives for financial firms to become very large in order to be 
perceived as too big to fail, and creates an unlevel competitive playing field with smaller firms 
that may not be regarded as having implicit government support. 
Creation  of  a  mechanism  for  the  orderly  resolution  of  systemically  important  nonbank 
financial  firms,  which  I  will  discuss  later,  should  help  remediate  this  problem.  In  addition, 
capital,  liquidity,  and  risk-management  requirements  for  systemically  important  firms  will 
need  to  be  strengthened  to  help  counteract  moral  hazard  effects,  as  well  as  the  greater 
potential risks these institutions pose to the financial system and to the economy. We believe 
that the agency responsible for supervision of these institutions should have the authority to 
adopt  and  apply  such  requirements,  and  thus  have  clear  accountability  for  their  efficacy. 
Optimally,  these  requirements  should  be  calibrated  based  on  the  relative  systemic 
importance  of  the  institution,  a  different  measure  than  a  firm's  direct  credit  and  other  risk 
exposures as calculated in traditional capital or liquidity regulation. 
It may also be beneficial for supervisors to require that systemically important firms maintain 
specific  forms  of  capital  so  as  to  increase  their  ability  to  absorb  losses  outside  of  a 
bankruptcy  or  formal  resolution  procedure.  Such  capital  could  be  in  contingent  form, 
converting 
to  mitigate  systemic  risk.  A 
macroprudential  approach  also  should  be  reflected  in  regulatory  capital  standards  more 
to  common  equity  only  when  necessary 
                                                 
2   The  Administration's  proposal  also  would  close  the  loophole  in  current  law  that  allowed  certain  investment 
banks, as well as other financial and nonfinancial firms, to acquire control of a federally insured industrial loan 
company (ILC) while avoiding the prudential framework that Congress established for the corporate owners of 
other full-service insured banks.  The Board has for many years supported such a change. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2009
generally, so that banks are required to increase their capital levels in good times in order to 
create a buffer that can be drawn down as economic and financial conditions deteriorate. 
The development and implementation of capital standards for systemically important firms is 
but one of many elements of an effective macroprudential approach to financial regulation.  
Direct and indirect exposures among systemically important firms are an obvious source of 
interdependency and potential systemic risk. Direct credit exposures may arise from lending, 
loan  commitments,  guarantees,  or  derivative  counterparty  relationships  among  institutions. 
Indirect exposures may arise through exposures to a common risk factor, such as the real 
estate  market,  that  could  stress  the  system  by  causing  losses  to  many  firms  at  the  same 
time, through common dependence on potentially unstable sources of short-term funding, or 
through common participation in payment, clearing, or settlement systems.  
While large, correlated exposures have always been an important source of risk and an area 
of  focus  for  supervisors,  macroprudential  supervision  requires  special  attention  to  the 
interdependencies  among  systemically  important  firms  that  arise  from common  exposures. 
Similarly,  there  must  be  monitoring  of  exposures  that  could  grow  significantly  in  times  of 
system-wide financial stress, such as those arising from OTC derivatives or the sponsorship 
of off-balance-sheet financing conduits funded by short-term liabilities that are susceptible to 
runs.  One  tool  that  would  be  useful  in  identifying  such  exposures  would  be  the  cross-firm 
horizontal  reviews  that  I  discussed  earlier,  enhanced  to  focus  on  the  collective  effects  of 
market stresses. 
The Federal Reserve also would expect to carefully monitor and address, either individually 
or in conjunction with other supervisors and regulators, the potential for additional spillover 
effects.  Spillovers may occur not only due to exposures currently on a firm's books, but also 
as  a  result  of  reactions  to  stress  elsewhere  in  the  system,  including  at  other  systemically 
important firms or in key markets. For example, the failure of one firm may lead to deposit or 
liability  runs  at  other  firms  that  are  seen  by  investors  as  similarly  situated  or  that  have 
exposures to such firms. In the recent financial crisis, exactly this sort of spillover resulted 
from the failure of Lehman Brothers, which led to heightened pressures on other investment 
banks. One tool that could be helpful in evaluating spillover risks would be multiple-firm or 
system-level stress tests focused particularly on such risks. However, this type of test would 
greatly  exceed  the  SCAP  in  operational  complexity;  thus,  properly  developing  and 
implementing such a test would be a substantial challenge. 
Potential role of a council 
The  breadth  and  heterogeneity  of  the  U.S.  financial  system  have  been  great  economic 
strengths of our country. However, these same characteristics mean that common exposures 
or practices across a wide range of financial markets and financial institutions may over time 
pose risks to financial stability, but may be difficult to identify in their early stages. Moreover, 
addressing the pervasive problem of pro-cyclicality in the financial system will require efforts 
across financial sectors. To help address these issues, the Administration has proposed the 
establishment of a Financial Services Oversight Council composed of the Treasury and all of 
the federal financial supervisory and regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve. 
The  Board  sees  substantial  merit 
to  conduct 
macroprudential analysis and coordinate oversight of the financial system as a whole. The 
perspective  of,  and  information  from,  supervisors  on  such  a  council  with  different  primary 
responsibilities would be helpful in identifying and monitoring emerging systemic risks across 
the full range of financial institutions and markets. A council could be charged with identifying 
emerging  sources  of  systemic  risk,  including:  large  and  rising  exposures  across  firms  and 
markets;  emerging  trends  in  leverage  or  activities  that  could  result  in  increased  systemic 
fragility;  possible  misalignments  in  asset  markets;  potential  sources  of  spillovers  between 
financial firms or between firms and markets that could propagate, or even magnify, financial 
shocks; and new markets, practices, products, or institutions that may fall through the gaps in 
the  establishment  of  a  council 
in 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 5
regulatory  coverage  and  become  threats  to  systemic  stability.  In  addition,  a  council  could 
play  a  useful  role  in  coordinating  responses  by  member  agencies  to  mitigate  emerging 
systemic  risks  identified  by  the  council,  and  by  helping  coordinate  actions  to  address 
procylicality in capital regulations, accounting standards (particularly with regard to reserves), 
deposit insurance premiums, and other supervisory and regulatory practices. In light of these 
responsibilities  and  its  broad  membership,  a  council  also  would  be  a  useful  forum  for 
identifying  financial  firms  that  are  at  the  cusp  of  being  systemically  important  and,  when 
appropriate,  recommending  such  firms  for  designation  as  systemically  important.  Finally, 
should Congress choose to create default authority for regulation of activities that do not fall 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  any  existing  financial  regulator,  the  council  would  seem  the 
appropriate instrumentality to determine how the expanded jurisdiction should be exercised. 
A  council  could  be  tasked  with  gathering  and  evaluating  information  from  the  various 
supervisory  agencies  and  producing  an  annual  report  to  the  Congress  on  the  state  of  the 
financial  system,  potential  threats  to  financial  stability,  and  the  responses  of  member 
agencies  to  identified  threats.  Such  a  report  could  include  recommendations  for  statutory 
changes where needed to address systemic threats due to, for example, growth or changes 
in  unregulated  sectors  of  the  financial  system.  More  generally,  a  council  could  promote 
research and other efforts to enhance understanding, both nationally and internationally, of 
the underlying causes of financial instability and systemic  risk and possible approaches to 
countering such developments. 
To fulfill such responsibilities, a council would need access to a broad range of information 
from  its  member  financial  supervisors  regarding  the  institutions  and  markets  under  their 
purview,  as  well  as  from  other  government  agencies.  Where  the  information  necessary  to 
monitor emerging risks was not available from a member agency, a council likely would need 
the authority to collect such information directly from financial institutions and markets.3 
Improved resolution process 
A key element to addressing systemic risk is the creation of a new regime that would allow 
the orderly resolution of systemically important nonbank financial firms. In most cases, the 
federal  bankruptcy  laws  provide  an  appropriate  framework  for  the  resolution  of  nonbank 
financial institutions. However, the bankruptcy code does not sufficiently protect the public's 
strong  interest  in  ensuring  the  orderly  resolution  of  a  nonbank  financial  firm  whose  failure 
would pose substantial risks to the financial system and to the economy.  Indeed, after the 
Lehman  and  AIG  experiences,  there  is  little  doubt  that  there  needs  to  be  a  third  option 
between the choices of bankruptcy and bailout. 
The  Administration's  proposal  would  create  such  an  option  by  allowing  the  Treasury  to 
appoint  a  conservator  or  receiver  for  a  systemically  important  nonbank  financial  institution 
that has failed or is in danger of failing. The conservator or receiver would have a variety of 
authorities  –  similar  to  those  provided  the  FDIC  with  respect  to  failing  insured  banks  –  to 
stabilize and either rehabilitate or wind down the firm in a way that mitigates risks to financial 
stability and to the economy.  For example, the conservator or receiver would have the ability 
to take control of the management and operations of the failing firm; sell assets, liabilities, 
and  business  units  of  the  firm;  and  repudiate  contracts  of  the  firm.  These  are  appropriate 
tools for a conservator or receiver. However, Congress may wish to consider adding some 
constraints as well – such as requiring that shareholders bear losses and that creditors be 
entitled to at least the liquidation value of their claims. 
                                                 
3   To  facilitate  information  collections  and  interagency  sharing,  a  council  should  have  the  clear  authority  for 
protecting confidential information subject, of course, to applicable law, including the Freedom of Information 
Act. 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2009
Importantly,  the  proposal  would  allow  the  government,  through  a  receivership,  to  impose 
"haircuts" on creditors and shareholders of the firm, either directly or by "bridging" the failing 
institution  to  a  new  entity,  when  consistent  with  the  overarching  goal  of  protecting  the 
financial  system  and  the  broader  economy.  This  aspect  of  the  proposal  is  critical  to 
addressing the too-big-to-fail problem and the resulting moral hazard effects that I discussed 
earlier. 
The Administration's proposal appropriately would establish a high standard for invocation of 
this new resolution regime and would create checks and balances on its potential use, similar 
to the provisions governing use of the systemic risk exception to least-cost resolution in the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act  (FDI  Act).  The  Federal  Reserve's  participation  in  this 
decisionmaking  process  would  be  an  extension  of  our  long-standing  role  in  protecting 
financial stability, involvement in the current process for invoking the systemic risk exception 
under  the  FDI  Act,  and  status  as  consolidated  supervisor  for  large  banking  organizations. 
The Federal Reserve, however, is not well suited, nor do we seek, to serve as the resolution 
agency for systemically important institutions under the new framework. 
As we have seen during the recent crisis, a substantial commitment of public funds may be 
needed, at least on a temporary basis, to stabilize and facilitate the orderly resolution of a 
large,  highly  interconnected  financial  firm.  The  Administration's  proposal  provides  for  such 
funding needs to be addressed by the Treasury, with the ultimate costs of any assistance to 
be recouped through assessments on financial firms over  an extended period of time. We 
believe the Treasury is the appropriate source of funding for the resolution of systemically 
important  financial  institutions,  given  the  unpredictable  and  inherently  fiscal  nature  of  this 
function. The availability of such funding from Treasury also would eliminate the need for the 
Federal Reserve to use its emergency lending authority under section 13(3) of the Federal 
Reserve Act to prevent the failure of specific institutions. 
Payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements 
The  current  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  systemically  important  payment, 
clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  is  fragmented,  with  no  single  agency  having  the 
ability  to  ensure  that  all  systemically  important  arrangements  are  held  to  consistent  and 
strong  prudential  standards.  The  Administration's  proposal  would  provide  the  Federal 
Reserve  certain  additional  authorities  for  ensuring  that  all  systemically  important  payment, 
clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  are  subject  to  robust  standards  for  safety  and 
soundness.  
Payment, settlement, and clearing arrangements are the foundation of the nation's financial 
infrastructure.  These  arrangements  include  centralized  market  utilities  for  clearing  and 
settling payments, securities, and derivatives transactions, as well as decentralized activities 
through  which  financial  institutions  clear  and  settle  such  transactions  bilaterally.  While 
payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  can  create  significant  efficiencies  and 
promote transparency in the financial markets, they also may concentrate substantial credit, 
liquidity,  and  operational  risks.   Many  of  these  arrangements  also  have  direct  and  indirect 
financial or operational linkages and, absent strong risk controls, can themselves be a source 
of  contagion  in  times  of  stress.  Thus,  it  is  critical  that  systemically  important  systems  and 
activities  be  subject  to  strong  and  consistent  prudential  standards  designed  to  ensure  the 
identification and sound management of credit, liquidity, and operational risks. 
The proposed authority would build on the considerable experience of the Federal Reserve 
in  overseeing  systemically  important  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  for 
prudential  purposes.  Over  the  years,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  extensively  with 
domestic and foreign regulators to develop strong and internationally recognized standards 
for  critical  systems.  Further, 
the  Federal  Reserve  already  has  direct  supervisory 
responsibility for some of the largest and most critical systems in the United States, including 
the  Depository  Trust  Company  and  CLS  Bank  and  has  a  role  in  overseeing  several  other 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 7
systemically  important  systems.  Yet,  at  present,  this  authority  depends  to  a  considerable 
extent on the specific organizational form of these systems as state member banks. The safe 
and  efficient  operation  of  payment,  settlement,  and  clearing  systems  is  critical  to  the 
execution of monetary policy and the flow of liquidity throughout the financial sector, which is 
why many central banks around the world currently have explicit oversight responsibilities for 
critical systems. 
Importantly, the proposed enhancements to our responsibilities for the safety and soundness 
of systemically important arrangements would complement – and not displace – the authority 
of  the  SEC  and  CFTC  for  the  systems  subject  to  their  supervision  under  the  federal 
securities and commodities laws. We have an extensive history of working cooperatively with 
these agencies, as well as international authorities. For example, the Federal Reserve works 
closely with the SEC in supervising the Depository Trust Company and also works closely 
with 21 other central banks in supervising the foreign exchange settlements of CLS Bank. 
Consumer protection 
A  word  on  the  consumer  protection  piece  of  the  Administration's  plan  may  be  appropriate 
here,  insofar  as  we  have  seen  how  problems  in  consumer  protection  can  in  some  cases 
contain the seeds of systemic problems. The Administration proposes to shift responsibility 
for writing and enforcing regulations to protect consumers from unfair practices in financial 
transactions  from  the  Federal  Reserve  to  a  new  Consumer  Financial  Protection  Agency. 
Without extensively entering the debate on the relative merits of this proposal, I do think it 
important to point out some of the benefits that would be lost through this change. 
Both the substance of consumer protection rules and their enforcement are complementary 
to prudential supervision. Poorly designed financial products and misaligned incentives can 
at  once  harm  consumers  and  undermine  financial  institutions.   Indeed,  as  with  subprime 
mortgages and securities backed by these mortgages, these products may at times also be 
connected to systemic risk. At the same time, a determination of how to regulate financial 
practices both effectively and efficiently can be facilitated by the understanding of institutions' 
practices  and  systems  that  is  gained  through  safety  and  soundness  regulation  and 
supervision.  Similarly,  risk  assessment  and  compliance  monitoring  of  consumer  and 
prudential regulations are closely related, and thus entail both informational advantages and 
resource savings. 
Under Chairman Bernanke's leadership, the Federal Reserve has adopted strong consumer 
protection measures in the mortgage and credit card areas. These regulations benefited from 
the  supervisory  and  research  capabilities  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  including  expertise  in 
consumer  credit  markets,  retail  payments,  banking  operations,  and  economic  analysis. 
Involving all these forms of expertise is important for tailoring rules that prevent abuses while 
not impeding the availability of sensible extensions of credit. 
Conclusion 
Thank  you  again  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  these  important  matters.   The  Federal 
Reserve looks forward to working with Congress and the Administration to enact meaningful 
regulatory  reform  that  will  strengthen  the  financial  system  and  reduce  both  the  probability 
and severity of future crises. 
8 
 BIS Review 92/2009
