Glenn Stevens: Economic update 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to James Cook 
University’s Business Excellence Series in the Tropics (BEST) Luncheon, Townsville, 4 June 
2009. 
 Thank  you  to  James  Cook  University  for  organising  this  occasion  and  for  the  invitation  to 
take part. 
Townsville  and  the  surrounding  region  boast  a  significant  set  of  industries.  Townsville 
provides a port and refining capacity for important parts of the mining sector. It is an export 
point for the live cattle industry, sugar and a range of other rural industries. For the tourist 
industry, it is an access point to the Great Barrier Reef and home to research into the marine 
environment. It is the base for an important part of Australia’s defence capability. Of course, 
the  University  is  also  a  strong  centre  for  higher  education.  A  number  of  the  University’s 
graduates in economics have become prominent in the world of finance and business. 
So it is a pleasure to be here, to talk about how economic conditions are unfolding, including 
in countries and industries in which this region has more than a passing interest. 
About  a  month  ago,  the  Reserve  Bank  released  its  May  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy.  I 
want to give an update on that material, though developments have not caused us greatly to 
change our views. 
I will start with the international economy. 
The current global recession is being widely referred to as the most significant of the post-
War period. There is, by now, little debate about that description. 
It is not necessarily the case, however, that it will be the biggest recession for all individual 
economies. It will be for many, but quite a few have seen larger recessions at some point in 
the previous six decades than they appear to be experiencing now. For some countries in 
Asia and Latin America, other episodes, with other causes, were more damaging than what 
has been observed, at least so far, this time. I do not think it will be the biggest recession of 
the post-War period in Australia either, though of course we will not know for sure for a while 
yet. 
Rather,  it  is  the  exceptional  synchronicity  of  the  international  downturn  that  has  been  so 
remarkable. 
It is well known, of course, that the financial crisis had its genesis in lax lending in some of 
the major economies, and cheap credit generally, earlier in this decade. This has been well 
covered before, so I will not go over it today. 
Rather,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  sharp  deterioration  in  global  demand  for  goods  and 
services that occurred late in 2008 and early this year. There are some important features of 
this  event  that  help  us  to  understand  both  our  own  experiences  in  Australia  and  those  of 
other countries. 
Historians will study this episode for years to come. They may find additional nuances, but 
one  very  clear  trigger  for  the  sharp  collapse  in  demand  was  the  heightening  of  stress  in 
financial markets.  
A  sequence  of  extraordinary  events  occurred  in  September  and  October  last  year.  These 
included: 
• 
the US Government taking over the two largest housing finance entities;  
BIS Review 70/2009 
 1
  the  bankruptcy  of  one  of  the  four  remaining  large  US  investment  banks,  which 
people had presumed was “too big to fail”;  
the US Government taking over one of the world’s largest insurance companies; and  
in  short  order,  pressure  on  systemically  important  institutions  across  the  United 
States and Europe.  
Combined,  this  previously  almost-unthinkable  sequence  resulted  in  a  sharp  increase  in 
perceived  systemic  risk  in  financial  markets  and  systems  everywhere.  Stock  prices  fell 
sharply around the world. Risk spreads on all sorts of debt instruments blew out, and capital 
markets for issuing (or rolling over) debt and equity essentially closed.  
It  was  the  most  turbulent  period  in  international  finance  any  current  banker,  economist, 
market trader or policy-maker has lived through or, we hope, ever will. 
Unlike most previous financial crises, moreover, the news about this set of events reached 
people all over the world very quickly. They did not learn about it the way they once might 
have:  sequentially,  with  varying  lags,  via  delayed  print  media,  word  of  mouth,  high-brow 
publications and so on. Instead, they learned about it simultaneously, via the 24-hour news 
cycle, in every country, more or less in real time. 
Not surprisingly, people everywhere suddenly became much more fearful of the future. 
In  the  face  of  this  acute  uncertainty,  firms  and  households  across  the  world  did  what  you 
would expect. They acted in a precautionary way. They postponed discretionary purchases, 
shelved expansion plans and did what they could to consolidate their balance sheets. 
The result was a highly synchronised slump in demand especially for consumer durables and 
investment goods. Production and consumption of more “everyday” non-durable goods and 
services  did  fall,  but  by  much  less than  for  those  products  that  could easily  be  purchased 
tomorrow rather than today (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
 The  nature  of  this  slump  helps  us  to  understand  both  the  relative  performance  of  various 
national economies and the subsequent behaviour of production generally. 
 2 
 BIS Review 70/2009
It  has  become  much  clearer  over  the  past  month  or  two,  for  example,  that  the  countries 
hardest  hit  have  been  those  that  are  most  involved  in  the  production  and  export  of  these 
high-value goods (Graph 2). Among the major economies, Japan and Germany have seen 
the  biggest  falls  in  output.  Among  emerging  market  countries,  some  of  the  biggest 
contractions were among the Asian nations that are an integral part of the production chain 
for consumer durables. 
Graph 2  
  If  the  fall  in  global  demand  in  late  2008  was  rapid,  the  cut  in  production  was  even  more 
aggressive as firms sought to reduce inventories. In many countries, these had tended to rise 
a little going into the crisis. As demand fell away, firms were faced with further increases in 
stocks of unsold items, at a time when the cost of funding them was moving up. Hence, they 
sought to get inventories down quickly as part of their strategy of surviving the downturn. To 
achieve a reduction in inventories, firms must cut production by more than demand, so that 
the level of production falls below the level of demand for a time. This is indeed what seems 
to have occurred in many cases. 
Once inventories are back under control, production will rise, back up to the level of demand. 
This is what we seem to be seeing now in some countries, particularly around Asia. Industrial 
production has risen quite sharply over the past few months, and in some cases has retraced 
a good deal of the earlier fall. 
The clearest signs of growth are in China, where our estimates are that industrial production 
had recovered all the losses by March. China does not publish quarterly GDP growth rates, 
but our best estimates are that the March quarter growth rate picked up relative to the weak 
outcome in the December quarter. 
The improvement in conditions in other emerging economies in Asia may be partly related to 
the pick-up in China. Quite a marked bounce in industrial output has occurred in Korea and 
Taiwan, and a similar pattern looks to be emerging in several other countries in the region. 
Even Japan’s production now seems to be rising, though from extremely weak levels. 
Across  the  leading  industrial  economies,  the  best  we  can  say  at  present  is  that  while  the 
contraction in overall output in the March quarter was broadly similar to that in the December 
quarter,  recent  data  suggest  that  the  rate  of  contraction  in  the  June  quarter  will  be 
significantly smaller. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 3
Now while the initial pick-up in output is coming from this inventory cycle running its course, 
that only lifts production to the level of demand, which remains lower than it was before. An 
ongoing rise in output will depend on demand starting to increase. 
Again,  the  clearest  indication  of  stronger  demand  is  in  some  of  the  emerging  economies, 
particularly  China.  The  improvement  in  China’s  growth  does  not  seem  to  be  coming  from 
Chinese exports to the developed world, but from stronger demand at home. The reversal of 
earlier  restrictive  policies  designed  to  slow  the  Chinese  economy  because  of  inflation 
concerns,  together  with  a  government  spending  package  that  by  any  standards  has  been 
very large, have both contributed. To date, the recovery has been led by increased spending 
on infrastructure. What is not yet clear is the extent to which Chinese private-sector demand 
is accelerating. 
A pick-up in China is relatively beneficial to Australia, as I will discuss in a moment. For the 
world  economy,  it  will  also  be  beneficial  if  the  emerging  world  relies  more  on  domestic 
demand for growth than it has in the past decade. A durable expansion will be one that is 
more balanced than the last one. 
That  said,  prospects  for  demand  in  the  developed  world  obviously  remain  very  important 
because of the still very large size of those economies. Most observers expect that demand 
in the United States and Europe (including the United Kingdom) will be quite subdued for a 
few years. 
One might, of course, ask whether the striking speed and simultaneity of the downturn could 
be seen again in the upswing. The reason people think such an outcome is unlikely is that 
the  loss  of  wealth  during  2008  and  the  need  for  private-sector  balance  sheets  to  be 
deleveraged  are  thought  likely  to  constrain  both  household  demand  and  the  ability  of  the 
banking sector to expand credit, for some time. 
This  is  a  reasonable  reading  of  the  history  of  most  financial  crises,  and  underpins  the 
consensus forecast that global growth, when it resumes, will be pretty modest initially. 
Yet the speed and size of the responses to the downturn by policy-makers around the world 
is just as unprecedented as the speed and size of the downturn itself. If there were an upside 
surprise on global growth, it would most likely be because the collective effects of all those 
policy responses turned out to be bigger than expected, perhaps because those expectations 
were formed by looking at a history where such simultaneous responses rarely occurred. 
Having said that, the size of the build-up in government debt in some of the major economies 
will surely become much more of a constraint on their fiscal room for manoeuvre over the 
next decade. Let me be clear that I am not talking about Australia here; rather, I have in 
mind countries where public debt could approach 100 per cent of annual GDP over the next 
few  years.  It  is  not  that  these  magnitudes  are  completely  unmanageable,  but  they  will 
constrain choices to an extent these countries have not been accustomed to for a long time. 
For example, their capacity to cushion the impact of another downturn, were one to occur in 
six or seven years’ time, would be limited. 
The developments in the world economy over the past year have had a significant effect on 
our economy. One key channel has been the impact on commodity markets, where prices 
fell  sharply  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.  It  has  been  apparent  for  some  time  from 
developments  in  markets  for  coal  and  iron  ore  that  there  would  be  large  downward 
adjustments to the contract prices for those commodities when they were renegotiated this 
year.  Those  falls  have  now  largely  been  realised,  broadly  in  line  with  what  was  expected. 
Compared with last year, there will be a lot less revenue coming in. 
But it is important to remember that commodity prices remain high by historical standards. 
Even with falls of 45-60 per cent for coal and around 35 per cent for iron ore, the 2009/10 
prices are the second highest on record in US dollar terms. Five or six years ago, these sorts 
of prices would have seemed extraordinary. As the outlook for resources demand becomes 
clearer, and the uncertainty in financial markets continues to lift, it would not be surprising if 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2009
plans for new mining projects that are being deferred at present were re-activated at some 
point, though this, even if it occurred, would presumably take some time to flow through into 
actual spending. 
The volume of Australian exports, moreover, has so far held up remarkably well, especially 
compared  with  those  of  some  other  countries  (Table 1).  Even  people  who  were  relatively 
optimistic, as I was, have been a bit surprised by this strength. 
 
 Part of the relative strength may reflect supply-side factors: a larger wheat crop in 2008 and 
the commencement of operation of an additional LNG compression train have both added to 
supply. 
There are, however, some particularly interesting developments in the pattern of demand for 
coal and iron ore. A large proportion of Australian iron ore goes to China and very little goes 
to Europe. Chinese demand has actually increased as infrastructure spending has picked up, 
whereas in Europe demand has fallen sharply. In the coal market, Australia’s exports have 
traditionally gone to Japan, Korea and Taiwan, where demand has softened. But increased 
demand  in  China  (which  traditionally  imported  very  little  coal)  has  partly  offset  the  falls 
elsewhere. Indeed, in the past year, China’s share of Australia’s merchandise exports has 
risen  sharply,  and  is  approaching  that  of  Japan  (Graph 3).  Part  of  the  increased  demand 
from  China  can  be  explained  by  the  construction-intensive  activity  taking  place  there,  and 
part by reduced Chinese production of iron ore and coal, as the fall in prices has seen some 
of  the  high-cost  mines  in  China  being  closed.  For  both  iron  ore  and  coal,  Australian 
companies are among the lowest-cost producers and so gain when higher-cost firms exit the 
scene.  Factors  such  as  this  have  kept  Australian  exports  doing  relatively  well  so  far,  and 
would seem to offer significant long-term opportunities, including for this region. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 5
 Graph 3 
 The Australian economy has, nonetheless, been affected by the global recession, with real 
GDP, on the latest estimates, posting a small net decline over the past couple of quarters. 
The  major  driver  of  the  slowdown  has  been  weaker  private  domestic  demand,  most 
prominently  a  sharp  decline  in  business  investment  spending,  with  a  fall  off  in  housing 
construction. The fall in investment is best seen as the same understandable precautionary 
behaviour by Australian businesses as displayed by their counterparts around the world. A 
decline in business investment spending of about 8 to 10 per cent in the December quarter 
seems to have been a pretty standard result around the world. 
Macroeconomic policies have not been able to prevent an economic downturn. They rarely 
can, especially in the face of a global recession of this magnitude. Indeed, attempts to do so 
have as often as not run into trouble by stoking up bigger problems a few years down the 
track. But it is reasonable to think that policies can have the effect of making the downturn 
shallower  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case,  and  that  they  can  help  to  establish 
conditions  conducive  to  recovery.  The  scope  to  implement  such  policy  changes  has  to  be 
earned during the expansion phase of the cycle. But Australia did earn that scope, and has 
been prepared to use it during the last six months. 
What has the Reserve Bank been doing? 
The Bank made a number of changes to its operations in financial markets to help keep them 
functioning  through  the  worst  of  the  crisis.  Measures  the  Government  took  in  this  sphere 
were also important for confidence and access to funding. 
The Board also moved quickly to ease monetary policy after the events of mid September, 
with  interest  rates  being  reduced  significantly.  At  3 per  cent,  the  overnight  rate  is  at  the 
lowest level seen since the early 1960s. This has fed through into significant declines in the 
rates  paid  by  borrowers,  especially,  but  not  only,  households.  The  debt  servicing  costs  of 
households have fallen faster and further than in previous cyclical episodes. 
The  Board  has  not  felt  the  need  to  cut  our  policy  rate  to  the  very  low  levels –  effectively 
zero – seen in some other countries. There are two reasons. The first is that the situation we 
face is not as dire. The second is that the reduction in interest rates we have implemented 
has had a more direct effect on borrowers than in many other countries. 
6 
 BIS Review 70/2009
The combined impact of the easing of fiscal and monetary policy is likely to be substantial. 
Quantification  of  the  effects  is  very  much  a  matter  of  informed  judgement.  The  fact  that 
Australia is experiencing, so far, a smaller downturn than most countries reflects in part the 
relatively smaller extent of the sort of financial excesses that have been the problem in some 
other countries, as well as the good fortune of our position in relation to China. But significant 
macroeconomic policy responses will have also played a role. Fiscal initiatives were not only 
sizeable by global standards, but implemented quickly. The impact of monetary policy easing 
in terms of reducing debt servicing burdens for borrowers has been greater than in the major 
northern hemisphere countries. 
The relevant question now is: what are the prospects for a durable expansion? 
It  is  likely  that  activity  has  remained  subdued  in  the  June  quarter.  The  rapid  decline  in 
business  investment  is  almost  certainly  continuing.  While  consumer  spending  has  held  up 
quite  well  so  far,  it  may  be  weaker  over  the  next  few  months,  as  the  one-off  government 
payments  pass  and  rising  unemployment  starts  to  weigh  on  incomes  and  willingness  to 
spend. 
On the other hand, we are likely to see significant growth in public spending over the year 
ahead,  reflecting  fiscal  policy  decisions.  Moreover,  while  it  will  be  a  while  yet  before  the 
effects of lower interest rates and the boost to grants to first-home buyers are seen in data 
on construction work done, the pick-up in borrowing for housing that we have been seeing for 
about six months is what would be expected if an upturn in residential investment spending is 
to begin later in the year. 
Overall,  then,  our  expectation  remains  that  the  economy  will  be  well  placed  for  expansion 
towards  the  end  of  this  year.  Initially  it  will  be  fairly  gradual,  in  part  because  of  the  global 
factors to which I referred earlier. If so, the degree of spare capacity in the economy will tend 
to be increasing for a while, and inflation will most likely continue to decline for some time. 
That  in  turn  means,  as  the  statement  following  this  week’s  Board  meeting  indicated,  that 
some scope remains to ease monetary policy further, if that were to be helpful to securing a 
durable upswing. 
The emphasis on “durable” is important. It is the intention of current monetary policy settings 
to lower debt-servicing costs, assist efforts to reduce leverage and support demand. It would 
be counterproductive, though, if further reductions in interest rates induced a large number of 
marginal borrowers into debts they could service only at unusually low interest rates. This is 
a reason for care, both by the Reserve Bank and private lenders, and I note that lenders are 
being a bit more conservative on non-price loan conditions for households. 
Picking cyclical turning points is notoriously hard – even in hindsight, let alone ahead of time. 
But I think Australia is as well positioned as any country, and better than most, to enjoy a 
new expansion. 
Longer term, there also is plenty to be positive about. There are good grounds to think that 
we  can  emerge  from  the  current  global  recession  with  our  economy  largely  free  of  the 
problems  in  the  financial  sector,  the  stresses  on  public  finances  and  the  general 
disillusionment facing a number of other economies. Keeping to prudent policy frameworks 
and  settings,  maintaining  flexibility,  focusing  on  productivity  and  pursuing  the  opportunities 
arising from the growing engagement with the Asian region will all be part of a prosperous 
future. 
This part of Australia is as well placed as any to play its part in that future. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 7
