Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Microfinance – the bright spot in these 
challenging times 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  2009  RBAP-MABS  National  Roundtable  Conference, 
Manila, 12 May 2009. 
 Mr. Francis Ganzon, Chairman, Rural Bankers Research and Development Foundation; the 
officers  and  members  of  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines  (RBAP);  our 
partners from the USAID led by Christian Hougen and John Owens; fellow advocates in the 
microfinance sector; special guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  
We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  are  happy  that  the  the  National  Roundtable 
Conference of RBAP – Microenterprise Access to Banking Services (MABS) has chosen for 
its theme “Microfinance: The Bright Spot in These Challenging Times”.  
Indeed,  we  believe  that  microfinance  is  an  effective  countercyclical  tool  for  softening  the 
negative  effects  of  economic  crises,  particularly  to  the  most  vulnerable  segment  of  the 
economy. Former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Anan once said that microfinance 
recognizes that poor people are remarkable reservoirs of energy and knowledge; that while 
the  lack  of  access  to  financial  services  may  be  a  sign  of  poverty,  it  is  also  an  untapped 
opportunity to create markets, bring people in from the margins and give them the tools with 
which to help themselves.  
Especially during challenging times, it is microfinance that can provide much-needed support 
for our entrepreneurial poor. But before I discuss microfinance, I will give a brief overview of 
our present operating environment and why we live in challenging times.  
The current global economic crisis is a source of worry.  
Even countries that do not have strong financial links to the US, Europe or the other markets 
that have been most affected are now seeing effects through real flows and financial losses 
on trade activities.  
As the global economy slows down, jobs are jeopardized and unemployment figures in the 
directly affected countries tend to rise. In fact, there are Filipino workers here and overseas 
that have been laid off.  
We have learned that no economy is immune from the effects of the present global crisis, 
described as the most serious since the Great Depression.  
However, economies with sound economic fundamentals are likely to fare better than others.  
Given the structural and market reforms we had painstakingly put in place since the Asian 
Financial  Crisis,  it  can  be  said  that  the  present  crisis  came  at  a  time  when  the  Philippine 
economy is in a position of relative strength.  
Indeed,  our  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  have  served  us  well.  In  the  face  of  this 
crisis, the Philippine economy remains resilient, relative to our peers in the region.  
Let me quickly run thru some numbers to show the “buffers” we have built. 
Our domestic economy has remained steady.  
In  2008,  GDP  grew  by  4.6%,  still  within  our  long-term  trend  growth  rate,  and  quite 
respectable when compared against our neighbors.  
The  outlook  for  this  year  remains  positive,  although  at  a  slower  pace  of  growth. 
Nevertheless, this is not bad at all considering that the Philippines is one of the few Asian 
countries seen to grow and ride out this severe global economic recession.  
BIS Review 59/2009 
 1
Our inflation rate continues to decelerate.  
Headline  inflation  in  April  was  reported  at  4.8  pct  from  6.4%  the  previous  month.  Core 
inflation has similarly slowed down (to 5pct from 5.6 pct). 
The forecast average inflation for 2009 is at 3.4 pct, well within our set target range of at 2.5-
4.5%.  
Our Balance of Payments is expected to continue to be in positive territory through the year. 
We continue to see a current account surplus from sustained remittances and receipts from 
the BPO sector.  
Because  of  our  healthy  external  position,  we  have  been  able  to  build  up  our  gross 
international reserves to a record-high level of $39.5 billion in April, enough to pay for more 
than 6 months’ worth of imports of goods and services. 
The positive external surplus will continue to support the peso.  
With  our  policy  for  a  market-determined  exchange  rate,  the  peso  is  expected  to  remain 
competitive as this moves in tandem with the other currencies in the region.  
Our banking system remains sound.  
Thanks to the innate conservatism of our banks and the phased-in approach by the regulator 
to financial innovation, Philippine banks’ exposure to toxic assets has been minimal.  
Also  due  to  reforms  implemented  in  earlier  years  to  clean  up  bank  balance  sheets, 
strengthen bank capitalization through Basel II, improve governance structures, enhance risk 
management systems, and adhere to international accounting standards, the banking system 
remains sound and stable.  
Our asset base continues to expand, asset quality has greatly improved with NPL ratio now 
at pre-1997 crisis level, and capital adequacy has remained above national and international 
standards. 
And we did not see a freezing of credit markets similar to what was happening in the US and 
Europe then. 
Given all these indicators, one could say “so far, so good”. 
Nevertheless, we are aware that risks remain. 
Thus,  in  October  2008,  at  the  height  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this  crisis,  the  BSP 
implemented  preemptive  measures  to  boost  domestic  liquidity.  The  following  are  among 
these measures:  
• 
Enhancement  of  the  BSP’s  standing  peso  repo  facility  by  expanding  allowable 
collateral and relaxing valuation on these;  
Creation  of  a  US  dollar  repo  facility  to  augment  dollar  liquidity  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market  and  ensure  the  ready  availability  of  credit  for  imports  and  other 
legitimate funding requirements; 
Increase in the budget for our peso rediscounting facility to P60 billion; and  
Reduction  in  the  regular  reserve  requirements  on  bank  deposits  and  deposit 
substitutes by two percentage points.  
  In addition, the BSP took the opportunity to reduce policy rates in the light of easing inflation 
expectations.  
During the last four policy meetings, the Monetary Board cut BSP’s policy rates by a total of 
150 basis points. Combined, the lower cost of money and increased liquidity should support 
continued economic growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2009
We  will  continue  to  monitor  developments  to  ensure  that  our  policy  settings  remain 
appropriate and balanced.  
Nevertheless,  while  there  has  been  monetary  easing,  the  BSP  remains  unrelenting  in  its 
pursuit  of  reforms.  We  will  continue  to  pursue  greater  efficiency,  better  risk  management, 
stronger  capitalization,  improved  disclosure  and  transparency  practices,  and  enhanced 
corporate governance standards in the banking system.  
So far, the reforms we have implemented have allowed our banks to efficiently perform their 
central role of channeling funds to productive uses, as well as in managing and distributing 
risks.  
Having a more efficient and liquid Philippine banking sector has helped mitigate the risk of 
what is called the negative feedback loop from the global financial crisis.  
Having said these, there is a critical question that we have to face:  
Will the global financial crisis affect the world’s microfinance sector? 
Microfinance scholars have grappled with the first question. Unfortunately, the results from 
their initial studies remain inconclusive. 
One study by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), published in 
March  2009  and  entitled  “Will  the  Bottom  of  the  Pyramid  Hit  Bottom?”1  states  that  (and  I 
quote)  the  crisis  may  ultimately  lead  to  a  squeeze  in  MFIs’  profitability.  Due  to  the  credit 
crunch, MFIs, especially those with limited deposit taking facilities, will have reduced access 
to  commercial  wholesale  funds  to  finance  their  loan  portfolios.  Scarce  private  credit  and 
higher borrowing costs would likewise stunt their portfolios. MFIs would also be competing 
for fewer and more expensive funds for their operations and expansion. 
The relative increase in prices and an overall slowdown in economic activities will also affect 
the profitability of clients’ businesses, thus constraining their household incomes. As a result, 
leading MFI clients may fall back on loan obligations or withdraw their savings.  
On  the  other  hand,  a  paper  entitled  “The  global  financial  crisis  and  its  impact  on 
microfinance”2  written  for the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) last  February 
2009, claims that the effects of the crisis on microfinance are actually well-managed.  
Authors  of  the  paper  claim  that  while  there  may  be  some  anecdotal  evidence,  there  have 
been no major negative changes in the profitability or risk profiles of MFIs. Their study was 
based  on  the  2008  4th  Quarter  figures  of  Symbiotics  50  Benchmark  which  tracks  large 
microfinance institutions worldwide.  
The  authors  however  recognize  that  microfinance  as  it  is  today,  given  greater  links  to 
domestic  and  international  financial  markets,  may  still  be  affected  by  the  financial  crisis. 
However, they iterate that past investments in building a sound foundation for the sector and 
the  vast  untapped  market  of  credit  worthy  clients  will  ensure  that  microfinance  remains 
resilient amidst this current crisis.  
Given  these,  the  next  question  is  whether  the  global  crisis  will  impact  Philippine 
microfinance.  Will  it  have  adverse  effects  or  darken  the  prospects  and  opportunities  of 
Philippine MFIs?  
                                                 
1   Will the Bottom of the Pyramid Hit Bottom? The Effects of the Global Credit Crisis on the Microfinance Sector”. 
Barbara  Magnoni  and  Jennifer  Powers,  produced  for  review  by  the  United  States  Agency  for  International 
Development (USAID). March 2009. 
2   The Global Financial Crisis and its Impact on Microfinance”. Elizabeth Littlefield and Christoph Kneiding for the 
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) Focus Note No. 52. February 2009. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 3
We at the Bangko Sentral believe that as our macroeconomy has proven resilient to crisis, 
we can expect the same resiliency in our microfinance industry. In fact, bright spots abound 
in Philippine microfinance. 
For instance, since microfinance in the country has been increasingly led by banks, the risks 
to the liability side of microfinance institutions remain more manageable.  
Banks,  as  deposit  taking  institutions,  are  less  reliant  on  external  sources  of  funds  and 
therefore  less  vulnerable  to  any  reversals  in  foreign  capital  flows  and  shifts  in  investor 
preferences as a result of the crisis.  
While  the  diversification  and  commercialization  of  sources  of  funding  has  been  seen  as  a 
positive  industry  development,  retail  deposits  remain  significant  as  a  stable  core  funding 
base.  
Further,  our  microfinance  institutions,  especially  banks  with  microfinance  operations,  have 
demonstrated the necessary commitment to institutional strengthening.  
More and more, we are seeing banks upgrading their risk management systems to be able to 
adequately and appropriately identify possible risks, such as credit and liquidity risk; and how 
they will be managed.  
Commitment  to  maintaining  the  quality  of  your  microfinance  loan  portfolios  has  also  been 
evident. I am happy to note that a culture of zero tolerance for delinquency and vigilance in 
monitoring of portfolio at risk is clearly evident among MABs banks. These are practices you 
must sustain, in good times and in bad.  
On  the  part  of  the  Bangko  Sentral,  we  will  continue  with  our  policy  approach  of  enabling 
banks,  particularly  rural  banks,  to  increase  the  scale  and  scope  of  their  microfinance 
operations.  
• 
Our  regulations  for  microfinance  have  created  the  enabling  environment  for  its 
practice to fully flourish within the banking sector.  
We have also liberalized the branching regime, and we will continue to review this 
as conditions warrant. Our branching regulations also provide particular incentives 
for  microfinance-oriented  banks  such  as  the  ability  to  branch  out  even  in  the 
restricted  areas  of  Metro  Manila  as  well  as  the  ability  to  collect  savings  from 
microfinance clients through other banking offices.  
The BSP has also been receptive to various product and technological innovations 
in banking services.  
We have also allowed the outsourcing of some banking functions to help improve 
your operating efficiency.  
Rural banks now have more opportunities to provide a wider range of services and 
products to their clients such as electronic money, FCDUs, and investments in ATM 
networks.  
    Moving forward, I propose that we make these bright spots brighter. In this, we have our own 
roles to play.  
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  shall  remain  unrelenting  in  our  commitment  to  strengthen  the 
banking  institutions  through  improvements  in  capital  positions  and  enhanced  capacities  to 
manage risks.  
Our  commitment  to  broaden  financial  inclusion  is  undiminished;  in  fact,  it  has  been 
heightened  by  the  financial  crisis.  Given  its  importance,  we  will  be  more  proactive  in 
exploring  ways  to  increase  access  to  financial  services,  particularly  for  those  who  remain 
unbanked and unserved by the financial system.  
4 
 BIS Review 59/2009
the 
forefront  of  delivering  microfinance  services 
I believe that all of you, as our partners, share these goals. I therefore take this opportunity to 
thank the 91 rural banks participating in MABS, including their nearly 500 banking offices, for 
being  at 
to  millions  of  Filipino 
microentrepreneurs. Ladies and gentlemen, let us give our MABS-participating rural banks a 
well-deserved round of applause!  
Indeed,  you  are  the  crucial  channels  for  countryside  development  and  the  catalysts  for 
promoting  a  truly  inclusive  financial  system.  You  can  therefore  count  on  Bangko  Sentral’s 
continuing support in this important task.  
While banks have accomplished much, you cannot be complacent nor rest on your laurels: 
Clearly, more needs to be done!  
You must continuously monitor the quality of your loan portfolios and vigilantly maintain low 
portfolio  at  risk  (PAR).  Of  course,  this  must  be  balanced  with  your  commitment  to 
continuously serve your microfinance clients.  
I am certain you have realized that microfinance clients who repay their loans faithfully are 
motivated in part by their desire to promptly access follow-on loans. This ensured access to 
finance is very important for our microentrepreneurs.  
Another  important  commitment  is  for  banks  to  maintain  strong  capital  positions.  Capital 
adequacy  is  central  to  ensuring  that  banks  have  sufficient  buffer  whenever  risks  turn  into 
losses.  Remember  that  our  banking  sector’s  strong  capital  position  is  one  of  the  main 
reasons why it has remained resilient amidst the continuing global financial crisis.  
I  do  look  forward  to  banks  becoming  more  proactive,  rather  than  reactive,  in  terms  of 
strengthening their capital positions.  
Finally,  I  wish  that  microfinance  institutions  will  look  at  this  crisis  as  an  opportune  time  to 
push  for  reforms  to  further  strengthen  the  microfinance  industry  to  find  ways  to  improve 
efficiencies, to strengthen governance structures to enhance the quality of its management to 
diversify funding, to become more transparent and to strengthen consumer protection.  
Microfinance institutions may also continue to expand and tap new markets, of course with 
appropriate caution and preparation. 
For  instance,  some  microfinance  institutions  see  market  growth  potential  from  returning 
overseas Filipinos who begin to engage in various entrepreneurial activities. 
From current indications, the global economic crisis has not negatively impacted Philippine 
microfinance. However, it is imperative that we all remain vigilant in these challenging times.  
We  have  seen  how  microfinance  has  improved  the  lives  of  millions  of  our  entrepreneurial 
poor. The yearly Microentrepreneur of the Year Awards program, where MABS banks always 
have a winner, is a regular reminder to us that access to financial services coupled with hard 
work, ingenuity and perseverance are powerful empowering tools for breaking out of poverty 
and building a better life not only for the microentrepreneurs themselves, but for their families 
and communities as well.  
You and I know of many Filipino success stories rooted in microfinance. The success of our 
microentrepreneurs continues to inspire and bring hope that it can be replicated throughout 
our country and liberate more Filipinos from poverty.  
This  is  the  reason  why  we  are  all  here  today.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  commit  to  work 
together to broaden and deepen the reach of microfinance.  
I hope therefore that this RBAP-MABS roundtable conference will be fruitful and successful 
in transforming our microfinance sector to be stronger, better, and even more responsive to 
the needs of our microentrepreneurs.  
Again, my congratulations to all those involved in our microfinance sector a truly bright spot 
in these challenging times.  
BIS Review 59/2009 
 5
Mabuhay ang microfinance! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Salamat sa inyong lahat!  
Thank you and good day! 
6 
 BIS Review 59/2009
