Mario Draghi: Fact-finding on issues affecting the banking and financial 
system 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Forum,  before  the  Finance  Committee  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  Chamber  of 
Deputies, Rome, 17 March 2009. 
 All the main advanced economies recorded a sharp contraction of output in the fourth quarter 
of  2008.  Consumption  and  investment  demand  is  falling  owing  to  the  rapid,  generalized 
deterioration in household and business confidence, the increase in unemployment, the drop 
in share prices and house values, and tighter access to credit. 
The  recession  has  passed  to  the  emerging  economies,  hit  by  the  drop  in  exports  to 
advanced  countries,  the  decline  in  raw  material  prices,  and  the  sudden  reversal  of  capital 
flows. The countries that depend most heavily on financing from abroad, such as those of 
Central and Eastern Europe, are especially vulnerable. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  and  other  official  and  professional  forecasters  have 
progressively revised their estimates of world economic growth downwards. In January, the 
IMF projected that world trade would contract by almost 3 per cent in 2009 and that GDP 
would fall by 1.6 per cent in the United States, 2 per cent in the euro area and 2.6 per cent in 
Japan. It has already announced that the estimates are being newly revised in the light of 
more recent data. World GDP growth will probably be negative on average for the year. 
Economic policymakers have acted promptly to contain the spread of the financial crisis and 
counter  its  effects  on  the  real  economy.  Central  banks  supplied  ample  liquidity  to  the 
financial  system,  with  interventions  of  unprecedented  size  and  degree  of  international 
coordination.  Governments  have  introduced  or  strengthened  guarantees  for  bank  deposits 
and securities and have prepared or taken measures to recapitalize financial institutions.  
These actions have prevented the collapse of the system but they have not yet shed full light 
on the financial situation of those banks that invested most heavily in “toxic” assets: there is 
still uncertainty as to the size and distribution of the losses on the balance sheets of what 
were  once  the  world’s  largest  banks.  Moreover,  it  is  likely  that  the  recession  will  cause  a 
further deterioration in banks’ assets. 
The restoration of confidence in financial institutions and properly functioning credit markets 
is essential, along with support for demand offered by monetary and fiscal policies, in order 
to restart growth. 
Official interest rates now stand at minimal levels in the leading economies. There is limited 
scope  for  the  monetary  policy  lever  to  work,  although  there  remains  the  option  of 
unconventional measures, which are being implemented in part. In some cases, notably the 
United  States,  the  central  bank  has  put  itself  in  a  position  to  intervene  directly  in  certain 
segments of the credit market in order to guarantee liquidity to the private sector. 
The  leading  governments  have  introduced  fiscal  stimulus  measures  to  counteract  the 
contraction  in  income  and  employment.  The  United  States  has  launched  a  programme  of 
expenditure  measures  and  tax  cuts  amounting  to  almost  $800  billion,  which  will  have  an 
overall impact on the deficit for the three years 2009-11 of about 5 per cent of annual GDP. 
The stimulus measures adopted by the European countries and Japan are of a smaller order 
of magnitude but considerable nonetheless, partly reflecting differences in the initial condition 
of  public  finances  and  in  the  operation  of  automatic  stabilizers.  In  China,  too,  the 
Government  has  announced  a  broad  programme  of  extraordinary  expenditure  to  boost 
demand. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 1
The importance of international cooperation for a return to stable world economic growth and 
the strengthening of the international financial system was stressed at the meeting of G20 
finance ministers and central bank governors in Brighton last weekend. 
In Italy, as in the rest of the euro area, the recession, which worsened in the middle of 2008, 
is  expected  to  continue  through  this  year.  All  the  indicators  (production,  orders  and 
inventories) continue to point to extremely slack activity. GDP is expected to contract in the 
first  quarter  of  this  year,  for  the  fourth  consecutive  time.  The  whole  of  2009  will  probably 
close with a new, large drop in economic activity, above all in the private sector. 
The  difficulties  of  the  main  outlet  markets  have  affected  exports,  which  were  the  most 
important  source  of  support  for  demand  in  2006-07.  In  January,  Italian  exports  to  non-EU 
countries  fell  to  historic  low  levels.  Firms  have  cut  back  dramatically  on  their  investment 
plans owing to the large margins of spare capacity. 
Consumer price inflation, which has been falling since last autumn, stood at 1.6 per cent in 
February;  it  is  expected  to  continue  to  fall  until  the  summer,  mainly  thanks  to  the  trend  in 
energy and food prices. Despite the contraction in activity, leading international organizations 
and professional forecasters do not expect a deflationary spiral to set in. 
The  additional  expenditure  and  reduction  in  revenue  that  Italy  has  approved  for  counter-
cyclical  purposes  amounts  to  about  0.5  percentage  points  of  GDP;  these  measures  are 
financed  by  others  of  opposite  sign.  In  addition,  previously  allocated  resources  have  been 
channelled into uses that stimulate aggregate demand more effectively. 
The  decision  as  to  the  forms  of  government  intervention  to  support  demand  is  no  less 
important  than  the  question  of  its  magnitude.  They  must  support  the  consumption  of  the 
weakest  categories  of  citizens  and  strengthen  the  economy’s  capacity  for  growth  through 
public investment projects that offer a high rate of return and are shovel-ready. 
The  Government  has  temporarily  extended  the  possibility  of  benefiting  from  social  shock 
absorbers  to  most  categories  of  atypical  workers;  further  improvements  were  defined  last 
week. Funding for these measures was recently increased thanks to an agreement between 
central  government  and  the  regions.  These  provisions  are  opportune,  but  there  is  still  the 
need to tackle a comprehensive reform. 
The Government has also announced it is examining provisions to facilitate the expansion of 
residential  buildings  and  to  reduce  construction  charges.  The  procedures,  contents  and 
timetable of any possible measures are not yet known. Simplifying formalities and reducing 
charges could constitute a stimulus. The complex nature of this subject, concurrent powers 
between the central and regional governments, and the need to design the intervention so as 
to preserve the natural environment and balanced town planning make the effects of such 
action uncertain in the short term, however. 
The amount of firms’ receivables from general government, connected with deferments and 
delays in paying for goods and services, is very high: about 2.5 per cent of GDP, more than 
30 per cent of annual general government consumption and investment expenditure. Faster 
payments would support firms without structurally burdening the public finances. 
In countries like Italy, with high public debt, broad and incisive short-term interventions must 
be compensated for by structural measures giving immediate assurance of the restoration of 
budget  balance  in  the  medium  term.  It  is  essential  to  look  farther  ahead:  the  long-term 
sustainability of the public finances is fundamental to ensure the effectiveness of short-term 
policies. 
Lending and the banks 
Italian  bank  lending  has  decelerated  sharply.  The  annualized  three-month  growth  rate  of 
loans to the private sector, adjusted for the accounting effect of securitizations, fell to 2.3 per 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2009
cent  in  January,  from  8.6  per  cent  in  September.  On  the  basis  of  partial  data,  lending  is 
estimated to have contracted slightly in February with respect to January. 
The slowdown has affected all categories of debtors. For firms, in January the three-month 
growth rate was 5.5 per cent, about three points lower than in September; however lending 
to  firms  with  fewer  than  20  employees  and  to  manufacturing  industry  declined.  The  fall  in 
production and uncertainty about the future of the economy reduced the demand for credit 
for investment and for funding inventories and working capital. 
Lending  to  households  increased  by  3.3  per  cent  in  January,  against  4.7  per  cent  last 
September. The growth in lending to households, which was quite robust a few years ago, 
had already moderated before the beginning of the financial crisis; the fall in house sales and 
the  drop  in  spending  on  durable  goods  caused  a  further  slowdown.  As  regards  loans  for 
house  purchases,  which  constitute  68  per  cent  of  credit  to  consumer  households,  in  the 
fourth quarter of 2008 new loans were down by 20 per cent from a year earlier. Consumer 
credit  for  the  purchase  of  goods  and  services  –  which  accounted  for  6  per  cent  of  bank 
lending to households – slowed sharply. 
New mortgage loans at fixed rates amounted to €36 billion in 2008 or 64 per cent of the total 
granted  to  households,  compared  with  €32  billion  (51  per  cent)  in  2007.  The  wide  gap 
between  Italy  and  the  euro-area  average  in  the  cost  of  new  fixed-rate  mortgages  (one 
percentage point in June 2007) has now narrowed to nearly nil. In the last few months the 
share of new fixed-rate loans has fallen slightly, though remaining higher than in the past (55 
per cent in January). One factor in this reduction was the fall in interest rates on variable-rate 
mortgages,  making  them  more  attractive  to  households;  on  the  supply  side,  difficulties 
encountered by banks in recent months in obtaining long-term funds may have induced them 
to limit their supply of fixed-rate mortgages. 
The stagnation in lending is also due to banks’ adopting a more cautious policy in lending to 
households  and  businesses.  The  Italian  banks  participating  in  the  Bank  Lending  Survey 
reported  that  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  lending  conditions  tightened  somewhat,  while 
firms’ demand for credit was basically stagnant. Between September and December, existing 
credit lines were reduced by 1 per cent in the face of a virtual standstill in actual lending. 
The  fact  that  banks  are  being  more  cautious  in  lending  reflects  difficulties  in  the  funding 
markets and the deterioration of customers’ creditworthiness.  
In 2008 fund-raising by Italian banks from non-resident intermediaries fell by almost 10 per 
cent. As funding from abroad dried up, banks responded by raising funds from households, 
in particular by selling bonds. This allowed overall fund-raising to continue to expand, but it 
did not prevent a sharp slowdown; the average growth rate fell from 11 per cent in 2007 to 5 
per cent in 2008; in January the latter figure was confirmed. 
In the same year, lending to the private sector grew more rapidly (7.3 per cent). Lending by 
large  banks,  which  are  more  reliant  on  fund-raising  abroad  and  more  exposed  to  market 
strains,  slowed  sharply.  Local  banks,  by  contrast,  maintained  similar  credit  flows  to  those 
before the crisis, thanks in part to a greater inflow of funds. 
The recession is impinging on the quality of credit. The ratio of new bad debts to total lending 
to firms is rising rapidly: at the end of 2008 it reached 2 per cent, the highest value since 
1999, excluding the spike in 2003 when the Parmalat group collapsed. Preliminary data for 
the first two months of 2009 show a further increase in the number of customers having bad 
debts for the first time. The exposure of these customers to the banking system more than 
doubled compared with the same period in 2008. 
Although it deteriorated slightly, the quality of credit to households remains high. 
Private-sector debt is much lower in Italy than in other countries. Although higher than in the 
past, households’ financial debt is 49 per cent of the sector’s disposable income, as against 
more than 90 per cent for the euro area and about 150 per cent for the United Kingdom and 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 3
the United States. Firms’ financial debt is 75 per cent of GDP, compared with a euro-area 
average  that  is  about  13  percentage  points  higher  and  ratios  of  77  and  113  per  cent 
respectively for the United States and the United Kingdom. Compared with the years before 
the 1993 recession, Italian firms appear to be in a sounder financial position today. At the 
end of 2007 the leverage ratio, calculated on the balance sheets of more than 50,000 firms, 
was about 50 per cent, 7 percentage points less than at the beginning of the 1990s. Above 
all the proportion of financial costs covered by internal sources of financing is higher today. 
In the eighteen months of the crisis the major Italian banks have suffered smaller losses than 
those of other countries thanks to their limited exposure to toxic assets and strong roots in 
traditional banking activity, the prudence of the regulatory and supervisory framework, and 
the less pronounced indebtedness of their customers. 
For the leading banking groups structured credit instruments are less than two per cent of 
their balance sheet assets. Investments in the most complex securities are a tiny proportion 
of the total. 
The capital of our banks, which, in contrast with developments in nearly all the other leading 
countries,  has  not  yet  benefited  from  public  recapitalizations,  remains  above  the  minimum 
regulatory requirements. The leverage ratio of the leading Italian banking groups – a simple 
indicator that avoids the complicated risk-weighting of assets required by the Basel 2 rules – 
is considerably lower than that of the main European banks. 
The proportion of hybrid capital instruments, the least robust component of tier 1 capital, is 
small  because  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  applied  limits  that  are  much  more  stringent  than  the 
relevant international standards. It follows that even when measures of “tangible” capital are 
adopted,  the  judgement  on  the  solidity  of  Italian  banks  does  not  change.  In  line  with 
international  practice,  the  calculation  of  Italian  banks’  regulatory  capital  excludes  the  book 
value  of  goodwill,  an  item  that  in  present  market  conditions  is  subject  to  considerable 
uncertainty.  Accordingly,  any  impairment  of  this  item  would  not  affect  banks’  regulatory 
capital. 
The market’s assessments nonetheless consider the possibility that a further strengthening 
of the banking system may be necessary. Banks must prepare to cope with the risks, already 
materializing, associated with the rapid deterioration in economic conditions. A fundamentally 
sound  model  of  intermediation  has  so  far  sheltered  them  from  the  worst  effects  of  the 
financial  crisis;  it  cannot  make  them  impermeable  to  the  global  recession.  Capital 
strengthening,  including  by  means  of  the  instruments  made  available  by  the  state,  is  a 
condition for maintaining the ability of the banking system to provide the economy with credit. 
In 2009 banks’ gross income will continue to contract, after an estimated fall of about 5 per 
cent  in  2008,  despite  the  still  substantial  growth  on  the  order  of  8  per  cent  in  net  interest 
income. As in the past it is likely that the decline in economic activity and interest rates will 
have  a  negative  impact  on  interest  income.  According  to  econometric  estimates,  a  one 
percentage-point reduction in GDP would lead to a 0.7 percentage-point contraction in net 
interest income; that produced by a one percentage point fall in money-market interest rates 
would be much larger, on the order of 3.5 percentage points. 
On the international front, the balance sheets of Italy’s leading banks are weighed down by 
their exposures to some Central and Eastern European countries, which are suffering from 
the  particularly  serious  repercussions  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  accumulated  in  the 
past.  According  to  BIS  data,  in  September  2008  the  Italian  banking  system’s  exposure  to 
these countries amounted to just over €150 billion, or 5 per cent of the system’s total assets. 
More than 70 per cent of the exposure is to five countries (Poland, Croatia, Russia, Hungary 
and Slovakia). The situation is being carefully monitored by the Bank of Italy. At European 
level, the political will and the instruments exist for intervention to prevent regional crises if 
necessary. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2009
From the end of September up to yesterday the share prices of the major Italian banks fell on 
average  by  more  than  50  per  cent,  in  line  with  the  fall  recorded  by  the  leading  European 
banks.  The  share  prices  of  international  banks  did  not  benefit  from  the  recapitalization 
measures adopted abroad. 
In the same period major Italian banks’ credit default swap premiums, which started from low 
levels by international standards, rose by about 70 basis points to about 180 basis points, a 
figure that is analogous to that obtaining yesterday for the corresponding European index. 
The premiums payable on credit default swaps are influenced by significant variations in the 
liquidity of these contracts. 
I have noted on several occasions that from the beginning of the turmoil in summer 2007, the 
Bank of Italy stressed how essential it was for banks to ensure adequate control of liquidity 
risk.  Enhanced  monitoring,  moral  suasion  and  specific  interventions  had  a  rapid  and 
significant impact; they enabled Italian banks to address the worsening of the financial crisis 
last  September  with  balanced  liquidity  conditions,  which  allowed  them  to  emerge  from  the 
most acute phases without incident. 
Supervisory activity, participation by the Bank of Italy in the collective decisions and actions 
of the Eurosystem, providing support to the Government and Parliament in the preparation of 
measures aimed at restoring confidence in the markets – to which I will return shortly – were 
accompanied  by  numerous  initiatives  taken  directly  by  the  Bank  in  the  performance  of  its 
monetary  functions  and  to  alleviate  specific  difficulties.  I  have  reported  on  this  in  detail 
elsewhere. I wish to recall in particular the swap transactions whereby some of the highest 
quality  securities  in  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  portfolio  were  made  available  to  banks  against 
securities not eligible as collateral for refinancing, in order to strengthen their ability to access 
these operations with the Eurosystem at times of tension. The swaps were activated from 16 
October onwards. 
The  strong  capital  base  of  Italy’s  central  bank  has  been  of  great  importance  in  recent 
months.  It  enabled  us  to  plan  and  implement  the  interventions  we  believed  necessary  to 
support  systemic  liquidity  promptly  and  for  significant  amounts,  without  jeopardizing  the 
Bank’s balance-sheet. 
While less tense than a few months ago, conditions on the interbank liquidity market are still 
far from normal. There continues to be a need for initiatives to rebuild confidence and revive 
trading. 
On 2 February trading commenced on the new Collateralized Interbank Market (MIC), a joint 
initiative  by  the  Bank  of  Italy,  the  Italian  Banking  Association  and  e-MID  SIM  S.p.A.,  the 
company that operates the e-MID electronic interbank market. Participating banks are given 
the  opportunity  to  execute  transactions  with  medium-term  maturities,  in  conditions  of 
anonymity  and  sheltered  from  credit  and  liquidity  risks.  The  Bank  of  Italy  evaluates  the 
collateral deposited by the participants and ensures prompt settlement of transactions in the 
event of default by a counterparty; the banks themselves, which are called on to bear some 
of  the  cost  of  an  eventual  failure,  contribute  to  the  proper  functioning  of  the  system  on  a 
mutualistic basis. The collateralized market is open not only to Italian banks but also to other 
European banks that meet the same requirements, subject to an agreement with their home 
central banks. The volume and prices of trades are satisfactory. Between the first and sixth 
weeks of activity average daily trades rose from €50 million to €318 million and outstanding 
deposits reached €2 billion. For maturities of one and two weeks, the most traded by banks, 
the interest rates on the collateralized market have been consistently lower than those on the 
uncollateralized market, between 10 and 30 basis points on average per week; on the same 
contracts  the  bid-ask  spread  for  the  best  quotes  in  the  MIC  order  book  have  fallen 
progressively, from 5 basis points to 1 basis point, testifying to increasing market liquidity. 
In all the main countries the authorities took steps to support the financial system. In Italy the 
Government and Parliament, with the technical support of the Bank of Italy, adopted a set of 
measures to protect depositors, support banks’ liquidity and capital, and reinforce their ability 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 5
to  finance  economic  activity.  The  provisions,  which  were  adopted  under  the  emergency 
decree procedure, were ratified by Laws 190/2008 and 2/2009. I believe it is useful to recall 
their main points. 
In a first measure (Decree Law 155/2008, ratified by Law 190/2008), retail banking deposits 
were granted a state guarantee. The guarantee supplements the insurance provided by the 
previously  existing  interbank  funds.  The  measure  was  important  to  reassure  savers  when 
market anxiety levels were most acute. 
A second set of measures, contained in Decree Law 157/2008, empowered the Ministry for 
the Economy and Finance to grant a state guarantee on new bank liabilities with a residual 
maturity  of  between  three  months  and  five  years,  guarantee  entities  that  offer  banks 
securities  eligible  for  use  in  refinancing  operations  with  the  Eurosystem,  and  supply 
government securities to banks in exchange for newly issued liabilities (this is in addition to 
the  Bank  of  Italy  asset  swap  transactions  recalled  earlier).  All  these  measures  serve  to 
guarantee banks access to a sufficient supply of liquidity, in order to ensure that the normal 
operation  of  the  lending  and  payments  system  is  never  interrupted,  even  in  conditions  of 
serious  turbulence.  Together  with  the  interventions  by  the  monetary  authorities,  the 
announcement  of  these  measures  helped  ease  tensions  on  the  interbank  market  in  the 
autumn. 
Thirdly,  to  deal  with  potentially  difficult  situations,  Decree  Law  155/2008  authorizes  the 
Treasury  to  subscribe  capital  increases  of  banks  facing  a  situation  of  capital  inadequacy 
ascertained by the Bank of Italy. The Government shareholding takes the form of non-voting 
preference shares; such public intervention is subject to the presentation of a restructuring 
plan assessed by the Bank of Italy. 
Lastly, Decree Law 185/2008 (ratified by Law 2/2009) authorizes a financial intervention by 
the  state  to  increase  the  capital  of  fundamentally  sound  banks.  In  this  case  it  is  not  a 
question  of  rescue  operations,  but  of  a  measure  to  strengthen  the  system  and,  in  a 
macroeconomic  environment  that  has  deteriorated  sharply,  to  avert  a  perverse  spiral 
between  loan  defaults  and  credit  restriction.  The  state  intervenes  by  taking  up  financial 
instruments issued  by  banks.  These  can  be  counted  for  prudential  purposes  in  core  tier 1 
capital, because both their remuneration and their value depend on the issuer’s profitability 
and  capital  adequacy,  and  they  may  therefore  be  used  to  absorb  possible  losses  in  all 
circumstances.  Applicant  banks  must  adopt  a  code  of  ethics,  including  with  regard  to 
executive  compensation,  and  undertake  to  sustain  the  financing  of  customers,  particularly 
households  and  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  This  commitment  has  been 
appropriately defined, taking into account the level of the demand for loans and the need to 
maintain standards of prudent credit allocation. 
The measure has been made operational by a decree of the Minister for the Economy and 
Finance. The Bank of Italy has given banks the necessary technical guidance. The economic 
terms  of  the  issues  must  comply  with  the  guidelines  established  by  the  European  Union; 
several alternative schemes have been defined, partly at the request of the Bank of Italy, to 
make  adherence  to  the  plan  more  advantageous  for  banks  that  intend  to  redeem  their 
instruments within a relatively short time. The terms of the Italian instruments are in line with 
those offered by other European countries. I expect banks to make use of them in suitable 
amounts. 
The recapitalization law also provides for monitoring the transactions and their effects on the 
economy  and  institutes  special  observatories  at  prefectures,  with  the  participation  of  the 
interested  parties.  The  Bank  of  Italy  will  supply  the  Ministry  for  the  Economy  and  Finance 
with data and analyses on the evolution of credit and borrowing costs on a regional basis, as 
an additional supplement to the ample geographically disaggregated data already released in 
its publications. The statistical information will allow any specific situations of tension to be 
identified. 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2009
interference 
In  my  opinion,  political  and  administrative 
It is essential that analysis of credit conditions at local level not stray into a role of pressuring 
banks,  prompting  them  to  relax  the  standards  of  sound  and  prudent  management  in  the 
selection  of  borrowers. 
in 
assessments of individual cases of creditworthiness must be avoided. Lending is and must 
remain an entrepreneurial activity, based on a prudent, professional evaluation of the validity 
of  companies’  plans.  Sooner  or  later,  imprudent  banks  end  up  in  distress  and  also  cease 
lending. But the test posed by the crisis is severe and requires the ability to be good bankers 
even when the economy is doing badly. The inevitable deterioration in loan quality due to the 
recession calls for far-sighted choices: just keeping the accounts straight is not enough. Firm 
support  for  creditworthy  customers  prevents  an  excessive  credit  squeeze,  which  would 
aggravate  the  recession,  thereby  worsening  the  position  of  banks’  customers.  As  I  have 
already said, every opportunity must be taken to strengthen the capital of banks, choosing 
the  most  appropriate  form  in  each  case:  recourse  to  the  market,  retained  earnings,  or  the 
instruments offered by the state. 
The restoration of confidence in the banking system is a global, not a national question. In 
my view, four conditions are essential. First, the uncertainty still surrounding the value of the 
most  troubled  assets  on  banks’  balance  sheets  must  be  dispelled;  this  must  become  an 
integral  part  of  public  interventions  in  support  of  the  financial  system.  It  is  indispensable, 
especially in Europe, that similar measures be based on common principles, in order to avert 
competitive  disparities  between  intermediaries  of  different  countries  and  between  banks 
exposed in differing degrees to the problem of impaired assets. 
Second, in determining recapitalization objectives, it is vital that the definitions of bank capital 
be the same at international level. 
Third, the authorities have made it clear that they intend to protect all systemically important 
institutions, endow them with the capital needed to face stress conditions, protect depositors 
and have the shareholders alone bear any losses. To all intents and purposes banks’ other 
creditors are protected against losses. This must be explained with absolute clarity; it is the 
only way to drastically reduce the risk premiums that the markets are still demanding on bank 
liabilities. 
Fourth, it is time to go beyond dealing with the problems inherited from the past and consider 
how to ensure the availability of credit from now on. Recapitalizing banks is necessary to this 
end,  but  it  is  not  sufficient;  there  is  a  need  to  think  about  new,  even  unconventional 
instruments. 
This  last  point  is  especially  pertinent  for  Italy,  where  neutralizing  the  complex  financial 
instruments  whose  value  has  plunged  is  of  limited  relevance  and  finding  instruments  that 
directly affect the availability of loans for firms and households is more important. 
One possibility would be the issuing of public guarantees for the senior tranches of pools of 
new loans, with a view to reviving an important channel of financing, loan securitization, that 
has completely dried up today. If banks are able to sell part of their loans on an active and 
liquid secondary market, they can use the liquidity obtained to reactivate the supply of credit. 
A scheme of this kind would have to be carefully designed in order to ensure its effectiveness 
in terms of new lending, give banks a correct structure of incentives and minimize the costs 
to  taxpayers.  The  originator  bank  should  retain  some  of  the  risk,  thereby  still  having  the 
incentive to select creditworthy borrowers; it should pay a suitable fee for the issue of the 
guarantee,  commensurate  with  the  quality  of  the  underlying  loans.  Limiting  the  public 
guarantee to the least risky portion of the pool of securitized loans keeps the state from being 
assigned an inappropriate role in the assessment of creditworthiness. Objective criteria could 
be  established  for  selecting  loans  of  good  quality  (for  example,  mortgages  with  a  loan-to-
value ratio not above a given limit and loans to small and medium-sized firms backed by the 
Guarantee Fund for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises), so as to encourage subscription 
of the entire pool of securitized loans by the market and limit the possible cost to taxpayers. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 7
Some features of the tax treatment of banks and other intermediaries in Italy that lack a clear 
economic  logic  and  produce  a  competitive  disadvantage  with  respect  to  other  countries 
should be reconsidered. 
Value adjustments to loans are deductible from taxable income each year only up to 0.3 per 
cent  of  a  bank’s  total  outstanding  loans;  writedowns  exceeding  that  amount  are  deducted 
over a period of eighteen years. The limit and the rules on the writedown period have been 
tightened repeatedly in recent years. It is difficult to see the economic justification or to find 
comparable provisions in the other major European countries. In France, Germany and the 
United Kingdom, value adjustments are tax-deductible on a loan-by-loan basis, in line with 
those stated in the accounts; in France and Germany, flat-rate allocations to provisions are 
also allowed. The penalization of Italian banks is pro-cyclical, because the burden is greater 
during cyclical downturns, when loan losses increase; at present, the mechanism is exerting 
a disproportionate impact on the credit system. 
In banks accounts, the limit on the deductibility of value adjustments results in an advance 
payment of taxes, in essence a tax credit. At the end of 2007 this credit amounted to some 
€4  billion;  for  2008  it  comes  to  €1.4  billion.  Writedowns  are  also  non-deductible  for  the 
regional tax on productive activities (IRAP) and thus diminish profit. The total impact of these 
deduction limits on banking profit amounts to some €400 million yearly. 
A loss always becomes fully deductible when it is realized – if the debtor is in bankruptcy 
proceedings;  otherwise,  the  revenue  agency  can  object  that  the  loss  is  not  “certain  and 
precise,” with the risk of an ensuing tax dispute. This risk affects the cost and availability of 
credit. In the present phase, during which loan losses will presumably increase, it would be 
advisable to diminish, as much as possible, the causes of regulatory uncertainty and hence 
the tax risks for the system. 
Starting with 2008, a portion of banks’ interest expenditure (currently 4 per cent) is no longer 
deductible from corporate income tax or the regional tax on productive activities. The ceiling 
also  applies  to  transactions  on  the  interbank  market,  thus  constituting  a  drag  on  its 
operations. For a bank, interest expenditure is what the cost of raw materials is for any other 
business. Neither the United States nor the  main European countries have any equivalent 
rule. Also starting last year, administrative expenses and depreciation are only 90 per cent 
deductible for purposes of IRAP, while dividends are exempt for 50 per cent of the amount 
received.  These  limits  are  specific  to  the  financial  industry  and  do  not  apply  to  other 
enterprises. Official estimates put the total cost of the non-deductibility of interest expenditure 
this year at €1.1 billion, a quarter of this due to interbank transactions. 
This  year,  the  VAT  exemption  on  auxiliary  services  provided  within  a  banking  group  is 
abolished.  The  exemption  reduced  the  cost  to  banks  of  the  non-deductibility  of  VAT  on 
purchases of  goods  and  services and  made  up  for  Italy’s lack  of  the  “group  VAT”  regime, 
which  in  many  other  European  countries  avoids  the  application  of  VAT  to  intra-group 
transactions.  It  is  desirable  that  Italy  institute  the  “group  VAT”  regime  envisaged  by  the 
Community directive, thus coming into line with the other main EU member states. 
Considering that government estimates put the additional cost of the non-deductibility of VAT 
at €400 million a year, the overall reduction in banks’ net profits due to these specific direct 
and indirect tax measures will be nearly €2 billion this year. 
High taxes mean less self-financing, less capital, less lending capacity.  
A bank’s good name, the basis of a solid relationship with customers, is always a precious 
asset,  and  all  the  more  so  in  times  of  crisis.  Safeguarding  and  enhancing  the  banking 
system’s reputation requires irreproachable conduct in practice, no less than strict rules. 
Transparent and correct relations with customers protect consumers. They spur competition, 
ensuring  full  comparability  of  products.  They  are  an  important  part  of  sound  and  prudent 
bank  management,  because  they  reduce  reputational  and  legal  risks.  They  safeguard  the 
stability of the system. 
8 
 BIS Review 38/2009
It is the responsibility of Consob to oversee the transparency and correctness of those who 
offer  financial  products  and  investment  services  to  the  public.  For  typical  banking 
transactions,  the  law  assigns  such  supervision  to  the  Bank  of  Italy.  This  activity  has  been 
stepped up in recent years. We have set up a special unit to monitor banks’ relations with 
customers.  We  have  drafted  a  radical  revision  of  the  regulations  under  our  jurisdiction. 
Tomorrow, public consultation will begin, using the Internet, on two major proposals: one for 
the practical institution of the new procedure for out-of-court settlement of disputes between 
banks and customers; the other for new provisions, designed in part through discussions with 
associations  of  banks,  other  intermediaries  and  consumers,  to  make  the  protections  for 
correctness  in  dealings  with  customers  more  effective.  With  these  new  rules  we  intend  to 
make the documents for customers clearer, more concise and comparable. The instruments 
governing  the  most  common  products,  mortgage  loans  and  current  accounts,  will  be 
especially incisive. 
For some time now we have intensified our controls. As far as it is within our power, we have 
directed them to substantial and not merely formal compliance with the rules. In the last three 
years  we  have  performed  checks  at  452  intermediaries  and  more  than  2,300  branches. 
Where we have found specific violations of the rules on notifying the public of the conditions 
offered, we have initiated sanction procedures (a total of 49, 11 of which have concluded with 
the levying of sanctions). In 206 cases, though the grounds for formal sanction were lacking, 
we  called  upon  the  intermediary  to  comply  more  closely  in  substance  with  the  rules;  we 
asked for the introduction of organizational arrangements and internal controls to guarantee 
better customer relations. Where necessary, intermediaries were required to refund sums of 
money unduly collected from customers and report on this to the Bank of Italy. Recently we 
have extended our controls to banks’ websites, in order to make sure that on-line customers 
have protection equivalent to that enjoyed by those using the traditional branch network. 
Bank customers often write to the Bank of Italy to report what they consider to be incorrect 
conduct.  We  receive  nearly  6,000  letters  a  year.  In  every  single  case  we  respond  to  the 
writer  and  ask  the  bank  involved  to  explain  its  position,  providing  a  clear  answer  and 
reporting it to us. Where necessary, we take the appropriate supervisory measures. 
On  mortgage  loans,  we  have  reminded  intermediaries  of  the  need  to  join  in  the  interbank 
procedures 
for 
noncompliance. On current accounts, we conduct an annual sample survey of banks’ terms 
and conditions, whose results will be presented in our Annual Report.  
rules  changes  now  allow  sanctions 
loan  portability.  Recent 
for 
 The crisis has highlighted the need to correct some significant features of the international 
financial architecture. More robust capital requirements for banks together with measures to 
counter  their  pro-cyclical  effects;  limits  on  excessive  leverage  for  financial  institutions;  the 
extension of prudential rules to segments of financial business that in some countries have 
largely  escaped  coverage;  strengthening  the  role  of  central  banks  in  guaranteeing  the 
macroeconomic aspects of stability – these are the most important elements of a radical and 
expeditious programme of revision that has been set in motion with a speed and a degree of 
international cohesion that would have been unthinkable a short time ago.  
The  need  for  strong  global  coordination  is  evident  and  universally  recognized.  The  major 
emerging countries have taken a larger role in the governance of the financial system. This is 
not just a matter of fairness; it is a requisite for effective intervention.  
I  do  not  intend  to  dwell  on  these  themes  here.  But  I  would  like  to  stress  that  improved 
supervisory coordination is essential above all at European level, if we want to preserve the 
benefits of the single capital market. There is growing support in Europe for bold solutions 
involving  the  sharing  of  some  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions.  The  new  European 
supervisory  architecture  will  not  dispense  with  the  wealth  of  knowledge,  expertise,  and 
familiarity with the market built up by national supervisors: it will need to capitalize on these 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 9
assets within an integrated framework. The experience of the European System of Central 
Banks shows that this route can be taken successfully. 
The recent report of the high-level De Larosière Group of experts points in this direction. In 
particular,  I  should  like  to  underscore  its  attention  to  macroprudential  supervision,  to  be 
assigned  to  a  central  body;  the  stress  on  the  harmonization  of  rules  and  supervisory 
standards;  and  the  call  for  Community  coordination  of  the  “colleges”  that  exercise 
supervision over the large European banking groups. The decision-making processes of the 
system,  the  powers  and  responsibilities  of  European  and  national  supervisors,  have  to  be 
designed  with  care.  The  European  Commission’s  intention  to  proceed  with  all  necessary 
speed is commendable. 
10 
 BIS Review 38/2009
