Masaaki Shirakawa: Global financial crisis and policy responses by the 
Bank of Japan 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Board  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 22 December 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have this opportunity to speak before business leaders in Japan here today. 
Time flies, and it is only about a week before the turn of the year. Looking back, this year has 
been  a  particularly  severe  one  both  for  overseas  economies  and  Japan's  economy.  The 
slowdown  in  the  world  economy  gradually  became  pronounced,  reflecting  the  turmoil  in 
global financial markets since the summer of 2007, and the situation changed significantly 
especially  since  the  bankruptcy  filing  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  mid-September.  Many  in 
corporate  management  have  expressed  the  view  that  the  sharp  downturn  in  overseas 
economies  and  Japan's  economy  over  the  past  several  months  is  one  they  have  never 
experienced before, and the severity of the situation is clearly shown in the recent economic 
data. Today, I would like to take this opportunity to review this year's developments in global 
financial markets, the world economy, and Japan's economy, talk about the background to 
the  current  global  financial  crisis,  and  lastly  explain  the  Bank  of  Japan's  thinking  on  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Global financial markets and the world economy 
I.  
I would like to start with developments in global financial markets and the world economy.  
As you know, the turmoil in global financial markets since the summer of 2007 was caused 
by  declines  in  the  prices  of  securitized  products  backed  by  subprime  mortgages.  It  is  not 
appropriate to limit our understanding of this trouble as "the subprime mortgage problem" or 
interpret  it  as  "the  financial  sector's  fault".  In  essence,  it  was  caused  by  the  bursting  of  a 
global credit bubble – a phenomenon generated by a combination of the rise in asset prices 
and  the  increase  in  credit  and  leverage.  During  the  period  of  the  credit  bubble,  firms  in 
general enjoyed the fruits of high growth in the world economy. The rise and bursting of the 
credit bubble was observed to the greatest degree in the U.S. economy, but other economies 
also experienced similar phenomena, albeit with some differences in degree. The turmoil in 
financial  markets  surfaced  as  "liquidity  constraints"  when  conduits  and  aggregators  of 
securitized  products  and  financial  institutions  faced  difficulties  in  raising  funds.  Losses 
incurred by financial institutions eventually expanded due to declines in the prices of various 
securitized products, and this in turn led to a tightening of credit standards. 
As  a  result,  there  was  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity,  impairing  financial 
institutions'  assets.  As  was  the  case  in  Japan  after  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  financial 
conditions  in  the  United  States  deteriorated  with  market  participants' pessimism  rising  and 
falling  in  a  repetitive  pattern.  Needless  to  say,  the  situation  deteriorated  sharply  since  the 
bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers in mid-September. Since then, market participants and 
investors have been extremely sensitive to counterparty risk and have significantly increased 
their  risk  aversion.  Consequently,  the  volume  of  transactions  in  financial  markets  dropped 
sharply and market liquidity declined not only in uncollateralized funds transactions, but also 
in  collateralized  ones  such  as  repo  transactions,  which  are  fund  transactions  with 
collateralized bonds, and foreign exchange swaps. The situation deteriorated further, with a 
widening  of  credit  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  and  a  further  decline  in  the  prices  of 
securitized products. This is evidenced by the fact that the price level of securitized products 
such  as  collateralized  loan  obligations  (CLOs),  which  are  products  backed  by  corporate 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 1
loans, has dropped to around 20 percent of the level observed before the summer of 2007 in 
the case of single A-rated products. In the United States, delinquency rates have risen not 
only for mortgage loans but for commercial real estate loans and consumer loans as well, 
reflecting the weaker U.S. economy. Reflecting this, the capital bases of financial institutions 
have  been  further  impaired,  and  their  lending  attitudes  have  become  even  tighter  –  the 
emergence of a negative feedback loop between financial and economic activities. 
To  address  the  situation,  which  can  be  described  as  a  "financial  crisis,"  governments  and 
central banks have already taken decisive measures. Central banks have strived to stabilize 
financial markets by aggressively providing liquidity in their own currencies. In addition, since 
September major central banks including the Bank of Japan have been providing a massive 
amount of liquidity in U.S. dollars in their respective markets under a coordinated framework. 
Since  the  bankruptcy  filing  of  Lehman  Brothers,  governments  have  undertaken  such 
measures  as  placing  troubled  financial  institutions  under  government  control  and  injecting 
public funds, substantially expanding deposit insurance coverage, and providing guarantees 
for financial institutions' debts. 
Despite the numerous measures taken in each country, global financial markets as a whole 
remain  under  great  strains.  In  money  markets,  interest  rates  on  comparatively  short-term 
instruments have recovered to the level before the bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers, due 
partly to the decisive measures taken by governments and central banks to date. However, 
interest  rates  on  longer-term  instruments  remain  elevated.  Stock  prices  have  fluctuated 
widely  against  the  backdrop  of  concerns  over  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy.  Credit 
spreads  on  corporate  bonds  have  been  at  a  high  level  due  to  concerns  about  corporate 
performance. The tightness of liquidity conditions among financial institutions has begun to 
improve  somewhat,  but  the  crux  of  the  problem  has  now  shifted  to  the  magnitude  and 
duration of adjustments in the world economy. 
The slowdown in the world economy has gradually become marked in 2008. In particular, the 
negative  feedback  loop  operating  between  financial  and  economic  activities  is  no  longer 
confined  to  the  U.S.  and  European  economies  but  has  recently  begun  to  be  observed  in 
other  economies,  indicating  that  the  conditions  of  the  world  economy  have  become  more 
severe. 
At the beginning of December, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), which 
determines  the  business  cycle  of  the  U.S.  economy,  announced  that  the  U.S.  economy, 
which  had  been  expanding  from  November  2001,  already  entered  a  recession  phase  in 
December  2007.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  significantly  reduced  its  target  for  the  federal 
funds  rate  since  last  fall.  Nevertheless,  due  to  the  widening  of  credit  spreads,  the  interest 
rates  applied  to  loans  extended  to  financial  institutions,  firms,  and  households  have  been 
rising so far. With regard to the housing market, which holds the key to the outlook for the 
U.S. economy, adjustments are likely to continue. Given the tightening lending attitudes of 
financial institutions, it is likely that fund-raising conditions will remain severe for firms and 
households.  The  prevalent  view  regarding  the  timing  of  the  recovery  in  the  U.S.  economy 
seems to be the latter half of 2009, but I think that this view is backed by the expectation that 
the current severe situation is likely to continue for some time, and not by some reasoning 
indicating that the economy is likely to recover from that time. In any event, it is likely that the 
current  recession  may  become  the  longest  in  the  postwar  era,  longer  than  the  16  months 
recorded in the periods 1973 to 1975 and 1981 to 1982. Economic conditions in Europe have 
also deteriorated. As in the U.S. economy, the lending attitudes of financial institutions have 
tightened,  and  pressures  acting  to  depress  economic  activity  from  the  financial  side  have 
intensified. In addition, the slowdown in emerging economies – for example, in Asia, Central 
and Eastern Europe, and Latin America – where economic conditions have been favorable 
until relatively recently, has become increasingly pronounced due not only to the decrease in 
their  exports  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  economic  conditions  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe but also to the adverse effects on domestic demand in emerging economies from the 
turmoil in global financial markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 4/2009
Economic  growth  rates  around  the  globe  have  been  declining  simultaneously  and  rapidly, 
albeit with some differences in level, as the effects of the financial crises in the United States 
and Europe have spread to other economies. Without a doubt, the distinctive features of the 
current recession are "simultaneity" and "rapidity." At present, not only advanced economies 
such as the United States, Europe, and Japan but also emerging economies are undergoing 
either  an  economic  slowdown  or  a  recession  simultaneously  for  the  first  time  since  the 
formerly planned economies joined the world of the market economies. As for the rapidity, it 
is obvious from the degree of downward revisions made to GDP growth rate forecasts since 
the  beginning  of  this  year.  According  to  the  World  Economic  Outlook  released  by  the 
International Monetary Funds (IMF), the growth of world output for 2009 was projected to be 
4.4 percent in January, but was revised downward to 2.2 percent in November. The output of 
advanced economies was also revised downward from 2.1 percent to minus 0.3 percent. 
Why has the world economy simultaneously faced rapid economic deceleration? There are a 
few likely hypotheses. First, the nature of economic downturn may have changed due to the 
globalization of financial markets. It is no exaggeration to say that a negative feedback loop, 
which  I  have  just  discussed  with  regard  to  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  is  now 
operating on a global basis. A typical example of this can be seen in the reduction of credit 
extension  to  emerging  economies  by  U.S.  and  European  financial  institutions.  Second, 
technical  innovations  in  the  field  of  information  and  communications,  as  represented  by 
supply chain management, may have had an impact. While supply chain management has 
enabled efficient management of production and inventories, at the same time it may have 
also facilitated rapid recognition of the decline in final demand, inducing sharp reductions in 
production.  Additionally,  with  today's  easy  access  to  diverse  information  via  the  Internet, 
changes  in  the  psychology  of  corporate  management  and  consumers  may  have  become 
increasingly  synchronized  around  the  globe.  Third,  with  the  global  economic  deceleration 
and turmoil in financial markets never experienced before, feelings of anxiety and defensive 
behavior may have spread globally, further accelerating the downturn. 
I am not sure which of these hypotheses on  the simultaneity and rapidity of the economic 
deceleration actually applies. Regardless, the background to the deceleration in world growth 
boils  down  to  the  single  fact  that  various  "excesses"  accumulated  during  the  prolonged 
period of high growth that continued until recently. Looking back, the world economy, until 
recently,  had  been  enjoying  unprecedentedly  favorable  conditions.  High  growth  rates  of 
around 5 percent continued from 2004 to 2007. On the other hand, prices, notwithstanding 
high  growth,  remained  stable  on  the  whole  until  the  recent  past,  due  to  an  expansion  of 
production  capacity  resulting  from  the  participation  of  emerging  economies  in  the  global 
market economy. Although memory fades, there were hot discussions in 2004 on the risk of 
deflation. "China exporting deflation" and "threat of deflation" were issues often addressed at 
international  conferences.  Low  interest  rates  continued  for  a  prolonged  period  in  an 
environment of high growth and low inflation. In this continued benign environment of high 
growth, stable prices, and low interest rates, various excessive activities, both economic and 
financial, were undertaken and "excesses" accumulated. Investors and financial institutions 
eased  their  credit  standards,  and  a  global  credit  bubble  emerged.  The  substantial  rise  in 
asset  prices,  the  surge  in  commodity  and  energy  prices,  and  the  significant  increase  in 
leverage  by  market  participants  were  all  indications  of  excessive  financial  and  economic 
activities.  Looking  calmly  at  the  current  deterioration  in  economic  conditions  around  the 
globe,  it  can  be  viewed  basically  as  part  of  the  process  of  correcting  the  "excesses"  that 
accumulated during the period of the credit bubble. 
As you know, Japan experienced this adjustment process from the 1990s to the beginning of 
the 2000s, following the bursting of the economic bubble. Japan's economy finally started to 
return to a full-fledged recovery path with the resolution of the "three excesses" of production 
capacity,  employment,  and  debt.  In  the  case  of  the  U.S.  economy,  key  factors  for  the 
economy to recover will be how adjustments in the household sector progress and to what 
extent financial institutions can write off their losses and enhance their capital bases. Future 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 3
developments in the world economy will be critical as well. Looking back, Japan's economic 
recovery materialized with the support of high growth in overseas economies. However, the 
current  situation  is  difficult  in  that  this  time  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy  is  highly 
uncertain. 
Current situation and outlook for Japan's economy 
II.  
Next, I would like to discuss the current situation of Japan's economy and the outlook for its 
future,  taking  into  account  the  developments  in  global  financial  markets  and  the  world 
economy that I have just described. 
Japan's economy continued to enjoy a moderate but prolonged economic expansion from the 
beginning of 2002, but  since the middle of 2007 the economy has been hit by a series of 
negative  shocks,  and  become  increasingly  sluggish.  Economic  growth  began  to  slow  from 
around the end of 2007, due mainly to a sharp decline in housing investment as the revised 
Building  Standard  Law  came  into  force.  Growth  in  corporate  profits  and  wages  has  been 
subdued due to the deterioration in the terms of trade since this spring reflecting increases in 
energy and materials prices, and as a result growth in business fixed investment and private 
consumption has been slowing at a moderate pace. The slowdown in overseas economies 
has become pronounced as strains in global financial markets and in the U.S. and European 
financial systems have intensified since this summer, and reflecting this, growth in Japan's 
exports turned negative. And since September, tightening in corporate financing, which I will 
discuss  later,  has  started  to  negatively  influence  economic  activity.  With  these  negative 
effects accumulating, economic conditions have recently been deteriorating. The results of 
the December Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released last 
week also indicated the severe situation of Japan's economy. Looking ahead, we judge that 
economic  conditions  are  likely  to  increase  in  severity  for  the  immediate  future.  This  is 
because  domestic  private  demand  is  likely  to  weaken  further  as  corporate  profits  decline, 
firms'  funding  conditions  deteriorate,  and  the  employment  and  income  conditions  in  the 
household sector worsen, and also because exports are expected to decrease sharply due to 
the further slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen. 
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items 
excluding fresh food had been around 0 percent from around 2003, but from around the end 
of 2007 it rose at a rapid pace, especially in petroleum products and food, due to the surge in 
commodity  prices,  and  reached  2.4  percent  this  summer.  Thereafter,  it  began  to  decline 
reflecting  the  drop  in  commodity  prices.  Looking  ahead,  given  that  aggregate  supply  and 
demand  conditions  will  likely  ease  as  growth  in  real  GDP  is  expected  to  fall  short  of  the 
potential  growth  rate  for  the  next  several  quarters,  and  that  commodity  prices  have  been 
falling, the rate of change is expected to moderate further. 
In  sum,  economic  conditions  have  been  deteriorating  and  are  likely  to  become  still  more 
severe  in  the  immediate  future.  With  regard  to  risk  factors,  much  depends  on  the  future 
developments in the financial crises in the United States and Europe and their impact, and 
on developments in overseas economies and financial conditions in Japan. Attention must be 
paid  to  the  further  downside  risks  posed  to  economic  activity.  As  for  prices,  there  is  a 
possibility that the inflation rate will decline further if the downside risks to economic activity 
materialize or commodity prices fall further. 
Among the risk factors affecting the outlook for Japan's economy, I have already discussed 
the situation of the world economy. Financial conditions in Japan have deteriorated sharply 
on the whole. This can be seen in tighter funding conditions in the CP and corporate bond 
markets as well as in an increasing number of small and even large firms which report that 
their financial positions are weak and the lending attitudes of financial institutions are severe. 
Should  the  severity  in  financial  conditions  such  as  the  lending  attitudes  of  financial 
institutions  and  in  the  issuance  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  increase,  pressures  acting  to 
depress economic activity from the financial side may intensify. With regard to bank loans, 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2009
which  had  been  covering  the  decline  in  the  issuance  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds,  the 
December Tankan shows an increasing number of firms reporting that the lending attitudes 
of financial institutions have tightened. The increase in the number of corporate bankruptcies 
and  the  fall  in  stock  prices  observed  recently  may,  through  a  rise  in  credit  costs  and  an 
increase  in  the  risk  associated  with  stockholdings,  change  financial  institutions'  risk-taking 
behavior, thereby leading to a tightening of their lending attitudes. In this regard, the current 
situation  in  Japan  requires  careful  examination  of  a  possible  negative  feedback  loop 
operating between financial and economic activities. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
Having discussed the current situation and the outlook for Japan's economy, I will now turn to 
the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. Since September, when the turmoil in global financial 
markets and in the U.S. and European financial systems increased in severity, the Bank has 
promptly undertaken various measures. These can be categorized in three areas: reductions 
in policy interest rates, measures to stabilize the market, and measures to support corporate 
financing. I would now like to explain the thinking behind these policy measures, including 
those decided last week. 
First are the measures taken as interest rate policy. Since February last year, the Bank had 
maintained the target of its policy interest rate, the uncollateralized overnight call rate, at 0.5 
percent. At the end of this October, the Bank reduced the target to 0.3 percent, and it was 
further reduced to 0.1 percent last week. The Federal Reserve, last week, also reduced its 
target for the federal funds rate, and set the interest rates on required and excess reserve 
balances  at  0.25  percent.  At  the  same  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  announced  that  the 
exceptionally low level of the federal funds rate will continue for some time. When interbank 
overnight interest rates are lowered this far, meaningful policy in terms of stimulating demand 
through interest rates shifts toward easing firms' accessibility of funds. This holds true in both 
Japan and the United States. 
In  this  sense,  measures  that  will  ensure  stability  in  financial  markets  and  maintain  an 
environment  to  extract  maximal  monetary  easing  effects  are  extremely  important.  In  this 
area,  the  Bank  implemented  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  soon  after  the 
bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers as a coordinated measure among the central banks in 
major  economies,  and  has  been  supplying  sufficient  dollar  funds  ever  since.  These 
operations are  currently  being  conducted  without  limitation  on  the  amount,  as  long  as it  is 
within  the  value  of  collateral.  As  a  result,  dollar  funding  rates  have  declined,  mainly  for 
shorter terms, and these operations are supporting economic activity by relieving the funding 
concerns of Japanese firms through reducing the dollar funding pressures among financial 
institutions. With regard to yen funds, the complementary deposit facility has been introduced 
to  enable  smooth  and  sufficient  provision  of  funds,  and  funds  for  over  the  year-end  have 
been  provided  in  larger  amounts  than  a  year  before.  Although  the  influence  of  intensified 
tensions in the global financial markets is being felt in Japanese markets in the form of large 
fluctuations in stock prices and a widening of credit spreads in the corporate bond market, 
Japanese financial markets have still been relatively stable compared to U.S. and European 
markets, in part because of the swift money market actions taken by the Bank. In addition, at 
the Monetary Policy Meeting held last week, the amount of outright purchases of JGBs was 
increased from 14.4 trillion yen per year to 16.8 trillion yen per year. This is to supply longer-
term funds and resolve the problem of having to conduct frequent short-term funds supplying 
operations, thereby facilitating smooth money market operations. 
Along with money market stabilizing measures, the Bank has introduced various measures to 
support  corporate  financing  with  a  view  to  extracting  maximal  monetary  easing  effects.  In 
advanced  economies,  the  parties  that  extend  credit  directly  to  firms  are  private  financial 
institutions  and  investors,  and  the  role  of  central  banks  is  to  indirectly  support  this  credit 
extension. Specifically, the role of central banks is to provide liquidity through money market 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 5
operations and to take corporate debt as eligible collateral for its credit extension to private 
financial  institutions.  If  central  banks  implement  measures  that  take  on  the  credit  risks  of 
individual firms, this will inevitably take away the businesses of private financial institutions. 
In addition, considering the increasing possibility of incurring losses, undertaking such credit 
risks must be examined from various aspects such as role sharing with the government in a 
broad sense, the financial health of the central bank, and confidence in the currency. In this 
connection, when the Federal Reserve introduced its outright purchases of CP, it attached 
various safety measures such as accepting only the most highly rated CP. 
As I mentioned earlier, financial conditions in Japan are deteriorating sharply on the whole, 
and the risk that low interest rates may not exert their intended impact on economic activity 
has  increased.  Based  on  this  recognition,  since  this  September  the  Bank  has  introduced 
various measures to reduce such risk through providing liquidity to financial institutions and 
expanding the range of eligible corporate debt accepted as collateral. The Bank has already 
been  conducting  purchases  of  CP  under  repurchase  agreements,  and  these  have  been 
significantly increased in terms of frequency and size to support the better functioning of the 
CP market. In addition, with a view to facilitating corporate financing during the run-up to the 
calendar and fiscal year-ends, the range of corporate bonds and loans on deeds accepted as 
eligible  collateral  has  been  expanded  and,  as  a  temporary  measure,  BBB-rated  corporate 
bonds and loans on deeds have been included in eligible collateral. Furthermore, a decision 
was  made  to  introduce  a  special  operation  to  facilitate  corporate  financing,  which  will  be 
implemented  in  early  January.  This  special  operation  will  enable  financial  institutions  to 
obtain  funds  over  the  fiscal  year-end  with  no  explicit  ceiling  on  the  total  funds  available, 
although the maximum loans available to individual financial institutions will not exceed the 
value of the corporate debt pledged as collateral. Also, the interest rate on these funds will 
be  set  lower  than  corresponding  market  interest  rates.  With  these  measures,  the  Bank  is 
aiming to support, in terms of funds availability and costs, the lending activities of financial 
institutions and transactions on the CP and corporate bond markets. 
In  addition,  given  that  the  tightness  in  corporate  financing  may  increase  further  during  the 
run-up  to  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  the  Bank  decided,  last  week,  to  introduce  outright 
purchases of CP as a temporary measure, and to investigate how other corporate financing 
instruments may be employed as a central bank. Since outright purchases of CP essentially 
undertake the credit risks of individual firms, they constitute an exceptional step taken by the 
central bank in light of the Bank's fundamental position that the main purpose of central bank 
operations  is  to  provide  liquidity.  Looking  back  on  the  history  of  central  banks  in  leading 
countries,  the  only  cases  where  central  banks  have  purchased  corporate  financing 
instruments  outright  are  the  Bank  of  Japan's  purchasing  of  ABCP,  ABSs,  and  corporate 
stocks in the first half of this decade and the Federal Reserve's purchasing of CP mentioned 
earlier. Nevertheless, it becomes difficult to draw a clear line between measures to provide 
liquidity  and  those  that  take  on  credit  risk  in  crisis  situations.  Central  banks  are  expected, 
based on the current economic and financial situation, to fully recognize the importance of 
their  responsibilities  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  prices  and  of  the  financial  system,  and  to 
make judgments on specific and practical matters in view of appropriately assuming these 
responsibilities. The Bank, in providing support to corporate financing, will examine the scope 
of undertakings that are necessary and appropriate for a central bank, as well as appropriate 
ways, including the involvement of the government, to ensure the Bank's financial health and 
confidence in the currency. 
Closing remarks 
Today, I have discussed the conditions of global financial markets and the world economy, 
the  economic  situation  in  Japan,  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  also  presented 
some  outlook  for  the  coming  year.  Currently,  the  world  economy  is  in  a  severe  situation 
never experienced for many years that I may venture to call a crisis situation. The immediate 
task  is  "fire-fighting"  against  this  crisis,  and  we  are  doing  our  utmost.  At  the  same  time, 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2009
however, looking back on the developments in the world economy for the past two decades 
or  so,  the  phenomenon  of  the  rise  and  bursting  of  bubbles  seems  to  have  increased  in 
frequency and become visible across a wider range of economies. 
Considering  the  background  to  these  experiences,  it  seems  necessary  to  remember  that 
responding to crises with excessive policy actions may lead to larger crises later on. In the 
current  crisis,  many  issues  have  surfaced  in  central  banking  circles  in  areas  such  as  the 
basic  ideas  behind  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  the  regulation  and  supervision  of 
financial institutions. I am sure that various issues are also being reconsidered in the field of 
corporate  management,  given  the  progress  of  globalization  in  economic  and  financial 
activities. The Bank, through exchanging views with you, will do its utmost as a central bank 
to facilitate the return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 7
