Christian Noyer: Interview with the Financial Times 
Interview of Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, conducted by Mr Ben Hall, 
Paris correspondent, and Mr Ralph Atkins, Frankfurt bureau chief on 11 March 2009 in Paris, 
published on 12 March 2009. 
 Financial Times: Is the US appeal for a bigger and more concerted economic stimulus 
by Europe merited? 
Christian  Noyer:  If  one  wants  really  to  make  sure  that  all  countries  are  making  the 
appropriate contribution to the stabilisation and further recovery of the world economy, one 
should  take  into  account  everything.  It  so  happens  that  in  some  countries  the  automatic 
stabilisers play a greater role than in others. Automatic stabilisers mean public expenditure. 
They may be automatic but they have the same kind of impact on the economy. One could 
even say a bigger impact because, since they are automatic, they are disbursed immediately 
and feed into the purchasing power of citizens . Therefore their ability to spend, is quicker 
than  when  you  go  through  a  budgetary  process  that  takes  time  to  be  decided  and  then 
implemented and then disbursed. If you take everything into account, my general feeling is 
that the efforts being made by the major industrial countries are fairly comparable. 
FT: Do they need to do more? 
CN: What has been designed by various countries – bearing in mind the structure of their 
economies  and  the  relative  importance  of  the  automatic  stabilisers  –  is  probably  the  right 
balance  between  what  needs  to  be  done  to  stimulate global demand  and the necessity to 
retain the credibility of the fiscal policy and budgets over time. It is especially important in 
European countries where we have the feeling that the so-called Ricardian effects can play a 
role. So if we were to give the impression to citizens that public finances were to deteriorate 
by  too  much  and  for  too  long  consumers  might  increase  their  savings  ratio  to  prepare 
themselves  for  tax  increases  in  the  future  that  they  might  regard  as  inevitable,  or  the 
reduction of benefits and pensions. So you have to keep the right balance between long term 
credibility  and  immediate  stimulation.  As  far  as  we  can  judge,  that  balance  is  probably 
appropriate. That will have to be reviewed according to future economic developments.  
A related issue is the fact we all agree that a condition for the revival of the global economy 
is  that  financial  systems  everywhere  are  stabilised  and  that  stabilisation  is  convincing  the 
markets. I have the impression that we are a little more advanced in that regard in Europe 
than in the US. It is clear that the US authorities are making every effort to reach that goal, 
but that is probably as important as the size of the stimulus itself if we want to stabilise the 
economy. 
FT: What more should they be doing? 
CN:  They  should  finish  the  work  they  have  started  and  reach  the  goal  of  convincing  all 
market players that this is done and the financial system is fully repaired. 
FT: But do you think doing too little is riskier than doing too much? 
CN: I would say there are two risks. Doing too little is a risk. Doing too much is a risk. If you 
trigger these Ricardian effects and actually trigger a reduction in the spending propensity of 
consumers, then of course, the result would be worse.  
FT: Would you put the emphasis on putting the regulating framework and only discuss 
other measures if there is time address other issues, as Axel Weber said yesterday? 
CN: The regulatory framework was identified at the summit in November by G20 heads as a 
very important thing to give back confidence to all market players and citizens in the financial 
system  and  the  economy.  The  heads  [of  government  and  states]  set  out  a  road  map  on 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 1
which we have since been working on in various working groups. This holds true. Of course 
there are things that can only be implemented over the next cycle because I hope there will 
be things that are designed to be counter-cyclical and to provide for cushions in good times 
and help the financial system and therefore the health of the economy in the low part of the 
cycle. But I think that it is important already to agree on the principles even if they will be 
designed  in  detail  by  standard-setters.  There  are  important  principles  that  would  create 
confidence in the financial system, like subjecting all financial actors of systemic importance 
to appropriate regulation and/or oversight as needed.  
FT:  Is  there  a  difference  between  the  continentals  the  UK/UK  on  counter-cyclical 
provisioning by banks? 
CN: There are two different avenues that could be complementary. They are being studied in 
a  subgroup  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  in  the  Basel  committee  on  banking 
supervision. One has to do with the banking book, or classical loans, and is more or less the 
dynamic provisioning that the Spanish created. That could answer the national pro-cyclical 
effect  of  provisions,  that  is  when  you  increase  provisions  in  the  down-turn,  and  reduce 
provisions in the upturn, quite normally, because that’s what happens when you measure risk 
at a particular moment. But what the Spanish have done is to take the whole cycle, so that 
you  are  obliged  to  build  up  certain  provisions  in  the  upturn  and  you  can  use  them  in  the 
downturn  and  that  reduces  and  eventually  eliminates  the  pro-cyclical  effects  of  the  credit 
cycle. 
The second concept is that for the trading book. One could oblige banks to build up buffers 
using part or all of the increase in the value of securities held so that until you have finally 
sold the security, have booked the profit, you’ve got a potential profit that you can turn into a 
cushion. So when you enter a downturn and market values drop, the cushion would be the 
first defence against that. How it would work exactly still needs to be developed. 
These  are  two  different  types  of  activities,  two  different  types  of  cushion.  You  could  have 
both.  
FT: Could you imagine the ECB embarking on a large-scale programme of quantitative 
easing, or would you rule it out? 
CN:  I  would  not  rule  out  anything  and  we  have  not  ruled  out  anything.  What  I  believe  we 
must do – and we keep studying various options – is to look at a few things and see whether 
we  need  to  go  beyond  what  we  have  done  already.  By  the  way,  I  consider  that  we  are 
already implementing a non-standard monetary policy. The fact that we have, first, enlarged 
the pool of collateral and, second, decided to make the provision of liquidity at all maturities 
up  to  6  months  at  fixed  rates  and  for  unlimited  quantities,  means  we  are  not  in  a  normal 
framework. 
FT Would you call that quantitative easing? 
CN: It is a way of doing quantitative easing, certainly, because, it means that we can provide 
liquidity to each institution beyond what they actually need. Having given at our last policy 
meeting the assurance that we would continue this as long as is needed and at least until the 
beginning of next year, means that we have given the assurance to the banks that the easing 
policy will continue for quite a long period of time. 
Having said that, what we need to look at now is not the theory. We have to be pragmatic, 
and  look  at  what  works  and  what  does  not  work.  The  objective  of  so-called  additional 
measures would be to act where parts of the credit market are not working, the transmission 
mechanism  is  not  working.  A  central  bank  may  consider  that  at  a  certain  point  it  is 
appropriate to intervene directly in these markets. 
At the moment, we have some signs that the transmission mechanism, in terms of interest 
rates  in  almost  all  segments  of  the  credit  market,  works  relatively  well.  All  money  market 
segments have seen interest rates go down very significantly. It is interesting to note that if 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2009
you take the 3-month reference rates, there is only 30 basis points difference between the 
euribor  and  the  dollar  libor,  and  no  difference  vis-à-vis  sterling,  so  that  in  practice  the 
transmission is quite efficient in the euro segment. 
Finally, the possibility for corporates to issue securities – short term or long term – seems to 
have  revived  significantly  since  December.  But  we  have  to  see  how  this  continues  and 
develops, and whether there are some market segments that do not improve sufficiently or 
remain impaired. 
FT: But that means it will be weeks or months before you took such steps… 
CN: We are working on that. We will see what we feel might be necessary. 
FT: But if there were measures taken, they would be “credit easing” targeted a specific 
problems, not blanket quantitative easing in the way that the Bank of England is doing 
it? 
CN:  Well  the  Bank  of  England  is  apparently  concerned  about  the  monetary  base.  But  we 
don’t have the same problems for the time being with the monetary base in the euro area. I 
don’t know if it has something to do with the fact that banking intermediation in the euro area 
as a whole plays a bigger role than in the US or even in the UK.  
FT:  Some  of  your  colleagues  on  the  governing  council  want  to  make  a  very  clear 
distinction between fiscal policy and monetary policy – whereas in the UK and US they 
have become blurred. Does that prevent the ECB from doing QE? Would you have to 
go to governments first? 
CN:  No,  we  have  the  ability  to  decide  on  the  instruments  that  we  feel  we  need  to  use  to 
implement our monetary policy. The only thing is that of course we are attentive to the level 
of risks that we are taking as a central bank. I would certainly agree that we should not blur 
the distinction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. That does not mean there is not a 
good  understanding.  The  fact  that  governments  have  taken  all  the  actions  that  they  have 
taken to support the financial system is extremely important for central banks. It is certainly 
easier to accept a broad range of collateral when you know that the banking system as a 
whole  is  backed  by  the  clear  declaration  by  governments  that  they  will  not  let  a  systemic 
institution fail. 
FT: This position of the ECB appears to assume there is no risk of deflation. But do 
you  think  that  the  risks  of  deflation  have  increased,  given  the  sharp  contraction  in 
economic growth that we have seen? 
CN:  Of  course  one  should  always  remain  prudent.  We  know  that,  given  the  evolution  in 
prices of energy and non-processed foods, it is likely that we will have a few months toward 
the middle of the year with slightly negative inflation figures. But that is very different from the 
persistent decline in prices that characterises deflation.  
I do not think personally that the risks of deflation are very high in the euro area for several 
reasons. One is that we have increased liquidity by a considerable amount. In both the US 
and  the  euro  area,  central  banks  have  increased  liquidity  in  the  system  in  one  year  by 
roughly  the  same  amount,  proportionately,  as  the  Bank  of  Japan  did  in  the  early  1990s’ 
banking crisis in five years.  
Second, we have a number of rigidities in nominal wages. We have a number of rigidities in 
some prices, so that fuels automatically certain rises in core inflation normally, and for the 
time being we have not seen that change significantly.  
Third, when we look at long-term inflation expectations, until now they have remained well 
anchored to our definition of price stability. 
So  these  three  reasons  make  me  think  is  that what  would  normally  happen  is  that  after  a 
trough inflation will come back to somewhere close to our definition of price stability. But of 
course we have to remain cautious and be ready to act, and certainly if we felt there had 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 3
been  a  change  in  these  various  elements  we  should  ask  ourselves  if  other  non-standard 
monetary policy actions might be necessary.  
FT: Classic quantitative easing? 
CN: For instance? 
FT: Buying government bonds? 
CN: Possibly. 
FT: Axel Weber has said 1 per cent would be the floor for the ECB main policy rate. 
Others have said zero could be possible. Where do you stand? 
CN: I’m pragmatic. We have certainly not decided in advance that there is a minimum level 
that would be our floor. But there are a couple of things that we need to take into account. 
First, it is a general rule that the more you cut rates and you approach zero, the less efficient 
are  the  moves  in  terms  of  transmission  into  the  real  economy.  So  we  may  feel  that  at  a 
certain point we need to do something more, or we do not. But we can expect the effect to be 
relatively limited.  
Second, I think the framework we have set, results in something very different from what we 
had before. Having decided that we refinance at fixed rates for unlimited quantities, and with 
a  large  corridor  between  the  deposit  facility  and  lending  rate  means,  the  lending  rate  has 
become  the  ceiling  and  the  deposit  facility  rate  is  the  floor  and  markets  tend  to  move  the 
money market rates in between, with overnight rates at a very low level and the three month 
rate  at  a  level  which  can  be  below  the  refinancing  rate.  As  a  consequence,  the  rates 
effectively paid by borrowers are much closer to the situation in the US or the UK than most 
people would imagine. 
FT: What does that mean in practice? That the main policy rate need not go any lower, 
or can’t go any lower? 
CN: I didn’t say that. 
FT: Or that the deposit facility rate can’t go any lower? 
CN: I didn’t say that either. But it is clear that the room for manoeuvre on the deposit facility 
is  limited.  What  I  mean  is  that  if  we  keep  the  present  framework,  we  cannot  move  much. 
That’s obvious. If we want to move more,  we  have to change the framework, which could 
cause inconvenience. 
FT: So there is not much room for manoeuvre and very soon you are going to have to 
think about other non-standard measures? 
CN:  If  we  feel  we  need  more…  We  are  in  a  process  where  three  month  rates  lose  a  few 
basis points every day. Market and lending rates are continuing to move nicely downwards. 
The process has been fuelled by the 275 basis points cut that the ECB has decided. The 
process is not finished. We need some time for all that to feed through into the economy. 
FT: So no rate cut in April? 
CN:  We  will  see.  We  have  proved  that  we  were  always  ready  to  act  when  we  felt  it  was 
necessary. But we act on the basis of facts and figures, not only macro-economic facts and 
forecasts, but also on the actual developments in the financial markets.  
FT:  Do  this  week’s  French  industrial  production  figures  means  things  in  France  are 
going to get a lot worse than expected by the Banque de France and the government? 
CN: The figures were bad and I must say that they probably makes our own forecast of a 
decline of growth of 0.6 per cent during the first quarter maybe a little bit optimistic. But this 
being said it is difficult to judge what it means without all the analysis. For instance, when I 
look  at  the  negative  growth  of  the  last  quarter  –  minus  1.2  per  cent  in  France  –  one 
comforting  aspect  was  that  three-quarters  of  the  decline  was  due  to  a  reduction  in 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2009
inventories. So that was of course much better for the future because it means that once the 
inventories  are  back  to  the  required  level,  to  the  level  that  corporates  want  to  have, 
production starts up. So it is difficult to comment without seeing all the explanations. 
For the time being I have the feeling that our situation will be relatively, slightly better than 
that of some of our neighbour countries. What was one of our weaknesses in the past – that 
is a strong reliance on domestic demand and domestic consumption for growth, and certain 
weakness in net exports – has become a strength in the downturn. Exports have fallen, like 
in Germany, but their weight in GDP is much lower, so that it has hit the economy less. The 
consumer spending trend has remained positive. Compared to countries like Spain or the UK 
the  average  indebtedness  of  households  was  lower,  so  that  the  effect  of  the  turmoil  on 
consumer  spending  has  been  also  relatively  lower  than  in  other  countries.  For  all  these 
reasons we felt that we had some slightly better resilience, but we must remain prudent.  
FT: Should Germany do more in terms of fiscal stimulus? 
CN:  I  think  that  they  have  decided  on  a  second  package  that  is  sizable.  I  recognise  the 
importance of the efforts that Germany has made. 
FT: Your plans for a central clearing house for derivatives have provoked controversy 
in  London,  where  this  is  seen  as  a  continental  grab  for  business  to  pass  though 
LCH.Clearnet  and  people  are  unconvinced  that  you  need  to  have  this  lender-of-last-
resort, central bank function.  
CN: For me, the argument is very simple. If you really want to have a safe system you really 
need  these  clearing  houses  to  have  the  possibility  of  extensive  access  to  central  bank 
liquidity.  I  think  that  is  the  only  way  to  ensure  that  in  times  of  stress,  when  you  have 
eventually  defaults  of  counterparties,  you  can  manage  the  liquidity  in  a  smooth  fashion. 
Having said that, no central bank would accept large-scale access to central bank liquidity 
without having the oversight.  
FT:  But  market  participants  say  that  even  after  the  Lehman  collapse,  they  still 
managed  to  unlock  a  lot  of  these  trades  without  having  to  resort  to  central  bank 
liquidity. 
CN: Well, the fact that it went well doesn’t mean that it will always go well. It may depend 
also  on  the  type  of  instruments  that  you  are  clearing.  We  have  the  feeling  that  it  may  be 
different for, on the one hand, fixed-income instruments and, on the other hand, derivative 
instruments. But this is a long-standing position, it is not taken especially vis-à-vis London. 
FT: What sort of model of European capitalism will emerge after this economic crisis? 
CN: We will probably return to a more organised, ruled, economic system. We are discussing 
regulation of the financial system but it doesn’t mean that we need an over regulated system 
– certainly not. We have to strike a balance, but it is clear in Europe, that we hope we will 
have a system that will be more regulated, or at least better regulated, without holes in the 
system. But we are living in a global world and we need to have consistent rules around the 
world. 
FT:  But  Europe  also  needs  to  have  its  own  internal  dynamism,  to  encourage 
innovation. That was part of the problem of the economic model before the crisis. If 
you create more regulation, doesn’t that make the problem worse? 
CN: I think it does not prevent innovation if the rules are well designed. The lesson that we 
should take from the crisis is that if we let something an innovation – like hedge funds, or 
securitisation – develop freely and continue not to regulate it or exert any surveillance even if 
it grows to such an important level that it is systemic, then the risk is enormous. We should 
be able to detect when a systemic risk is becoming too big in the system and then act. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 5
