John Hurley: Financial stability and recent market developments in 
Ireland 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, to the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Finance and the Public Service, 
Dublin, 21 January 2009. 
 Good morning Chairman and members of the Joint Committee. Thank you for the invitation 
to  speak  with  you  today.  I  am  accompanied  by  Tony  Grimes,  the  Director  General  of  the 
Central Bank and Tom O’Connell, Assistant Director General, Economics.  
The Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland consists of the Central Bank 
and  the  Financial  Regulator,  each  with  its  own  responsibilities.  Among  the  Central  Bank’s 
key  responsibilities  are  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  the  provision  of  liquidity  and 
contributing to financial stability. The Financial Regulator’s key responsibilities are prudential 
regulation focussed on the individual financial institutions and consumer protection.  
In my own opening remarks, I would like to briefly recall the background to the current issues 
in  our  financial  system  and  in  the  economy  more  generally,  up  to  and  including  the 
nationalisation of Anglo Irish Bank, and to outline the on-going role of the Central Bank in 
dealing with these issues. As you know, last week’s Government decision regarding Anglo 
Irish  Bank  was  taken  in  consultation  with  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator.  This 
necessary decision reflects the commitment of the authorities here to maintaining the stability 
of the financial system and demonstrates that whatever actions are necessary in that regard 
will be taken. With reference to financial stability issues more generally, I will comment on the 
actions taken by the authorities here to secure the stability of our domestic financial system, 
particularly since the Lehman’s bankruptcy last September.  
The domestic economy  
The  Irish  economy  is  currently  going  through  a  very  difficult  period  and  is  facing  into  a 
second consecutive year of contraction. The contraction in output is set to result in significant 
job  losses  and  a  sharp  rise  in  unemployment.  Given  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  speed  with 
which the global financial market crisis can be overcome, the assessment of the domestic 
economic  outlook  is  especially  difficult.  What  is  certain  is  that  we  are  in  a  significant 
downturn and two courses of action are essential. It is imperative that we move to correct the 
sizeable  deficit  in  the  public  finances  over  a  reasonable  timeframe.  It  is  also  vital  that  we 
improve  our  competitiveness,  which  has  weakened  steadily  in  recent  years.  This  is 
necessary to protect employment, to maintain and attract foreign investment and, over the 
longer term, to improve the potential for the economy to grow. In our present circumstances, 
pay  developments  need  to  take  account  of  the  changed  outlook  for  inflation  and  the 
extremely  difficult  situation  facing  the  Government’s  finances.  They  also  need  to  take 
account  of  the  necessity  to  restore  competitiveness  in  a  difficult  international  trading 
environment  so  as  to  be  in  a  position  to  avail  of  improved  economic  conditions worldwide 
when these eventually emerge.  
Notwithstanding current difficulties, Ireland’s medium-term prospects are good. On the basis 
of still favourable demographic trends and some improvement in productivity growth, Ireland 
has  the  potential  to  grow  strongly  again  in  a  few  years.  However,  the  achievement  of  this 
potential  is  not  inevitable  and  is  contingent  on  sound  economic  management.  In  the  short 
term  this  will  involve  painful  but  necessary  action  to  ensure  long-run  sustainability  in  the 
public finances and to restore our competitive position.  
BIS Review 7/2009 
 1
The global financial crisis  
When  I  last  appeared  before  you  in  July,  I  pointed  out  that  we  were  in  a  challenging 
environment.  At  that  time,  we  were  experiencing  a  greater-than-expected  slowdown  in 
domestic growth in conjunction with a generalised disruption in international money markets. 
In mid-September this situation deteriorated dramatically with the failure of Lehman’s bank in 
the United States. This event served both to accentuate and accelerate the adverse effects 
of the crisis across global financial markets.  
Among  developed  countries,  as  confidence  and  trust  waned,  even  the  strongest  banking 
systems  were  affected.  To  protect  financial  systems,  which  are  so  vital  to  every  country’s 
economy,  policymakers  internationally  moved  from  interventions  in  individual  institutions  to 
scaled-up assistance, including funding guarantees and recapitalisations, on a system-wide 
basis.  
I  have  made  it  clear  over  the  last  number  of  years  that  the  Irish  economy  was  facing  an 
increasing number of downside risks and that, if an international shock interacted with these 
domestic vulnerabilities, it would give rise to serious consequences for our economy. In the 
event, this is what occurred and a rebalancing in the domestic economy, which could have 
been painful but manageable, has turned into a much more difficult challenge.  
The excess supply of liquidity and large global imbalances, which emerged in the early years 
of this decade, were major causes of the significant vulnerabilities that materialised within the 
global  financial  system.  These  vulnerabilities  included  excessive  credit  growth,  increasing 
leverage in the financial sector, and a search for yield leading to an under-pricing of risk in 
financial markets generally.  
These developments had a marked influence on the Irish financial system. Although the Irish 
banks avoided the toxic assets associated with the US subprime market, there were specific 
domestic vulnerabilities, such as the banking system’s strong credit growth, over-exposure to 
property-related assets and growing dependence on international wholesale funding.  
These  domestic  and  international  vulnerabilities  were  identified  clearly  in  our  Financial 
Stability  Reports  in  recent  years.  However,  the  severity,  breadth  and  rapid  onset  of  the 
financial  crisis  that  has  developed  and  the  consequent  impact  on  the  global  economy  is 
unprecedented. This is reflected in the very large deterioration in financial stocks globally and 
exemplified  in  our  own  market.  The  upshot  of  all  these  developments  is  that  all  banking 
systems in advanced industrial countries have now required a number of rounds of support 
from  their  respective  authorities.  We  have  seen  actions  in  this  regard  by  some  of  those 
authorities again this week.  
The Central Bank’s response to the current crisis  
The Central Bank has responded to the unfolding crisis in a number of ways.  
Provision of liquidity  
The Irish central bank, on behalf of the Eurosystem, and along with central banks globally, 
has been providing significant volumes of liquidity to the banking sector, since major financial 
stress began to become evident in autumn 2007. The Eurosystem entered this crisis with a 
relatively broad collateral framework for supplying liquidity to banks, in comparison with other 
major  central  banks.  It  has  since  made  its  liquidity  more  easily  accessible  for  banks  by 
widening  its  list  of  eligible  collateral,  providing  the  funds  on  a  full  allotment  basis  and 
extending the maturity of its operations. Other central banks have since moved closer to the 
Eurosystem model.  
2 
 BIS Review 7/2009
Euro area monetary policy  
In response to the turmoil, and the associated impact on the real economy, the Eurosystem 
along  with  other  major  central  banks,  has  eased  monetary  policy,  in  some  instances,  to 
levels not previously seen. The Governing Council of the ECB has cut its policy interest rate 
by 225 basis points cumulatively since last summer. This substantial fall in rates over the last 
few  months  has  been  a  response  to  reduced  inflation  risks  at  a  time  of  deteriorating 
economic  and  financial  developments  in  the  euro  area.  Clearly,  if  events  cause  our 
expectations regarding inflation to be revised, then the Governing Council remains ready to 
act.  
Membership of the euro area has given us significant advantages, for example, in relation to 
liquidity support to our banks and elimination of exchange rate risk within the euro area. The 
advantages  can  also  be  seen  by  the  fact  that  debates  are  now  taking  place  in  countries 
outside  of  the  euro  area  regarding  the  benefits  membership  could  bring  them.  However, 
membership  of  a  monetary  union  and  the  absence  of  an  independent  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policy  means  that  member  state’s  domestic  economic  policies  have  to  be 
appropriate.  In  particular,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  in  the  absence  of  an  independent 
monetary  policy,  it  is  essential  in  present  circumstances  that  a  strong  focus  is  placed  on 
policies to restore competitiveness. 
Contributing to financial stability  
While monetary policy and liquidity provision have always been the key functions of central 
banks,  in  recent  years  there  has  been  an  increasing  emphasis  on  their  contribution  to 
financial stability.  
Through  the  publication  of  financial  stability  assessments,  central  banks  in  the  major 
industrial  countries  draw  attention  to  risks  to  the  financial  system.  This  information  and 
analysis is provided to the wider public, financial market participants and directly to the banks 
so that they are informed about the economic and financial environment, thus allowing them 
to adjust their behaviour consistent with those risks.  
It is precisely this role that the Central Bank here has played over the past four to five years 
pointing out the domestic and international risks to the economy at a time when house prices 
and  credit  growth  were  increasing  at  very  high  rates.  These  risks,  based  on  our  ongoing 
analysis and research, were highlighted not only in our annual Financial Stability Reports, but 
also in our Quarterly Bulletins and in statements made by me regularly. In the context of an 
unprecedented period of expansion and wealth creation, this proved a difficult message to 
get across. It is evident there was not a sufficient or timely change in behaviour in response 
to these warnings. Other central banks around the world faced similar headwinds in changing 
behaviour consistent with the risks identified in their own financial stability assessments.  
An  international  debate  has  now  begun  on  how  authorities  might  directly  change  the 
behaviour of financial market participants to mitigate the risks identified in Financial Stability 
Reports. This debate, in part, is focusing on whether central banks need specific powers to 
intervene directly in this regard. For example, one proposal is that central banks might have 
an  explicit  role  in  setting  capital  ratios  in  response  to  emerging  risks  identified  in  their 
financial stability assessments.  
A  further  area  for  discussion  is  how  monetary  policy  might  better  respond  to  asset  price 
developments.  For  example,  should  policy  “lean  against  the  wind”  by  tackling  asset  price 
inflation more directly.  
Recent developments  
In  late-September,  following  the  Lehman’s  bankruptcy  and  when  the  global  interbank 
markets froze and funding was unavailable even at the shortest maturities, the Central Bank 
BIS Review 7/2009 
 3
formed  the  view  that  the  risks  to  financial  stability  were  becoming  unacceptably  high  with 
knock-on effects for the wider economy. The scale of liquidity outflows was such that some of 
our institutions had acute liquidity risks. The concentrated nature of the Irish banking system 
meant that there was a high risk of contagion in the event of an individual bank encountering 
difficulties.  There  was  no  impending  pan-European  initiative  to  address  these  international 
pressures  at  that  time,  although  it  was  to  emerge  subsequently.  Our  own  Government 
decision to guarantee key liabilities of the banking sector was taken at that time to protect the 
stability  of  the  domestic  financial  system  by  ensuring  renewed  access  to  funding  for  Irish 
financial institutions. A success of this measure was evident by the immediate improvement 
in  the  liquidity  situation,  including  a  substantial  net  inflow  of  funds  in  the  days  after  the 
guarantee  was  introduced,  and  the  ability  of  a  number  of  the  covered  institutions 
subsequently  to  raise  longer-term  finance  on  the  international  markets.  In  the  subsequent 
weeks,  most  other  European  countries  moved  to  introduce  some  form  of  guarantee 
arrangements.  
It was recognised at the time that it would also be necessary to determine if additional capital 
was required, particularly in the context of demands for higher Tier 1 capital by international 
investors  and  pressure  on  property  valuations  in  the  context  of  a  much  more  significant 
downturn. Accordingly, after consultation with the Central Bank and the Financial Regulator, 
the Government announced details last month of its capitalisation scheme. The risk for banks 
that do not meet higher market standards is that they face a much more difficult environment 
for raising funds. It was not acceptable to the authorities that banks would attempt to achieve 
these higher ratios by curtailing credit to the real economy. A very important aspect of the 
capitalisation scheme is the agreement of the participating banks to develop specific credit 
policies  targeted  at  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises,  first  time  buyers  and  consumers 
generally.  
As part of the response of the authorities to ongoing events, the Government last week made 
its decision to bring Anglo Irish Bank into full public ownership in order to secure the bank’s 
continued  viability.  The  action  was  in  response  to  a  weakened  funding  position  and  the 
reputational damage to the bank arising from unacceptable practices that took place within it 
at  a  time  when  overall  market  sentiment  was  already  negative  towards  the  institution.  It 
meant  that  recapitalisation  was  no  longer  the  appropriate  and  effective  way  to  secure  its 
continued  viability.  So  far  as  Allied  Irish  Banks  and  Bank  of  Ireland  are  concerned,  the 
Government has reiterated that it sees these banks as central to the Irish financial system 
and essential to the proper functioning of the economy. It has also indicated its intention that 
both  banks  remain  as  independent  banks  in  private  ownership  and  has  stated  that  it  is 
proceeding with the planned re-capitalisations of both banks.  
A  well  functioning  financial  system  is  central  to  the  well-being  of  any  economy.  The 
Government  has  underlined  the  strong  commitment  of  all  the  authorities  to  take  whatever 
action is necessary to achieve this outcome. 
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining partnerships in a year of challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Annual Reception for the Banking Community, Manila, 
16 January 2009. 
Members of the judicial, legislative, and executive branches of government; leaders of the 
Philippine  banking  community;  special  guests  from  the  diplomatic  community,  the  private 
 4 
 BIS Review 7/2009
sector,  the  academe,  and  the  media;  fellow  central  bankers;  ladies  and  gentlemen,  a 
pleasant good evening to all of you. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board, I thank you all for taking the time to join us tonight for our 
traditional Reception for the Banking Community.  
That we are celebrating 60 years of Central Banking in the Philippines in 2009, makes this 
reception  doubly  meaningful.  We  are  happy  therefore  that  we  have  with  us  tonight  former 
deputy  governors  and  members  of  the  Monetary  Board;  two  former  governors  under  the 
Central Bank of the Philippines – Governor Jaime Laya and Governor Jose Cuisia, Jr.; and 
one former governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – Governor Gabriel Singson. Ladies 
and gentlemen, let us acknowledge all central bankers – past and present – on this 60-year 
milestone with a round of applause.  
We  have  60  years  of  central  banking  behind  us  and  we  move  forward  to  the  future  with 
confidence having learned many lessons along the way. We therefore look forward to more 
opportunities for us to shape a better future for ourselves, our families, our communities, and 
our country through sound and responsive monetary and banking policies.  
Take  the  year  just  past,  for  instance.  No  doubt  about  it,  2008  was  challenging  given  the 
difficulties we had to face. But it was also the same difficulties that allowed us to confirm.. 
that our collective reform efforts have put our financial system in better shape.  
Indeed  the  irony  of  financial  markets  is  that  crises  invariably  occur  despite  the  best 
intentions; yet, it is in facing the next challenge in relative strength that we can truly say we 
have learned from the past. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  fully  cognizant  of  the  difficulties  that  the  current  global 
financial  crisis  has  created  and  the  spillover  effects  that  it  would  certainly  generate.  Our 
continuing  efforts  to  clean  up  our  domestic  banking  system  and  root  out  malpractices  that 
particularly victimize the most vulnerable customers and our financial safety nets may also 
be creating short-term anxiety alongside global turmoil.  
But I stand before you tonight to affirm that our banking system, in all its vital components – 
rural and cooperative banks, thrift banks, and commercial and universal banks, is in much 
better  shape  today  than  it  was  during  the  last  crisis  we  faced.  And  I  can  tell  you,  the 
Monetary Board and the rest of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas family remain confident that 
our banking system can work through these challenges.  
I  assure  you,  this  is  not  meant  to  be  a  self-acclamation.  Rather,  it  is  our  tribute  to  the 
collective efforts we have invested in our shared future. As a community of stakeholders, it is 
this common future that requires of us.. shared responsibilities to take on challenges together 
in  order  to  grow  and  gain  as  one.  I  refer  specifically  to  the  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines,  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks  and  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines.  The  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  thanks  you  and  salutes  your  efforts  in 
sustaining economic activities not only in urban centers but also in the countryside through 
responsible and responsive banking. Ladies and gentlemen, let us give a round of applause 
to the Philippine banking sector.  
There is a saying that it is okay to build sand castles in the sky for as long as our feet are 
well planted on the ground. What is the context, what do I mean by this? There are three 
points I wish to make.  
First, the best strategy is always to move forward as one. This is not an inspirational punch 
line  but  the  hard  reality  of  market  dynamics.  We  appreciate  that  banks  are  inherently 
business concerns, but protecting the institutional bottom line requires nurturing sustainable 
relationships in a thriving environment. What is not too obvious is that the financial system as 
a  whole  moves  forward  only  when  we  work  together.  Ultimately,  it  is  this  stability  from 
working together that gets us through the business cycles, even as this starts from a position 
BIS Review 7/2009 
 5
of competing interests. As competitive elements within one system, we can always agree to 
disagree but we cannot fall into the trap of disagreeing to agree. 
Second, it is critical that any lingering risk aversion from whatever source does not spill over 
into our ability to provide needed financial services for our real economy. Global conditions 
will be challenging. But in the same breath, let us not allow fears of off-shore conditions to 
pre-judge our on-shore actions, when and where such links are not warranted. If we are to 
consolidate  our  position  of  relative  strength,  we  need  to  seize  opportunities  when  they 
present themselves, while mindful of our basic fiduciary responsibilities and our mandate to 
act prudently. 
This is a call for active participation at a time when the real economy needs us the most. We 
have seen how successful partnerships between the Bangko Sentral and the banking sector 
generated positive results for our people, our economy, and our country. I refer specifically to 
the banking sector as effective and responsive transmission channel for the Bangko Sentral’s 
policies concerning money, banking and credit.  
And  now,  to  pro-actively  move  forward,  I  also  ask  for  a  re-affirmation  of  our  partnership 
across a spectrum of initiatives – from expanding access to and improving the quality and 
cost of our services especially to the poor, to small enterprises, and to our overseas Filipinos; 
to  building  and  deepening  financial  awareness  and  literacy;  to  promoting  better  consumer 
protection;  to  structuring  organized  and  transparent  financial  markets.  The  times  are 
challenging  but  they  are  as  much  a  test  of  our  own  resolve;  this  will  prove  to  be  the  first 
hurdle in building sustainable relationships in a thriving environment. 
Third,  the  global  financial  architecture  is  broken  because  less  attention  was  given  to  the 
details  as  markets  moved  faster,  forward,  and  further.  There  was  over  reliance  on  market 
pressures to instill market discipline and global institutions – from multilaterals to regulators 
to market players – took comfort from the on-going work on best international practices. As 
we are now reminded, market failures happen at a painful cost to the displaced and that best 
international practices will mitigate domestic risks only if the supervisory framework evolves 
with market dynamics. 
Moving forward, I believe that the need is not necessarily for more complex and rigorous new 
regulations  but  for  greater  accountability.  Much  more  would  therefore  be  required  of  the 
Board of Directors of banks and of the technical expertise of the line functions that relate to 
prudential management of risks. This is the form of market-driven accountability that I believe 
will  be  needed  in  restructuring  the  financial  landscape  –  and  it  is  quite  different  from  just 
simply  having  more  regulations.  Let  us  therefore  work  more  closely  together  in  crafting 
regulations that would make markets more efficient and dynamic.  
Will 2009 be a difficult year? Given the downward trajectory of the global economy, volatile 
commodity prices, and the continuing financial turmoil, conventional wisdom says that it will 
be.  
Nevertheless, I believe that together we have the capacity to ride out the challenges before 
us.  The  key  is  to  manage  the  factors  that  are  within  our  control,  to  maintain  a  positive 
mindset,  and  to  capitalize  on  our  time-tested  resiliency  and  ability  to  innovate  amidst 
challenging times.  
And  don’t  forget,  our  economic  fundamentals  continue  to  be  a  source  for  optimism.  This 
includes  sustained  economic  growth,  slowing  inflation,  declining  interest  rates,  record  high 
international  reserves,  balance  of  payments  surplus,  a  competitive  peso  and  a  stable 
banking system.  
In  the  end,  the  challenge  in  2009  for  the  banking  sector  is  to  quickly  act  on  the  painful 
lessons of the global financial crisis. It is simply far too convenient to point at the complexities 
of structured products, the over-leveraging, or the fundamental dilemma with market greed. 
All  these  were  necessary  inputs  but  together  they  are  not  sufficient  to  explain  where  the 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2009
world is today. More importantly, debating the whys and wherefores will have its place, but at 
this juncture we need to act decisively with conviction, in unison, and move forward. 
Ladies and gentlemen, while the global prognosis for 2009 is daunting, the Bangko Sentral 
continues  to  believe  that  the  Philippines  remains  in  a  position  of  relative  strength  as  we 
navigate through these difficult times. What we do to consolidate our gains rests squarely on 
us. In the case of the Philippine banking community, I am confident it will prevail and remain 
sound and stable.  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I thank all the sectors represented here 
tonight  for  their  continuing  support:  the  banking  community;  the  legislative,  executive  and 
judicial branches of government; the private sector, the diplomatic corps, the academe, the 
media, our special guests, and our partners in bilateral and multilateral agencies.  
Together, let us offer a toast to our continuing partnership in sustaining economic growth in 
our country and improving the quality of life of Filipinos. Cheers!  
Finally, before it becomes totally unfashionable, let me take this opportunity to wish all of you 
blessings of good health, success, and prosperity this New Year. 
Mabuhay!  
Thank you all and enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS Review 7/2009 
 7
