Ewald Nowotny: Real implications of the financial turmoil – strategies for 
growth and stability 
Keynote  Speech  for  Panel  Discussion  by  Mr  Ewald  Nowotny,  Governor  of  the  Austrian 
National Bank, at a conference, hosted by the Representative Office of the Austrian National 
Bank in Belgium, Brussels, 20 January 2009. 
 Financial turmoil and its impact on the Austrian banking sector 
• 
As  you  all  know,  global  financial  markets  have  been  shaped  by  financial  turmoil 
since  the  summer  of  2007.  In  September  2008,  the  crisis  intensified  as 
uncertainty in international markets was raised considerably when Fannie Mae and 
Freddie  Mac  were  placed  under  conservatorship,  and  when  Lehman  Brothers  – 
which had been a major counterparty in the credit derivatives and swap market – 
went bankrupt. The uncertainty was further heightened by massive write-downs and 
liquidity  problems  of  large  international  banks  and  insurance  companies.  Stock 
prices plunged, credit risk premia rose substantially, and conditions on the interbank 
market tightened even further. 
In  this  situation,  central  banks  and  governments  responded  with  numerous 
measures to restore confidence and stability in the financial market. In the EU, 
the heads of state or government endorsed a joint action plan to fight the financial 
crisis  by  raising  the  savings  guarantee  for  depositors,  recapitalizing  financial 
institutions  and  guaranteeing  certain  bank  obligations.  Austrian  policymakers  also 
adopted comprehensive measures to fight the financial crisis. 
Although the direct effects of the financial crisis on Austrian banks have been limited 
so far due to their relatively small exposures to the U.S. subprime market, Austrian 
banks  have  been  indirectly  affected  to  a  significant  extent  as  refinancing  costs 
rose,  income  declined,  loan  loss  provisions  had  to  be  raised  and  risk  aversion 
increased  among  investors  especially  towards  exposures  in  Central,  Eastern  and 
Southeastern  Europe  (CESEE).  However,  Austrian  banks  expect  net  income  to 
have been still clearly positive in 2008 – as of the 3rd quarter 2008 they expected a 
net income of EUR 3.6 billion for 2008, which is 25% down compared to year-end 
2007;  additional  write-downs  expected  in  the  4th  quarter  will,  however,  have 
depressed income even further. 
Regarding foreign currency loans, which are very popular in Austria, the share of 
foreign currency lending to customers decreased over the last years, although it is 
still high on an international comparison (18% of total loans to domestic customers 
in  Q3 2008).  In  2008,  the  developments  on  foreign  currency  markets  (e.g. 
appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  Japanese  yen  against  the  euro)  had  a 
negative impact on outstanding FX volumes. Due to this increase in FX risk, most 
banks announced more restrictive allocation policies for the future, and the Austrian 
authorities increased their monitoring activities of these loans. 
Austrian  banks  were  first  movers  in  the  CESEE  banking  markets  in  the  late 
1980s.Since  then  they  have  continuously  expanded  their  presence  and  are  now 
significant  players  with  highly  diversified  exposures  across  the  whole  CESEE 
region.1  According  to  business  segment  reports,  the  largest  Austrian  banks 
                                                     
1   According to figures from the BIS, the overall exposure of Austrian banks to CESEE amounted to about EUR 
191 billion at the end of Q2 2008 or 66.5% in terms of AT’s GDP forecast for 2008. Their share in the entire 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 1
Austrian measures to combat the financial crisis 
• 
generated consolidated profits of EUR 3.3 billion in the first half of 2008 in CESEE, 
compared to EUR 1 billion in the domestic segment and –EUR 0.3 billion in the rest 
of  the  world.  In  recent  months,  the  global  economic  slowdown  has  also  led  to 
increasing vulnerabilities in CESEE, especially in Hungary, the Ukraine and Latvia; 
and  the  risk  aversion  of  global  investors  towards  this  region  has  increased.  In 
addition, local banking systems are quite exposed to foreign exchange risks given 
the high share of foreign currency loans. 
the 
The  measures  adopted  by  Austrian  policymakers  to  fight  the  financial  crisis  were 
endorsed by the Austrian Parliament in October 2008 and encompass primarily two 
new  laws,  the  Interbank  Market  Support  Act  (InterbankmarktstärkungsG),  and  the 
Financial Market Stability Act (FinanzmarktstabilitätsG). 
The  Austrian  measures  were  designed  in  accordance  with  the  common  principles 
highlighted in the Ecofin meeting on October 7, 2008, and the Declaration on a 
concerted European action plan that the heads of state or government of the euro 
area  made  on  October  12,  2008.This  declaration,  which  defines  specific 
cornerstones  regarding  national  measures  for  supporting  the  financial  markets, 
shows that the European Union is in the position to act quickly and coordinated in 
the case of a financial crisis. 
Interbank  Market  Support  Act,  an  “Austrian  Clearingbank” 
With 
(Oesterreichische Clearingbank AG) was established as a special purpose entity for 
strengthening  the  inter-bank  market.  The  Austrian  Clearingbank  serves  as  an 
intermediary on the interbank market by borrowing funds and lending such funds to 
credit  institutions  and  insurance  undertakings.  The  Republic  of  Austria  assumes 
limited-term liability for receivables and a guarantee for debt instruments issued by 
the  Clearingbank.  Measures  under  this  law  may  not  exceed  EUR  75  billion  and 
they are temporary – the law expires on December 31, 2009. 
Under  the  Financial  Market  Stability  Act,  the  Minister  of  Finance  may  take 
measures to recapitalize credit institutions and insurance undertakings by way of 
assumption  of  liabilities,  guarantees  for  loans  and  provision  of  own  capital, 
acquisition of  company  shares  or convertible bonds,  takeover  of  company  assets, 
and  –  as  last  resort  –  takeover  of  property  rights  (i.e.  nationalization).Fees  and 
interest  for  the  instruments  must  be  set  at  market  rates.  Measures  under  this  law 
may not exceed EUR 15 billion. The law also provides for (re)privatization after the 
purpose has been achieved. 
Another  measure  taken  by  the  Austrian  authorities  concerns  the safeguarding of 
bank deposits: 
• 
For bank deposits of retail customers, a 100% state guarantee was put in 
place retroactively from October 1, 2008, limited until the end of 2009. 
As of January 1, 2010, protection for retail customers will be raised to EUR 
100.000 (previously EUR 20.000 per account holder/per bank). 
The  deposit  protection  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  will  be 
raised to EUR 50.000. 
A maximum of EUR 10 billion is allotted to this measure. 
                                                                                                                                                             
CESEE banking market was 15.2% in mid-2008 (if Russia is excluded: 21.8%). At end-2008 twelve Austrian 
banks operated 73 fully consolidated subsidiaries in CESEE. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2009
  In  addition,  the  Austrian  Financial  Market  Authority  (FMA)  passed  a  decree 
prohibiting the short-selling of the stocks of insurance companies and banks listed 
on the Austrian Stock Exchange, for a period of 3 months until the end of January 
2009 (which can be prolonged if deemed necessary). 
All these measures, adopted in a swift and comprehensive way, will contribute to re-
establishing  confidence  in  the  Austrian  financial  market  and  securing  financial 
stability. 
Development of the European supervisory framework 
• 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  revealed  certain  weaknesses  in  the  EU’s 
supervisory  framework,  which  is  still  fragmented  nationally  despite  increasing 
financial integration and cross-border activities of financial institutions. Until now the 
supervisory development in the EU has followed an evolutionary approach, and the 
Level 3 Committees of the Lamfalussy Framework – CEBS, CESR and CEIOPS2– 
have  achieved  considerable  convergence  regarding  supervisory  practices  and 
procedures. However, the weaknesses revealed in the course of the financial crisis 
have prompted supervisors and regulators on international as well as EU levels to 
rethink the supervisory framework and come up with proposals for strengthening the 
current architecture. 
From my point of view, strengthening the role of the consolidating supervisor 
as  originally  proposed  in  the  amendments  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive 
(CRD)  is  not  the  right  way  forward  in  developing  EU  supervisory  regimes.  The 
strengthened  consolidating  supervisor,  or  “lead  supervisor,”  would  hinder  the 
development of an EU-wide supervisory approach, and lead to group-specific and 
fragmented supervisory regimes. Credit institutions would be faced with an unlevel 
playing field, since they would conduct business on the same local markets but be 
subject  to  different  supervisory  regimes.  Moreover,  the  lead  supervisor  approach 
would not take into account the interests of local supervisors and governments. The 
local entities would be supervised by a foreign authority with very limited incentives 
to provide information, while responsibility for financial market stability would remain 
with the local authorities. These are not favorable preconditions for effective crisis 
management and resolution. 
Thus, I would suggest to further optimize the current supervisory framework in 
the short term, building on the improved supervisory colleges, and further promote 
regulatory  convergence.  However,  in  the  longer  term,  the  only  feasible  concept, 
from  my  point  of  view,  is  the  establishment  of  a  federally  organized  European 
System  of  Banking  Supervisors.  This  seems  to  be  the  only  way  to  ensure  real 
supervisory  convergence  as  well  as  efficient  and  effective  supervision  of  cross-
border  institutions.  In  such  a  system,  a  European  Banking  Supervisory  Authority 
should act as regulator and take all supervisory decisions on cross-border banking 
groups.  At  the  same  time,  and  coordinated  by  the  European  Supervisor,  the  fact-
finding  in  terms  of  on-site  inspections  and  off-site  analyses  should  remain  at  the 
national level. This would ensure that supervisors have local market knowledge. For 
banks  that  are  predominantly  active  at  the  national  level,  the  national  authorities 
would  keep 
their  current  responsibilities.  This  would  not  only  prevent  an 
overburdening of the European Supervisor, but also be consistent with the principle 
of subsidiarity. 
                                                   
2   CEBS: Committee of European Banking Supervisors, CESR: Committee of European Securities Regulators, 
CEIOPS: Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pension Supervisors. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 3
 However, the move to such a system requires a strong political commitment and 
probably  also  stronger  political  integration;  moreover,  a  number  of  preconditions 
especially with respect to burden sharing arrangements would have to be fulfilled. I 
would  therefore  suggest  establishing  some  kind  of  “Masterplan”,  a  roadmap 
towards  a  European  System  of  Banking  Supervisors  with  defined  milestones  and 
timelines. 
Necessity of coordinated stimulus packages 
• 
The financial crisis has become an economic crisis. Consumer confidence is rapidly 
decreasing,  and  growth  forecasts  for  industrialized  countries  have  been  revised 
downwards several times during the last weeks. We expect Austrian GDP to shrink 
by slightly less than -1% in 2009, which means a downward revision of about 2.5 
percentage points since the official June 2008 forecast of the OeNB.3 Forecasts for 
Germany  are  between  -2%  and  -3%.  Italy  continues  to  struggle  in  growth  terms; 
about  -2%  are  expected  for  2009.4  Even  world  growth  is  going  to  be  below  +1% 
(recent projection by World Bank of +0.9% for 2009). 
In “normal” times, fiscal policy supports monetary policy in smoothing the business 
cycle via automatic stabilizers. This concept has worked quite well over the last 25 
years. However, we do not live in normal times at present: Due to the financial crisis 
and  due  to  very  low  expectations  on  returns  of  possible  investments  for  the  near 
future,  the ability  of  monetary  policy  to  boost investment  and  consumption  is  very 
limited right now. We seem to be already in an investment trap and might fall into a 
liquidity trap as well. So there is a need for fiscal policy measures. 
Automatic  stabilizers  still  work  but  are  not  large  enough  to  prevent  a  severe 
economic  downturn.  The  leeway  of  automatic  stabilizers  has  been  diminished 
through structural reforms like reductions in the progressivity of tax systems and a 
decrease in the relative size of governments. 
So  coordinated  discretionary  measures  as  proposed  in  the  European  Economic 
Recovery Plan are necessary. Coordination among EU Member States is important 
due to their high openness, as a result of which multipliers are relatively low. Most 
EU  countries  (including  Austria)  are  already  implementing  such  programs.  In 
Germany, the coalition just agreed on a EUR 50 billion package last week.5  
The  importance  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  in  the  current  environment  has  also 
been recognized by the IMF, as pointed out in a recent staff position note.6 They 
also  call  for  timely  and  collective  measures.  The  measures  should  be  “lasting” 
because the downturn might be lasting, and “contingent” because it might get worse. 
So there has to be commitment to keep the measures until the recession is over, 
and to do more if the recession gets worse indeed. 
“Sustainability” of the measures is very important as well. They should not conflict 
with long-term goals of growth policy, such as the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy; 
this point has been heavily emphasized in the European Economic Recovery Plan. 
                                                      
3   Until now (OeNB forecasts since 1998), the highest downward revision has been 1.2 pp (December 2001 in 
forecast for 2002). 
4   Euro Area 2009: -0.9% (Consensus Forecast Dec. 08); -0.5% (BMPE Dec. 08). 
5   Agreement on 12 January 2009. 
6  
IMF 
Policy 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2008/122308.pdf. 
Position 
Fiscal 
Note: 
Crisis. 
Staff 
the 
for 
4 
 29 
December 
2008. 
BIS Review 19/2009
Furthermore,  in  accordance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  there  has  to  be  a 
commitment that consolidation will be carried out in better times. Trust of investors 
in the sustainability of public finances is crucial to keep financing costs low, and trust 
of  the  general  public  is  important  to  prevent  compensatory  private  savings  in  a 
Ricardian-like reaction to stimulus programs. The latter point has been emphasized 
in a paper in the IMF World Economic Outlook on the effects of discretionary fiscal 
policy.7  
Both  the  IMF  and  the  EC  call  for  diversified  packages  combining  revenue  and 
expenditure measures. Spending measures generally take longer to implement but 
have also a higher multiplier (which is, incidentally, also the assumption on which 
the  new  chair  of  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisors  in  the  US8  has  based  its 
assessment). 
Tax  cuts  and  transfers  should  be  targeted  to  households  with  a  large  marginal 
propensity  to  consumption.  One  possible  measure  in  this  context  would  be  to 
increase  the  size  of  unemployment  benefits  and  the  corresponding  period  of 
entitlement.  This  would  also  increase  the  degree  of  automatic  stabilization. 
Relatively  recent  papers  by  Solow  and  Blinder9  made  some  interesting  proposals 
how to raise the degree of automatic stabilization without increasing the (structural) 
size  of  the  government  sector  (e.g.  tax  rates  responding  automatically  to  the 
business cycle). 
Furthermore,  it  is  important  that  enterprises  belonging  to  the  real  economy  have 
access to credit. The increase of the EIB’s credit supply is a step in that direction. 
Banks which get capital injections from the Austrian government will be required by 
law to use at least parts of the injection to grant credit to SMEs and households. 
                                                    
7  
IMF  World  Economic  Outlook,  October  2008  –  Chapter  5:  Fiscal  Policy  as  a  Countercyclical  Tool. 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/pdf/c5.pdf. 
8   http://otrans.3cdn.net/45593e8ecbd339d074_l3m6bt1te.pdf, page 13. 
9   Alan S. Blinder, 2004. "The Case Against the Case Against Discretionary Fiscal Policy," Working Papers 100, 
Princeton University, Department of Economics, Center for Economic Policy Studies. Robert M. Solow, 2005. 
"Rethinking Fiscal Policy," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Oxford University Press, vol. 21(4), pages 509-
514. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 5
