Heng Swee Keat: A review of Singapore’s economy and financial system 
Opening remarks by  Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary  Authority of 
Singapore, at MAS' Annual Report 2008/09 Press Conference, Singapore, 16 July 2009. 
 Backdrop on global financial and economic crisis 
The world economy has witnessed one of the most tumultuous and challenging times. Global 
GDP is expected to contract in 2009, the first time in the post-War period.1 The tremors that 
shook the financial markets surpassed the most extreme stress scenarios. Bank losses have 
now  exceeded  US$1.5  trillion  and  further  writedowns  are  expected.  In  the  six  months 
following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  from  September  2008  to  March  2009,  stock 
markets  worldwide  fell  by  almost  40%,  wiping  off  about  US$16  trillion  in  capitalisation. 
Singapore’s Straits Times Index (STI) also fell by close to 35%. In the fixed income markets, 
the  rally  in government  bonds  was  offset  by  the  sell-off  in the  non-sovereign  sectors  such 
that global bond markets in aggregate also declined over this period. Many institutional and 
individual investors were affected negatively.  
These shocks to the international financial system severely disrupted credit flows and led to 
dislocations in economic activity globally. The US – which was the epicenter of the crisis – as 
well as the EU and Japan, fell into a deep recession. The collapse in G3 demand, in turn, 
had a cascading effect on the emerging economies. As trade collapsed towards the end of 
2008 and into the first few months of this year, Asia’s export-reliant economies were hard-hit.  
Against  this  external  backdrop,  the  Singapore  economy  contracted  sharply,  as  our 
manufacturing, transport, logistics and wholesale trade industries were closely tied to global 
and regional trade flows. By the first quarter this year, the economy had posted an output 
loss of around 10% from its peak a year ago, the steepest decline in its history. 
The  unprecedented  global  financial  crisis  has  weighed  heavily  on  financial  markets 
worldwide,  leading  to  severe  declines  in  valuation  across  many  asset  classes  amidst 
heightened market volatility. MAS’ investments were negatively affected by the crisis. As at 
the close of the financial year on 31 March 2009, MAS recorded a net loss of S$9.2 billion, 
about 3.5% of MAS’ average total assets. This compares with profits of S$7.44 billion in the 
previous year and S$3.85 billion in FY06. This severe crisis has therefore pared back about 
80% of the gains in the preceding two years. The extent of loss has been mitigated as we 
raised  the  liquidity  profile  of  our  portfolio  in  the  early  part  of  2008,  in  the  face  of  greater 
uncertainties. With the broad based upturn in financial markets after the close of the financial 
year, the  valuation of MAS’ foreign assets has improved and more than half of the losses 
have been recovered.  
Despite  the  severe  global  conditions,  Singapore’s  financial  system  has,  by  and  large, 
weathered  the  crisis  well.  In  managing  this  crisis,  MAS  has  focused  on  maintaining  the 
strength of Singapore’s financial system, based on three key pillars: first, maintaining sound 
financial  institutions;  second,  ensuring  well  functioning  markets;  and  third,  maintaining 
confidence of investors. Let me touch on these in greater details. 
                                                 
1  
In  July  2009,  IMF  upgraded  its  2010  world  GDP  growth  forecast  from  1.9%  to  2.5%.  Its  2009  world  GDP 
growth forecast was lowered slightly to -1.4% from -1.3% previously. 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 1
Strengthening resilience – what MAS has done  
Given  the  openness  of  our  financial  system  and  the  severe  downturn  in  our  economy, 
Singapore’s  financial  system  cannot  be  insulated.  MAS  focused  on  maintaining  the 
soundness  of  financial  institutions  in  Singapore.  We  intensified  supervision  of  financial 
institutions through close monitoring of their financial soundness, holding regular discussions 
with the board, management, and auditors of financial institutions, and for foreign financial 
institutions, having constant dialogues with their home regulators and head-office auditors. 
Stress testing major financial institutions is one of our supervisory tools that is used regularly 
even before the crisis. In this crisis, we have given stress tests an added emphasis, and the 
latest stress tests of banks and life insurers were conducted in Q1 2009. As the banks and 
insurers here were well-capitalised and financially sound, the objective of the stress test was 
not to ascertain what recapitalization amount was needed, because the need did not arise. 
Instead, the stress tests were to allow MAS to determine how resilient the banks and insurers 
were to highly adverse scenarios. In this regard, the stress tests revealed that while financial 
institutions’ financial resources would be affected by lower asset values, rising credit costs 
and moderating earnings, they are generally resilient even under stress conditions. A second 
objective  is  to  focus  the  financial  institutions’  attention  on  managing  their  risks  and 
safeguarding  the  robustness  of  their  liquidity,  earnings  and  capital  so  that  they  remain 
financially sound through the economic downturn.  
Second, we took steps to ensure well-functioning markets. Singapore’s interbank money 
markets  did  not  experience  the  seizure  that  griped  the  LIBOR  markets.  However,  the 
openness of our markets meant we could not be immune from the global dislocations. MAS 
reassured financial institutions that they would have access to S$ and US$ liquidity in three 
ways. 
We kept a higher level of liquidity in the banking system. We also expanded eligibility to the 
Standing  Facility  to  all  banks  that  participate  in  the  MAS  Electronic  Payment  System, 
MEPS+, allowing them to repurchase SGS for S$ funds with the MAS. Finally, we entered 
into a US$30 billion swap arrangement with the US Federal Reserve. This arrangement has 
been extended to 1 February 2010.  
Third, measures were put in place to maintain confidence of investors in Singapore as an 
international financial centre. In response to announcements by jurisdictions in the region of 
blanket  government  guarantee  on  deposits,  the  Singapore  Government  announced  on  16 
October  2008  a  guarantee  on  deposits  of  individuals  and  non-bank  customers  of  banks 
licensed in Singapore. This was aimed at ensuring a level international playing field for banks 
in  Singapore  and  demonstrated  the  Government’s  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the 
financial  system.  It  has  also  had  the  effect  of  maintaining  the  confidence  of  investors  and 
depositors in our banking system. 
State of the financial System 
The  measures  taken  around  the  three  pillars  of  maintaining  sound  financial  institutions, 
ensuring well functioning markets and maintaining confidence of investors, as well as 
the  way  in  which  institutions  and  market  players  responded  to  the  crisis,  have  helped  our 
financial sector weather the crisis. A healthy and functioning financial system has continued 
to support credit and capital intermediation to the economy. Compared to the Asian Financial 
Crisis,  the  moderation  in  bank  lending  has  been  milder.  While  credit  conditions  have 
tightened, there has not been disruption of credit flows to corporates. A total of S$9.6 billion2 
was raised by SGX listed companies in the first half of 2009, which accounted for 65% of 
                                                 
2   Source: SGX & Thomson Reuters. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2009
total  rights  offerings  in  Asia  in  this  period.  More  than  7,300  Government-backed  loans 
amounting to S$4 billion have since been approved in the first half of 2009.  
In  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  the  financial  sector  grew  by  7.7%  quarter-on-quarter  on  a 
seasonally-adjusted  annualized  basis.  Financial  services  employment  has  also  held  up 
reasonably well.  Employment  stock  continued  to  increase  in  Q4  2008 and  fell  by  1,900  or 
1.1%  in  Q1  2009.  A  recent  poll3  showed  that  the  banking  and  financial  services  sector 
reported the biggest jump in hiring intentions, 32% this quarter, up from 19% in Q2. 
Strengthening resilience – new measures 
Going  forward,  we  will  remain  vigilant  and  continue  to  focus  on  the  three  key  pillars  of 
resilience of our financial system. The main focus would be on shaping and adopting new 
international  regulatory  standards,  strengthening  the  corporate  governance  of  financial 
institutions,  enhancing  the  Standing  Facility  and  strengthening  the  Singapore  Government 
Securities auction system, and bolstering investors’ confidence in our financial system. 
Reforming  the  regulatory  framework  has  become  a  major  issue  internationally,  and  the 
emerging  consensus  is  towards  more  stringent  regulation.  Under  the  first  pillar  of  sound 
financial institutions, MAS is contributing to and helping to shape new regulatory standards 
being  discussed  at  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  and  other  international  standard-setting  bodies.  For  example,  discussions  on 
liquidity risk management standards and the capital framework for banks are at an advanced 
stage. Over the course of the next one to two years, we will be implementing changes to our 
regulatory  framework  to  adopt  these  new  standards.  As  MAS’  regulatory  framework  has 
generally  been  regarded  as  conservative,  we  are  in  a  good  position  to  adopt  these 
standards.  We  are  mindful  of  maintaining  a  balanced  approach  and  not  over-swinging  the 
regulatory pendulum. We will work closely with and consult the industry and the public. 
In the area  of regulatory standards, we  will review the Corporate Governance Regulations 
and  Guidelines  for  locally  incorporated  banks  and  significant  life  insurance  companies, 
introduced  in  2005  and  which  were  implemented  in  2007.  MAS’  review  will  focus  on  the 
effectiveness of risk management at the Board level, including the role played by Boards in 
safeguarding the safety and soundness of their institutions and in addressing market conduct 
risks.  This  would  include  a  review  of  the  Board’s  role  in  setting  remuneration  policies  to 
manage risks effectively. 
Giving  further  impetus  to  risk  management,  the  locally  incorporated  banks  are  conducting 
more detailed stress tests internally as part of their Basel II implementation process and the 
results will be used in their capital planning. For foreign banks, MAS is continuing our close 
cooperation  with  home  supervisors  through  regular  discussions  as  well  as  participation  in 
supervisory colleges. 
In  the  second  area  of  ensuring  well-functioning  markets,  several  new  measures,  to 
enhance the MAS Standing Facility and strengthen the SGS primary auction system, 
will be implemented. 
The  MAS  Standing  Facility  has  been  a  key  channel  of  providing  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions. To further enhance this facility, with immediate effect: 
a) 
We  will  accept  AAA-rated  S$  debt  securities  issued  by  sovereigns,  supranationals 
and sovereign-backed corporates as collateral in the Standing Facility in addition to 
SGS. Given this change, we will also permit banks to treat these securities as Tier 2 
                                                 
3   Conducted US-based recruitment firm Hudson. 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 3
b) 
liquid assets, with the same zero risk weighting as SGS. This will help banks to better 
manage their risks and liquidity profiles. 
We will also enter into cross-border collateral arrangements with other central banks 
to accept well-rated foreign currencies and government debt securities as collateral in 
the  Standing  Facility.  Last  month,  I  signed  an  MOU  with  the  Governor  of  De 
Nederlandsche  Bank  N.V.,  the  Dutch  Central  Bank.  Discussions  are  ongoing  with 
several other central banks. 
Globally, government bond issuance is rising while banks’ balance sheets which are typically 
used  to  underwrite  these  issuances  are  shrinking.  We  have  seen  in  some  jurisdictions 
several instances of poor or even failed auctions of government bonds due to unexpectedly 
weak sentiment or concerns about ballooning government debt and fiscal deficits. Singapore 
is  different.  The  Government  does  not  issue  bonds  to  finance  its  budget  deficit.  Investors 
understand that the Government issues SGS for the sole purpose of building a risk-free yield 
curve  for  the  corporate  sector  to  price  its  debt.  But  the  SGS  market  can  be  affected  by 
contagion  of  weak  sentiment  spilling  over  from  other  markets.  We  have  therefore  worked 
with the Government on two measures to enhance the resilience of the SGS market. 
MAS will be empowered to either adjust the issuance size or vary its subscription amount to 
stabilise  an  auction.  This  will  mitigate  the  risk  of  disorderly  trading  in  specific  securities  or 
further  volatility  in  the  secondary  market.  In  the  event  of  extreme  market  conditions  or 
disruption, MAS will be empowered to cancel an auction.  
In  ensuring  stability  and  resilience  of  the  financial  sector,  a  key  anchor  is  a  central  bank 
backed  by  a  strong  balance  sheet.  We  have  increased  our  total  capital  and  reserves  to 
S$28.74 billion, representing close to 11% of MAS’ total assets of S$264.75 billion. This will 
position us well to navigate through a potentially volatile financial market environment, and 
allow  us  to  implement  a  broader  range  of  measures  to  stabilize  the  Singapore  financial 
system should the need ever arise.  
While  local  institutions  withstood  the  crisis  and  remained  sound,  a  large  number  of  local 
investors  were  adversely  affected  when  the  credit-linked  structured  notes  they  bought 
defaulted  or  were  redeemed  early.  Although 
triggered  by  an 
unprecedented financial crisis, it has been a painful experience for affected investors. MAS 
has responded by taking prompt measures to require affected financial institutions to review 
complaints rigorously. MAS’ approach was for financial institutions to review complaints on a 
case-by-case  basis.  Settlement  offers  are  made  by  the  financial  institutions  taking  into 
account the particular facts and circumstances of each transaction. We also completed our 
investigations into the sale and marketing of structured notes linked to Lehman Brothers by 
these  financial  institutions.  Our  investigation  found  that  the  nature  and  extent  of  failings 
identified  and  their  potential  impact  on  the  sales  process  and  customers  differed  for  each 
institution. 
It is clear from our investigation findings that an across-the-board general settlement for all 
investors would not have been justifiable. We understand that not everyone agrees with the 
case-by-case  approach.  However,  we  believe  it  is  the  correct  approach  that  is  fair  to  all 
parties concerned.  
There are lessons from this episode for financial institutions, investors and MAS. Thus, in the 
third area of enhancing confidence in our financial system, we have to review the roles 
undertaken by all parties. MAS has reviewed the sale and marketing of structured products, 
and  in  March  2009  put  out  for  consultation  a  set  of  proposals  to  further  safeguard 
consumers’  interests  and  promote  higher  industry  standards  for  the  sale  and  marketing  of 
unlisted  investment  products.  For  financial  institutions,  the  Board  and  senior  management 
must  take  immediate  steps  to  win  back  the  trust  and  confidence  of  their  customers.  MAS’ 
Fair  Dealing  guidelines  reiterate  that  the  Board  and  senior  management  of  financial 
institutions are responsible for achieving fair dealing outcomes by their institutions. They will 
the  defaults  were 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2009
that 
financial 
in  addition, 
institutions  must  ensure 
need  to  go  beyond  just  addressing  the  failings  identified  in  MAS’  investigations.  One 
immediate area for attention is staff training. 
To  this  end,  MAS  has  proposed  a  new  Capital  Markets  and  Financial  Advisory  Services 
(CMFAS)  examination  module  on  product  knowledge  for  representatives  who  want  to  sell 
“complex  investment  products”.  MAS  has  been  working  with  representatives  from  various 
industry  associations  and  The  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  to  develop  this  CMFAS 
examination  module.  But 
their 
representatives keep up to date with market developments. 
MAS will review and intensify our supervision of financial institutions in the sale of investment 
products, and commit more resources to this. We will continue to use thematic and ad-hoc 
inspections to  review  compliance  policies,  procedures  and  controls  of  financial  institutions. 
MAS’ supervision cannot replace the primary role of the Board and senior management to 
ensure that controls and processes are implemented robustly by all their staff in all dealings 
with customers, at all locations. We will therefore scrutinise the steps being taken by Board 
and senior management to ensure fair dealing by the financial institution with its customers. 
This  will  include  areas  such  as  product  approval  due  diligence,  as  well  as  the  pay  and 
incentive  structures  for  sales  and  advisory  staff,  and  their  training  and  supervision. 
Downstream,  we  will  increase  the  use  mystery  shopping  to  complement  inspections  and 
other supervisory tools to help us identify specific areas where financial institutions are falling 
short.  
While  this  means  that  MAS  will  be  more  probing  in  our  supervision  and  dealings  with 
financial institutions than in the past, we will need to be careful that this does not create an 
overly legalistic and combative relationship with the regulated entities. We share a common 
objective in having a regime that encourages growth based on sound and ethical business 
practices, and adherence to the spirit and letter of MAS’ standards, so that consumers can 
be well served. 
Consumers  too  have  to  play  their  part.  The  recent  crisis  reinforces  the  importance  of 
investing  only  in  products  that  they  understand  and  taking  steps  to  better  safeguard  their 
interests when making investment decisions. Although these points have been highlighted in 
various MoneySENSE guides and seminars, in times of rising asset markets, outreach efforts 
had not been easy, but we must persist. 
To  help  investors  understand  common  financial  products,  we  launched  the  MyMoney 
programme,  in  partnership  with  ABS,  the  Securities  Investors  Association  (SIAS)  and  the 
Singapore  Management  University’s  Sim  Kee  Boon  Institute  for  Financial  Economics. 
Speakers shared facts on the risks in investment products such as structured deposits, unit 
trusts,  bonds  and  investment  linked  policies,  highlighting  risk-return  trade-offs,  and  key 
issues consumers should consider before deciding whether to purchase a product.  
Going forward, we need to focus on new products when they are launched. We would like to 
see  financial  institutions  organise  educational  initiatives  in  partnership  with  independent 
experts, when they launch products with features or structures that are new to the market. 
A major piece of work for us in this area in the coming year will be to develop a financial 
literacy  core  competency  framework.  Building  on  the  three  tiers  of  financial  literacy  in  the 
MoneySENSE  programme,  the  framework  will  set  out  the  basic  knowledge  and  life  skills 
individuals would need to make informed financial decisions at key life stages, starting at an 
early  age,  continuing  through  working  life  and  into  retirement.  These  decisions  include 
managing budgets, setting aside adequate funds  for emergencies, managing CPF  savings 
prudently for retirement, assessing affordability when buying a property, and understanding 
and evaluating risks when investing in particular products. 
The  Financial  Sector  Development  Fund  has  set  aside  $10  million  to  fund  financial 
educational programmes for the next three years. Going forward, we will invite the public to 
contribute  new  and  imaginative  ideas  on  how  financial  education  can  be  delivered  more 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 5
effectively.  Consumer  education  requires  sustained  efforts  by  each  and  everyone  in  the 
community. We will fund proposals that can best support the delivery of the knowledge and 
skills in the financial literacy competency framework. 
Our next measure to maintain confidence is a review of the deposit insurance (DI) scheme 
in  Singapore.  As  part  of  MAS’  continual  efforts  to  enhance  the  regulatory  framework  in 
Singapore, we are reviewing the DI scheme to ensure it remains relevant, provides adequate 
protection to depositors and is in line with international practice. When the DI Scheme was 
started  in  April  2006,  it  targeted  to  fully  insure  the  deposits  of  80-90%  of  individual 
depositors. In line with this, a limit of $20,000 per individual depositor per institution was set, 
allowing 87% of individual depositors to be fully insured. 
This coverage ratio has now come down to 83%, the lower end of our targeted range. MAS is 
considering raising the DI coverage limit above $20,000 to achieve a better coverage ratio 
and  provide  a  better  level  of  protection  to  depositors.  We  are  mindful  that  this  should  not 
substantially increase the cost to the industry and indirectly to customers. We are targeting to 
conduct our review and consult the industry and public on the proposed changes over the 
next six to nine months, and will seek to implement the revisions to the deposit insurance 
scheme in 2010. 
Strengthening research capabilities 
Even as we deal with the immediate effects of the global crisis, we also continue to have our 
eye on building up capabilities in the longer term. The Economic Policy Department in MAS 
has  run  a  successful  visiting  scholar  programme  since  2002.  To  support  and  strengthen 
research  in  finance  and  economics  on  a  wider  scale,  MAS  announced  today  that  it  will 
sponsor  a  professorship  in  economics  and  finance  at  the  National  University  of  Singapore 
(NUS)  for  the  next  five  years.  This  Professorship  also  signifies  MAS’  desire  to  strengthen 
collaboration between academia, industry and the public sector. Together with NUS, we will 
engage  internationally  renowned  academics  to  lead  and  conduct  research  in  Singapore  in 
the areas of finance, international economics, monetary economics or public finance. 
Economic outlook 
Finally,  on  the  economic  outlook.  More  recent  data,  including  the  advanced  estimates 
released by MTI, showed that the Singapore economy had rebounded strongly in the second 
quarter.  This  recovery  has  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  sharp  retraction  in  economic 
activity which took place during Q4 2008 and Q1 2009. As such, businesses have started to 
rebuild  inventories  to  levels  that  are  more  sustainable  and  consistent  with  underlying 
demand, which has stabilized somewhat amidst easing financial conditions. In the domestic 
financial  sector,  several  areas  of  activities  posted  gains  in  the  second  quarter.  Improved 
sentiment  has  buoyed  stock  market  turnover,  while  the  latest  figures  for  May  showed  that 
domestic non-bank loans remained firm.  
Nevertheless, much still depends on the strength of final demand in the G3. Given that there 
remain  stresses  in  the  global  financial  system  and  job  markets  in  the  major  economies 
continue  to  weaken,  the  domestic  economy  is  likely  to  witness  slow  and  uneven  growth, 
rather than sharp and decisive recovery. For the economy as a whole, MTI has revised the 
official growth forecast for 2009 to between -6% and -4%. 
In tandem with the weak demand and easing domestic costs, consumer price increases are 
expected  to  be  muted.  For  the  whole  of  2009,  CPI  inflation  is  now  expected  to  come  in 
between -0.5% and 0.5%. This revision takes into account the recent developments in global 
commodity prices. 
6 
 BIS Review 91/2009
Monetary policy 
In  October  last  year,  in  light  of  the  weak  economic  environment  and  easing  inflationary 
pressures, MAS shifted to a 0% appreciation of the S$NEER policy band. This was followed 
by a re-centring of the policy band to the prevailing level of the S$NEER in April 2009, while 
keeping the 0% appreciation path. At this juncture, notwithstanding the sharp rebound in the 
economy in Q2 2009, growth remains below trend and inflationary pressures continue to be 
muted.  We  assess  that  the  current  policy  stance  remains  appropriate  to  support  the 
economic  recovery  and  ensure  medium-term  price  stability,  which  in  turn  underpins 
confidence  in  the  Singapore  dollar.  Our  next  monetary  policy  review  will  take  place  as 
scheduled in October. 
Conclusion 
Going  forward,  it  will  be  important  for  central  banks  and  regulators  around  the  world  to 
remain  vigilant  and  to  continue  addressing  financial  system  risks  as  the  markets  remain 
fragile and uncertainty remains. Singapore is not insulated from pressures in other parts of 
the world. We need to understand the changes and anticipate how they would affect us in 
order to take the right actions. MAS will continue to build on our key pillars of having sound 
financial  institutions,  ensuring  well  functioning  markets  and  maintaining  confidence  of 
investors.  Building  on  such  strong  fundamentals  and  adapting  to  new  challenges,  we  can 
ensure we emerge stronger. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 7
