K C Chakrabarty: Technology, financial inclusion and the role of urban 
cooperative banks 
Address  by  Dr  K.C.Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Foundation Day and Inauguration of the “Core Banking Solution Project” of the A.P. Mahesh 
Co-op Urban Bank Ltd., Hyderabad, 9 August 2009. 
 Hon’ble Finance Minister, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, Shri Rosaiahji; Chairman, A.P. Mahesh 
Co-operative  Urban  Bank  Shri  Ramesh  Kumar  Bung;  Sr.  Vice-Chairman  Purshotamdas 
Mandhana; Vice-Chairperson Smt Pushpa Boob, Board of Directors, Senior Executives, Staff 
Members, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  evening  amongst  all  of  you  on  the  occasion  of  the  32nd 
Foundation Day Celebrations of The A.P. Mahesh Cooperative Urban Bank Ltd. I would like 
to  thank  you  for  inviting  and  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  share  some  of  my  views  on  the 
current  pressing  issues,  the  challenges  and  the  opportunities  in  front  of  the  urban 
cooperative  banks  today.  Let  me  first  congratulate  all  of  you  on  the  occasion  of  the 
Foundation Day and the technological achievement on the eve of inauguration of the Core 
Banking  Solution  Project  of  the  bank.  This  single  step  will  enable  the  A.P.  Mahesh 
Cooperative  Bank  to  serve  better  the  needs  of  its  traditional  constituency,  the  middle  and 
lower middle classes and the marginalized sections of society spread over its 30 branches – 
22  in  the  twin  cities  of  Hyderabad  and  Secunderabad  and  one  each  at  Khammam, 
Vijayawada, Guntur, Rajahmundry, Visakhapatnam, Warangal in Andhra Pradesh, Jaipur in 
Rajasthan  and  Mumbai  in  Maharashtra.  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  significance  of  this 
achievement  of  the  bank  and  I  do  hope  that  it  will  give  a  new  fillip  to  the  overall  growth, 
enhancement in efficiency and bringing excellence in the cooperative banking sector in the 
country.  
The  A.P.  Mahesh  Coop  Bank  has  been  a  forerunner  amongst  urban  cooperative  banks 
(UCBs)  by  its  performance  and  setting  the  benchmark  as  a  good  success  story  in  the 
cooperative banking. The growth of the bank has been impressive as the bank has achieved 
the milestones of business crossing Rs.1000 crore and Core Banking Solution being rolled 
out across its network of 30 branches. The bank from its Primary Cooperative Society status 
in  June,  1977  has  moved  from  strength  to  strength  by  becoming  a  Scheduled  Bank  in 
October, 1996 and later a Multi State Cooperative Bank in May, 2001.  
As there has been spurt in the technology adoption by the urban cooperative banks in India 
in recent times, thereby inducing the inclusive  growth process, I felt that it would be more 
appropriate if I share my views on the topic “Technology, Financial Inclusion and the Role of 
Urban Cooperative Banks” for achieving the inclusive growth in India.  
Importance of UCBs 
In India, like many other countries in the world, cooperative movement started as a means of 
ensuring  that  the  poorly  equipped  citizens  have  similar  advantages  that  better  placed 
persons  were  able  to  command.  This  was  ensured  by  the  pooling  in  of  their  individual 
resources. The principle of mutual aid, which is the basis of cooperative organisation, and 
the  practice  of  thrift  and  self-help  which  sustain  it,  generate  a  feeling  of  self-reliance  and 
empowerment  which  is of  utmost  importance  in  a  democratic  set  up  like  us.  I  believe  that 
these are the core objectives for which we are striving for from most of our initiatives of the 
various  developmental  projects  and  programmes.  We  recognise  and  are  aware  of  their 
importance  in  the  entire  banking  system  in  expanding  the  outreach  of  the  system  and 
increasing  access  to  credit.  The  High  Power  Committee  on  Urban  Cooperative  Banks 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 1
constituted by RBI in 1999, has aptly commented that the cooperative credit endeavour was 
the  first  ever  attempt  at  micro  credit  dispensation  in  India.  The  type  of  reach  cooperative 
banks has in our country and the type of customized services they can offer at the local level, 
the potential is tremendous. But, the question is have we achieved the true potential? The 
answer to the question in my opinion to a certain extent is negative. The same is evident if 
we look at the market share of deposits and advances of the Scheduled Commercial Banks 
(SCBs), UCBs and RRBs. The SCBs share in the total bank deposits has been 92.1, 93.0 
and 93.3 per cent in the year 2006, 2007 and 2008 as compared to UCBs 4.9, 4.2 and 3.9 
per cent in the corresponding period, displaying a downward trend. The SCBs share in the 
total bank advances has been 93.2, 94.0 and 94.4 per cent in the year 2006, 2007 and 2008 
as compared to UCBs 4.4, 3.8 and 3.4 per cent in the corresponding period, again displaying 
a downward trend.  
 
Uneven  geographical  dispersal  of  UCBs  in  few  states  such  as  Maharashtra,  Gujarat, 
Karnataka,  Andhra  Pradesh  and  Tamil  Nadu  account  for  over  80%  of  urban  cooperative 
banks  presence  and  75%  of  their  total  deposits.  Predominant  concentration  of  Urban 
Cooperative  Banks  in  these  5  states  is  mainly  on  account  of  emergence  of  strong 
cooperative leadership. 
UCBs normally confine their area of operation to localised geographical regions, but over a 
period of time, their area of operation has crossed the frontiers of districts and in some cases 
the  states  of  their  registration.  Continuing  the  ideals  and  beliefs  of  cooperative  pioneers, 
UCBs seek to bring about an alignment of human and social development with their business 
objectives. At present, the bigger question is can we extend or diversify the development of 
strong, vibrant and financially sound UCBs to the other regions of the country as well to cater 
to the requirements of the people at the base level and bring them under the banking fold. 
There  is  a  clear  indication  as  per  the  available  data  as  mentioned  earlier  that  a  huge 
potential  exists  for  the  UCBs  to  play  a  more  proactive  role  in  the  banking  sector  in  the 
coming years. 
 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2009
 The  potential  exists,  but  how  important  a  role  the  UCBs  can  play  in  our  scheme  for  an 
inclusive growth? Why  should we have more thrust on the role played by the UCBs? In a 
regime  of  planned  development,  sound  cooperative  banking  movement  is  an  instrument, 
which while retaining some of the advantages of decentralisation and local initiative, will yet 
serve willingly and readily the overall purposes and directives of the developmental plans of 
the  government  in  the  identified  sectors.  It  is  an  indispensable  instrument  of  planned 
economic action in a democracy. The client profile of UCBs today predominantly comprise of 
priority  sector  segments  viz.  Small  business  establishments,  SSIs,  retail 
traders, 
professionals, self-employed persons and SRTOs, etc. who would not normally find it easy to 
have  access  to  large  commercial  banks.  In  urban  areas,  however,  there  are  a  number  of 
underbanked  people  like  artisans,  labourers,  small  business  men,  retailers,  etc.  of  smaller 
means who find it difficult to organise themselves in keeping with the requirements of modern 
times. It is highly desirable on social as well as on economic grounds, that members of this 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 3
class should be enabled to be brought into the banking fold and the UCBs certainly can take 
a lead into this.  
Role of RBI – efforts to ensure sustainable growth and functioning of UCBs 
While  the  cooperative  banking  sector  had  shown  spectacular  growth  during  the  1990’s 
exhibiting  substantial  potential  for  sustained  growth,  there  were  also  concerns  regarding 
inherent  weakness  of  some  of  the  entities  over  the  years  resulting  in  erosion  of  public 
confidence  and  causing  concern  to  the  regulators  as  also  to  the  sector  at  large.  Various 
Committees and Task Force set up over the years, notably the Committee headed by Shri K. 
Madhava Rao on UCBs and Shri Jagdish Capoor on the rural cooperatives Task Force on 
Urban Cooperative Banks have also recommended for enabling all the stakeholders to work 
together for a strong vibrant and stable system. It is in this critical context that, the Reserve 
Bank committed itself to strengthening the sector and to protect the depositors’ interests. The 
Reserve Bank’s Vision Document for UCBs brought out in March 2005 with the objective of 
maintaining the viability and competitiveness of the cooperative sector. The document also 
envisaged:  
• 
• 
Putting in place a mechanism to address the problems of dual control,  
Putting in place a consultative arrangement for identifying weak but potentially viable 
entities  and  nurturing  them  back  to  health,  if  need  be  through  a  process  of 
consolidation, and 
To identify unviable entities in the sector and provide them an exit path.  
• 
To address these issues, RBI felt the need to have more effective interaction with the State 
Government to address some of the systemic issues hindering the growth and functioning of 
the cooperative banks. In view of this, RBI has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with  26  States  so  far,  which  provides  the  basis  for  constitution  of  Task  Force  for  Urban 
Cooperative  Banks  (TAFCUB),  the  forum  for  consultative  decision  making  process.  The 
various TAFCUB meetings across the States have generated the desired effects and have 
helped in strengthening of the UCB sector as a whole.  
RBI’s role in empowering UCBs 
In order to empower the cooperative banks in their commercial / managerial functioning, RBI 
in  its  MOUs  with  the  State  Governments  has  committed  to  facilitate  the  development  of 
human  resources  and  skills  and  to  provide  assistance  in  IT  initiatives  undertaken  by  the 
UCBs. The UCBs here have to take a lead and play a more pro-active role in order to utilise 
the  services  and  assistance  provided  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  make  themselves  more 
competitive  by  bringing  efficiency  in  their  functioning.  This  has  to  be  achieved  through 
cultivating  Capital  Adequacy  and  NPA  Provisioning  Standards;  better  Corporate 
Governance; introducing Professional Management and following best practices in Banking 
operations. 
Role of technology 
The use of technology in expanding the banking outreach has been an area of focus for the 
Reserve Bank. Technological innovation has not only enabled a broader reach for consumer 
banking  and  financial  services,  but  has  enhanced  its  capacity  for  continued  and  inclusive 
growth. Banks and financial institutions rely on gathering, processing, analyzing information 
in  order  to  improve  its  service  and  meet  the  expectations of  customers.  Banks  have  been 
quick to realize and adopt technology in a big way. The visible benefits of IT in day-to-day 
banking  in  India  are  quite  well  known.  The  “Anywhere  Banking”  through  Core  Banking 
Systems,  “Anytime  Banking”  through  new,  24/7/365  delivery  channels  such  as  Automated 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2009
Teller Machines (ATMs), and Net and Mobile Banking, etc. are also increasingly becoming 
an  integral  part  of  the  services  provided  by  the  UCBs.  In  addition,  IT  has  enabled  the 
efficient, accurate and timely management of the increased transaction volume that comes 
with a larger customer base.  
Another  important  aspect  with  regard  to  technology  implementation  for  internal  purpose  in 
UCBs is the Management Information System (MIS). The MIS reports so generated help the 
top management as an effective risk management and a strategic decision making tool.  
Use  of  IT  reduces  the  costs  of  financial  transactions,  improves  the  allocation  of  financial 
resources,  and  increases  the  competitiveness  and  efficiency  of  financial  institutions.  Most 
importantly, it enables to take any product or service to the general masses. The challenge 
now  lies  in  taking  greater  advantage  of  new  technologies  and  information-based  systems 
and  expanding  the  coverage  of  the  Indian  banking  and  financial  system  to  under-served 
markets  in  rural  and  semi-urban  areas.  The  use  of  Smart  Card  technology,  mobile  ATMs, 
coverage  of  post  offices  under  electronic  payments  networks  in  remote  areas  could  play 
significant role in providing financial services to unbanked and underbanked people. Today, 
we all should understand that poor people are bankable and there is tremendous potential for 
the business growth of financial institutions by providing banking services to them. What we 
need  right  now  is  the  appropriate  business  delivery  model  which  will  facilitate  taking  the 
banking  services  to  the  doorsteps  of  the  people  at  a  lesser  cost.  The  technology  based 
solution would go a long way for achieving inclusive growth in India.  
India  is  experiencing  an  explosion  in  the  use  of  mobile  communication  technology.  Mobile 
phone  users  now  belong  to  all  strata  of  society,  spread  across  metropolitan,  urban,  semi-
urban and rural centres. Banks and financial service providers can leverage the advantage 
by reaching out to people through this medium for providing various financial and banking 
services.  The  mobile  phone  can  function  as  a  multi-application  smart  card,  thus  making 
banking  services  available  to  virtually  every  mobile  phone  owner.  This  holds  substantial 
promise  as  the  delivery  vehicle  of  the  future  –  there  is  huge  potential  and  an  exciting 
opportunity.  However,  the  expansion  of  such  capabilities  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
minimum  level  of  essential  security  features  and  continued  compliance  with  established 
covenants and international standards relating to privacy of customer transactions in order to 
enhance  the  customers’  confidence  in  the  mobile  and  internet  banking  by  controlling  the 
fraudulent transactions.  
In  order  to  enhance  the  deployment  of  technology  in  UCBs,  a  Group  was  constituted  to 
examine the various areas where IT support could be provided by the Reserve Bank of India. 
Based on the recommendations of the Working Group which looked into ways of supporting 
IT initiatives of the UCBs, IDRBT is being asked to facilitate UCBs availing of Core Banking 
Platform on an Application Service Provider (ASP) model. With this, the UCBs will be able to 
put in place cost-effective, modern technology so as to render better customer service and 
sound regulatory compliance. 
Challenges before UCBs 
The success of cooperatives ultimately depends upon their ability to perform their duties and 
fulfill the expectations of their members. The loyalties of the members can be retained not on 
the  basis  of  monopoly,  agreements  or  under  duress  but  on  the  strength  of  the  goodwill 
secured  by  rendering  service.  Banking  Cooperatives  are  sometimes  organised  and 
administered by those who lack both the qualifications and the experience necessary for the 
job. This factor alone accounts for a large number of cooperatives' failures and the uneven 
development  of  the  movement,  in  the  country.  The  importance  of  efficient  management 
cannot, therefore, be over emphasised.  
Functioning  in  a  highly  technologically  advanced  banking  environment  in  the  country  is  in 
itself a challenge and an opportunity for the UCBs to upgrade to a computerized environment 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 5
so  as  to  focus  on  more  business  opportunities  and  render  better  customer  service.  These 
technological platforms provide an impetus for growth. The role of training and educating not 
only  the  staff  but  also  the  customers  about  the  various  technology  based  banking  and 
financial  services  also  plays  an  important  part  here.  Being  a  movement  essentially 
dependent on the ability of persons in humble walks of life, who are often amateurs in the 
handling of business operations, the need for training and education is greater to optimally 
utilise the technological platform. RBI is also trying to facilitate the imparting of training to the 
key players responsible for the growth of UCBs. To improve the professional skills and as 
part of the commitment made in the MoUs with the State Govts., free of cost training courses 
for Directors, CEOs and other officials of UCBs are being conducted by the Reserve Bank at 
regional  locations  and  in  local  languages  for  the  convenience  of  banks.  As  of  now,  1307 
directors have been given training apart from 1004 CEOs, 2078 officials and 341 liquidators/ 
administrators/auditors including Chartered Accountants.  
They have no or few assets,  
They have nothing to offer as collateral,  
They have no business experiences,  
They cannot be trained for availing financial services,  
They have no credit history, and  
They cannot understand the nuances of banking due to illiteracy or less education.  
Financial inclusion for an inclusive growth 
Traditionally,  we  have  seen  and  observed  that  the  poor  have  not  been  welcomed  to  the 
banking  fold  by  the  banks  and  financial  institutions  with  a  misconception  that  they  are  not 
bankable and there is no business opportunity in offering services to the under-privileged and 
poor people in the semi-urban rural and slum-dwellers in the metropolitan cities. Banks and 
financial  institutions  had  been  till  recent  times  financially  excluding  these  people  on  the 
pretext that: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Given  the  belief  that  Credit  is  a  Human  Right  as  advocated  by  Nobel  Laureate  Professor 
Muhammad Yunus, and the poor can overcome poverty by generating their own employment 
and income, we have to develop a financial system which takes care of the needs of the poor 
on an urgent basis. Access to affordable financial services – especially credit and insurance 
– enlarges livelihood opportunities and empowers the poor to take charge of their lives. Such 
empowerment aids social growth and sustainable growth of the economy. Apart from these 
benefits, Financial Inclusion imparts formal identity, provides access to the payments system 
and to savings safety net like deposit insurance.  
Today,  we  need  to  understand  that  Financial  Inclusion  is  critical  for  achieving  inclusive 
growth in the country. To achieve that, we have to expand our scope of financial inclusion 
initiatives to reach out to people at the grass-root level. We may consider achieving that in 
three ways:  
• 
Through State-driven intervention by way of statutory enactments (for instance, the 
US example of the Community Reinvestment Act; and in France making it a statutory 
right to have a bank account). 
Through voluntary effort by the banking community by evolving various strategies to 
bring  within  the  ambit  of  the  banking  sector  the  large  strata  of  society,  and  more 
importantly; 
Creating a demand by the people themselves to pull the banks, financial institutions 
and other service providers towards them to offer banking and financial services at a 
competitive  and  affordable  rate.  This  will  go  a  long  way  in  not  only  financially 
BIS Review 96/2009
  6 
 including  and  empowering  the  people  but  also  as  an  avenue  of  providing  excellent 
business opportunities for the financial market payers.  
Generally,  we  associate  the  term  Financial  Inclusion  with  our  initiatives  of  bringing  poor 
people in the rural areas into the banking fold; however, we have to realize that there are still 
a large number of people in the urban area who are financially excluded. They have the need 
for  availing  the  various  types  of  banking  services,  especially  the  savings  and  money 
remittance services. This section of financially excluded people in the urban areas provides a 
good  opportunity  for  the  UCBs  to  step  in  and  fill  this  void.  This  is  a  challenge  and  a  big 
opportunity for the UCBs at the same time; and I reiterate that if UCBs are not able to grab 
this excellent opportunity, new institutions will come up to fill this void and UCBs will lose a 
good business opportunity.  
RBI and financial inclusion 
RBI has been giving adequate attention and has stepped in whenever it felt that the banking 
community  as  a  whole has  missed  out  or  not  given  the  desired  attention  to  certain  areas. 
This is the reason why the Reserve Bank is placing a lot of emphasis on financial inclusion. 
In India, the focus of the financial inclusion at present has been confined to ensuring a bare 
minimum access to a savings bank account without frills with a limited overdraft facility to all. 
RBI  has  framed  guidelines  with  a  view  to  achieving  greater  financial  inclusion,  to  make 
available a basic banking “no frills” account either with nil or very minimum balances as well 
as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of the population. The 
nature and number of transactions in such accounts would be restricted and made known to 
customers in advance in a transparent manner. Efforts are being made so that all banks give 
wide  publicity  to  the  facility  of  such  no  frills  account  to  ensure  greater  financial  inclusion. 
Banks  and  financial  institutions  have  to  take  a  lead  here  for  achieving  our  objective  of 
reaching out to people.  
In order to ensure that persons belonging to low income group both in urban and rural areas 
do not face difficulty in opening the bank accounts due to the procedural hassles, we have 
simplified the KYC procedure for opening accounts for people who intend to keep balances 
not exceeding rupees fifty thousand (Rs. 50,000/-) in all their accounts taken together and 
the total credit in all the accounts taken together is not expected to exceed rupees one lakh 
(Rs.1,00,000/-) in a year.  
Cooperative banks and regional rural banks being local level institutions are well suited for 
achieving  financial  inclusion.  Being  local  institutions  they  are  ideally  suited  for  achieving 
Financial  Inclusion.  The  use  of  IT  solutions  for  providing  banking  facilities  at  people’s 
doorsteps holds the potential for scalability of the Financial Inclusion initiatives. Many Pilot 
projects have been initiated in various States using smart cards for opening bank accounts 
with bio-metric identification. Here, the link to mobile or hand held connecting device ensures 
that the transactions are recorded in the bank’s books on real time basis. The outcome of 
these Pilot projects has been promising. However, we have to now ensure that the gains and 
lessons  from  these  Pilot  projects  are  translated  into  an  achievable,  affordable  and 
implementable  plans  on  a  pan  India  basis  to  leverage  the  benefits  of  inclusive  growth, 
otherwise all our hard work in recent years would fizzle out without many tangible benefits. 
Conclusion 
Today, our focus should be to simplify the technology which can operate on any platform. 
The technology solution to the business needs should be user-friendly without much third-
party or IT vendor intervention or support requirement for operating the same. In this context, 
the banks need to redesign their business strategies to incorporate specific plans to promote 
financial inclusion of low income group treating it both a business opportunity as well as a 
social  responsibility.  We  can  achieve  our  goal  of  inclusive  growth  if  all  the  available 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 7
resources  including  technology  and  expertise  available  with  the  banks,  the  support  of  the 
government, the optimum utilization of the Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs), NGOs and Self 
Help  Groups  are  geared  towards  including  more  and  more  people  under  the  banking  net. 
Initially,  it  may  appear  that  taking  banking  to  the  sections  constituting  “the  bottom  of  the 
pyramid”  may  not  be  profitable  but  as  various  study  conducted  reveals  that  even  the 
relatively low margins on high volumes can be a profitable proposition. Banks therefore need 
to work out their appropriate business delivery models and financial products to cater to the 
needs of the people.  
It is important that banks should give wide publicity to the facility of no-frills account. Banking 
services need to be “marketed” to connect with large population segments and these may be 
justifiable promotional costs. 
Mobile phones, POS terminals, “simple to use” cash dispensing and collecting machines akin 
to  ATMs,  etc.  with  operating  instructions  and  commands  in  vernacular  language  would 
greatly facilitate the financial inclusion of the semi-urban populace at an affordable cost, and 
cooperative banks with a local touch and feel can address these issues in a big way.  
The Reserve Bank’s endeavour has been to strengthen the UCBs so that they run on sound 
principles  without  posing  any  systemic  problems.  Our  focus  is  also  geared  towards 
facilitating  the  process  of  computerization  in  UCBs,  especially  those  who  are  not  yet 
computerized  to  enable  them  to  take  advantage  of  technology  to  increase  business 
opportunities,  improve  customer  service  and  increasing  the  coverage  of  its  services. 
Financial Inclusion as a holistic benchmark of a country’s advancement and its commitment 
to  meet  the  aspirations  of  its  disadvantaged  franchisee  is  a  “Goal”  to  pursue  by  all  the 
concerned players. All of us, the RBI, the banks and financial institutions, the fringe players 
facilitating  the  financial  inclusion  process  have  to  work  hard  for  the  sustainable  inclusive 
growth, both social and economical. We indeed have an important role to play and contribute 
towards the development of this great nation.  
I am sure The A.P. Mahesh Cooperative Urban Bank’s technological initiatives will go a long 
way in contributing to our goal of achieving 100 per cent inclusive growth in India. I wish you 
all the best for all your future endeavours and initiatives.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 96/2009
