Ben S Bernanke: Current economic and financial conditions and the 
federal budget 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 3 June 2009. 
 Chairman  Spratt,  Ranking  Member  Ryan,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  offer  my  views  on  current  economic  and  financial 
conditions and on issues pertaining to the federal budget.  
Economic developments and outlook 
The U.S. economy has  contracted sharply since last fall, with real gross domestic product 
(GDP) having dropped at an average annual rate of about 6 percent during the fourth quarter 
of 2008 and the first quarter of this year. Among the enormous costs of the downturn is the 
loss of nearly 6 million jobs since the beginning of 2008. The most recent information on the 
labor  market  –  the  number  of  new  and  continuing  claims  for  unemployment  insurance 
through late May – suggests that sizable job losses and further increases in unemployment 
are likely over the next few months. 
However,  the  recent  data  also  suggest  that  the  pace  of  economic  contraction  may  be 
slowing. Notably, consumer spending, which dropped sharply in the second half of last year, 
has been roughly flat since the turn of the year, and consumer sentiment has improved. In 
coming months, households' spending power will be boosted by the fiscal stimulus program. 
Nonetheless,  a  number  of  factors  are  likely  to  continue  to  weigh  on  consumer  spending, 
among  them  the  weak  labor  market,  the  declines  in  equity  and  housing  wealth  that 
households have experienced over the past two years, and still-tight credit conditions. 
Activity in the housing market, after a long period of decline, has also shown some signs of 
bottoming. Sales of existing homes have been fairly stable since late last year, and sales of 
new homes seem to have flattened out in the past couple of monthly readings, though both 
remain  at  depressed  levels.  Meanwhile,  construction  of  new  homes  has  been  sufficiently 
restrained  to  allow  the  backlog  of  unsold  new  homes  to  decline  –  a  precondition  for  any 
recovery in homebuilding. 
Businesses  remain  very  cautious  and  continue  to  reduce  their  workforces  and  capital 
investments. On a more positive note, firms are making progress in shedding the unwanted 
inventories  that  they  accumulated  following  last  fall's  sharp  downturn  in  sales.  The 
Commerce Department estimates that the pace of inventory liquidation quickened in the first 
quarter, accounting for a sizable portion of the reported decline in real GDP in that period. As 
inventory stocks move into better alignment with sales, firms should become more willing to 
increase production. 
We continue to expect overall economic activity to bottom out, and then to turn up later this 
year. Our assessments that consumer spending and housing demand will stabilize and that 
the  pace  of  inventory  liquidation  will  slow  are  key  building  blocks  of  that  forecast.  Final 
demand  should  also  be  supported  by  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus,  and  U.S.  exports  may 
benefit  if  recent  signs  of  stabilization  in  foreign  economic  activity  prove  accurate.  An 
important caveat is that our forecast also assumes continuing gradual repair of the financial 
system and an associated improvement in credit conditions; a relapse in the financial sector 
would be a significant drag on economic activity and could cause the incipient recovery to 
stall. I will provide a brief update on financial markets in a moment.  
BIS Review 68/2009 
 1
Even after a recovery gets under way, the rate of growth of real economic activity is likely to 
remain below its longer-run potential for a while, implying that the current slack in resource 
utilization  will  increase  further.  We  expect  that  the  recovery  will  only  gradually  gain 
momentum and that economic slack will diminish slowly. In particular, businesses are likely 
to be cautious about hiring, and the unemployment rate is likely to rise for a time, even after 
economic growth resumes. 
In  this  environment,  we  anticipate  that  inflation  will  remain  low.  The  slack  in  resource 
utilization  remains  sizable,  and,  notwithstanding  recent  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and 
other commodities, cost pressures generally remain subdued. As a consequence, inflation is 
likely to move down some over the next year relative to its pace in 2008. That said, improving 
economic conditions and stable inflation expectations should limit further declines in inflation. 
Conditions in financial markets 
Conditions  in  a  number  of  financial  markets  have  improved  since  earlier  this  year,  likely 
reflecting both policy actions taken by the Federal Reserve and other agencies as well as the 
somewhat better economic outlook. Nevertheless, financial markets and financial institutions 
remain  under  stress,  and  low  asset  prices  and  tight  credit  conditions  continue  to  restrain 
economic activity. 
Among  the  markets  where  functioning  has  improved  recently  are  those  for  short-term 
funding,  including  the  interbank  lending  markets  and  the  commercial  paper  market.  Risk 
spreads  in  those  markets  appear  to  have  moderated,  and  more  lending  is  taking  place  at 
longer maturities. The better performance of short-term funding markets in part reflects the 
support  afforded  by  Federal  Reserve  lending  programs.  It  is  encouraging  that  the  private 
sector’s  reliance  on  the  Fed’s  programs  has  declined  as  market  stresses  have  eased,  an 
outcome  that  was  one  of  our  key  objectives  when  we  designed  our  interventions.  The 
issuance  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABS)  backed  by  credit  card,  auto,  and  student  loans 
has  also  picked  up  this  spring,  and  ABS  funding  rates  have  declined,  developments 
supported  by  the  availability  of  the Federal  Reserve’s  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan 
Facility as a market backstop. 
In  markets  for  longer-term  credit,  bond  issuance  by  nonfinancial  firms  has  been  relatively 
strong recently, and spreads between Treasury yields and rates paid by corporate borrowers 
have narrowed some, though they remain wide. Mortgage rates and spreads have also been 
reduced  by  the  Federal  Reserve's  program  of  purchasing  agency  debt  and  agency 
mortgage-backed  securities.  However,  in  recent  weeks,  yields  on  longer-term  Treasury 
securities and fixed-rate mortgages have risen. These increases appear to reflect concerns 
about  large  federal  deficits  but  also  other  causes,  including  greater  optimism  about  the 
economic  outlook,  a  reversal  of  flight-to-quality  flows,  and  technical  factors  related  to  the 
hedging of mortgage holdings. 
As  you  know,  last  month,  the  federal  bank  regulatory  agencies  released  the  results  of  the 
Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  (SCAP).  The  purpose  of  the  exercise  was  to 
determine,  for  each  of  the  19  U.S.-owned  bank  holding  companies  with  assets  exceeding 
$100 billion, a capital buffer sufficient for them to remain strongly capitalized and able to lend 
to creditworthy borrowers even if economic conditions over the next two years turn out to be 
worse than we currently expect. According to the findings of the SCAP exercise, under the 
more  adverse  economic  outlook,  losses  at  the  19  bank  holding  companies  would  total  an 
estimated $600 billion during 2009 and 2010. After taking account of potential resources to 
absorb those losses, including expected revenues, reserves, and existing capital cushions, 
we  determined  that  10  of  the  19  institutions  should  raise,  collectively,  additional  common 
equity of $75 billion. 
Each of the 10 bank holding companies requiring an additional buffer has committed to raise 
this  capital  by  November  9.  We  are  in  discussions  with  these  firms  on  their  capital  plans, 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2009
which are due by June 8. Even in advance of those plans being approved, the 10 firms have 
among them already raised more than $36 billion of new common equity, with a number of 
their  offerings  of  common  shares  being  over-subscribed.  In  addition,  these  firms  have 
announced actions that would generate up to an additional $12 billon of common equity. We 
expect  further  announcements  shortly  as  their  capital  plans  are  finalized  and  submitted  to 
supervisors.  The  substantial  progress  these  firms  have  made  in  meeting  their  required 
capital  buffers,  and  their  success  in  raising  private  capital,  suggests  that  investors  are 
gaining greater confidence in the banking system. 
Fiscal policy in the current economic and financial environment 
Let  me  now  turn  to  fiscal  matters.  As  you  are  well  aware,  in  February  of  this  year,  the 
Congress  passed  the  American  Recovery  and  Reinvestment  Act,  or  ARRA,  a  major  fiscal 
package aimed at strengthening near-term economic activity. The package included personal 
tax  cuts  and  increases  in  transfer  payments  intended  to  stimulate  household  spending, 
incentives  for  business  investment,  increases  in  federal  purchases,  and  federal  grants  for 
state and local governments.  
Predicting the effects of these fiscal actions on economic activity is difficult, especially in light 
of the unusual economic circumstances that we face. For example, households confronted 
with declining incomes and limited access to credit might be expected to spend most of their 
tax  cuts;  then  again,  heightened  economic  uncertainties  and  the  desire  to  increase 
precautionary  saving  or  pay  down  debt  might  reduce  households’  propensity  to  spend. 
Likewise, it is difficult to judge how quickly funds dedicated to infrastructure needs and other 
longer-term  projects  will  be  spent  and  how  large  any  follow-on  effects  will  be.  The 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has constructed a range of estimates of the effects of 
the  stimulus  package  on  real  GDP  and  employment  that  appropriately  reflects  these 
uncertainties. According to the CBO's estimates, by the end of 2010, the stimulus package 
could boost the level of real GDP between about 1 percent and a little more than 3 percent 
and the level of employment by between roughly 1 million and 3-1/2 million jobs. 
The increases in spending and reductions in taxes associated with the fiscal package and 
the  financial  stabilization  program,  along  with  the  losses  in  revenues  and  increases  in 
income-support payments associated with the weak economy, will widen the federal budget 
deficit substantially this year. The Administration recently submitted a proposed budget that 
projects the federal deficit to reach about $1.8 trillion this fiscal year before declining to $1.3 
trillion in 2010 and roughly $900 billion in 2011. As a consequence of this elevated level of 
borrowing, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP is likely to move up 
from about 40 percent before the onset of the financial crisis to about 70 percent in 2011. 
These developments would leave the debt-to-GDP ratio at its highest level since the early 
1950s, the years following the massive debt buildup during World War II. 
Certainly, our economy and financial markets face extraordinary near-term challenges, and 
strong  and  timely  actions  to  respond  to  those  challenges  are  necessary  and  appropriate. 
Nevertheless,  even  as  we  take  steps  to  address  the  recession  and  threats  to  financial 
stability,  maintaining  the  confidence  of  the  financial  markets  requires  that  we,  as a  nation, 
begin  planning  now  for  the  restoration  of  fiscal  balance.  Prompt  attention  to  questions  of 
fiscal  sustainability  is  particularly  critical  because  of  the  coming  budgetary  and  economic 
challenges  associated  with  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation  and  continued 
increases  in  medical  costs.  The  recent  projections  from  the  Social  Security  and  Medicare 
trustees show that, in the absence of programmatic changes, Social Security and Medicare 
outlays will together increase from about 8-1/2 percent of GDP today to 10 percent by 2020 
and 12-1/2 percent by 2030. With the ratio of debt to GDP already elevated, we will not be 
able to continue borrowing indefinitely to meet these demands. 
Addressing the country's fiscal problems will require a willingness to make difficult choices. In 
the end, the fundamental decision that the Congress, the Administration, and the American 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 3
people must confront is how large a share of the nation's economic resources to devote to 
federal  government  programs,  including  entitlement  programs.  Crucially,  whatever  size  of 
government  is  chosen,  tax  rates  must  ultimately  be  set  at  a  level  sufficient  to  achieve  an 
appropriate balance of spending and revenues in the long run. In particular, over the longer 
term, achieving fiscal sustainability – defined, for example, as a situation in which the ratios 
of government debt and interest payments to GDP are stable or declining, and tax rates are 
not so high as to impede economic growth – requires that spending and budget deficits be 
well controlled. 
Clearly, the Congress and the Administration face formidable near-term challenges that must 
be  addressed.  But  those  near-term  challenges  must  not  be  allowed  to  hinder  timely 
consideration of the steps needed to address fiscal imbalances. Unless we demonstrate a 
strong  commitment  to  fiscal sustainability  in  the  longer  term,  we  will  have  neither  financial 
stability nor healthy economic growth. 
Federal Reserve transparency 
Let  me  close  today  with  an  update  on  the  Federal  Reserve's  initiatives  to  enhance  the 
transparency  of  our  credit  and  liquidity  programs.  As  I  noted  last  month  in  my  testimony 
before the Joint Economic Committee, I asked Vice Chairman Kohn to lead a review of our 
disclosure  policies,  with  the  goal  of  increasing  the  range  of  information  that  we  make 
available to the public.1 That group has made significant progress, and we expect to begin 
publishing soon a monthly report on the Fed's balance sheet and lending programs that will 
summarize  and  discuss  recent  developments  and  provide  considerable  new  information 
concerning the number of borrowers at our various facilities, the concentration of borrowing, 
and  the  collateral  pledged.  In  addition,  the  reports  will  provide  quarterly  updates  of  key 
elements  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  annual  financial  statements,  including  information 
regarding  the  System  Open  Market  Account  portfolio,  our  loan  programs,  and  the  special 
purpose vehicles that are consolidated on the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. We hope that this information will be helpful to the Congress and others with an 
interest  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  actions  to  address  the  financial  crisis  and  the  economic 
downturn. We will continue to look for opportunities to broaden the scope of the information 
and supporting analysis that we provide to the public. 
                                                 
1   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  "The  Economic  Outlook,"  statement  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  U.S. 
Congress, May 5. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2009
