Usha Thorat: Global agenda for regulatory and supervisory reforms – the 
stock taking and way forward 
Opening remarks by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Panel  Session  on  “Strengthening  financial  regulation  and  supervision”  of  the  FICCI  –  IBA 
Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 8 September 2009. 
Assistance of Shri Tulasi Gopinath in preparing the speech is acknowledged. 
 I thank the organisers of the FICCI – IBA Conference on Global Banking: Paradigm Shift for 
having  invited  me  to  chair  the  panel  session  this  afternoon  on  Strengthening  Financial 
Regulation and Supervision. 
Macro-economic scenario 
The massive derailment of the financial sector in the advanced economies has had a knock 
on effect on the world economy. The world output is expected to contract by 1.4 per cent in 
2009, GDP in the advanced economies is projected to decline by 3.8 per cent in 2009 before 
growing by a meagre 0.6 per cent in 2010. The GDP of US and the UK is forecast to witness 
a fall of 2.6 per cent and 4.2 per cent in 2009 before an anaemic recovery to 0.8 per cent and 
0.2 in 2010, respectively. Euro area, on the other hand, is expected to shrink by 4.8 per cent 
and  0.3  per  cent  both  in  2009  and  2010,  respectively  (WEO,  2009a).  Unemployment  in 
advanced countries is projected to scale higher from 5.8 per cent in 2008 to 8.1 per cent in 
2009  and  further  to  9.2  per  cent  in  2010  (WEO,  2009).  The  unemployment  in  the  US  is 
expected  to  almost  double  from  5.8  per  cent  in  2008  to  10.1  per  cent  in  2010.  Spain  is 
forecast  to  suffer  the  highest  unemployment  within  the  euro  area  with  19.3  per  cent 
unemployment in 2010. The fiscal stimuli that have been put together in these countries in 
response led to worsening fiscal positions. In the OECD countries, the fiscal position is set to 
deteriorate from -3.2 per cent in 2008 to -7.7 per cent in 2009 and further to -8.8 per cent in 
2010. The fiscal deficit is poised to more than double in the US, Japan and the Euro area in 
2009 and further deteriorate in 2010. By the end of 2010, the ratio of gross government debt 
to GDP is estimated to reach 98 per cent for the US, 87 per cent for Germany, 80 per cent 
for France and 73 per cent for UK. Financial stabilization in the world has come at a huge 
cost. Financial stabilization cost1 is highest for the US at 12.7 per cent of GDP and lowest for 
Italy at 0.9 per cent of GDP. For the UK, it is 9.1 per cent, 4.4 per cent for Canada, 3.1 per 
cent for Germany, and 1.8 per cent for France (GFSR, 2009). 
Collapsing growth in advanced economies led to a sharp contraction in economic activity in 
EMEs,  due,  inter  alia,  to  an  unprecedented  drop  in  export  demand  that  coincided,  with  a 
significant reversal in international bank lending and foreign portfolio investment. Emerging 
and developing economies are projected to post a much subdued growth of 1.5 per cent in 
2009, notwithstanding an expected pick up in growth momentum during the second half of 
2009. Emerging Asia is estimated to grow by 5.5 percent in 2009 and 7.0 percent in 2010, 
owing to improving prospects in China (7.5 per cent and 8.5 per cent) and India (5.4 per cent 
and 6.5 per cent). African countries are forecast to register much lower growth of 1.8 per cent 
in 2009 and recover to 4.1 per cent in 2010. On the contrary, Latin America is projected to 
contract by 2.6 per cent in 2009, before a recovery to 2.3 per cent in 2010. Badly affected by 
the reversal of capital flows and sharp contraction in commodity exports, countries in central 
and  eastern  Europe  and  in  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  are  expected  to  suffer 
                                                 
1   Net cost, which is gross minus recovery over the next five years. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 1
more severe shrinkage of 5.0 per cent and 5.8 per cent respectively in 2009 (WEO, 2009a). 
These countries are highly dependent on western European banks, which own the majority 
of banking systems in these countries. Cross-border bank funding has been disrupted as the 
banking crisis in western Europe intensified. This real sector weakness has been adversely 
affecting the banking sector in these countries through the negative feedback loop. 
Global response by sovereigns and regulators 
It is not therefore surprising that there has been so much soul searching, especially in the 
advanced economies, of what went so seriously wrong with the international financial system 
leading  to  the  worst  crisis  since  the  great  depression.  The  various  factors  that  led  to  and 
precipitated  the  crisis  are  now  well  known  and  documented  and  I  do  not  want  to  go  over 
these. What I would like to do, is to discuss the actions taken so far by Governments, central 
bankers  and  regulators  over  the  last  one  year.  Just  last  week,  we  have  had  two  very 
important  statements  –  one  issued  by  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Governors  and  the 
other  by  the  Basel  oversight  body  –  the  Group  of  Governors  and  Heads  of  supervision. 
These  statements  reflect  the  consensus  arrived  at,  so  far,  for  strengthening  financial 
regulation and supervision and outline what remains to be done. It is therefore very timely 
that we are having this seminar today to debate and discuss the implications of the changing 
international framework for emerging countries like India.  
Let me start with the Basel Committee. In July this year, the Committee issued a series of 
standards  for  higher  capital  for  the  trading  book  as  it  was  recognised  that  the  Basel  II 
framework  seriously  underestimated  the  capital  needs  for  the  trading  book.  Therefore,  the 
Basel  Committee  has  introduced  new  trading  book  capital  rules  that  substantially  raise 
trading  book  capital 
for 
resecuritisations  and  exposures  to  off-balance  sheet  vehicles.  It  has  evolved  principles  for 
stress testing and valuation of complex products, as also for supervision and management of 
funding liquidity risk. It has incorporated the FSB compensation standards into the Pillar 2 
supervisory  review  process  and  has  enhanced  Pillar  3  disclosures  focusing  on  trading 
activities, securitisations and exposures to off-balance sheet vehicles. Yesterday, i.e. on 7th 
Sep  2009,  following  a  meeting  of  the  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision,  the  oversight 
body of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision representing 27 important jurisdictions, 
issued  a  press  release  on  a  comprehensive  set  of  measures  to  strengthen  regulation, 
supervision and risk management of the banking sector. These measures include: 
• 
It  prescribes  higher  capital 
requirements. 
requirements 
Raising  the  quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  the  Tier  1  capital  base.  The 
predominant form of Tier 1 capital must be common shares and retained earnings. 
Deductions  and  prudential  filters  will  be  harmonised  internationally  and  generally 
applied at the level of common equity.  
Introduction of a Leverage ratio which will be initially a supplementary measure to the 
Basel II risk-based framework with a view to migrating to a Pillar 1 treatment based 
on  appropriate  review  and  calibration.  To  ensure  comparability,  the  details  of  the 
leverage  ratio  will  be  harmonised  internationally,  fully  adjusting  for  differences  in 
accounting. 
Introduction  of  a  minimum  global  standard  for  funding  liquidity  that  will  include  a 
stressed liquidity coverage ratio requirement, underpinned by a longer-term structural 
liquidity ratio. 
Prescribe  a  framework  for  countercyclical  capital  buffers  above  the  minimum 
requirement.  The  framework  will  include  capital  conservation  measures  such  as 
constraints on capital distributions. An appropriate set of indicators, such as earnings 
and  credit-based  variables,  will  be  used  as  a  way  to  condition  the  build  up  and 
release of capital buffers. 
   2 
 BIS Review 104/2009
  Provisioning requirements on a forward looking basis using the principle of expected 
losses. 
Recommendations to reduce the systemic risk associated with the resolution of cross-
border banks. 
Assess the need for a capital surcharge to mitigate the risk of systemic banks.  
• 
In  order  to  ensure  transition  to  a  higher  level  and  quality  of  capital,  supervisors  will  be 
encouraged  to  take  actions  to  limit  excessive  dividend  payments,  share  buybacks  and 
compensation. 
The  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  issued  a  statement  on  5th 
September  reaffirming  their  commitment  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  to  prevent  the 
build-up of excessive risk and future crises and support sustainable growth. The Group took 
note of the actions taken so far by FSB including introduction of CCPs to clear most credit 
default  swaps,  stronger  oversight  regimes  for  credit  rating  agencies,  internationally  agreed 
principles  for  the  oversight  of  hedge  funds,  good  practices  for  due  diligence  by  asset 
managers  when  investing  in  structured  finance  products,  and  issuance  of  internationally 
agreed principles for regulation of short selling. More action has been called for by the Group 
in the following areas: 
• 
• 
Compensation practices.  
Stronger regulation and oversight for systemically important firms and strengthening 
the legal framework for crisis intervention and winding down firms.  
review,  capacity  building  and 
Delivering  an  effective  programme  of  peer 
countermeasures  to  tackle  non-cooperative  jurisdictions  that  fail  to  meet  regulatory 
standards, AML/CFT and tax information exchange standards.  
Consistent  and  coordinated  implementation  of  international  standards,  including 
Basel II, to prevent the emergence of new risks and regulatory arbitrage, particularly 
with regard to Central Counterparties for credit derivatives, oversight of credit ratings 
agencies  and  hedge 
for 
securitisations. 
Convergence  towards  a  single  set  of  high-quality,  global,  independent  accounting 
standards  on 
loan-loss  provisioning,  off-balance  sheet 
exposures and the impairment and valuation of financial assets.  
funds,  and  quantitative 
   requirements 
instruments, 
retention 
financial 
The Indian position 
In India, strengthening and developing financial sector has been subservient to the needs of 
the  real  sector.  Endeavour  has  always  been  to  ensure  harmonised  development  of  all  the 
sectors of the Indian economy. A number of measures based on the principles that are now 
accepted  internationally  were  already  brought  into  practice  even  before  the  crisis.  These 
included restrictions on leverage for banking and non banking institutions, stringent liquidity 
requirements,  counter  cyclical  prudential  measures,  not  recognising  in  Tier  I  capital  many 
items  that  are  now  sought  to  be  deducted  internationally,  recognising  profits  from  sale  of 
securitised  assets  to  SPVs  over  the  life  of  the  securities  issued,  not  reckoning  unrealised 
gains in earnings or in Tier I capital. The challenge for us is to facilitate the growth of the real 
sector  through  financial  products  and  innovations  subject  to  adequate  safeguards  and 
adoption  of  sound  risk  management  policies.  For  further  strengthening  financial  regulation 
and supervision, the following measures are under the consideration of RBI: 
• 
Based  on  July  2009  final  documents  from  BCBS  on  enhancements  to  Basel  II 
framework, further guidelines relevant to standardized method are being issued. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 3
       A  draft  circular  detailing  the  modalities  for  adopting  the  integrated  liquidity  risk 
management  system  as  also  the  guidance  note  on  “Liquidity  Risk  Management” 
based  on  Basel  Committee’s  “Principles  for  sound  liquidity  risk  management  and 
supervision”  brought  out  in  September  2008  as  well  as  other  international  best 
practices will be put up on the Reserve Bank website by October 31, 2009.  
As part of developing financial market infrastructure, recently, capital adequacy norms 
for CCPs have been laid down. CCIL’s role is being gradually extended to the OTC 
interest  rate  and  forex  derivatives  segment,  initially  as  a  reporting  platform  and 
thereafter, covering the settlement aspect.  
Additional  guidance  on  securitisation  focusing  on  a  minimum  lock-in-period  and 
minimum  retention  criteria  for  securitising  the  loans  originated  and  purchased  by 
banks is proposed to be issued shortly.  
Recently, regulatory and supervisory framework for financial conglomerates has been 
reviewed  for  enhancing  the  regime.  The  enhancements  would  be  put  in  operation 
shortly.  
RBI would shortly be issuing a draft Discussion Paper on prudential issues in banks’ 
floating and managing private pools of capital in order to sensitize banks about risks 
inherent  in  such  activities  and  limit  such  exposures  commensurate  with  their  risk 
management and available capital.  
As indicated in the Annual Policy Statement announced in April 2009, the Reserve 
Bank would recommend the implementation of the sound procedures/principles being 
developed by the FSB for financial institutions regarding the compensation packages.  
There  has  been  significant  progress  in  the  area  of  convergence  of  accounting 
standards. The Indian accounting standards are expected to be fully convergent with 
IFRSs with effect from April 1, 2011. Reserve Bank of India is actively working with 
the Government, accounting standard bodies and banks for ensuring preparedness 
for smooth convergence by the banking system.  
Way forward 
The  agenda  that  is  being  developed  for  strengthening  of  financial  sector  regulation  and 
supervision  is  ambitious.  Contentious  issues  will  arise  both  at  national  and  at  the 
international  levels  on  regulatory  cooperation.  Whereas  the  principles  underlying  this 
regulatory  overhaul  are  being  increasingly  accepted,  many  challenges  will  arise  on  their 
practicality and modes of implementation: 
• 
Firstly, there is a need to ensure that regulators and supervisors remain firm in their 
resolve to ensure that there is no build-up of risk in the system and that the principles 
and framework articulated are adhered to in letter and spirit. 
Second,  the  interconnectedness  of  the  institutions  and  markets  requires  central 
banks,  banking  and  securities  regulators  to  work  in  close  coordination  with  full 
exchange of information and frequent interaction to assess the systemic risks at any 
point of time.  
Third, several of the countercyclical proposals are dependent on the assessment of 
economic  and  banking  conditions  in  national  jurisdictions  which  will  determine  the 
capital buffer requirements – these will obviously vary from one jurisdiction to another 
as cycles would also vary. With banks operating across the globe, this will imply that 
capital requirement could vary across jurisdiction – parking the transaction in a more 
favourable  jurisdiction  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Coupled  with  complex  structures  and 
differential tax regimes, minimising regulatory and tax arbitrage will continue to be a 
huge challenge. 
  4 
 BIS Review 104/2009
      Fourth,  cross  border  resolution  issues  will  continue  to  be  daunting  especially  as 
national regulators will seek to protect domestic depositors and stake holders.  
Fifth,  convergence  toward  international  accounting  standards  will  be  a  huge 
challenge  in  terms  of  not  only  bringing  in  the  changes  in  standards  that  are 
appropriate for  the  country  but  also  for  putting  in  place  systems  and  capabilities  to 
facilitate  convergence.  Issues  such  as  putting  in  place  prudential  filters  for  not 
distributing unrealised gains would also arise. 
Sixth, while there are discernible signs of recovery in the global financial markets, the 
real test of the resilience of the financial system will be its performance through the 
exit process. For the emerging market economies such as ours, the challenge will be 
to manage the impact of this process of global stabilisation. 
Seventh, in emerging markets such as India, without sufficient historical data of credit 
and  default  cycles,  there  are  difficulties  in  putting  in  place  many  of  the  advanced 
methodologies  under  the  regulatory  framework  such  as  expected  loss  provisioning, 
additional capital buffers linked to PDs. 
Eighth, an additional challenge for the EMEs is that they are exposed to the volatile 
international capital flows necessitating suitable regulatory policies depending on the 
macro economic conditions for ensuring financial stability.  
Finally,  for  countries  like  India,  the  advantages  of  coming  in  late  is  that  while 
introducing  new  products  and  instruments  one  can  have  the  benefit  of  the  global 
experience so that the pitfalls can be avoided while reaping the gains of innovation.  
Thank you. 
References 
World Economic Outlook, (2009): International Monetary Fund, April. 
World Economic Outlook (2009a): International Monetary Fund, Update, July. 
Global Financial Stability Report (2009): International Monetary Fund, April. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 5
