Duvvuri Subbarao: Ethics and the world of finance 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference on “Ethics and the World of Finance”, organised by Sri Sathya Sai University, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, Andhra Pradesh, 28 August 2009. 
 Thank you for inviting me to participate in this unique conference on “Ethics and the World of 
Finance”. This topic would have been relevant at any time. But it is particularly so, given the 
current financial crisis which has called into question the ethical foundation of the financial 
world. It is also fitting that we are discussing ethics and the world of finance at Sri Sathya Sai 
University. The worlds of faith and economic development are profoundly intertwined, in both 
precept and practice. At heart, the strongest link is the aim to foster greater social justice. 
Ethics and the world of finance – the canvas 
I must admit I have not thought about ethics and the world of finance deeply or systematically 
before confronting the challenge of addressing this conference. And as I tried to collect my 
thoughts,  several  questions  came to  mind.  How  do  we,  as  individuals,  approach  issues  of 
ethics and values? Are our approaches different in our personal and professional lives? Are 
issues of ethics different in the financial sector? What are the ethical issues thrown up by the 
current crisis? Has economics, as an academic discipline, lost its value base? Is that the root 
cause for the malaise in the financial sector? How do we in the Reserve Bank interpret our 
mandate towards ethical standards and values in all that we do? These questions cover a 
fairly large canvas; and my scholarship and experience are clearly not adequate to cover that 
entire canvas. But I will address some of these questions in my limited capacity and time. 
The power of context 
We – all of us – confront ethical issues and dilemmas every day and we deal with them by 
our own standards. All of us know it is a constant struggle between sticking to the straight 
and narrow path of ethical virtue and succumbing to temptation. As individuals and families 
we  manage  this  struggle  in  our  own  different  ways,  drawing  the  line  for  ourselves  as  we 
weigh the trade-offs.  
A follow on question is, are our ethical standards of honesty, sensitivity, fair play and values 
absolute or do they change depending on the context? We all know that some people are 
more honest than others. But the question is, is an honest person honest all the time, or does 
her  sense  of  honesty  depend  on  the  trade-offs  in  the  specific  context  of  a  dilemma? 
Empirical psychology tests show that there is not a tight circle of honest people and another 
tight circle of dishonest people.  
In  his  best-selling  book,  “The  Tipping  Point”,  Malcolm  Gladwell  argues  that  something  like 
honesty is not a fundamental trait, but is considerably influenced by the situation. There are 
specific  situations  so  powerful  that  they  can  overwhelm  our  inherent  predisposition.  To 
buttress this argument, Gladwell cites a landmark set of behaviour experiments by two New 
York based researchers, Hugh Hartshorne and M.A. May. Hartshorne and May administered 
several types of tests to eleven thousand school children over the course of several months, 
all  designed  to  measure  honesty.  The  tests  varied  by  subject,  design,  level  etc.  and  the 
results are therefore quite robust. Some of the test results are obvious. A few children never 
cheat, and a few always do. Less intelligent children cheat more than smart children. Older 
children  cheat  more  than  younger  ones.  Girls  cheat  about  as  much  as  boys.  Some  test 
results  though  are  less  obvious.  For  example,  performance  of  children  varied  as  between 
class-room  exams  and  take  home  exams.  Some  children  cheat  in  arithmetic  but  not  in 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
spelling tests. The surmise of this extensive behaviour experimentation was that between the 
binary extremes of a few who never cheat and a few who always do, there is a large grey 
mix. Some people cheat if there is an opportunity; some cheat if the stakes are high enough; 
some cheat if the chance of getting caught is small. 
What do the above results mean for our value systems as individuals in our personal lives 
and  in  our  professional  lives?  Do  we  have  double  standards?  Are  we  more  strict  about 
breaking  a  self-imposed  standard  in  our  personal  lives  but  do  so  with  less  pangs  of 
conscience  in  our  professional  lives?  I  believe  such  compartmentalization  is  not  valid. 
Individuals  carry  their  ethical  standards  and  values  everywhere,  and  how  they  resolve 
specific dilemmas and issues is determined not so much by the personal and professional 
domain of the dilemma but by the power of context that Gladwell cites. 
Ethics in the financial sector 
Let me now turn to the issue of ethics in the financial sector. As I said earlier, the question is, 
is  the  financial  sector  different  from  other  fields  by  way  of  ethical  dimensions?  Is  there  a 
greater opportunity or larger temptation to deviate from the straight and narrow path? Is the 
power of context more forceful here? Conversely, is it people of looser ethical standards and 
values  who  succeed  in  the  field  of  finance?  Again,  this  is  a  debate  that  defies  clear  cut 
resolution. 
At one extreme are people who claim that the financial system, at its heart, is about trust. 
Nowhere  is  this  more  true  than  in  banking.  The  word  credit  derives  from  the  Latin  word 
credere,  meaning  to  believe.  Billions,  indeed  trillions  of  financial  transactions  take  place 
everyday, and all of these are based on trust. Without broad based trust and presumption of 
honest  behaviour,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  the  financial  sector  to  grow  to  its 
present size and importance. As we have seen time and again, dishonest schemes where 
trust is breached implode and come crashing down. Two come to mind immediately, though 
there  are,  of  course,  many  more.  There  is  Nick  Leesson,  the  British  trader  who  single-
handedly caused the collapse of one of England’s most venerable banks in the mid-1990s; 
and there is the more recent case of Bernie Madoff, the former head of the New York Stock 
Exchange, whose Ponzi Scheme robbed millions of individuals of their life savings and looted 
the treasuries of charitable institutions involved in building social capital.  
At the other extreme are people who say ethics and finance are poles apart. They contend 
that at a fundamental level, finance is all about making money, never mind how it is made. 
Status  and  recognition  are  accorded  by  how  much  profit  is  made  regardless  of  how  it  is 
made. It is argued that even as the millions of foot soldiers may be innocent, people who rise 
to positions of top management and leadership in the financial sector could not have done so 
without compromising on scruples. According to people given to this persuasion, there is a 
book called The Complete Book of Wall Street Ethics which is fat and bound and in which all 
pages are blank.  
Even  as  this  debate  frowns  on  moderation,  I  believe  the  view  that  people  in  the  financial 
sector are inherently less ethical than those elsewhere does not stand the test of empirical 
scrutiny. Yes, there may be larger temptations here given the money that can be made, and 
perhaps even bigger opportunities. But once again, it is the power of context that Malcolm 
Gladwell  talks  about  that  is  relevant.  It  is  not  that  professionals  in  the  financial  sector  are 
inherently less ethical, but given the environment of the financial sector, there may be larger 
incidence of unethical behaviour. Consider, for example, Dennis Levine, the Drexel Burnham 
Lambert  investment  banker  who  was  convicted  of  insider  trading  in  one  of  Wall  Street’s 
biggest scandals. According to him, it was just so easy. In seven years he multiplied a paltry 
$40,000 into $12 million, and all it took was a 20-second phone call to an offshore bank a 
couple of times a month – may be 200 calls in total. He was confident that the elaborate veils 
of  secrecy  plus  overseas  bank  privacy  laws  would  protect  him.  Closer  home  there  is  the 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
recent case of Satyam which allegedly window dressed the company accounts for over ten 
years, betraying the trust of all its stakeholders. 
John  Stuart  Mill  said  that  if  we  make  men  honest,  good  and  decent,  then  they  will  make 
themselves  honest,  good  and  decent  engineers,  doctors  and  teachers,  and  may  I  add, 
financial sector professionals. The financial sector is, after all, a reflection of the society in 
which it operates. So, the approach to bringing ethical values into finance has to begin not by 
special  efforts  to  enforce  or  regulate  ethical  standards  in  finance,  but  by  fostering  a  value 
system in society at large. 
Ethical issues thrown up by the financial crisis 
This global financial crisis has been the deepest, broadest and most hurting financial crisis 
since 1929. All of a sudden, it seems like an entire super structure was built on sand instead 
of rock as it was believed. We are too close to the crisis to really grasp how this crisis might, 
as they say, turn out to be game changing. What the crisis has done is to cause a massive 
break down of trust: trust in the financial system, trust in bankers, trust in business, trust in 
business leaders, trust in investment advisers, trust in credit rating agencies, in politicians, in 
the media and in the process of globalization.  
When  you  break  down  the  complex  gamut  of  the  causes  of  the  crisis,  several  skeletons 
tumble out of the cupboard. Almost all of these relate to how the financial system operated. 
In  a  phrase  that  has  now  become  daily  staple,  sub-prime  borrowers  were  given  loans  at 
teaser rates. And these borrowers were led to believe that they would never lose as the price 
of the house they were buying will only keep going up. The loans were sliced and diced, built 
into  complex  products  and  rated  by  rating  agencies.  Dazzled  by  these  ratings,  gullible 
investors lapped up the mortgage based assets (MBA) not realizing the risk they were taking. 
Meanwhile  investment  banks  took  the  MBAs  off  their  balance  sheets  so  that  they  could 
leverage once more and repeat the cycle of sub-prime lending. 
At one level, it is possible to argue that nobody in the entire chain did anything legally wrong. 
But  that  is  too  simplistic  an  argument.  We  do  not  govern  our  behaviour  simply  by  what  is 
allowed by law or regulation. Our code of conduct should be held to a stricter test. Was the 
behaviour of actors across the chain of the financial sector fair, ethical and moral or was it 
swayed by the opportunity of making quick profit afforded by information asymmetries? Were 
sub-prime borrowers adequately warned that there is a good chance that asset prices would 
fall? Did investment advisers tell their clients of the risk they were taking in buying MBAs and 
CDOs? Did credit rating agencies not compromise their standards and cut corners? In sum, 
were  professionals  in  the  financial  sector  legally  right,  but  only  legally  right  and  morally 
wrong?  
The crisis has also exposed an issue of moral hazard in the banking system – something that 
has come to be called privatization of profit and socialization of costs. Banks enjoy an implicit 
guarantee of government bail out. This is true regardless of whether a large segment of the 
banking  sector  is  owned  by  the  government  as  in  our  country,  or  whether  the  banks  are 
privately owned as is the case in most countries. Governments, regardless of their political 
affiliations,  can  hardly  afford  to  have  large  institutions  fail.  This  “too  big  to  fail”  syndrome 
enables financial institutions to take risks that, say a soap manufacturer, cannot take. If as a 
result banks make huge profits, they can reward themselves with generous pay packets and 
bonuses. And if loans sour and the balance sheets crash, no worry since the bank will be 
bailed out at tax payers expense.  
The difference between the financial sector and other businesses is therefore quite clear. If 
say,  a  soap  manufacturing  company  is  an  astounding  success,  who  benefits?  The 
shareholders and the management. And if it fails, who loses? Both of the above. But in the 
case  of  a  bank,  the  story  is  different.  If  the  bank  is  a  success,  who  benefits?  The 
shareholders and the management. And if it fails, who loses? Not the shareholders and the 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
management, but the public at whose expense the bank is bailed out. The ripple effect is less 
pronounced but similar in the case of all institutions in the financial sector even if they are not 
banks. 
That crucial difference, I believe, underscores the special ethical dimension of the financial 
sector  in  contrast  to  other  businesses.  Banks  and  financial  institutions  have  a  greater 
responsibility  of  being  conscious  of  the  obligation  they  have  of  not  jeopardizing  the  larger 
public interest. What Mahatma Gandhi said, that businesses hold public money in trust, is 
more true of the financial sector than others. 
Ethical basis of economics 
The crisis has also triggered an interesting, if also a soul searching debate on whether the 
malaise that we have seen in the financial sector might in fact be a result of the flaws in the 
direction that economics, as an academic discipline, has taken over the years. 
Some of you may have read in the papers that Queen Elizabeth visited the London School of 
Economics a few weeks ago and reportedly asked the economists there, “why did no one 
see the crisis coming?”. The Queen’s question is understandable given the growing claims of 
economics to hard predictive power like other exact sciences. Over the last several decades, 
the direction of economics has been to position itself more like a natural science rather than 
the  social  science  that  it  actually  is.  As  Lord  Skidelsky  argued  in  a  recent  article  in  the 
Financial  Times,  economics  tried  to  be  more  like  physics  with  precise  predictive  abilities 
based on mathematical models rather than like sociology or psychology where the outcomes 
are determined by human behaviour and therefore beyond the pale of precise modelling and 
exact  predictions.  Undoubtedly,  the  mathematical  models  helped  economic  analysis  and 
aided  in  determining  optimal  solutions.  The  trouble  though  was  that  the  mathematical 
abstractions  got  carried  too  far,  and  in  the  process  economics  lost  its  link  with  real  life 
situations that it was expected to study and analyze. In other words, mathematical models 
became an end in themselves and assumed a life of their own.  
What  does value  orientation  to  an academic  discipline  mean?  Let  me  explain  through  two 
illustrations, one that may be considered to be in the realm of theory, and a more complex 
one all of us could run into in our professional lives. Suppose you are given a problem in a 
test, say an accounting examination. You are asked not only to solve the problem, but also to 
comment on questions such as, “was that way of accounting legal?”, “was it ethical?”, “was it 
chosen because it was convenient for the firm?”. What will your take away be from such an 
exam? Not just the technique of accounting, but the values that must underline accounting.  
Problems  in  real  life  tend  to  be  more  complex,  and  reflect  real  behaviour.  My  second 
illustration is a variation of what is called the ultimatum game. Say, a team of two people, A 
and B, accomplishes a task by putting in equal effort, 50-50. The manager gives Rs.1000 to 
A and tells him to share it between them according to their respective contributions to the 
task. The rules of the game are that A can divide the money in any proportion he wants. And 
B has the option to accept or reject the offer. If B accepts the proportion in which money has 
been divided, both get to keep the money. If B rejects the offer, both lose and the Rs.1000 
goes back to the manager. The rules put pressure on A to divide the money at least roughly 
in proportion to their respective contributions. Anything markedly out of line will annoy B, and 
she will likely reject the offer even if she is losing what she otherwise could have gotten. In 
other words, in the face of overt dishonesty, it becomes more important for B to make A lose 
rather  than  cut  losses  for  herself.  The  ultimatum  game  illustrates  how  you  cannot  move 
ahead  in  life  or  in  business  without  a  sense  of  values.  Tools  and  concepts  of  ethical 
reasoning belong with the other valuable instruments of financial practice. 
People  often  forget  that  the  godfather  of  modern  capitalism,  and  often  called  the  first 
economist  –  Adam  Smith  –  was  not  an  economist,  but  rather  a  professor  of  moral 
philosophy. Smith had a profound understanding of the ethical foundations of markets and 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
was deeply suspicious of the “merchant class” and their tendency to arrange affairs to suit 
their private interests at public expense. In his book, “A Theory of Moral Sentiments”, Smith 
argues  that  a  stable  society  is  based  on  sympathy,  a  moral  duty  to  have  regard  for  one’s 
fellow  human  beings.  In  short,  Smith  emphasized  the  ethical  content  of  economics, 
something that got eroded over the centuries as economics tried to move from being a value 
based social science to a value free exact science.  
Ethical dimensions of RBI’s mandate 
I note that following my speech and that of my senior colleague and widely respected former 
Governor, Dr. Reddy, this conference has scheduled two panel discussions. The first is on 
the “Role of the Regulator – Governance and Regulation” and the second on the “Role of 
Individual Financial Institutions and Corporate Responsibility”. I also note that the panellists 
are some of the most distinguished leaders of the Indian financial sector. Both these topics 
have a connection with RBI’s role and responsibilities. So, let me briefly, touch on the ethical 
dimensions of RBI’s mandate. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  a  broad  mandate.  As  central  banks  go,  I  believe  we  are  a  “full 
service”  central  bank.  We  are  the  monetary  authority,  we  issue  currency,  we  are  the 
regulator of banks and non-bank finance companies and much of the financial markets. We 
regulate also the payment and settlement system. We are the debt manager for the central 
and state governments and the gatekeeper for the external sector. What guides us in fulfilling 
this broad mandate is a sense of institutional values and professional integrity. 
Let me give a few examples. One of the core aims of monetary policy is to maintain price 
stability.  If  we  fail  in  that  regard,  there  would  be  inflation.  And  inflation,  as  we  know,  is  a 
perniciously regressive tax that hurts the poor the most. So, by maintaining price stability, we 
are safeguarding the well being of the poor in society.  
We  take  our  regulation  responsibility  seriously.  An  important  guideline  for  regulation  is  to 
protect  the  interests  of  depositors.  We  therefore  ensure  that  banks  are  well  capitalized, 
prudently managed and that they have adequate and appropriate internal controls.  
Our regulatory responsibility also casts an obligation on us of protecting the interests of the 
borrowers. We need to ensure that borrowers get credit at remunerative rates of interest and 
that they are not disadvantaged by information asymmetries. We advise banks not to charge 
excessive/usurious  rates  of  interest  on  non-priority  sector  personal  loans  and  credit  card 
dues.  We  have  asked  that  banks  should  communicate  publically  information  on  the 
maximum  interest  chargeable  to  any  type  of  loan  or  advance.  We  have  mandated  that 
service charges should be reasonable and have some relation to the cost of rendering the 
services. We have a system of banking ombudsman to address the grievances of customers. 
I cannot claim that we are the best practice in dispute resolution, but I can claim with pride 
that we try our best to be the best practice.  
In recent years, we have been focussing on financial inclusion and financial literacy. The aim 
of  the  financial  inclusion  campaign  is  to  provide  access  to  financial  services  to  people  in 
remote and rural areas and poorer segments of the society. Our stress is on expanding the 
reach  of  financial  services  to  ensure  that  every  household  has  a  bank  account.  But  the 
aspiration extends, beyond merely chasing a target, to the quality of financial inclusion. Not 
only  should  the  poor  have  an  account,  but  they  should  also  be  getting  the  benefit  of  the 
account  by  way  of  credit  and  other  financial  transactions.  The  aim  of  the  financial  literacy 
programme is precisely that – to educate people on the type of services that they can get 
from  the  financial  sector,  on  the  rights  that  they  have  and  on  the  grievance  redressal 
mechanism.  
Finally we are deeply sensitive to the Reserve Bank’s role as the issuer of currency. A billion 
plus people place their implicit faith in the currency signed by the Governor promising to pay 
the bearer on demand the face value of the note. It is this faith that makes people keep the 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 5
currency as a store of value. It is this faith that enabled us to make the transition from the 
inefficiencies of the barter system to an efficient cash economy. It is this faith that underlies 
hundreds and thousands of cash transactions that take place every day and keeps a sixty 
trillion  rupee  economy  going.  The  preamble  to  the  RBI  Act  enjoins  on  the  Reserve  Bank, 
among other things, of “securing monetary stability”. Maintaining the integrity of the currency 
note signed by the Governor is a responsibility that the Reserve Bank treats as sacrosanct – 
not just as a legal mandate but as an ethical responsibility. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude. To  summarize,  I  have  argued  that  all  of  us  as  individuals,  families, 
social  communities  and  faith  communities  confront  ethical  dilemmas  everyday,  and  we 
resolve them in our own ways. Notwithstanding where we draw the line, we take the value of 
ethical behaviour to be axiomatic. There is no evidence to show that people in the financial 
sector are inherently less ethical than people in other professions. However, given the larger 
temptation and more opportunities, the power of context to be short, there could be greater 
incidence  of  unethical  behaviour  in  the  financial  sector.  Drawing  lessons  from  the  crisis,  I 
have  argued  that  because  of  the  very  nature  of  the  financial  sector,  leaders  and  top 
management in the financial sector have an extra obligation to be sensitive to larger societal 
obligations. I have raised the issue of economics, as an academic discipline, losing its value 
base, and conjectured if that could be at the root of the malaise in the financial sector. 
I  have  also  outlined  how  a  sense  of  responsibility  to  larger  societal  good  underpins  the 
mandate of the Reserve Bank. 
Let me also mention that the year 2009/10 marks the platinum jubilee of the Reserve Bank of 
India. We have planned a number of events to mark and celebrate the occasion. The theme 
of all our celebration is “how can RBI make a difference to the lives of the ordinary people in 
India?”. This theme draws again from the professional value system of the Reserve Bank. 
I wish this conference on Ethics in the World of Finance all success. 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2009
