Henrique Meirelles: Regulation and international standards in Brazil, the 
US, the EU and Switzerland 
Speech  by  Mr  Henrique  Meirelles,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  at  the  First 
International Conference on Law & Economics, IBMEC São Paulo, in cooperation with the 
Foundation  for  Law  and  Economics  at  the  University  St  Gallen,  Switzerland,  held  in  São 
Paulo, 2 April 2009. 
 The world is experiencing the most severe economic and financial crisis in 80 years. What 
started  as  a  deleveraging  process  in  the  US  banking  system  has  extended  to  a  strong 
downturn not only in advanced economies, but also in the emerging world. 
It is emblematic that we are here today in São Paulo discussing regulation at a time the issue 
is also being discussed at the meeting of heads of states of the G-20 in London. Much of the 
focus  of  the  meeting  relates  to  the  redesign  of  the  international  financial  system  and  its 
regulation, including possibly the outline of a sort of international financial regulator.  
The current financial turmoil is ultimately a result of the failure of regulators, supervisors and 
policymakers in the advanced economies to prevent excessive risk-taking and leverage and 
to account for the interplay between regulated and non-regulated markets, partly due to their 
fragmented  regulatory  frameworks,  partly  due  to  legal  restrictions  on  information  and  data 
sharing. Lax regulatory standards, coupled with poor risk management practices, deleterious 
incentives  for  risk-taking  and  deficient  corporate  governance  structures  in  financial 
institutions are costing the global economy a high price. 
Throughout the years, Brazil has adopted more cautious and broader regulatory standards 
than the international norm. Just to mention a few examples of what I am referring to, there 
are twenty-one different types of financial institutions under the regulation and supervision of 
the Central Bank, from universal banks to credit unions, all sharing common prudential and 
leverage rules. Furthermore, not only capital requirements are higher in Brazil than the Basel 
recommendation but also all capital requirements and controls are applied on a consolidated 
basis that includes non-financial subsidiaries in a banking group, so that most institutions are 
consolidated  for  supervision  purposes.  Finally,  accounting  standards  adopted  in  Brazil 
require  that  all  operations  be  kept  on  balance,  with  the  respective  risk  requirements  and 
provisions. 
Risk  management  and  internal  controls  regulations,  as  well  as  prudential  loan  loss 
provisioning  requirements  and  large  exposure  limits  have  been  in  force  for  many  years  in 
Brazil. Additionally, having learned from past experience of international integration and fast 
contagion,  the  Central  Bank  makes  careful  evaluation  of  financial  innovations  and  their 
impact on financial stability, so that the development of new products should be compatible 
with adequate prudential regulation. For instance, access to credit derivatives is limited and 
all  over-the-counter  derivatives  that  have  a  supervised  entity  as  counterparty  have  to  be 
registered and monitored.  
The continuous review and update of the prudential regulatory framework is a priority for us. 
An example of a recent early prudential action occurred in June 2007, well before the recent 
financial  turmoil  aggravated:  the  Central  Bank  established  a  foreign  exposure  capital 
requirement for cross-border positions within international banking groups.  
In  a  nutshell,  the  Brazilian  approach  insulated  its  financial  institutions  from  the  sort  of 
problems that is affecting counterparties abroad. In fact, it is no coincidence that our financial 
system  has  shown  resilience  and  has  been  largely  unaffected  during  the  current  financial 
turmoil.  
BIS Review 44/2009 
 1
The  overall  assessment  on  the  Brazilian  regulation  framework,  which  was  sometimes 
criticized  on  the  grounds  of  excessive  carefulness,  is  currently  praised  in  international 
forums. For instance, the fact that Brazilian regulators have access to information from the 
clearing  systems  of  all  operations  in  the  financial  market  is  a  factor  of  admiration  and 
reference worldwide. 
Before  closing,  let  me  mention  that  I  strongly  welcome  the  recent  enlargement  towards 
emerging economies – including of course Brazil – of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) and 
of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS).  Emerging  economies  rapidly 
increasing weight in the global economy and global finances makes them an integral part of 
any viable solution to the current problems, as we are witnessing today in regard to their role 
in  the  G-20.  The  enlargement  of  forums  in  the  area  of  regulation  and  financial  sector 
supervision give more legitimacy to the discussion being held, with a view to design a new 
and  more  robust  regulatory  framework.  I  believe  we  need  to  have  this  new  framework  in 
place  by  2010,  as  the  current  crisis  is  left  behind,  hopefully,  and  growth  and  stability  are 
restored.  
As  part  of  the  work  program  already  laid  down  in  the  G-20,  critical  points  in  the  reform 
include the need to make regulatory capital more neutral over-the-cycle, by integrating the 
macro  prudential  framework  into  the  required  capital  of  individual  institutions;  the  need  to 
reach, with prudential regulation and supervision, all quarters of the financial industry; and 
the need to enhance transparency of financial instruments and markets. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2009
