Linah K Mohohlo: The financial crisis – impact on Africa 
Remarks by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana and a member of the 
African  Progess  Panel  (APP),  on  behalf  of  the  APP  Chairman  at  the  meeting  on  “The 
financial crisis: impact on Africa”, Tunis, Tunisia, 12 November 2008. 
 I wish to begin by tendering profound apologies from the Chairman of the Africa Progress 
Panel,  Mr  Kofi  Annan,  who  is  unable  to  be  a  part  of  this  meeting  due  to  overlapping 
commitments. He is particularly disappointed by his inability to attend as today’s meeting is 
taking place partly as a result of conversations between him and the President of the African 
Development  Bank  (ADB),  Dr  Kaberuka.  I  have,  therefore,  been  asked  and  accepted  to 
speak on his behalf and on behalf of the other members of the Africa Progress Panel.1
For those who may not know, the Africa Progress Panel exists to monitor, encourage and 
support African countries and their development partners in taking specific steps to advance 
social,  economic  and  political  progress  in  Africa.  In  this  context,  this  meeting  is  both 
significant  and  timely,  and  President  Kaberuka  deserves  commendation  for  taking  the 
initiative  to  get  us  together.  The  Africa  Progress  Panel  welcomes,  in  particular,  the 
collaborative  approach  being  taken  by  the  ADB,  the  African  Union  and  the  Economic 
Commission  for  Africa.  This  will  underpin  the  meeting’s  capacity  to  provide  input  for 
upcoming  critical  events,  such  as  the  G20  meeting  that  is  tenable  in  Washington  DC  on 
November  15,  and  the  Doha  meeting  on  International  Finance  scheduled  for  the  end  of 
November. To that end, the Africa Progress Panel would be delighted if this meeting resulted 
in  a  “Tunis Communiqué”  which  would  provide  guidance  on  how  the  global  financial  crisis 
can  be  managed  in  a  manner  supportive  of  progress  in  Africa  and  its  achievement  of  the 
Millennium Development Goals. 
It is to be hoped that such a communiqué would recognise the Africa Progress Panel’s main 
concerns. First, it is worth noting that when crises of the nature currently unfolding occur, it is 
always the least responsible that are usually the worst affected and the least able to cope. In 
other words, it is the poor who end up paying the heaviest price for the mess they had no 
hand in creating. Hence we must encourage a stronger and shared understanding, in both 
Africa  and  in  global  fora,  of  how  the  financial  meltdown  might  affect  our  continent.  At  the 
same  time,  we  must  recognise  that  the  impact  will  vary  according  to  the  specific 
circumstances  of  each  region  and  country.  One  thing  for  sure  is  that  the  current  financial 
crisis is unprecedented in modern times for its scale and catastrophic dimensions, and its full 
impact  has  yet  to  unfold.  Another  defining  feature  of  the  crisis  has  been  the  pace  and 
dynamism of its development, often in unexpected directions. It is less than two months since 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  September  15,  2008,  but  it  is  not  much  of  an 
exaggeration  to  say  that  this  seems  like  a  life  time  away.  Africa  had  initially  appeared 
relatively insulated, both for its financial system and economic development more widely. But 
the continent can no longer be lulled by any sense of security that this is a crisis only for the 
developed world, and its banks in particular. 
Globalisation  has  many  benefits,  but  there  are  associated  risks  and,  as  the  International 
Monetary Fund has repeatedly come up with lower forecasts for global economic growth, it is 
increasingly clear that developing economies will feel the chill of the looming recession. The 
commodities  boom  has  come  to  an  abrupt  halt,  and  this  is  of  particular  concern  to  many 
African  economies  given  the  negativeimpact  of  reduced  trade  on  Balance  of  Payments. 
                                                 
1   Panel Members: Mr Kofi Annan (Chair), Mr Tony Blair, Mr Michel Camdessus, Mr Peter Eigen, Mr Bob Geldof, 
Ms  Graça  Machel,  Ms  Linah  Mohohlo,  Gen  Olusegun  Obasanjo,  Mr  Robert  Rubin,  Mr  Tidjane  Thiam,  Prof 
Muhammad Yunus, Mr Michael Keating (Director). 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 1
 Slowing  world  demand  also  undermines  African  countries’  efforts  towards  diversifying 
economies  away  from  primary  sectors.  As  we  are  witnessing  in  Botswana,  even  when 
investors wish to proceed with new developments, they are increasingly constrained by lack 
of access to credit. The so-called “flight to quality” where risk averse investors concentrate 
their investments in the short end of the yield curve, can destabilise financial flows. In the 
face of global financial markets, Africa’s banking practices as well as related regulatory and 
oversight  regimes  cannot  continue  to  remain  local  and,  in  many  instances,  ineffective. 
Needless  to  add,  investing  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  volatile  markets  is  an  additional 
challenge  which  requires  the  establishment  of  prudent  investment  policies  and  guidelines, 
depending on whether the reserves are the minimum necessary for short-term import cover, 
or represent an accumulated stock of national savings (e.g. Sovereign Wealth Funds). 
It  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  Africa’s  interests  and  priorities  are  represented  in  the 
review or design of any new global financial architecture relating to, for example, the role of 
the Bretton Wood Institutions. We must also ensure that the financial crisis is not used as a 
pretext for relaxing or abandoning the hard-won commitments by Africa and its development 
partners, at least in four main areas: 
- 
sustainable economic growth, including food security, climate change, infrastructure 
and/or trade; 
social  development,  notably  health,  education  and  the  more  important  gender 
issues; 
good governance, and its associated financial and political accountability; and 
financing for development, including levels of development aid. 
- 
- 
The Africa Progress Panel believes that the growing sense of mutual accountability between 
Africa and its partners, whether traditional or new, needs to be encouraged and supported. 
While it would be unwise to make any predictions, the election of Mr Barack Obama bodes 
well  for  not  only  the  maintenance  but  also,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  the  further  evolution  of 
commitments to Africa by the United States of America. However, we should be aware that 
both Africa’s traditional and new partners are under enormous pressure to cut expenditure, 
and this makes aid levels highly vulnerable. Therefore, we should do everything possible to 
encourage them to live up to their commitments by, among others, reaffirming our side of the 
bargain.  Notably,  this  involves  committing  to  the  maintenance  of  fiscal  and  broad 
macroeconomic  discipline,  investing  domestic  resources  with  a  view  to  achieving  specific 
human  development  objectives,  and  strengthening  political  accountability  at  national  and 
regional levels. To this end, the Chairman and members of the Africa Progress Panel would 
like to support, in any way we can, the ADB President, Dr Kaberuka, the Chairman of the 
African  Union  Commission  and  the  Executive  Secretary  of  the  Economic  Commission  for 
Africa as they ensure that Africa’s interests are well understood and represented in critical 
discussions,  some  of  which  will  take  place  in  the  next  few  months.  African  leaders  are 
encouraged to network among themselves to forge a common position on these issues, in 
the best interests of the continent and its populace. 
On behalf of Chairman Kofi Annan and other members of the Africa Progress Panel, I thank 
you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2009
