T T Mboweni: Reflections on some economic and social developments in 
South Africa in the past 15 years 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  10th 
Annual Steve Biko Memorial Lecture, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, 10 September 
2009. 
 Introduction 
I  wish  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Steve  Biko  Foundation,  the  Biko  family  and  the 
University  Cape  Town  for  extending  this  invitation  to  deliver  the  10th  Annual  Steve  Biko 
Memorial  Lecture.  I  am  particularly  humbled  to  belong  to  the  club  of  those  who  have 
previously addressed this august gathering. 
September 2009 marks the 32nd anniversary of the murder in detention of Bantu Stephen 
Biko.  It  is,  therefore,  a  fitting  tribute  to  Steve  Biko  to  hold  this  event  in  September,  South 
Africa’s heritage month. This is particularly so because the threat of forgetting who we are, 
where we come from and how we got to be where we are looms ever larger, particularly for 
the younger generations. 
I  never  met  Steve  Biko  personally,  having  been  a  teenager  in  Limpopo  by  the  time  he 
departed this world. His teachings, though, had a profound influence on me. That was the 
period  historians  referred  to  as  a  period  of  political lull.  My  ultimate  involvement  in  politics 
stemmed,  in  part,  from  some  of  those  efforts  of  the  black  consciousness  movement  to 
“conscientise”  the  masses  and  revive  political  activism.  Indeed,  as  Archbishop  Desmond 
Tutu writes in his preface to Steve Biko’s I write what I like: 
“Black Consciousness sought to awaken in us the sense of our infinitive value and worth in 
the sight of God because we were all created in God’s image, so that our worth is intrinsic to 
who we are and not dependent on biological irrelevancies such as ethnicity, skin colour or 
race. Black Consciousness helped to exorcise the horrible demons of self-hatred and self-
contempt that made blacks suck up to whites whilst treating fellow blacks as the scum they 
thought themselves to be. Black Consciousness aroused in us the knowledge of our share in 
what  St  Paul  called  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of God,  urging  us  to  enter  into  that 
splendid heritage.”1
Inflation 
To break a bit with tradition, the thrust of my address tonight will be on economic issues. In 
particular,  I  will  share  a  few  observations  and  thoughts  on  selected  macroeconomic 
developments in South Africa in the past 15 years. From 9 November 2009 I will no longer be 
allowed  to  comment  on  monetary  policy.  As  the  outgoing  governor,  however,  I  will  take 
advantage of this platform to remind you of a few truths, one being that no central bank worth 
its salt can ever tolerate high inflation. Price stability may not be a sufficient condition but I 
maintain  that  it  is  a  necessary  condition  for  a  solid  foundation  for  sustainable  growth  and 
prosperity. 
I would like to believe that Steve Biko would have been gratified by the fairly contained pace 
of inflation over the past 15 years, knowing the dire consequences of inflation for the poor – 
those  who  are  usually  least  able  to  hedge  against  inflation  –  in  particular.  Since  1994 
average headline inflation has amounted to approximately 6,5 per cent per annum. Over the 
                                                 
1   Steve Biko, I write what I like, A selected of his writings. 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 1
preceding 15 years, 1979 to 1994, it had averaged almost 14 per cent per annum. Inflation 
has  been  uneven  over  the  period,  though,  induced  typically  by  significant  changes  in  key 
exogenous drivers of inflation, such as oil prices. 
Secondly, the recent upsurge in strike action has led to some commentators describing the 
wave as a “winter of discontent”. In this regard, I would like to comment on some worrying 
trends in the settlements reached. Wage settlements above the projected rate of inflation and 
in excess of productivity gains tend to undermine the fight against high inflation. They lead to 
labour  cost  increases  way  above  those  of  trade  competitors  and,  therefore,  loss  of 
competitiveness. 
Though  I  will  discuss  the  labour  market  in  much  depth  later,  I  need  to  refer  briefly  to  our 
labour laws. Many commentators have described the labour market as rigid and inflexible. As 
the country’s first post-1994 Minister of Labour, some of the blame has been pointed in my 
direction. I am the first to admit that some things could have been done differently. Hindsight, 
however, is useful only when it improves our foresight. I would like to take this opportunity to 
espouse  some  of  the  theoretical  and  philosophical  underpinnings  behind  the  Labour 
Relations Act. The labour movement regarded me as a hero then. 
Social ills 
The break with tradition, however, cannot be complete when addressing such an established 
forum. I will, therefore, digress slightly and venture an opinion on a few matters not related to 
economics  and  central  banking.  The  shameful  xenophobic  tendencies  we  witnessed  last 
year  should  have  caused  all  South  Africans  to  exclaim:  “Oh,  beloved  country,  what  would 
Steve Biko have said?” At the height of the attacks on foreigners most of us were notable by 
our  silence  and  inaction.  Sadly,  such  indifference,  anger,  hatred  and  violence  towards 
foreigners, particularly black Africans, still finds expression among many South Africans. 
This is at a time when we seek to accelerate economic integration in the SADC region, with 
all the lofty ideals of establishing a free trade area by last year (2008), a customs union by 
next year (2010), a common market and a monetary union by, respectively, 2015 and 2016. 
The ultimate objective of SADC is to build a region in which there will be a high degree of 
harmonisation  and  rationalisation  to  enable  the  pooling  of  resources  in  order  to  achieve 
collective selfreliance and improve the living standards of the people of the region. 
At central bank level, an important milestone has been the completion of the drafting of the 
proposed SADC central bank model law, which will pave the way for the harmonisation of 
legal and regulatory frameworks. 
Steve Biko observed that the most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the mind 
of the oppressed. Indeed, the liberation of the oppressed is not only political, economic and 
social,  but  involves  psychological  liberation  as  well.  Can  we  claim  to  have  liberated  our 
minds  when  the  daily  statistics  of  rape  and  other  forms  of  violence  against  women  and 
children leave us questioning the very essence of our humanity? This cannot be what Steve 
Biko  envisioned  when  he  wrote:  “We  have  set  out  on  a  quest  for  true  humanity,  and 
somewhere  on  the  distant  horizon we  can  see  the  glittering  prize.  Let  us  march  forth  with 
courage  and  determination,  drawing  strength  from  our  common  plight  and  brotherhood.  In 
time we shall be in a position to bestow upon South Africa the greatest gift possible – a more 
human face.”2
Delivering  this  lecture  three  years  ago,  Archbishop  Emeritus  Desmond  Tutu  asked:  “What 
has come over us? Perhaps we did not realise just how apartheid has damaged us so that 
we seem to have lost our sense of right and wrong, so that when we go on strike as is our 
                                                 
2  
Ibid. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2009
right  to  do,  we  are  not  appalled  that  some  of  us  can  chuck  people  out  of  moving  trains 
because they did not join the strike, or why is it common practice now to trash, to go on the 
rampage? Striking municipal workers empty trash on the streets, other strikers break shop 
windows, loot and trash the premises? Even our students on strike will often destroy the very 
facilities  they  need  for  their  studies.  What  has  happened  to  us?  It  seems  as  if  we  have 
perverted  our  freedom,  our  rights  into  licence,  into  being  irresponsible.  Rights  go  hand  in 
hand with responsibility, with dignity, with respect for oneself and for the other.”3  
We can pose exactly the same questions today when the Bus Rapid Transit system, a bold 
attempt to improve public transport, leads commuters in Johannesburg being inconvenienced 
by  a  stayaway  from  some  in  the  taxi  industry  hell-bent  on  holding  the  country  to  ransom 
whenever they are not having it their way and perceive a threat to shrink their market share. 
They  will  even  go  to  the  extent  of  firing  live  bullets  at  buses  ferrying  commuters.  We  are 
witnessing  social  ills  that  are  partly  rooted  in  our  history  as  well  as  in  unintended 
consequences of policy interventions during the post-apartheid period. 
Health professionals abandon the sick in dire need of medical attention. Teachers abandon 
learners in favour of this it the other demand, usually very close to exams. Shopping at malls 
has become risking life and limb as marauding mobs, armed and ready to shoot to kill, strike 
brazenly and with such frequency. Striking municipal workers still trash our cities. Soldiers – 
those entrusted with the defence of the country and the constitutional order – disobey a court 
order and run riot near the Union Buildings, some of them armed. The scenes – the resultant 
mayhem and police firing at soldiers – would make responsible citizens to be very afraid and 
exclaim:  “Oh,  beloved  country,  what  would  Steve  Biko  have  said  about  all  those 
developments?” 
Economic growth 
Having been willing to give everything for the ideal of a democratic society, Steve Biko would 
have observed the progress of the country since democracy was introduced in 1994 with the 
greatest interest. In fact, he would have done more than that: he would certainly have been 
leading rather than observing, shaping events rather than being shaped by them. 
In reviewing the past 15 years in the South African economy, and with the wisdom acquired 
over the years, he might have chosen to draw up a balance sheet of assets and liabilities, the 
positives and the negatives encountered over this period. 
One of the highlights of the performance of the country has been the unprecedented levels of 
economic growth attained since the turn of the century. Calculated at constant 2000 prices, 
real gross domestic product per capita rose by more than 28 per cent, from R20 214 in 1994 
to R25 897 in 2008.4 Similarly, real gross national income per capita, which also allows for 
the effect of changes in the terms of trade on real income, rose by more than 29 per cent 
over this period. The level of real gross domestic product expanded by 63 per cent over the 
period  1994  to  2008,  giving  an  indication  of  how  much  the  overall  cake  had  grown  on  a 
cumulative basis. The pace of growth, however, was uneven. 
Economic growth, however, has not yielded the most desirable results as far as employment 
creation  is  concerned.  Researchers  assert  that  improved  income  levels  since  1994  were 
more  driven  by  welfare  transfers  than  labour  market  absorption.  Up  to  2005,  growth  in 
employment largely tracked real GDP growth, albeit at a less than sufficient pace to meet the 
                                                 
3   Steve  Bantu  Biko  Memorial  Lecture,  delivered  by  Archbishop  Emeritus  Desmond  Tutu,  University  of  Cape 
Town, 26 September 2006. 
4   Unless  stated  otherwise,  data  is  from  the  Quarterly  Bulletin  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (various 
issues) and the SARS Customs and Excise database. 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 3
rapid growth of the labour force. The revised Labour Force Survey estimates, for instance, 
reveal  that  between  March  2001  and  March  2007  the  absorption  rate  trended  downwards 
from 45,8 per cent to 44,1 per cent.5 Even more disheartening is the number of discouraged 
job seekers which grew from 1 725 000 to 2 511 000 over the same period. Females were 
more adversely affected than males by all these disappointing labour market outcomes. 
Even  though  the  demand  side  of  the  labour  market  has  been  disappointing,  some  strides 
have been made in enhancing the quality of labour supply. This, however, has not been even 
throughout  all  education  levels.  The  proportion  of  the  population  aged  20  years  and  older 
without any schooling dropped from 19,1 percent in 1996 to 10,3 per cent in 2007, while the 
share  of  those  with  some  secondary  education  increased  from  33,6  per  cent  to  40,1  per 
cent.6
At the post-matric levels, however, the improvements are less dramatic. Over the ten years 
starting in 1996, the population over 20 years of age which completed higher education grew 
marginally from 7,1 to 9,1 per cent7.7 Sadly, reality dictates that it is the quality of labour that 
determines  employability.  Evidence  shows  that  growth  in  inequality  is  partly  attributable  to 
the fact that skilled workers were more favoured by growth in job opportunities. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  new  dispensation,  our  school  system  performed  better  in 
producing standard grade than higher grade matric passes in mathematics. Standard grade 
passes  increased  from  75  543  to  123  813  between  1997  and  2007.  Higher  grade  passes 
dipped from an initial 29 475 to 19 327 in 2000 and recovered to 25 415 passes in 2007. 
Although the total number of graduates increased from 578 134 in 2000 to 741 380 in 2006, 
the share of science, engineering and technology graduates moved marginally from 25,5 per 
cent to 28,5 per cent over the same period.8
Opening up to the international community 
Increased  globalisation  has  been  one  of  the  defining  characteristics  of  the  world  economy 
over the last two decades. The advent of democracy in 1994 ushered in a new era in South 
Africa’s  economic  history.  At  the  heart  of  this  process  was  the  integration  of  the  domestic 
economy into the world economy. 
Prior to 1994, apartheid South Africa faced large-scale international financial sanctions and 
isolation.  This  stifled  economic  activity  in  numerous  ways.  For  instance,  access  to  foreign 
sources  of  finance  was  blocked  in  the  mid-1980s,  resulting  in  a  debt  standstill  in  1985  as 
South  Africa  could  no  longer  roll  over  its  foreign  borrowing  and  honour  its  commitments. 
Unable  to  tap  foreign  savings,  South  Africa  had  to  finance  all  its  investment  from  its  own 
domestic savings, and was therefore forced to run surpluses on the current account of the 
balance of payments. This, in turn, implied generally strict economic policy settings aimed at 
moderating domestic income and expenditure, thereby reducing imports. 
With  the  transition  to  democracy,  international  sanctions  were  lifted  away  as  the  global 
community  embraced  South  Africa.  Whereas  from  1985  to  1993  net  outflows  of  financial 
capital  averaging  2,4  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  were  recorded,  financial  inflows 
have subsequently been registered in every year but one. The average net inflow from 1994 
to 2008 amounted to 3,2 per cent of gross domestic product, augmenting domestic savings 
and making it possible to import more and grow faster. 
                                                 
5   Statistics South Africa. Labour Force Survey: Historical Revision March Series 2001 to 2007, Pretoria, August 
2008. 
6   Statistics South Africa. Community Survey 2007, Pretoria, 2008. 
7  
8   The Presidency, Republic of South Africa. Development Indicators 2008 (www.thepresidency.gov.za), 2008. 
Ibid. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2009
Significant reform of our trade policies has resulted in trade as a ratio of GDP increasing from 
around  40  per  cent  in  the  early  1990s  to  around  70  per  cent  in  2008.  The  nature  of  our 
trading  relations  has  also  changed  significantly.  In  the  early  to  mid-1990s,  the  developed 
countries  –  most  notably  those  in  Europe  –  accounted  for  around  60  per  cent  of  South 
Africa’s  trade.  Since  then  our  export  markets  have  diversified,  with  countries  in  Africa  and 
Asia  gaining  in  prominence.  Around  25  per  cent  of  our  total  exports  are  sold  in  Asian 
markets. India and China’s rise in the global economy has been one of the main reasons for 
the rise in the demand for commodities. The two currently account for around 13 per cent of 
South Africa’s exports. 
The  normalisation  of  international  relations  also  involved  a  programme  to  gradually  phase 
out  exchange  control.  Up  to  March  1995  the  so-called  financial  rand  system  applied  to 
investment  by  non-residents.  This  not  only  inhibited  outflows  of  financial  capital,  but  also 
inflows.  With  the  abolition  of  the  financial  rand  system  in  March  1995,  the  country  moved 
from two prices for foreign currency to a single price, thereby removing a dispensation prone 
to abuse, fraud and corruption. Moreover, while the door was opened for capital movements 
in  both  directions,  it  so  happens  that,  subsequently,  inflows  have  exceeded  outflows  quite 
substantially.  The  confidence  in  ourselves  which  was  demonstrated  by  liberalising  capital 
flows has been rewarded. 
Further  exchange  control  reforms  of  the  past  15  years  include  allowing  South  African 
individuals  to  invest  money  abroad,  or  as  foreign-currency  denominated  investments  with 
South African institutions. The applicable allowance was raised over time and currently the 
maximum  amount  per  individual  is  R2  million.  A  more  liberal  approach  has  also  been 
adopted  as  far  as  investment  by  South  African  companies  abroad  is  concerned.  Such 
investments  have  contributed  to  development,  competition  and  growth  on  the  African 
continent  and  elsewhere.  Furthermore,  a  number  of  prominent  South  African  companies 
have  been  allowed  to  shift  their  primary  listing  to  foreign  securities  exchanges,  thereby 
making it easier for them to borrow money or issue shares in those markets. People who had 
previously illegally built up foreign assets were also granted amnesty to declare and legalise 
such asset holdings. Numerous persons made use of this opportunity. 
South Africa seems to have benefited considerably from the greater freedom – with greater 
responsibility  –  which  its  citizens  enjoy  in  the  international  arena.  Both  foreign  assets  and 
liabilities have risen considerably. Foreign currency markets have become more liquid. Under 
these circumstances the South African Reserve Bank has also been able to work down its 
oversold  forward  position  in  the  market  for  foreign  currency  –  its  international  liquidity 
position  has  changed  from  a  negative  US$25,2  billion  at  the  end  of  1994  to  a  positive 
US$36,9 billion at present. Apart from this, imports of goods and services have risen from 20 
per cent of gross domestic product in 1994 to 38 per cent in 2008, while the corresponding 
ratio for exports has risen from 22 per cent to 35 per cent over the period. 
Government finance: reallocating resources to social spending 
In  the  area  of  government  finance  remarkable  progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  15 
years.  In  1994  expenditure  by  the  South  African  government  had  a  significant  racial  bias. 
While significant additional expenditure was called for to correct this imbalance, government 
faced significant constraints: national government debt, for instance, was 50 per cent of GDP 
and debt service costs absorbed a considerable amount of funds. 
Mindful of the need to structure national finances in a sustainable way, government decided 
to  do  the  right  thing  rather  than  go  the  macroeconomic  populist  route.  Government 
expenditure  and  debt  were  kept  under  control,  the  capacity  of  the  South  African  Revenue 
Service  to  collect  taxes  efficiently  was  enhanced,  and  an  environment  conducive  to 
economic  growth  was  fostered.  Progress  was  made  on  all  these  fronts,  with  the  growing 
economy  expanding  the  tax  base  and  the  formidable  Revenue  Service  ensuring  that  the 
fiscus received what was due to it. The buoyant tax revenue growth over the past 15 years 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 5
made it possible to raise government expenditure and transfers quite substantially while, at 
the same time, keeping the budget deficit small enough to reduce the ratio of government 
debt to gross domestic product to 24 per cent in the second quarter of 2009. 
This  prudent  approach  paid  off  recently  when  the  international  economic  crisis  led  to  a 
contraction  in  economic  activity  in  South  Africa.  Low  levels  of  government  debt  made  it 
possible to adopt a much more expansionary fiscal policy stance under the circumstances, 
despite subdued tax revenues. Although this is set to raise the government debt ratio over 
the next few years, such increase is warranted in the interest of supporting economic activity 
and employment. 
While  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy  stance  can  bolster  economic  activity,  it  is  crucial  to 
simultaneously ensure that the expenditure incurred is productive. Much can and must still 
be  done  in  this  area.  For  instance,  as  highlighted  by  ANC  Secretary  General  Gwede 
Mantashe in an address on 2 September, the micro-organisation of school education leaves 
much to be desired, with actual teaching in township and rural schools averaging only three-
and-a-half  hours  per  day.  To  correct  this  is  not  rocket  science,  but  would  need  sustained 
good  organisation  and  discipline.  Throwing  money  at  the  problem  would  not  in  itself  be 
helpful.  
Financial sector developments 
In  the  area  of  finance  the  period  from  1994  onward  brought  numerous  opportunities,  as 
major  impediments  to  the  majority  of  the  population’s  interaction  with  the  financial  system 
were removed. The demise of racially-based restrictions on the ownership of real estate, for 
instance, opened avenues for borrowing towards home-ownership and farming, and for using 
such fixed property as collateral. 
However,  the  removal  of  legal  impediments  alone  is  not  enough  to  move  rapidly  to  a 
satisfactory  state  of  affairs.  As  the  saying  goes,  the  only  place  where  one  would  find 
“houses” before “jobs” is in the dictionary. While considerable progress has been made with 
the extension of home and land ownership through government programmes and initiatives 
in the private financial sector, not enough jobs (and accompanying remuneration flows) have 
been forthcoming to support sustainable home-ownership on the larger scale needed. This 
has  also  held  back  the  extent  of  deposits  or  investments  with,  and  borrowing  from,  the 
financial sector. Nevertheless, the extent to which jobs were created and to which previously 
“unbanked”  persons  became  “banked”  was  sufficient  to  raise  considerably  the  amount  of 
money and bank credit in the economy relative to the nominal gross domestic product. For 
instance, in 1994 the broadly defined money supply, M3, amounted to around 47 per cent of 
annualised nominal gross domestic product. Currently the same ratio is approximately 83 per 
cent. 
The many South Africans who did get a job frequently found that, in the wake of their new 
salary or wage flows, they received numerous offers to take up credit. Many of them became 
overextended,  as  suggested  by  the  increase  in  the  overall  ratio  of  household  debt  to 
annualised disposable income from 56 per cent in 1994 to more than 76 per cent by mid-
2009. So much friction was generated by this dispensation and government had to introduce 
the  National  Credit  Act  in  2007  to  improve  consumer  protection.  This  is  accomplished 
through measures such as enhanced disclosure in credit contracts and thorough screening 
of prospective borrowers’ ability to repay debt before granting a new loan. 
Fixed capital formation 
It is gratifying to note the considerable strengthening of fixed capital formation in the South 
African  economy.  In  1994  capital  expenditure  was  barely  15  per  cent  of  gross  domestic 
product. It took a long time to gain the momentum and put in place the processes necessary 
6 
 BIS Review 109/2009
to raise capital spending, but since around 2003 this has started to happen. Currently fixed 
capital  expenditure  amounts  to  almost  25  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product.  This  says 
much  about  the  self-confidence  gained  by  South  Africans  and  about  the  forward-looking 
focus of our society – characteristics which Steve Biko would have embraced and promoted 
with tireless energy. 
Socio-economic trends 
South Africa has come a long way in terms of rebuilding and healing from the legacies of the 
apartheid past. We all recognise that a lot still needs to be done. However, we can only learn 
by replicating what evidently works and reviewing what does not. A clear message emerging 
from socio-economic trends in the post-1994 period is that we should pay closer attention to 
policy implementation in terms of sequencing and understanding complementarities between 
macroeconomic and sectoral interventions. 
From the socio-economic point of view, we can point out with pride that significant ground 
has been gained in improving the living conditions of ordinary South Africans. After the turn 
of the century the overall levels of poverty showed a definite downward trend, albeit gradual. 
The proportion of the population living below the Income and Expenditure Survey poverty line 
of R250 per month (at constant 2007 prices) increased from 31 per cent in 1995 to 38 per 
cent in 2000, and dipped thereafter to 23 per cent in 2005.9
Similarly, the levels of inequality peaked in 2000 and began to decline somewhat thereafter. 
The  total  Gini  coefficient  rose  from  0,672  in  1993  to  0,685  in  1999  before  trending 
downwards  to  0,660  in  2007.10  Inter-  and  intra-racial  trends,  however,  remain  worrisome. 
Although inequality has eased somewhat since 2000, among Africans it remains the highest 
compared with other population groups. 
Furthermore, according to the All Media and Products Survey data, notwithstanding the low 
base, the share of income accruing to Africans marginally gained ground against that of other 
population  groups,  rising  from  nearly  32  per  cent  to  39  per  cent  over  the  10-year  period 
between 1994 and 2004.11
These trends are due more to the expansion of households receiving social grants. Whereas 
the  year-on-year  growth  in  welfare  payments  before  2000  averaged  about  6  per  cent,  it 
soared to 40,4 per cent in 2001, thereafter decelerating to around 29 per cent to 2005 and 
3,4 per cent in 2007. The total number of social grant beneficiaries expanded six fold from 
2,409 million in 1996 to 12,386 million 2007. Nearly two-thirds, or just over 8 million of these 
recipients, were children.12
While no one can dispute the positive impact social grants have made on poverty, we need 
to  interrogate  the  sustainability  of  the  social  welfare  grant  approach  in  the  long  run.  I  fully 
appreciate the need for the state and society to provide welfare support to citizens who are 
physically or mentally incapacitated due to illness, disability, or old age. But when millions of 
our people depend on social grants for sustenance, and urban legend has it that teenagers 
go to the extent of falling pregnant so as to gain access to grants, we need to ask ourselves, 
as I think Steve Biko would: are we not running the risk of these social grants becoming an 
end in themselves and thus nurturing a dependency syndrome, destroying the fabric of our 
society? 
                                                 
9  
10 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
11   Van der Berg, S., et. al. A series of National Accounts-Consistent Estimates of Poverty and Inequality in South 
Africa, Stellenbosch Economic Working papers: 09/07, South Africa. 
12   The Presidency, Republic of South Africa. Development Indicators 2008 (www.thepresidency.gov.za), 2008. 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 7
We  have  also  witnessed  notable  improvements  in  living  conditions  of  households.  The 
number of households living in formal dwellings rose from 64 per cent in 1996 and peaked at 
73,6 per cent in 2004 before moderating to 70,5 per cent in 2007. Access to services such as 
water  and  electricity  also  expanded.  The  proportion  of  households  using  electricity  as  the 
main source of energy increased significantly from nearly 58 per cent to 80 percent between 
1996 and 2007. Access to piped water rose from 84,5 per cent in 1996 to 88,6 per cent of 
households in 2007.13 Very commendable. 
Conclusion 
Steve  Biko  would  be  pleased  to  see  South  Africa  emerging  among  the  best  performing 
economies  on  the  global  platform.  He  would  be  proud  with  our  constitutional  dispensation 
and Bill of Rights in which the rights for all are enshrined; the emerging Black middle class; 
the equitably structured welfare benefits; and the general decline in poverty. He would frown 
upon us for the failure to adequately intervene to address the spread of HIV and AIDS, and 
many  social  ills  such  as  crime  and,  more  specifically,  rape  and  other  forms  of  violence 
against  women  and  children;  the  continuing  racial  and  cultural  intolerance  as  well  as 
xenophobia. Steve Biko was most concerned about our worldview and value systems. For 
him this was more than just a manifestation of material well-being. 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me therefore to argue that, apart from the need to strengthen 
our  family  and  community  systems,  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  revitalising  our  knowledge 
systems  which  are  essentially  broader  than  preparing  our  children  to  be  economically 
productive,  asset-backed  citizens  of  the  future.  Our  knowledge  system  needs  a  complete 
overhaul in which the youth grow to understand their authentic history (less the romance), 
their  cultural  progressive  value  system  and  what  it  means  to  be  a  good  citizen.  The 
groundbreaking  work  done  by  such  prominent  South  African  anthropologists  as  Dr  Harriet 
Ngubane should be celebrated and replicated. 
The growing unemployment rate combined with the partly undesirable inequality trends can 
be  fertile  ground  for  exacerbating  polarisation  among  South  Africans,  leading  to  social 
tension across racial, class and gender lines. The current global economic recession adds to 
our woes. It is eroding some of the achievements we have made in stabilising the economy, 
broadening  economic  participation  and  improving  the  living  conditions  of  many  South 
Africans. 
In  conclusion,  the  current  financial  crisis  and  global  recession  nevertheless  gives  us  the 
opportunity to re-evaluate our craft in dovetailing macroeconomic policy with industrial, trade 
and  other  strategic  sectoral  policies  to  ensure  that  future  economic  growth  translates  into 
tangible and sustainable well-being for all, especially our rural communities, women, youth 
and other marginalised sectors of society. More fundamentally, we are struggling to realise 
broad-based transformation of political freedom into economic, social and cultural freedom 
with the required degree of integrity, loyalty and professionalism. If we can overcome these 
challenges,  we  would  have  surely  achieved  some  but  not  all  the  wishes  of  our  fallen 
visionaries like Steve Biko. 
“Keep the Faith”! 
Thank you. 
                                                 
13   Statistics South Africa. Community Survey 2007, Pretoria , 2007. 
8 
 BIS Review 109/2009
