Caleb M Fundanga: Growth and development of the Zambian economy 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
opening of the Standard Chartered Bank Plc, Livingstone, 7 January 2009. 
 The Deputy Minister of Southern Province, Hon Daniel Munkombwe; 
The Standard Chartered Bank – Acting Managing Director, Mr. Robin Bairstow 
Members of the Press; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  thanking  Mr  Bairstow  and  his  Colleagues  for  inviting  me  to  this 
occasion which marks the official opening of the Standard Chartered Bank Plc , Livingstone 
Falls  Park  Agency.  I  congratulate  Standard  Chartered  Bank  Plc  for  yet  another  milestone 
achievement. 
Hon. Minister, I have stated at various fora that it is important for banks in Zambia to take 
actions which support the growth and development of our economy. We need banks to open 
new  branches,  such  as  this  one,  to  increase  the  convenience  for  our  people  to  access 
banking  services;  thereby  increasing  the  efficiency  of  our  economy  and  empowering  our 
citizens. In particular, I have been encouraging banks to expand their services to areas with 
vast economic potential like Livingstone, which represents a Win-Win situation for both the 
bank and the City. 
I  am  glad  that,  although,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  already  has  an  established  branch  in 
Livingstone, it has chosen to expand its services to other areas of the City in order to bring its 
products and services to the customer’s door step. This strategic move speaks louder than 
words and confirms that there are enormous opportunities here, which the bank can benefit 
from, despite the stiff competition in the market. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  another  issue  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  continues  to  challenge 
commercial  banks  on,  is  the  cost  of  borrowing  which  continues  to  be  high  in  spite  of  the 
efforts by the Bank of Zambia and the Government in ensuring that these costs come down. 
As you are no doubt aware, the Bank of Zambia reduced the Statutory Reserve Ratios from 
14%  to  8%  in  October,  2007  with  a  primary  aim  of  bringing  the  cost  of  borrowing  down. 
Further, in the recent few years, the Bank had managed to contain inflation to low levels in 
order  to  further  reduce  the  lending  rates.  Coupled  with  this,  in  the  recent  past,  the 
Government adopted prudent fiscal policies that enabled the private sector to access more 
credit  from  the  financial  system.  Despite  these  efforts,  credit  is  still  not  affordable  to  the 
majority of our people. This high cost has in turn stifled the growth of the productive sector 
and  in  particular  Agriculture  and  the  SME  sector,  which  are  the  engine  for  the  economic 
growth of our country. 
Hon  Minister,  I  am  however,  glad  to  note  that  credit  to  the  private  sector  has  increased 
significantly with the Personal loans category accounting for the largest beneficiary of credit 
followed  by  the  Agriculture  sector.  I  must  hasten  to  mention  however  that  in  striving  to 
increase credit, banks must always comply with the regulations as stipulated in the Banking 
&  Financial  Services  Act  to  ensure  the  safety  of  customers’  deposits.  Furthermore,  much 
more  credit  needs  to  be  directed  to  sustainable  productive  sectors  like  Agriculture, 
Manufacturing and Tourism. This entails increasing borrowing options available to the small 
scale farmers and the SME sector. At current levels, interest rates are too high for the SMEs 
to access credit and venture into meaningful projects. 
In  order  to  reduce  the  incidences  of  default,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  through  NB  Circular 
3/2008 of December, 2008 made it mandatory for every lender in Zambia to go through the 
Credit Reference Bureau. Any loans approved without passing through the Credit Reference 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 1
Bureau  will  attract  Regulatory  Action.  This  will  undoubtedly  help  to  reduce  the  cost  of 
borrowing. I therefore, urge banks and other financial institutions to continue reviewing the 
cost  of  borrowing  as  part  of  the  process  to  improve  SMEs  access  to  the  much  needed 
finances  to  expand  their  operations,  employ  more  people,  and  thereby  provide  impetus  to 
significantly reduce poverty rates in the country. It is also my hope that the coming on board 
of the Citizens Economic Empowerment Commission will significantly aid the development of 
the SME sector. 
Hon  Minister,  Distinguished  ladies  and  Gentlemen,  As  a  direct  consequence  of  being  an 
open  economy,  Zambia  has  not  been  spared  by  the  effects  of  the  current  global  financial 
turmoil.  As  you  are  aware,  the  decline  in  the  copper  prices  on  the  world  market  has 
negatively affected the operations of the mining sector, leading to downsizing and job losses. 
Contributions by the mining sector to Government revenue is also expected to decline in the 
2009 while foreign exchange in the market has declined. The unprecedented high prices of 
fertilisers and other agricultural inputs also contributed to the current high food prices. These 
and  several  other  factors  have  resulted  in  the  depreciation  of  the  Kwacha  against  other 
international currencies as well as high inflation which closed the year at 16.6% from 8.9% in 
2007. 
Hon Minister, the economic outlook may not be rosy now. The challenges may be huge but 
at  the  same  time  not  insurmountable.  You  will  agree  with  me  that  as  a  country  with  vast 
arable land and water resources as well as a huge market of eight neighbouring countries, 
we cannot afford to sit and wait for assistance from other countries. We need to work extra 
hard so that we can feed our children as well as export the surplus to neighbouring countries. 
We need to look within ourselves and determine how each one of us can help overcome the 
challenges that we face today. It is therefore my appeal to all of us present here today to 
show more commitment to the growth and development of our country. 
Further, I call upon all banks to partner with the Government in alleviating the suffering of our 
people  by  contributing  to  the  development  of  our  nation.  After  all  a  growing  and  more 
developed economy will contribute more to the banking sector and therefore increase more 
profits. Banks need to seriously engage in activities that will contribute to the environment in 
which they are benefiting. This can be achieved in many ways including; 
• 
• 
By making available more loans that will increase the productivity of our economy; 
By encouraging more Zambians to open bank accounts through provision of easily 
accessible and affordable products and services; 
By  providing  products  and  services  that  suit  the  needs  of  the  various  customers 
across the country and not only those that suit people in Lusaka; 
By opening more branches across the country; and 
By installing more ATMs 
• 
• 
All this, Ladies and Gentlemen, will greatly contribute to the emergence of a middle class in 
Zambia, which will bring real economic development and lead to poverty reduction. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  despite  the  recent  challenges  facing  the  financial  sectors  in  the 
world, Standard Chartered Bank’s commitment to growth and re-investment is unwavering. 
The bank continues to be adequately capitalised with its total assets accounting for 14.4% of 
the banking sector’s total assets while its deposit base remained strong at 16.3% of the total 
industry deposits. Infact, not so long ago on December 10, 2008, I was invited to officially 
open  the  Standard  Chartered  Solwezi  Branch.  I  have  no  doubt  that  with  the  current 
expansion strategy; the bank will reach greater heights. However, you will all agree with me 
that  those  who  have  more  should  do  more.  I  therefore  look  forward  to  seeing  more  from 
Standard Chartered Bank Zambia, it being such a leading bank in Zambia. 
 2 
 BIS Review 4/2009
Hon. Minister, it is my sincere hope that the Falls Park Agency will live up to the expectations 
of the Livingstone community. 
Once again, I would like to thank Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Plc, through the acting 
Managing Director, Mr Bairstow for inviting me to witness the official opening of this agency. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 3
