Shyamala Gopinath: Retail payment systems – select issues 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, at the Regional Seminar on Payment Systems, jointly organised by the Reserve Bank 
of India and the Bank for International Settlements, Mamallapuram, Chennai, 17 March 2009. 
Assistance provided by Mr. K.N. Krishnamurthy, Mr. P. Vasudevan and Ms. Charulatha Kar in preparation of the 
remarks is gratefully acknowledged.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  to  be  the  first  speaker  in  a  gathering  of  Payment  and  Settlement 
System professionals who will be deliberating upon various issues that I am sure will go a 
long way in strengthening the payment systems fabric in individual countries as well as in a 
global context. In the context of an otherwise gloomy scenario in the global financial system, 
the presence of robust payment and settlement systems infrastructure around the world has 
been a matter of great solace.  
As  I  can  see  from  the  agenda,  fruitful  deliberations  on  various  issues  concerning  retail 
payment systems will be the focus of this Seminar, which I consider to be highly appropriate 
as it is an exciting and most happening area. Being the first speaker, I have an advantage – I 
am not constrained by what has been said or covered before. Disadvantage though is not 
having the benefit of a chartered path to cover. Let me make best use of the advantages. I 
will share not only some of my perspectives with you but also present the relative status in 
the Indian context.  
The payment systems in any economy can be compared to the arteries in a human body. So 
long  as  the  arteries  are  performing  their  tasks  silently  and  efficiently,  the  human  body 
remains healthy and their role is hardly noticed. Once they start clogging or malfunctioning, 
they can impair and impact the efficient functioning of all other parts of the body. Similarly, 
efficiently functioning payment and settlement systems often remain in the background, but 
come  to  lime  light  when  an  inefficient  payment  system  or  any  failure  in  any  segment  of 
payment system causes ripple effects in the economy. 
Depending on the nature or type of transactions that are handled by any payment system, 
their  importance  to  the  larger  financial  system  is  determined  which  in  turn  influences  the 
extent  of  regulatory  focus  that  is  given  to  the  system.  Besides,  inter-temporal  and  inter-
spatial  developments  in  the  context  of  payment  systems  further  necessitate  continuous 
changes to be incorporated in regulatory attention too. Thus, in the initial stages of evolution 
of oversight structure for regulation and supervision of payment and settlement systems, a 
greater  attention  may  be  given  to  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems  (SIPS)  as 
compared to retail payment systems, for obvious reasons, especially as these SIPS usually 
handle  payments  of  large  value  and  settlement  of  inter-bank  transactions  emanating  from 
financial  markets  pass  through  such  systems.  However,  as  regulatory  attention  on  these 
large  value  payments  get  stabilised  and  simultaneously  developments  in  retail  payment 
mechanisms evolve, the span of oversight attention widens to encompass these systems as 
well. Let me briefly highlight some of the issues that merit attention in the context of retail 
payment systems.  
I  am  not  sure  whether  a  standard  definition  of  “Retail  Payment  System”  has  been  given 
anywhere, but a reference to the “Glossary of terms used in Payment Systems” (by CPSS – 
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems) shows that “retail payments” are defined 
as mainly consumer payments of relatively low value and urgency. Accordingly, “retail funds 
transfer  system”  is  defined  as  a  “system  which  handles  a  large  volume  of  payments  of 
relatively  low  value  in  such  forms  as  cheques,  credit  transfers,  direct  debits,  ATM  and 
EFTPOS  (Electronic  Funds  Transfer  at  Point  of  Sale)  transactions.  Even  going  by  this 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 1
working definition, what clearly emerges is that the user base for retail payment systems is 
very  large  as  they  touch  every  economic  activity  in  the  country  and  even  cross-border 
transactions of such nature. In terms of volumes, paper-based and electronic retail payment 
systems far exceed the large value payment transactions, while they may be lower in terms 
of value. 
Efficient retail payment systems bring in operational efficiencies for all commercial activities 
and  greatly  facilitate  e-commerce.  Recent  developments  in  payment  systems,  aided  by 
developments in information and communication technologies, have provided customers with 
a wide array of choices, demanding greater levels of efficiency and safety in their operations. 
Further, final settlement of transactions from many of these retail systems may also occur in 
one or the other large-value payment systems, increasing their systemic importance. Thus, 
such retail payment systems, even though they are not SIPS, can be aptly called as Systems 
of System-Wide Importance. Oversight arrangements of such systems should, therefore, not 
lose sight of this relevance of retail payment mechanisms in the larger economic context. 
The presence of a sound legal framework greatly enhances the efficacy and efficiency of the 
oversight  function.  In  India,  we  have  recently  enacted  the  Payment  &  Settlement  Systems 
Act, 2007 – an exclusive legislation for regulating and supervising payment activities, with the 
Reserve Bank of India being designated as the authority to do so. This legislation, not only 
empowers  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  authorise,  monitor  and  supervise  various  players 
and  infrastructural  arrangements  in  place  for  payment  and  settlement  systems,  but  also 
eliminates certain ambiguities that existed in adherence to processes and procedures related 
to payment and settlement activities. 
Retail payment systems are growing in terms of their reach and variety – products, delivery 
channels,  number  of  service  providers  and  diverse  technological  solutions.  The  rapid 
migration  from  paper  to  electronic  modes  can  largely  be  attributed  to  the  extraordinary 
growth in issuance and usage of cards (both debit and credit), increasing ACH transactions 
(for  repetitive  bill  and  utility  payments),  multiple  delivery  channels  (ATMs,  net-banking  and 
core-banking solutions) and the changing appetite of the present generation of consumers. 
What  we  are  witnessing  is  the  favourable  shift  from  the  beneficiary-initiated  transactions 
(from debit-pull in cheques) to the beneficiary-facilitated transactions (to credit-push in ACH). 
This,  to  be  precise,  is  what  makes  this  segment  most  exciting  to  the  players  and  most 
challenging  to  the  regulators.  The  responsibility  of  both,  though,  is  to  make  it  a  win-win 
situation to the users – by ushering products that are “competitive yet comparative”, “unique 
yet  generic”, 
“comprehensive-in-coverage  yet 
transparent-in-content”. 
Under such a scenario, any country planning for an efficient payment system needs to put in 
place a roadmap, which is often called as the "Vision Document". The vision document lays 
out  the  future  direction  of  the  payment  systems  –  which  normally  gives  a  reasonable 
description  of  what  could  be  expected  in  a  span  covering  the  next  3-5  years  in  various 
segments,  both  wholesale  and  retail.  This  document  is  expected  to  represent  the  initial 
direction  of  the  approach  of  a  central  bank  from  the  point  of  transparency  of  its  policies. 
Vision  document  would  cover  the  aspirations  and  desires  of  the  consumers,  the  service 
providers, technological capabilities, global developments and domestic requirements. All or 
major  policy  pronouncements  thereafter  would  broadly  traverse  this  path.  In  the  Indian 
context, the aspects outlaid in the “Payments System Vision Document” encompassing the 
three-year period 2005-2008 have largely been achieved and we are now in the process of 
framing the vision document covering the period up to 2011. 
Given the wider range of economic activities that impact and in turn are influenced by the 
presence of a safe and efficient retail payments infrastructure in the country, developments in 
these systems can be harnessed to widen the scope of coverage of the services particularly 
in the context of financial inclusion. In countries like ours, developments in retail payments 
and their delivery channels can be effectively dove-tailed for bridging not only geographical 
“feature-rich  yet  cost-effective”  and 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2009
gaps but also in terms of extension of financial activities and access to these activities to a 
wider section of society. 
Payment and settlement systems in India have, and I am sure it is the case in many other 
jurisdictions too, players that are common across the retail and wholesale segments. Access 
criteria  for  membership  to  the  clearing  houses  that  provide  the  retail  products  (cheques, 
ACH,  etc.)  and  eligibility  to  offer  various  payment  products  (pre-paid  instruments,  mobile 
payments,  etc.)  should  be  stringent  enough  to  permit  only  strong  entities  with  better  risk 
management practices to enter. What we should aim for is a level-playing-field with players 
firmly-on-the-ground.  Infirmities  and  arbitrage  opportunities  in  one  segment  should  not  be 
allowed  to  transcend  into  the  other.  Procedures  should  be  in  place  to  benchmark  and  lay 
down  the  expectations  and  roles  of  different  stakeholders  in  each  product-segment.  The 
endeavour should be to correspondingly benchmark these requirements and standards with 
international  standards,  wherever  they  are  available.  A  word  of  caution  –  the  international 
standards  and  benchmarks,  including  vendor  solutions  operating  elsewhere,  have  to  be 
dovetailed and customised to suit domestic requirements and situations. 
Deliberations  in  Seminars  such  as  these  also  need  to  highlight  the  need  for  a  set  of 
standards  or  recommendations  for  best  practices  in  the  context  of  retail  payment  systems 
just as the prescriptions in the context of SIPS or Securities Settlement Systems etc. May be 
a  beginning  could  be  made  along  the  lines  of  the  European  Central  Bank's  "Oversight 
standards  for  euro  retail  payment  systems"  (June  2003)  which  seek  to  apply  some  of  the 
Core  Principles  for  SIPS  to  specific  retail  payment  systems  as  well  depending  upon  the 
assessment  made  by  the  central  bank  with  respect  to  the  systemic  implication  such  retail 
systems can have. In the Indian context, we have already made our electronic funds transfer 
systems such as RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement) and NEFT (National Electronic Funds 
Transfer)  compliant  with  the  FATF  (Financial  Action  Task  Force)  requirements  on  wire 
transfers. We have also prepared bench mark documents covering cheque clearing – both 
mechanical  and  manual,  as  also  retail  electronic  products  which  cover  the  aspects  of 
minimum standards that have to be put in practice to ensure their efficient operations. These 
benchmark standards are applicable to both the processing centres run by the Reserve Bank 
as well as other commercial banks. 
Another  issue  that  merits  attention  is  that  of  service  charges.  It  can  be  argued  that  the 
competitiveness and competition or a buyer’s market would bring down costs in a near-to-
medium timeframe and definitely in the longer run. Yet, the fears of cartelisation, excessive 
cost-recovery in the initial years and lack of transparency in the cost-structure are concerns 
that  need  to  be  addressed.  While  the  charges-framework  should  be  remunerative  to 
providers  they  should  not  be  prohibitive  to  users.  The  challenges  lie  in  striking  a  balance 
between cost and cost-recovery, including the issues relating to transparency in the charges 
framework and rationalisation of charges across banks / service providers. In UK, the Office 
of  Fair  Trading  (OFT)  has  been  addressing  these  issues.  We,  in  India,  have  recently 
mandated the service charges that could be levied by banks for providing electronic payment 
products to their customers, as also for usage of shared-ATM networks by banks' customers. 
Besides  other  kinds  of  financial  risks  and  risk  mitigation  measures  that  need  to  be  taken, 
operational risk  assumes  significant  importance  in  the  context  of  retail  payments  and  their 
settlement mechanisms because of the wider scope of operations of such systems which is 
not limited to a few players (unlike large-value or inter-bank payment systems). While Retail 
payment systems need to be sized appropriately to handle substantial volumes and reduce 
the  load  on  large-value  payment  systems,  appropriate  and  well-tested  business-continuity-
plans with sufficient built-in-redundancies should also be in place to ensure availability of the 
retail payment systems in the eventuality of any disruption / contingency. I am sure important 
issues  such  as  process  innovation,  outsourcing,  Business  Continuity  Planning  etc  will  be 
substantially covered during the seminar deliberations. 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 3
While banks and other financial intermediaries are often the major players in any payment 
system arrangement, the role of non-bank operators such as technology and communication 
service-providers,  support  services  for  ATM  networks,  issuance  of  pre-paid  payment 
instruments, etc certainly cannot be ignored.  Modern payment systems, be it wholesale or 
retail, depend extensively on technology and communications for their effective and efficient 
functioning.  The  role  of  non-banks  gains  more  importance  when  e-wallets  and  pre-paid 
instruments are widely accepted as convenient channels of effecting payment; the impact of 
such instruments in replacing the physical needs of cash in an economy is enormous and 
warrants delicate policy handling. 
Another  issue  that  needs  to  be  examined  in  retail  payment  systems,  relates  to  the  role  of 
industry  organisations  and  self-regulatory  organisations  in  meeting  the  expectations  of 
various  consumer-groups,  information  dissemination,  building  awareness  of  the  products 
among  the  banks’  operational  staff,  public  and  the  like  as  also  in  promoting  the  usage 
thereof.  Consolidation  of  infrastructure  and  patronising  umbrella  organisations  is  what  we 
have been aiming at in India. Recently the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), 
an  umbrella  organisation  set-up  by  banks,  has  been  institutionalised  which  is  expected  to 
take over the various retail payment products operating in the country. Being an organisation 
with banks as stakeholders, NPCI is expected to provide uniformity in operations, standard 
operating  procedures,  and  promote  resiliency  and  efficiency  of  the  retail  payments 
infrastructure. 
The  Seminar  would  also  give  us  the  opportunity  of  learning  from  developments  in  various 
jurisdictions.  UK  has  recently  implemented  the  benchmark  24x7  system  (known  as  Faster 
Payments Service), wherein retail customers are in a position to transfer funds at any point of 
time in a day, while the related inter-bank settlements take place only during the working of 
hours of the RTGS system. Bank customers can initiate such transfers either through net or 
phone  banking.  I  believe  the  speakers  from  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  would  also  be 
sharing  with  us  their  experience  and  success  of  similar  systems  implemented  in  their 
country. In India, the NEFT (a retail electronic funds transfer facility), has six net settlements 
during the day, for providing funds transfer facilities. This network handles transfer volumes 
of around three million transactions a month, while that in UK, I understand, handles as high 
a volume as five million a day. 
As  I  said  earlier,  the  issues  are  endless,  and  before  I  take  your  leave,  let  me  flag  a  few 
developments which are presently being considered by us. These relate to white-labelling of 
ATMs  (complete  out-sourcing  of  most  of  the  ATM-related  activities  by  banks),  cash 
withdrawal  at  points-of-sale,  transfer  of  social  security  benefits  through  electronic  means, 
hastening 
two-factor 
authentication  for  use  of  cards,  consolidation  of  infrastructure,  supporting  the  need  for  a 
single national-id for customer identification and KYC purposes, providing low-value one-to-
one  transfers  on  a  24x7  basis,  etc.  Giving  a  logical  direction  to  settlement  finality  in  net-
settlement systems by examining guaranteed settlement is yet another thought process.  
Ladies and gentlemen, you would agree with me that the host of issues that revolve around 
the retail payment systems cannot be addressed in a matter of few minutes. All that I have 
attempted is to draw  your attention to the important issues that any regulator needs to be 
conscious about. I am sure over the next three days some of these issues may see solutions 
emerging with your active participation. At the end of the Seminar, let us all hope to carry 
with us sufficient knowledge to steer the course of the retail payment systems not just within 
our  jurisdictions  but  also  strive  to  harmonise  the  efforts  of  retail  payment  activities  across 
jurisdictions. 
Let me conclude by quoting what Leonardo da Vinci had said – “I have been impressed with 
the urgency of doing. Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Being willing is not enough; we 
must do.” What was true then is equally applicable today. I wish you all the very best and 
happy deliberations. 
the  migration  of  paper 
the  paper-less  mode, 
instruments 
to 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2009
