Jean-Claude Trichet: A paradigm change for the global financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
International  Colloquium  “Nouveau  Monde,  Nouveau  Capitalisme”  roundtable,  Paris, 
9 January 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The current crisis stands out because it is affecting the heart of the global financial system. 
Its  root  cause  was  a  widespread  undervaluation  of  risk  in  the  global  financial  system, 
especially in the most advanced economies. This included an underestimation of the quantity 
of risk financial institutions took upon themselves and an underpricing of the unit of risk. Risk 
was  underpriced  because,  among  other  things,  financial  market  participants  largely 
extrapolated ongoing trends and the very low levels of volatility in financial markets and in 
the real economies going forward.  
A number of policy-makers indicated at the time that these trends and low volatility could not 
be  taken  for  granted.  As  chairman  of  the  Global  Economy  Meetings  of  central  bank 
governors in Basel, I myself reported my colleagues’ sentiments on this matter. We also said 
publicly, long before the difficult time we are going through today, that the private sector had 
to prepare for a market correction, because such a correction was inevitable. The aim of our 
urging was to try to ensure that the correction itself would be as orderly as possible. Yet, one 
of  the  main  reasons  for  the  lack  of  preparation  had  its  basis  in  the  widely  held  view  that 
regulation should not stifle financial innovation and that markets knew best and could – for 
the most part – regulate themselves adequately.  
The turmoil has shown how complacent and misleading this attitude was. When the turmoil 
set in, many financial institutions realised that their risk management systems were not as 
reliable and robust as they had believed them to be and, indeed, should have been. Most 
importantly  at  the  time,  market  liquidity,  that  is  the  ability  of  financial  markets  to  express 
appropriate  prices  at  all  times,  which  had  wrongly  been  taken  for  granted,  evaporated  in 
large segments of the financial markets. 
Investment-banking  business  models  typically  featured  high-leverage,  marking-to-market 
accounting,  large  maturity  mismatches  and  relatively  limited  liquidity  and  capital  reserves. 
This model was efficient as long as markets kept booming and functioned properly, but left 
those banks with little or no shock-absorption capacity. We have seen the result: investment 
banking, as we knew it, has disappeared before our eyes, and all banking institutions have 
come under severe pressure.  
The financial authorities – both in Europe and in other parts of the world – reacted promptly. 
Central  banks,  including  prominently  –  and  from  the  very  start  of  the  turmoil  –  the  ECB, 
provided  short-term  liquidity  support  to  prevent  contagion.  A  number  of  the  central  banks’ 
actions  were  coordinated  internationally.  Regulators  gave  priority  to  comprehensive  policy 
responses, addressing the more fundamental weaknesses. Coordinated guidelines were put 
forward  at  the  European  and  international  level  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  the 
Eurogroup and the European Council, in particular, and were reflected in the declaration of 
the G20 summit. This bears witness to the importance of measures to be applied consistently 
in all countries. A global financial system requires a globally coordinated response, and the 
official sector has been providing just such a response. 
Looking ahead, we should correct the substantial flaws in the financial system that have now 
become  evident.  Of  course,  we  should  not  throw  the  baby  out  with  the  bath  water  by 
discarding the market economy setup that underlies the system. It is the only setup that has 
proved  able  over  time  and  globally  to  deliver  sustained  prosperity,  and  it  has  no  equal  in 
overall efficiency. But our basic aim should be to improve very significantly the resilience of 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 1
the  financial  system:  the  fragility  that  has  become  apparent  since  August  2007  and  more 
acute since mid-September last year is not acceptable. We have to draw lessons from the 
present situation without any complacency. 
To  be  specific  in  terms  of  avenues  for  reform,  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  areas  where 
change  is  particularly  needed:  1)  short-termism,  2)  pro-cyclicality  and  3)  transparency.  I 
believe that shortcomings in these areas were instrumental in creating the conditions for this 
crisis and amplifying its severity.  
1. 
First, among financial market participants (traders, managers, risk committees and 
boards  of  directors  alike)  for  a  long  time  there  has  been  an  excessive  focus  on 
short-term  profits  to  the  detriment  of  longer-term  business  performance.  This  has 
resulted  in  excessive  risk-taking  and,  particularly,  an  underestimation  of  low 
probability  risks  stemming  from  excessive  leverage  and  concentration.  We  now 
need  to  create  more  balanced  and  forward-looking  incentive  frameworks  for 
management  compensation  and  more  effective  internal  risk  measurement  and 
control  systems  that  take  into  account  not  only  near-term  profitability  but  also 
sustainability and durable financial strength. This is an area where improvement will 
depend crucially on private decisions, in addition to public action.  
Second, we need to re-examine all aspects of the current regulatory framework to 
ensure  it  does  not  contribute  to  the  intrinsic  cyclicality  of  banking.  A  number  of 
potential  sources  of  pro-cyclicality  need  to  be  investigated,  including  fair  value 
accounting  and  leverage,  capital  requirements  and  provisioning  regimes.  Looking 
forward,  new  mechanisms  should  be  devised  to  ensure  that  banks  accumulate 
resources in good times to cushion the shock when the cycle turns. Measures could 
include requiring banks to hold additional capital and liquidity buffers and introducing 
dynamic provisioning systems that require banks to build up a general reserve that 
can be drawn on in downturns. Market economies inevitably entail cyclical swings; it 
is  up  to  regulatory  and  supervisory  bodies  to  ensure  that  their  regulations  and 
actions do not amplify those swings.  
Third,  in  recent  decades  transparency  has  not  matched  the  increasing  level  of 
sophistication  and  complexity  of  financial  instruments,  creating  significant  gaps  in 
investor information and financial education. These need to be filled with enhanced 
risk disclosure at all levels, particularly in institutions and markets that are currently 
unregulated but can – as recent experience has shown – exert a relevant systemic 
impact.  Financial  regulation  should  be  reviewed  to  better  reflect  the  role  of  highly 
leveraged institutions in particular – namely private equity, hedge funds and special 
purpose  vehicles  –  and  of  derivatives  markets  in  general,  including,  but  not 
exclusively,  credit  derivatives.  Regarding  the  latter,  I  welcome  in  particular  the 
initiative  to  improve  the  infrastructure  of  over-the-counter  markets  by  establishing 
central counterparty clearing for the CDS market.  
2. 
3. 
Let me conclude. 
In the current, very demanding situation, the swiftness and the magnitude of the decisions 
taken by central banks as regards the supply of liquidity and the decisive actions taken by 
governments  and  parliaments  as  regards  recapitalisation  in  the  financial  sector  and  the 
provision of guarantees have proved effective in avoiding a meltdown of global finance. But it 
would  be  a  mistake  to  underestimate  the  structural  fragility  of  the  present  state  of  global 
finance and, consequently, of the global economy. 
This  is  the  heart  of  the  matter:  we  need  a  paradigm  change  in  the  global  economy.  The 
previous  paradigm  was  based  on  the  concept  of  relatively  short-term  financial  market 
equilibrium. What we need is a new paradigm. A paradigm based upon the following three 
fundamental  notions.  First,  the  notion  of  medium  and  long-term  sustainability,  which  will 
require us to be much more resolute in distinguishing between the stable equilibria on the 
one  hand  and  the  unstable  equilibria  on  the  other  hand,  which  should  not  be  accepted. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2009
Second, the notion of resilience to shocks, taking into account the fact that whatever the level 
of sustainability of a particular financial situation, we can never eliminate the occurrence of 
unpredictable  shocks.  These  shocks  can  come  not  only  from  the  economic  and  financial 
sphere – the present stress test is a very powerful example – but also from the geopolitical 
sphere, or they can be triggered by natural catastrophes. Resilience is therefore essential; it 
is  a  necessary  complement  to  sustainability.  The  third  notion  is  holism:  the  present  global 
financial  system  depends  on  the  appropriate  handling  of  a  very  large  number  of  factors: 
prudential practices, accounting rules, audit quality, liquidity management, risk management 
and credit assessment, to mention but a few. This holistic approach must also comprehend a 
fundamental  factor,  namely  the  long-term  sustainability  and  resilience  of  public  macro 
policies  –  whether  in  particular  fiscal  or  structural  –  and  the  associated  progressive  but 
resolute  elimination  of  those  large  domestic  and  external  imbalances  that  are  one  of  the 
major causes of global economic and financial instability. 
Such a paradigm change, including the three notions of medium and long-term sustainability, 
resilience and a holistic approach of the global financial system, is now absolutely essential 
to correct the fragility of the market economy which we are presently experiencing. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 4/2009 
 3
