Donald L Kohn: The economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Hutchinson Lecture, Newark, Delaware, 20 April 2009. 
 I'm pleased to be here and honored to be invited to deliver the Hutchinson Lecture. Although 
I  never  met  Harry  Hutchinson,  I  very  much  wish  I  had.  Like  Harry,  I  received  a  Ph.D.  in 
economics from the University of Michigan, and my professional interests have centered on 
money and banking. Given Harry's expertise and his keen interest in teaching, I'm sure he 
would have had valuable insights about the recent financial turmoil to share with all of us. In 
this  talk,  I  will  focus  on  the  economic  outlook,  which,  of  course,  has  been  significantly 
influenced  by  that  turmoil.  After  a  brief  review  of  recent  developments,  I  will  discuss  the 
factors that are likely to support a resumption of economic growth over coming quarters as 
well as the likely contour of that recovery.1  
Recent developments 
The  U.S.  economy  and  financial  markets  have  been  through  an  extraordinarily  difficult 
period.  The  downturn  in  economic  activity  that  has  been  under  way  since  late  2007 
steepened  considerably  last  fall  as  the  strains  in  financial  markets  intensified,  credit 
conditions tightened further, and asset values continued to slump. Partly in response to the 
financial turmoil, consumer and business confidence plummeted, and nearly all major sectors 
of  the  economy  registered  steep  declines  in  activity.  In  all,  real  gross  domestic  product 
(GDP)  dropped  at  an  annual  rate  of  6-1/4  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008;  the 
Commerce  Department's  advance  estimate  for  the  first  quarter  of  2009  –  which  will  be 
released next week – is expected to show another sizable decrease. This recession seems 
likely to be among the deepest and longest in the post-World War II period. 
Labor  market  and  production  data  continued  to  deteriorate  through  the  first  quarter. 
Businesses shed more than 650,000 jobs in March, the fifth consecutive month of job losses 
in  the  neighborhood  of  600,000  or  more,  and  the  unemployment  rate  jumped  to  8-1/2 
percent. Moreover, the number of new claims for unemployment insurance benefits remained 
elevated in early April, which suggests that job losses have remained appreciable. And in the 
industrial  sector,  another  large  drop  in  output  was  recorded  in  March  as  manufacturers 
continued to cut production in response to weak demand and excess inventories. 
The  recent  spending  indicators,  however,  have  been  more  mixed.  On  the  negative  side, 
businesses  have  continued  to  make  sharp  reductions  in  their  capital  expenditures,  and 
exports have been hard hit by the steep drop in economic activity abroad. However, there 
are a few tentative signs that the pace of decline in some other key components of demand 
may be lessening. To be sure, consumer spending continues to suffer the effects of the poor 
job market and the sizable losses of equity and housing wealth over the past two years. But 
after smoothing through the data for the first three months of 2009, consumption appears to 
have  steadied  some  after  a  sharp  drop  in  the  summer  and  autumn  of  2008.  And  in  the 
housing sector, the declines in sales and construction of single-family homes have abated in 
the past couple of months – in part, perhaps, because of the low levels of mortgage interest 
rates  and  the  greater  affordability  of  housing.  As  demand  firms,  and  once  inventories  of 
houses and a broad range of goods are brought into line with sales, economic activity should 
begin to stabilize.  
                                                 
1   The views are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Andrea Kusko and Daniel Sichel of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks.  
BIS Review 49/2009 
 1
The crosscurrents in the recent data and a bit more favorable financial news of late stand in 
contrast to the uniformly bleak picture of a few months ago. These developments may be an 
early indication that conditions are falling into place for real GDP to decline at a slower rate in 
the  second  quarter  and  to  stabilize  later  this  year.  I  want  to  emphasize  that  the  high-
frequency data are very noisy, and  considerable uncertainty attends the near-term path of 
the economy. Still, I don't think it is premature to start to ponder the shape that a recovery – 
when it occurs – would be likely to take. 
The outlook for recovery 
Consideration of the likely shape of the recovery depends very much on understanding how 
we got to where we are now. For a number of years earlier in the decade, U.S. economic 
growth was supported importantly by rapid increases in consumption and housing, which, in 
turn, were fueled by an extended surge of global credit. Housing demand was propelled, in 
part, by persistently low long-term interest rates, loose underwriting standards on mortgages, 
and,  for  a  while,  expectations  of  continuing  increases  in  house  prices  that  resulted  in  the 
building of too many houses and the elevation of home prices to unsustainable levels. These 
same developments fed a surge in consumption through the effects on wealth of rising house 
prices  and  through  various  financial  innovations  that  allowed  many  households  to  liquefy 
their housing wealth. Financial intermediaries were further exposed by generally inadequate 
compensation for risk and increased leverage. As the housing boom petered out and then 
reversed, both households and lenders found themselves overextended, developments that 
led  to  a  mutually  reinforcing  pullback  in  spending  and  lending.  The  dynamics  of  this 
adjustment,  which  coincided  with  the  collapse  of  the  global  credit  boom,  helped  push  the 
U.S. economy into deep recession.  
Economic policymakers have moved aggressively to counter the threat to economic stability 
by, in effect, filling some of the gap in private lending and spending with government lending 
and  spending.  Because  the  disruptions  in  the  economy  have  been  so  closely  related  to 
problems in the financial sector, many of the policy measures have been focused on financial 
institutions and markets and on countering the tightening of financial conditions that occurred 
as lenders became more risk averse and took steps to conserve capital and liquidity. These 
measures  should  result  in  improved  credit  conditions  for  businesses  and  households  and 
thus are expected to help mitigate the negative feedback between the financial sector and 
the  real  economy.  Such  improvement  is  crucial  because  we  will  not  have  a  meaningful 
recovery without a stabilization of our financial system and credit markets. 
The Federal Reserve has played an active role over the past 18 months in the development 
and implementation of policies to counter the financial crisis and its economic fallout. Steps 
taken have included lowering interest rates, making backup sources of liquidity available to 
private lenders, and using the Federal Reserve's lending capacity to try to revive a variety of 
financial markets. The easing of monetary policy, as conventionally defined by the target for 
the federal funds rate, has been very aggressive; by the end of last year, the Federal Open 
Market  Committee  (FOMC)  had  brought  the  target  federal  funds  rate  down  essentially  to 
zero. Moreover, the FOMC noted, in the statement after its March meeting, "that economic 
conditions  are  likely  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of  the  federal  funds  rate  for  an 
extended  period."  By  communicating  this  expectation,  the  Committee  reinforced  market 
beliefs that interest rate policy is likely to remain on hold, thereby putting downward pressure 
on longer-term rates, which have the largest effects on spending.  
In addition, the Federal Reserve has taken other policy steps to ease credit conditions and 
support  the  broader  economy.  Throughout  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  moved  to 
ensure that U.S. depository institutions can obtain the liquidity that they require. Given the 
global  nature  of  financial  markets  and  institutions,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  established 
swap lines with foreign central banks, allowing them to obtain dollars so that they could meet 
the  dollar  liquidity  needs  of  banks  in  their  jurisdictions.  As  some  large  investment  banks 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
came increasingly under pressure in early 2008, the Federal Reserve, consistent with its role 
as  lender  of  last  resort  and  in  light  of  the  key  roles  these  institutions  play  in  a  range  of 
financial  markets,  introduced  programs  under  which  it  could  provide  liquidity  to  primary 
dealers. And, as the financial situation deteriorated last fall, the Federal Reserve established 
liquidity facilities for money market mutual funds and introduced programs to provide liquidity 
directly  to  borrowers  and  investors  in  key  credit  markets,  including  the  commercial  paper 
market, where strains threatened the ability of many financial and nonfinancial firms to place 
their paper. The Federal Reserve and the Treasury have worked together to try to restart the 
asset-backed securities markets, where loans are packaged for sale to final investors. And 
just  recently,  the  Federal  Reserve  started  making  substantial  purchases  of  longer-term 
Treasury  and  mortgage-related  securities  to  support  market  functioning  and  reduce  long-
term interest rates in the mortgage and other private credit markets. 
Along  with  its  monetary  policy  actions,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  part  of  a  broader 
government  effort  –  one  that  includes  the  Treasury  and  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC) – to provide more direct support to financial firms and the economy. In 
part, this effort has involved targeted actions to prevent the failure or substantial weakening 
of specific systemically important institutions when the disorderly failure of a large, complex, 
interconnected firm would disrupt the functioning of a range of financial markets and impede 
the  flow  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses.  Besides  this  targeted  support,  the 
government has been injecting capital into the banking system to ensure that U.S. banking 
institutions are well capitalized and can support the recovery by lending to sound households 
and businesses. In addition to the programs to provide capital, the government, through the 
FDIC,  has  temporarily  guaranteed  selected  liabilities  of  insured  depository  institutions  and 
their holding companies, thereby improving their access to funding. The government has also 
taken  steps,  most  recently  through  the  Making  Home  Affordable  program,  to  reduce 
unnecessary  foreclosures.  Beyond  helping  homeowners  stay  in  their  houses,  limiting 
foreclosures should benefit lenders, mitigate adverse impacts on affected communities, and, 
by limiting the decline in overall home prices, help support the broader economy. Finally, the 
Treasury recently announced a program to assist banks and other lenders in finding markets 
for their "legacy assets" – that is, real estate-related assets that were accumulated during the 
housing boom and have since declined in value and become relatively illiquid. Uncertainty 
about the value of legacy assets is weighing on confidence in banks, and so helping banks to 
dispose of such assets should contribute to their ability to raise capital and increase lending.  
Employing  its  fiscal  policy  tools,  the  government  has  enacted  a  multifaceted  program  of 
stimulus that will provide direct support to spending and economic activity. In February, the 
President signed into law a $787 billion package that included cuts in taxes and increases in 
transfer  payments  for  households,  lower  taxes  for  businesses,  higher  spending  for 
infrastructure 
local 
governments, many of which would otherwise have been forced to cut spending in response 
to  declining  revenues.  Although  the  exact  effects  of  these  measures  on  the  economy  are 
difficult  to  gauge,  they  will  likely  provide  a  significant  boost  to  activity.  According  to  the 
Congressional Budget Office, the effect of the stimulus package on the level of real GDP at 
the  end  of  2010  could  range  from  about  1  percent  to  more  than  3  percent,  relative  to  a 
baseline forecast that does not include the stimulus. That additional GDP translates into an 
unemployment  rate  by  the  end  of  next  year  that  is  between  1/2  and  2  percentage  points 
lower  than  it  otherwise  would  be.  With  the  tax  cuts  already  showing  up  in  paychecks, 
increases in transfer payments already in place, and grants to states and localities starting to 
flow, the effects of the package on aggregate demand should start to provide some support 
to activity fairly quickly. 
Thus a broad range of policies are in place to foster recovery. But economic recoveries are 
also typically shaped by powerful internal cyclical dynamics. Indeed, it appears that some of 
the forces that had been holding down growth are starting to abate. In particular, the recent 
data  suggest  that  the  multiyear  contraction  in  home  sales  and  new  construction  may  be 
investments,  and  additional 
financial  assistance 
to  state  and 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 3
nearing an end. House prices could well continue to fall for a while, and months' supply of 
unsold  homes  will  likely  remain  elevated  for  some  time.  At  some  point,  however,  house 
prices will begin to flatten out, and fears about buying into a falling market will start to wane. 
At the same time, the improved affordability of homeownership resulting from reduced house 
prices, low mortgage interest rates, and government programs (including incentives for first-
time homebuyers) should boost demand. Because inventories of unsold homes are still very 
high relative to sales, it may take a while for any pickup in demand to translate into higher 
production. But even stabilization in residential construction would remove what has been a 
significant drag on the U.S. economy. 
Addressing inventory overhangs of goods other than houses is another important part of the 
adjustment process. In a number of industries, inventory-sales ratios soared late last year, 
and  they  remain  elevated  despite  substantial  reductions  in  manufacturing  output  and  a 
marked quickening in the rate of inventory liquidation. Businesses still have a ways to go to 
bring inventories into alignment with sales. But as these excesses are worked off, production 
will begin rising back up to the level of sales, thereby providing a boost to GDP growth.  
Another factor at work is the sharp fall in prices of oil and other commodities since the middle 
of 2008. This decline in prices – which partly reflected the worldwide drop in demand – has 
helped bolster real incomes and consumer spending in the United States.  
More broadly, we are in the midst of an adjustment to the negative shocks that have hit the 
economy over the past two years and that intensified last fall. In particular, late last year we 
experienced a marked deterioration in a broad range of financial markets, severe cutbacks in 
spending  in  response  to  the  tighter  financial  conditions,  and  a  sudden  and  substantial 
erosion of confidence among households and businesses that greatly steepened the ongoing 
recession.  In  response  to  the  effect  of  these  shocks,  businesses  have  instituted  sharp 
reductions in production, ratcheted down capital spending plans, and laid off workers. At the 
same time, households have scaled back spending in response to lower wealth, diminished 
access  to  credit,  and  the  deterioration  in  their  prospects  for  employment  and  income. 
Financial  markets  have  improved  some  since  last  fall,  though  they  remain  disrupted  and 
fragile. Over time, as businesses and households gradually adjust to these adverse shocks, 
the  drag  on  activity  will  abate,  and  the  stage  will  be  set  for  recovery  and  a  resumption  of 
growth. 
How strong will the recovery be?  
The historical record provides a natural starting point for gauging the likely strength of the 
coming recovery. According to the research literature, the recessions that occurred between 
the  end  of  World  War  II  and  the  1980s  were  typically  followed  by  high-growth  recovery 
phases that relatively quickly pushed output back up to its pre-recession level, and policy – 
sometimes  fiscal  but  especially  monetary  policy  –  contributed  significantly  to  those 
bouncebacks.2 All else being equal, that historical pattern would point to a strong recovery in 
this episode. 
However, the last two business cycles cast some doubt on that conclusion. The recovery that 
followed the recession in the early 1990s was fairly sluggish. And with a lackluster recovery 
                                                 
2   See for example, George L. Perry and Charles L. Schultze (1993), "Was This Recession Different? Are They 
All Different?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, iss. 1, pp. 145-95; Christina D. Romer and David H. 
Romer  (1994),  "What  Ends  Recessions?"  in  Stanley  Fischer  and  Julio  J.  Rotemberg,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics  Annual  1994  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press),  pp.  13-57;  and  Daniel  E.  Sichel  (1994), 
"Inventories and the Three Phases of the Business Cycle," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, vol. 12 
(July), pp. 269-77. Burns and Mitchell (1946) made a similar point about the strength of recoveries in an earlier 
period. See Arthur F. Burns and Wesley C. Mitchell (1946), Measuring Business Cycles (New York: National 
Bureau of Economic Research). 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
after the 2001 recession, the evidence supporting rapid bouncebacks after downturns was 
weakened further. Some analysts have suggested that those slow recoveries reflected the 
shallowness of the downturns – indeed, the research on the pre-1990 episodes indicated that 
the strength of recoveries was correlated with the depth of the preceding recessions, and the 
slowness of the recoveries from the 1990 and 2001 recessions would be consistent with that 
correlation.3  However,  many  commentators  instead  attributed  the  slowness  of  those 
recoveries to the drag from structural factors – namely, the financial headwinds in the early 
1990s and the need to work off capital overhangs after 2001. All in all, the historical record 
leaves us with at least two possibilities for the coming recovery: a strong recovery from the 
deep recession or a sluggish recovery because drag from the underlying structural factors 
partly offsets the usual forces that generate a rapid bounceback. 
In the current episode, the imbalances preceding this contraction were substantial, and we 
are still dealing with the consequences of the developments that precipitated the downturn. 
Accordingly, my best guess is that we are in for a relatively gradual recovery, though a very 
wide range of uncertainty surrounds that outlook.  
In the financial markets, we are in the midst of a massive restructuring of credit flows and 
adjustment of risk premiums. After the recent experience, there is likely to be less reliance on 
securitization  markets  to  intermediate  credit  flows  and  more  reliance  on  banks  and  other 
intermediaries. But those intermediaries are still rebuilding the capital and liquidity positions 
they need to substantially increase their participation in credit markets. 
As I noted, we have taken important policy steps to support financial institutions and markets 
and  to  restart  the  flow  of  credit.  Indeed,  risk  spreads  in  both  short-term  and  long-term 
markets have narrowed since late last year, and equity prices, after a sharp decline earlier 
this year, have rebounded substantially in recent weeks. However, financial markets continue 
to be fragile, many risk spreads are still elevated, and investors appear to remain uncertain 
about the strength of some financial institutions. Some of the government programs I have 
discussed – those to restart markets, provide additional capital buffers, and open outlets for 
legacy assets – are just now being implemented. While these programs are promising, we 
will not be able to judge their success for a time. Thus, I suspect that credit conditions will 
ease only slowly and will continue to exert restraint on spending for a time.  
The sharp drop in consumer spending since the middle of last year has been reflected in a 
noticeable  upturn  in  the  personal  saving  rate,  which  now  stands  above  4  percent  after 
fluctuating  between  0  and  1percent  for  most  of  the  period  since  2005.  I  would  not  be 
surprised  to  see  the  saving  rate  rise  somewhat  further  in  coming  quarters  as  the  lagged 
effects of the steep declines in home values and equity prices over the past couple of years 
restrain spending relative to income. In addition, shoring up personal financial positions may 
trump a rebound in spending for a time – especially if unemployment continues to rise, as it 
did  in  the  initial  phase  of  the  past  two  recoveries.  Confidence  about  future  economic 
prospects  will  be  a  critical  influence  on  people's  willingness  to  spend.  Confidence  took  a 
major  hit  last  fall,  and  my  best  guess  is  that  it  will  recover  slowly  along  with  the  financial 
markets and the economy. But once financial conditions stabilize, the economy regains its 
footing,  and  households  sense  that  better  prospects  lie  ahead,  confidence  could  rebound 
more vigorously, leading to a more rapid pickup in purchases at that point. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  also  fallen  sharply  since  last  fall,  and  it  is  likely  to  remain 
weak  through  the  remainder  of  2009.  Indeed,  businesses  will  probably  be  reluctant  to 
undertake new projects in the absence of a substantial improvement in the outlook for sales 
and  profitability  and  a  lifting  of  uncertainty.  And  tight  credit  conditions  –  especially  for 
                                                 
3   See Perry and Schultze, "Was This Recession Different?" p. 149. For related evidence, see Paul Beaudry and 
Gary Koop (1993), "Do Recessions Permanently Change Output?" Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 31 
(April), pp. 149-63; and Sichel, "Inventories and the Three Phases of the Business Cycle." 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 5
commercial construction – likely will be a significant negative force. But here too, confidence 
could  bounce  back  more  rapidly,  and  if  credit  conditions  were  to  ease  appreciably, 
businesses  might  move  ahead  quickly  with  capital  spending  projects  that  had  been 
postponed during the recession.  
Exports  were  an  important  source  of  strength  for  the  U.S.  economy  in  recent  years. 
However, the global nature of the current economic downturn means that they are unlikely to 
provide much support for domestic production going forward. Activity in foreign economies, 
taken together, contracted in the fourth quarter at a rapid pace – similar to that in the United 
States. Recent indicators point to equally dismal outcomes in the first quarter and, although 
there have been a few signs of stabilization, have yet to send a clear signal that the global 
economy has hit bottom. The intensification of financial turmoil was global, and many of our 
trading partners are also facing constraints on credit availability. 
Although the recovery in the U.S. economy is likely to be gradual in its early stages, it should 
gain  momentum  over  time.  As  credit  markets  improve,  the  accommodative  stance  of 
monetary  policy  will  show  through  more  clearly.  And  a  rebound  in  confidence  about  the 
future  should  help  spur  demand.  As  demand  strengthens  and  financial  markets  improve, 
some of the adverse feedbacks should reverse and begin working to bolster activity. In time, 
as  these  forces  come  into  play,  economic  growth  will  pick  up,  ultimately  returning  the 
economy to its full productive capacity and bringing the unemployment rate down to a more 
normal level. 
Inflation prospects 
If,  as  I  have  described,  the  economic  recovery  initially  follows  a  relatively  gradual  track, 
margins of slack in labor and product markets are likely to remain wide for a time, implying 
some further downward pressure on inflation. The extent of a decline in inflation, however, 
should  be  limited  by  the  relative  stability  of  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  That  said, 
there are sizable risks on both sides of the inflation forecast. 
On  the  one  hand,  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  adverse  economic  conditions  will 
cause deeper cuts in prices, a greater softening in wages, and a steep decline in inflation 
expectations.  Substantial  declines  in  inflation  would  raise  real  interest  rates,  thereby 
restraining the recovery even more. Moreover, the risk that inflation could be lower will be 
exacerbated to the extent that economic activity falls short of the path that I have described. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  continue  to  look  for  ways  to  relieve 
financial pressures and encourage spending.  
On the other hand, the Federal Reserve's actions to ease credit conditions have resulted in a 
tremendous  increase  in  its  assets and  in  bank  reserves.  Some  observers  have  expressed 
concern  that  these  actions,  if  not  reversed  in  a  timely  manner,  are  sowing  the  seeds  of  a 
sharp pickup in inflation down the road. As I just noted, near-term prospects appear to be for 
a decline in inflation rather than an increase. But my colleagues and I are acutely aware of 
the risk of higher inflation as the economic recovery gains speed. We are firmly committed to 
acting  in  a  way  that  preserves  price  stability,  and  we  believe  we  have  the  tools  to  absorb 
reserves and raise interest rates when needed. Moreover, we are working with the Treasury 
to introduce legislation that would enlarge our tool kit for moving away from the extraordinary 
degree of financial stimulus we have put in place when the time arrives.  
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  uncertainty  around  the  economic  outlook  is  substantial.  The  path  of  the 
economy will depend critically on how quickly the current stresses in financial markets abate; 
these  events  have  few  if  any  precedents,  and  thus  it  is  very  difficult  to  predict  how  the 
adjustment process will play out. But at the end of the process, our financial system will be 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2009
on firmer footing. Both markets and regulators will continue to press financial firms to employ 
less  leverage  and  have  more  reliable  sources  of  liquidity,  and  those  firms  will  have  every 
incentive  to  more  effectively  price,  monitor,  and  manage  risk.  Improvements  to  the 
supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  will  help  create  a  more  stable  financial  system.  In 
addition,  we  will  have  a  stronger  economy.  Businesses  will  have  boosted  the  efficiency  of 
their operations. And households will be less indebted and saving more. That greater saving 
will,  all  else  being  equal,  support  greater  investment  or  allow  domestic  saving  to  displace 
foreign saving for a more sustainable international position. The U.S. economy has proven 
itself over the years to be flexible and resilient as well as innovative and productive, qualities 
that enable it to rebound from serious economic shocks, and I am confident that, in a like 
manner, we will rebound from our current economic and financial challenges. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 7
