Duvvuri Subbarao: Risk management in the midst of the global financial 
crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Financial 
Management Summit 2009 organized by the Economic Times, Mumbai, 22 May 2009. 
 Thank you for inviting me to be the keynote speaker at this Financial Management Summit. 
The global economy is passing through its deepest financial and economic crisis of our time. 
Protecting the Indian economy from the worst impact of the crisis has been a big challenge 
for the government and the Reserve Bank. Equally, I am conscious of the fact that industry, 
business and investors gathered here today have had to make very challenging adjustments 
in these difficult times. 
The Chinese have a saying, “may you live in interesting times.” I can hardly complain. These 
have  been  very  interesting  times  for  me,  perhaps  a  bit  too  interesting.  I  came  into  the 
Reserve Bank when runaway inflation around the world, and here in India, was the overriding 
concern. Less than a month later, this turned into the biggest global recession of our times 
with severe financial dislocation and concerns about deflation becoming the global chorus.  
Crisis management around the world 
During  this  period,  macroeconomic  management,  needless  to  say,  has  been  challenging. 
The financial crisis called into question several fundamental assumptions and beliefs about 
economic  resilience  and  financial  stability.  With  all  the  advanced  economies  in  a 
synchronised  recession,  global  GDP  is  projected  to  contract  for  the  first  time  since  the 
Second World War. We were lulled into believing that the rewards of the Great Moderation 
were with us for ever to enjoy until the Great Unravelling hit us and forced us into this Great 
Recession. 
Governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  have  responded  to  the  crisis  in  an 
unprecedented  show  of  policy  force.  The  shock  and  awe  of  fiscal  stimulus  and  monetary 
easing is still with us. Importantly, given the nature of the crisis, purely national responses 
have been supplemented by global efforts. The G-20 group of nations met twice in the last 
six  months.  At  their  April  2009  meeting,  the  G-20  leaders  collectively  committed  to  take 
decisive,  coordinated  and  comprehensive  actions  to  revive  growth,  restore  stability  of  the 
financial  system,  restart  the  impaired  credit  markets  and  rebuild  confidence  in  financial 
markets and institutions.  
The crisis has forced macroeconomic policy around the world into clearly uncharted territory. 
Governments  and  central  banks  took  largely  unprecedented  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
measures to prevent the global recession from turning into a protracted depression.  
Some analysts said this was an over reaction. Others criticized the tyranny of the short term 
compromising medium term sustainability. But received wisdom and mainstream view have 
been that it was clearly safer to err on doing too much rather than doing too little. Thus the 
policy response should be seen as an insurance against this risk. But there is no real way of 
judging whether we are overinsuring or underinsuring. If indeed the world has overinsured, 
then  there  is  a  risk  that  all  this  liquidity  has  the  potential  to  trigger  a  bout  of  undesirable 
inflation. Conversely, if we have underinsured, then this recession could turn deeper, nastier, 
and longer. And as we know from experience, there is no way to measure apriori whether we 
have  insured  right.  So  policymakers  all  over  the  world  are  perhaps  erring  on  the  side  of 
overinsuring  –  keeping  financial  markets  flush  with  liquidity,  providing  substantial  fiscal 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 1
support, using the breathing space provided by the policy support to restructure the financial 
system, and hoping that they can withdraw the liquidity and stimulus as the recovery firms up 
and before inflationary threats take root.  
Notwithstanding the relative calm in recent weeks, the global financial outlook continues to 
be uncertain. It is not clear that we have seen the end of the emergence of tainted assets, 
and doubts persist on whether the initiatives underway are sufficient to restore the stability of 
the  financial  system.  There  is  continued  debate  on  the  adequacy  of  the  fiscal  stimulus 
packages across countries, and their effectiveness in arresting the downturn, reversing job 
losses and reviving consumer confidence. Many major central banks have nearly or totally 
exhausted  their  conventional  weaponry  of  calibrating  policy  interest  rates  and  are  now 
resorting  to  unconventional  measures  such  as  quantitative  and  credit  easing.  Given  the 
erosion of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, there are concerns about when and 
to what extent monetary response, admittedly  aggressive, will begin to have an impact on 
reviving credit flows and spurring aggregate demand.  
India – crisis response and challenge 
At  home,  the  impact  of  the  crisis  has  been  deeper  than  anticipated  earlier  although  less 
severe than in other emerging market economies. The extent of impact has caused dismay, 
mainly on two grounds: first, because our financial sector remains healthy, has had no direct 
exposure to tainted assets and its off-balance sheet activities have been limited; and second, 
because India’s merchandise exports, at less than 15 per cent of GDP, are relatively modest. 
Despite these mitigating factors, the crisis hit India underscoring the rising two-way trade in 
goods and services and financial integration with the rest of the world. 
There  have  been  several  comforting  factors  going  into  the  slowdown.  First,  our  financial 
markets,  particularly  our  banks,  have  continued  to  function  normally.  Second,  India’s 
comfortable  foreign  exchange  reserves  provide  confidence  in  our  ability  to  manage  our 
balance  of  payments  notwithstanding  lower  export  demand  and  dampened  capital  flows. 
Third,  headline  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  wholesale  price  index  (WPI),  has  declined 
sharply. Consumer price inflation too has begun to moderate. Fourth, because of mandated 
agricultural lending and social safety-net programmes, rural demand continues to be robust. 
Both  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  responded  to  the  challenge  strongly,  and  in 
close  coordination  and  consultation.  The  Reserve  Bank  shifted  its  policy  stance  from 
monetary  tightening  in  response  to  the  elevated  inflationary  pressures  in  the  first  half  of 
2008-09 to monetary easing in response to easing inflationary pressures and moderation of 
growth  engendered  by  the  crisis.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  response  was  aimed  at 
containing  the  contagion  from  the  global  financial  crisis  while  maintaining  comfortable 
domestic  and  foreign  exchange  liquidity.  Taking  a  cue  from  the  Reserve  Bank’s  monetary 
easing, most banks have reduced their deposit and lending rates.  
The  Government  launched  three  fiscal  stimulus  packages  between  December  2008  and 
February 2009. These stimulus packages came on top of an already announced expanded 
safety-net programme for the rural poor, the farm loan waiver package and payout following 
the Sixth Pay Commission report, all of which too added to stimulating demand. 
As the monetary and fiscal stimuli work their way through, and if calm and confidence are 
restored  in  the  global  markets,  we  can  see  economic  turn  around  later  this  year.  After 
averaging nine per cent growth over the last four years, economic activity in India has slowed 
since  the  last  quarter  of  2008.  The  outcomes  in  recent  months  have  been  mixed.  While 
overall  industrial  production  fell  again  in  March,  cement  and  steel  production  have  shown 
some  preliminary  signs  of  upturn.  Segments  in  the  automobile  sector,  particularly  two  and 
three wheelers and passenger cars, are showing modest revival of demand. The industrial 
and business outlook is improving. These signs are not unambiguous — there is as yet no 
clear sign of export decline reversing the trend, and credit growth continues to be subdued. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2009
Taking the evolving global situation and the domestic conditions into account, in our Annual 
Policy Statement last month, we projected real GDP growth of 6.0 per cent for 2009/10. The 
balance of our assessment continues to support this growth projection. 
While the risks from the uncertainties in the global financial markets continue to persist, there 
are risks on the domestic front too. The challenge is how we manage the recovery. The fiscal 
and monetary response now on will have to weigh in the state of the economy going forward 
6-9 months. If the global recovery takes root and private investment demand revives faster, 
there  could  be  less  of  a  case  for  further  stimulus.  On  the  other  hand,  if  global  financial 
markets do not stabilize and global recovery does not take hold by the last quarter of 2009, 
we would realize with the benefit of hindsight, that the domestic policy response should have 
been stronger.  
So, where and how does the economic dilemma fit into the topic of risk management, which 
is the subject of this summit? It fits in because the context throws up questions about risk 
management  in  the  macroeconomy.  How  does  one  hedge  against  the  uncertainty  of 
outcomes of toady’s fiscal and monetary policy actions? How does one insure against such 
risks?  Clearly  there  are  no  easy  ways;  if  indeed  there  were,  we  would  not  be  having  this 
seminar. I will focus on three aspects: monetary policy, fiscal policy, and financial stability to 
define the contours of uncertainty.  
Looking ahead – monetary policy 
On the monetary policy front, managing the risk calls for maintaining ample liquidity in the 
system.  The  RBI  has  done  so  the  past  six  months  through  a  variety  of  instruments  and 
facilities. And in the April 2009 policy review, we extended the tenure many of these facilities. 
Some will argue, and rightly so, that this might be sowing the seeds of the next inflationary 
cycle. And this is exactly the kind of risk one has to grapple with. So while the Reserve Bank 
will  continue  to  support  liquidity  in  the  economy,  it  will  have  to  ensure  that  as  economic 
growth  gathers  momentum,  the  excess  liquidity  is  rolled  back  in  an  orderly  manner.  It  is 
important  to  note  though  that  even  as  the  monetary  easing  has  increased  liquidity 
considerably,  at  the  aggregate  level  this  has  not  been  out  of  line  with  our  monetary 
aggregates unlike in many advanced countries. As such, the challenge of unwinding will be 
less daunting for India than for other countries. 
The rise in macroeconomic uncertainty and the financial dislocation of last year have raised a 
related  problem.  The  adjustment  in  market  interest  rates  in  response  to  changes  in  policy 
rates  gets  reflected  with  some  lag.  In  India  monetary  transmission  has  had  a  differential 
impact across different segments of the financial market. While the transmission has been 
faster in the money and bond markets, it has been relatively muted in the credit market on 
account of several structural rigidities. However, the earlier acceleration in inflation coupled 
with  high  credit  demand  appears  to  have  added  to  these  rigidities  by  prompting  banks  to 
raise deposits at higher rates to ensure longer term access to liquidity. High deposit rates in 
turn have not allowed banks to cut lending rates at a faster pace consistent with the growth 
and  inflation  outlook.  Although  deposit  rates  are  declining  and  effective  lending  rates  are 
falling,  there  is  clearly  more  space  to  cut  rates  given  declining  inflation.  Making  liquidity 
available  in  sufficient  quantity,  as  RBI  has  done,  should  also  help  by  giving  confidence  to 
banks of the availability of funds.  
Looking ahead – fiscal policy 
The challenge for fiscal policy is to balance immediate support for the economy with the need 
to  get  back  on  track  on  the  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  process.  The  fiscal  stimulus 
packages and other measures have led to sharp increase in the revenue and fiscal deficits 
which,  in  the  face  of  slowing  private  investment,  have  cushioned  the  pace  of  economic 
activity.  
BIS Review 63/2009 
 3
The first order of economic business for the new government will be the full budget. Given 
the still soft economy, the pressure to provide more stimulus will persist. While this may help 
in the very near term, the sustainability of the recovery requires returning to responsible fiscal 
consolidation. The borrowing programme of the government has already expanded rapidly. 
The Reserve Bank has been able to manage the large borrowing programme in an orderly 
manner. Large borrowings by the government run against the low interest rate environment 
that the Reserve Bank is trying to maintain to spur investment demand in keeping with the 
stance of monetary policy.  
The  Reserve  Bank  will  continue  to  use  a  combination  of  monetary  and  debt  management 
tools to manage the government borrowing programme to ensure its successful completion 
in  a  smooth  manner.  During  the  first  half  of  2009-10,  planned  Open  Market  Operations 
(OMO)  purchases  and  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS)  unwinding  will  add  primary 
liquidity which will be equivalent, in terms of monetary impact, to reduction of CRR by three 
percentage  points.  This  should  leave  adequate  resources  with  banks  to  expand  credit. 
However,  with  every  percentage  point  increase  in  the  fiscal  deficit,  maintaining  adequate 
liquidity in the system becomes that much more difficult. Managing this trade off between our 
short term compulsions and longer term sustainability will be one of the big challenges going 
forward.  
Looking ahead – financial stability 
Beyond monetary and fiscal policies, preserving financial stability is key to navigating these 
uncertain  times.  A  sound  and  resilient  banking  sector,  well-functioning  financial  markets, 
robust  liquidity  management  and  payment  and  settlement  infrastructure  are  the  pre-
requisites for financial stability. The banking sector in India is sound, adequately capitalized 
and  well-regulated.  By  all  counts,  Indian  financial  markets  are  capable  of  withstanding  the 
global shock, perhaps somewhat bruised but definitely not battered.  
But  how  sure  can  we  be?  Here  we  have  some  encouraging  news.  Amidst  the  din  of  the 
financial  turmoil  and  the  all-consuming  fixation  on  rate  cuts  over  the  last  six  months,  a 
seminal report on the health of the Indian financial system has received less notice than it 
deserved.  
Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA) 
In March this year, the Government and RBI jointly released the report of the Committee on 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  (CFSA)  that  was  co-chaired  by  Deputy  Governor  Rakesh 
Mohan and Finance Secretary Ashok Chawla. The report is the culmination of work started in 
September 2006 to undertake a comprehensive self-assessment of India’s financial sector, 
particularly  focusing  on  stability  assessment  and  stress  testing  and  compliance  with  all 
financial standards and codes.  
The CFSA owes its origins to the Financial Sector Assessment Program, FSAP for short, that 
was initiated in 1999 and carried out jointly by the IMF and the World Bank after the Asian 
crisis.  Several  countries,  including  India,  participated  in  this  long  drawn  and  resource 
intensive exercise. This program so far has been conducted by the IMF and the World Bank 
using experts from around the world to carry out the assessment with participation from the 
host country.  
While India had earlier participated in the FSAP conducted by the IMF and World Bank, to 
the  best  of  my  knowledge,  we  are  first  country  to  make  a  self  assessment  of  its  financial 
sector in line with the FSAP. This is a remarkable achievement especially as the assessment 
conformed to the structure and procedure laid down by the IMF, the World Bank and several 
standard-setting bodies like the BIS, IOSCO and IAIS. As the previous Finance Secretary, I 
had watched the process first hand. By all accounts, this was a large and complex exercise. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2009
But  the  Government  and  the  RBI  remained  committed  to  a  rigorous,  transparent  and 
unbiased process.  
The  CFSA  followed  a  forward-looking  and  holistic  approach  to  self-assessment,  based  on 
three  mutually  reinforcing  pillars:  financial  stability  assessment  and  stress  testing;  legal, 
infrastructural  and  market  development  issues;  and  an  assessment  of  the  status  of 
implementation  of  international  financial  standards  and  codes.  The  first  pillar  is  essentially 
concerned  with  stability  assessment.  Taking  into  account  the  legal,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  architecture  in  India,  the  CFSA  felt  the  need  for  involving,  and  associating 
closely, all the major regulatory institutions in the financial sector – the RBI, SEBI and IRDA, 
besides the relevant government departments. Direct official involvement at different levels 
brought about enormous responsibility, ownership, and commitment to the process, ensuring 
constructive pragmatism when faced with contentious issues. 
Since  the  assessment  required  comprehensive  domain  knowledge  in  the  various  technical 
areas  examined,  the  CFSA  initially  constituted  Technical  Groups  comprising  officials  with 
first-hand  experience  in  handling  the  respective  areas  from  the  regulatory  agencies 
concerned  as  well  as  the  government  to  undertake  the  preliminary  assessment  and  to 
prepare technical notes and background material in the concerned areas. This ensured that 
officials  who  are  well-conversant  with  their  own  systems  and  are  aware  of  the  existing 
strengths and weaknesses could identify the best alternative solutions. 
To  ensure  an  impartial  assessment,  the  CFSA  constituted  four  external  independent 
Advisory  Panels,  comprising  non-official  experts  drawn  from  within  the  country.  These 
Panels  made  their  assessments  after  thorough  debate  and  rigorous  scrutiny  of  inputs 
provided by the Technical Groups. To further strengthen the credibility of this assessment, 
the Advisory Panels’ assessments were peer reviewed by eminent international experts. 
The  CFSA  then  drew  up  its  own  overview  report  at  the  final  stage,  drawing  upon  the 
assessments, findings and recommendations of the Advisory Panels and the comments of 
the peer reviewers. The assessments and recommendations comprise six volumes. All the 
six volumes are freely available on RBI’s website and I would strongly recommend that you 
read  them.  If  six  volumes  are  daunting,  then  read  at  least  the  first  two  volumes,  viz.,  the 
Executive Summary and the Overview Report. 
Overall, the CFSA found that our financial system is essentially sound and resilient, and that 
systemic stability is by and large robust. India is broadly compliant with most of the standards 
and codes though gaps were noted in the timely implementation of bankruptcy proceedings.  
Of  immediate  interest,  and  related  closely  to  the  current  macroeconomic  conditions,  the 
CFSA also carried out single-factor stress-tests for credit and market risks and liquidity ratio 
and scenario analyses. These tests show that there are no significant vulnerabilities in the 
banking  system.  This  does  not  mean  that  NPAs  will  not  rise  in  this  economic  slowdown. 
NPAs may indeed rise, as the Reserve Bank has pointed out. But given the strength of the 
banks’ balance sheets, that rise is not likely to pose any systemic risks, as it might in many 
advanced countries.  
Risk  assessment,  however,  is  a  continuous  process  and  the  stress  tests  need  to  be 
conducted  taking  into  account  the macroeconomic  linkages  as  also  the  second  round  and 
contagion risks. The Reserve Bank intends to formalize this process by setting up an inter-
disciplinary Financial Stability Unit to monitor and address systemic vulnerabilities.  
India outlook 
Le me now conclude. We are, as I said at the beginning, in uncharted policy territory. The 
crisis is forcing countries around the world to test the limits of their fiscal and monetary tools. 
This is true for macroeconomic policy, and I believe it is also true for business policy, which 
you  will  be  discussing  today.  Our  economy  remains  fundamentally  strong  despite  the 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 5
adverse impact of the global financial crisis. With the right mix of macroeconomic policy and 
corporate  strategy,  my  sense  is  that,  as  an  economy,  we  will  emerge  from  this  global 
recession stronger than before. 
Once  again  thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  share  my  views.  I  wish  your  deliberations  all 
success.  
6 
 BIS Review 63/2009
