Andrew G Haldane: Small lessons from a big crisis  
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  45th  Annual  Conference  “Reforming  Financial 
Regulation”, Chicago, 8 May 2009. 
I would like to thank Andrew Mason, Adrian Chiu, David Gregory and Nick Vause for comments and contributions. 
 Macro-prudential  policy  is  a  new  ideology  and  a  big  idea.  That  befits  what  is,  without 
question, a big crisis. There are a great many unanswered questions before this ideology can 
be put into practice. These questions will shape the intellectual and public policy debate over 
the next several decades, just as the Great Depression shaped the macroeconomic policy 
debate from the 1940s to the early 1970s.  
But  there  are  already  some  smaller  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  crisis  events.  That  is  the 
purpose  of  these  comments.  Seven  issues  arising  from  the  crisis  are  discussed  and  their 
implications for policymakers and practitioners assessed.  
If there is a unifying theme, it is informational failure. This has been a crisis borne of, and 
prolonged  by,  lack  of  information.  That  fog  of  uncertainty  remains  dense  18  months  on. 
Because  financial  markets  are,  first  and  foremost,  a  market  in  information,  these 
informational failures have generated prolonged paralysis in financial markets. Tackling them 
is priority number one. 
Lesson 1: Finance is no golden goose 
Imagine having placed a hedged bet back in 1900. A £100 long bet is placed on UK financial 
sector  equities  together  with  a  £100  short  bet  on  general  UK  equities.  In  effect,  this  is  a 
gamble  on  the  UK  financial  sector  outperforming  the  market.  How  would  that  bet  have 
performed over the intervening 110 or so years? 
Chart 1 provides the answer. For around the first 85 years, this gamble looks like a rather 
staid strategy. By 1985, it would have delivered a capital sum of £500, at a modest annual 
average return of around 2% per year. There were periods of both over-performance (1900-
1944) and under-performance (1971-1986) by the financial sector over this period. But, give 
or take, this was close to a break-even strategy.  
The following twenty year period, from 1986 to 2006, transformed that picture. By the end of 
2006,  the  once-staid  strategy  would  have  delivered  a  capital  sum  of  over  £10,000,  at  an 
annual  average  return  of  over  16%.  Banking  became  the  goose  laying  the  golden  eggs. 
There is no period in recent UK financial history which bears comparison. 
The  past  two  years  have  undone  most  of  those  gains.  The  cumulative  fall  in  UK  bank 
equities up to its low point in March is the largest on record at over 80%, outstripping the fall 
following first oil price shock in 1973/74 and the stock market crash of 1929. By the end of 
2008,  the  banking  gamble  would  have  delivered  a  capital  sum  of  £2,200,  at  an  annual 
average return over the 110 year period of less than 3%. Financials have reverted to being 
close to a break-even strategy. That is broadly what long-run growth theory would lead us to 
expect. 
So  what  lessons  should  we  take  from  this?  Many  practitioners  and  policymakers  were 
seduced  by  the  excess  returns  to  finance  during  that  twenty-year  golden  era.  Banks 
appeared to have discovered a money machine, albeit one whose workings were sometimes 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 1
impossible  to  understand.  One  of  the  South  Sea  stocks  was  memorably  “a  company  for 
carrying  out  an  undertaking  of  great  advantage,  but  nobody  to  know  what  it  is”.1  Banking 
became the 21st century equivalent.  
We should aspire to a financial system where there is greater market and regulatory scrutiny 
of future such money machines. In achieving this, there is a role for some body – a systemic 
overseer  –  which  is  able  to  detect  incipient  bubbles  and  fads  and,  as  importantly,  act  to 
correct them. This role is about removing the punchbowl from future financial sector parties. 
ROE = Return on Assets * Leverage  
Lesson 2: Unless the golden goose is geared 
At one level, the crisis tells us that banks may not be special after all, at least in terms of their 
long-run  profitability.  There  is,  however,  one  dimension  along  which  banks  are  a  different 
animal: leverage. To see this, consider a simple decomposition of return on equity (ROE) for 
a firm: 
(1)  
 
The first term is a measure of management skill in extracting profits from a pool of assets. 
The second is a measure of gambler’s luck in gearing up those assets. In effect, ROE is skill 
multiplied by luck. So which has been the dominant determinant of banks’ ROE, historically 
and recently? 
Chart 2 looks at the decomposition given by equation (1) for UK banks over the period since 
1920.  Movements  in  leverage  have  clearly  been  the  dominant  driver.  Since  2000,  rising 
leverage fully accounts for movements in UK banks’ ROE – both the rise to around 24% in 
2007 and the subsequent fall into negative territory in 2008. 
Chart 3 looks at the same decomposition across a panel of 70 global banks at the end of 
2007.  The  vertical  axis  measures  return  on  assets  and  the  horizontal  axis  leverage.  The 
curves are iso-ROE lines, drawn at 5%, 20% and 40%. The distribution of points lies along a 
downward-sloping curve. Two implications follow from this. 
First,  the  downward  slope  is  consistent  with  global  banks  targeting  a  ROE,  perhaps 
benchmarked by peers’ performance. The Bank’s market intelligence in the run-up to crisis 
suggested  that  such  “keeping  up  with  the  Jones’s”  was  an  important  cultural  influence  on 
banks’  decision-making.  Second,  Chart  3  suggests  that  banks  kept  up  in  this  competitive 
race by gearing-up. Banks unable to deliver sufficiently high returns on assets to meet their 
ROE targets resorted instead to leveraging their balance sheets.  
During the golden era, competition simultaneously drove down returns on assets and drove 
up  target  returns  on  equity.  Caught  in  this  cross-fire,  higher  leverage  became  banks’  only 
means of keeping up with the Jones’s. Management resorted to the roulette wheel. As firms 
collectively migrated South-east in Chart 3, leverage increased across the financial system 
as a whole. Having bet the bank on black, many financial firms ended up in the red.  
Two lessons for the future suggest themselves from this prognosis. First, when evaluating 
banks and their management, there is a need for greater focus on returns on assets rather 
than  on  equity.  Good  luck  and  good  management  need  to  be  better  distinguished.  Put 
differently, returns to investors and managers need to be more accurately risk-adjusted if the 
right balance between risk and return is to be struck for individual firms and for the financial 
system as a whole. 
Second, there is a need to place much stricter system-wide limits on leverage. These limits 
should  aim  to  prevent  the  South-Easterly  migration  by  banks  under  competitive  pressure. 
                                                 
1   Charles McKay (1841), “Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds”, London: 
Richard Bentley. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2009
That suggests these ratios will need to be state-dependent, rising as the temperature rises 
across  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Some  have  called  this  a  counter-cyclical  regime. 
Given its source, it might better be called a counter-cultural regime.  
Lesson 3: Size does matter 
The “80/20 rule” has its origin in the study of contagious diseases. For a number of diseases, 
20% of the population account for around 80% of the disease spread. The present financial 
epidemic  has  broadly  mirrored  those  dynamics.  The  failure  of  a  core  set  of  large, 
interconnected  institutions  –  Fannie  and  Freddie,  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman  Brothers,  AIG  – 
contributed disproportionately to the spread of financial panic. 
Epidemiology provides a second key lesson for financial policymakers – the importance of 
targeted vaccination of these “super-spreaders” of financial contagion. Historically, financial 
regulation  has  tended  not  to  heed  that  message.  As  Chart  4  demonstrates,  larger 
polygamous  financial  institutions  have  if  anything  run  with  lower  capital  buffers  than  their 
smaller monogamous partners. 
There  are  two  potential  explanations  for  this  seemingly  perverse  result.  First,  Basel  II 
conferred diversification benefits on larger firms. Second, even ahead of crisis there was a 
market  expectation  that  larger  firms  were  more  likely  to  receive  government  support.  As 
Chart 5 illustrates, those expectations have subsequently been validated by events, with the 
largest packages of official sector capital support having gone to the biggest global banks. 
Hastily  convened  marriages  between  institutions  during  the  crisis  have  increased  the  size 
and degree of concentration within the banking industry.  
So  regulation  may  have  contributed  to  perverse  risk-taking  incentives  among  large, 
interconnected firms. And subsequent interventions may have worsened those incentives. In 
response, the authorities in a number of countries have recently announced their intention to 
tackle  this  incentive  problem,  by  better  aligning  regulatory  taxes  with  firms’  systemic 
importance.  No  country  has  as  yet  turned  that  statement  of  intent  into  an  operational 
framework for systemic regulation. Doing so will require an understanding of the network of 
connections between firms, which at present is lacking.  
Lesson 4: Banks cannot “pass” a stress test 
Over the past six months, stress-tests have moved from the back-offices of risk managers to 
the front offices of the world’s media. Assessments of the balance sheet consequences of tail 
macroeconomic  risks  are  now  in  the  bloodstream  of  financial  policymakers.  They  also 
appear, belatedly, to be entering the bloodstream of financial firms. That is real progress. 
But as with all technical progress, there is some danger of an overshoot. While the inputs to, 
and  outputs  from,  stress-testing  are  statistical,  the  inferences  reached  from  them  are 
necessarily subjective. Stress-tests are probabilistic and state-dependent judgements. Two 
of the key judgements are, first, what prescribed stress scenarios are appropriate inputs; and 
second, what thresholds for satisfying these stress-tests are set. Both are fiendishly difficult. 
On  the  first,  a  stress  scenario  is  just  one  point  in  a  probability  distribution.  Which  point  to 
choose – indeed, which distribution to choose – is a matter of judgement. Consider the two 
distributions for UK GDP growth shown in Chart 6, one taken from the ten years to 2007, the 
other across a longer 150-year sample.2 The standard deviations of these two distributions 
differ by a factor of 4.5. For a financial firm that is 30-times leveraged, that can easily be the 
                                                 
2   See Haldane (2009a), “Why Banks Failed the Stress Test”. See 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech374.pdf 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 3
difference between landing in the red rather than the black. In that sense, stress tests are not 
something  it  is  possible  definitively  to  “pass”  –  though  experience  suggests  they  are 
somewhat easier to “fail”. 
On thresholds, determining the optimal level of capital for a bank is an area which has been 
chronically,  and  perhaps  surprisingly,  under-researched.  Policymakers  have  repeatedly 
ducked this question. Aggregate amounts of capital in the financial system have been fixed 
at the same levels which prevailed at the time of the first Basel Accord. And academics have, 
to my knowledge, no definitive quantitative answer to the optimal capital question.  
Longer runs of data, while interesting, are far from definitive. Over the past 150 years, capital 
ratios among US commercial banks have fallen roughly by a factor of ten (Chart 7). Is the 
optimal capital ratio to be found from experience in the 1990s – roughly, 5%? Or from the 
interwar years – roughly 10%? Or from the latter half of the 19th century – between 20% and 
40%?  
Answering those questions will mean reassessing the validity of the Modigliani/Miller (MM) 
theorem in today’s capital markets.3 MM states that firms’ debt/equity ratios are essentially 
irrelevant to their total cost of capital. Why? Because a rise in leverage generates offsetting 
movements  in  the  cost  and  risk  of  banks’  capital,  in  a  frictionless  world  leaving  the  risk-
adjusted cost of capital unchanged.  
By revealed preference, owners and managers of banks have rejected the MM hypothesis. 
They seem to perceive that raising equity is, in some sense, costly. Perhaps they are right. 
But, equally, it is possible that these perceptions are distorted – for example, because the 
cost  of  equity  is  mistaken  for  the  total  cost  of  banks’  capital,  or  because  managerial  and 
shareholder  incentives  are  linked  to  equity  rather  than  asset  returns,  as  outlined  earlier. 
Either way, the MM hypothesis needs to be objectively reassessed in a banking context. And 
until then, stress tests need to be administered with a healthy dose of realism.  
Lesson 5: The plumbing worked 
With so much having gone wrong during this crisis, it is easy to overlook what has gone right. 
Well-functioning payment and settlement systems – the plumbing of the financial system – 
are  one  such  unheralded  success.  To  my  knowledge,  there  are  no  examples  of  these 
systems  collapsing  under  the  strain  of  the  financial  crisis.  This  is  no  small  achievement. 
Pressures  on  participants  within  payment  systems  have  been  acute.  And  volumes  flowing 
through these systems have picked up sharply during periods of volatility in asset prices – for 
example, in the foreign exchange settlement system CLS (Chart 8). 
The robustness of these systems is no fluke. It is testimony to the efforts made over the past 
twenty of so years, initially by central banks, to proof these systems against systemic risk. 
These  developments  included  the  introduction  of  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  in 
payment  systems,  delivery-versus-payment  (DvP)  in  securities  settlement  systems  and 
payment-versus-payment  (PvP)  in  foreign  currency  settlement  systems.  These  innovations 
effectively removed principal counterparty risk from the transactions equation. 
This infrastructural revolution largely went unnoticed at the time and risks going unnoticed 
now. Its effects can be seen by counter-factually asking what might have happened during 
the  present  crisis  without  it.  With  counterparty  risk  preserved,  banks  would  have  delayed 
payments  or  transactions  for  fear  of  extending  uncollateralized  credit  to  institutions  of 
unknown  credit  quality.  Payment  systems  may  have  suffered  the  same  seizures  felt  by 
                                                 
3   Miller, M and Modigliani, F (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of Investment”, 
American Economic Review 48 (3). 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2009
money  markets  during  the  crisis.  There  would  have  been  an  irreparable  blockage  in  the 
plumbing. 
In the event, activity in most financial markets has remained strong, allowing risk to be traded 
and  relocated.  Robust  payments  infrastructure  played  a  key,  if  largely  silent,  role  in  this 
positive  outcome.  Though  neither  visible  nor  audible,  this  underscores  the  importance  of 
systemic  oversight,  and  redesign,  of  payment  and  settlement  infrastructures  by  central 
banks. 
Lesson 6: But some plumbing was missing 
The infrastructure of financial markets extends well beyond payment and settlement systems 
–  for  example,  into  the  area  of  trading  and  clearing  systems.  Here,  crisis  events  suggest 
scope  for  improvement.  A  number  of  markets  have  seized  during  the  past  18  months, 
including  at  various  times  the  foreign  exchange  swap  market,  the  corporate  bond  market, 
structured  credit  markets,  various  derivative  markets  such  as  CDS  and,  perhaps  most 
strikingly, the money market.  
These are all Over-the-Counter (OTC) markets. As such, they do not typically benefit from 
clearing through a Central Counterparty (CCP). CCPs effectively eliminate counterparty risk 
between trading participants. This crisis has been, first and foremost, a crisis of counterparty 
risk. So it is perhaps unsurprising that some OTC markets without a CCP have been hardest 
hit. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  US  authorities  have  recently  proposed  the  extension  of  central 
clearing  to  all  standardised  OTC  derivative  instruments.4  This  is  a  bold  measure  and  one 
which  deserves  international  support.  In  time,  it  might  usefully  be  extended  beyond  OTC 
derivatives  to  some  cash  OTC  instruments,  such  as  corporate  bonds.  The  benefits  of  this 
shift are essentially threefold. 
First, central clearing encourages standardisation and simplification of the contractual terms 
of financial instruments. Instrument complexity has been a key fault-line exposed during the 
crisis, especially among bespoke structured credit products. Ahead of crisis, standardisation 
was seen as a pre-requisite for central clearing. CCPs should be better seen as a catalyst for 
such standardisation. In future, infrastructure design might usefully shape market convention, 
rather than vice-versa. 
Second, because a CCP represents a potential single point of failure, it needs to be bullet-
proof. Standards of resilience should be comparable with other public utilities, such as water, 
gas and electricity. That has implications both for CCP risk management standards and for 
governance arrangements. Both need importantly to weigh the public good of systemic risk 
containment.  
Third,  a  CCP  condenses  the  dense  network  of  interconnections  between  firms  into  a 
sequence  of  simple  bilateral  relationships  with  the  CCP.  The  cats-cradle  becomes  a  hub-
and-spokes.  This  can  have  important  benefits  in  reducing  uncertainty  among  market 
participants, which might otherwise impair the functioning of markets. 
As  an  illustration,  Charts  9  and  10  consider  the  pricing  of  CDS  contracts.5  Pre-crisis,  with 
counterparty  risk  low,  the  numbers  of  counterparties  in  the  network  chain  is  essentially 
irrelevant for CDS pricing (Chart 9). That picture changes dramatically once counterparty risk 
                                                 
4   See http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/tg129.htm. 
5  Further  analysis 
in  Haldane 
is  given 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf  
(2009b), 
“Rethinking 
the  Financial  Network”.  See 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 5
rises (Chart 10). Indeterminacies in CDS prices – and thus market impairments – then arise. 
These are larger, the greater the length of the network chain.  
A  CCP  effectively  cuts  through  this  uncertainty  problem.  By  interposing  itself  in  each 
transaction, it condenses the network chain to a single link. Counterparty uncertainty is all 
but eliminated – and with it indeterminacies in prices and the potential for financial market 
impairment. 
Taken  together,  these  benefits  present  a  compelling  case  for  reform  of  the  post-trade 
infrastructure of a number of OTC markets. Delivering that reform may call for a rather more 
interventionist  stance  by  the  authorities  than  has  been  the  case  in  the  recent  past.  Past 
revolutions  in  the  payment  and  settlement  infrastructure  may  provide  a  road-map  for 
delivering that reform and for understanding its benefits. 
Lesson 7: Banks’ profits were the problem – but are now the solution 
The  shock  to  global  banks’  profitability  from  the  crisis  has  been  sharp  and  severe  (Charts 
11). Judging by the response of banks’ equity prices, it may also be prolonged. Despite the 
recent recovery, the market capitalisation of global banks has fallen by $3 trillion since the 
crisis began. In part, this is a reflection of banks’ business models having been reassessed. 
But it also reflects fears of future intervention to curtail banks’ risk-taking and profit-seeking.  
As  unfashionable  as  it may  sound,  it  is  important  that  banks’  profitability  picks  up,  sharply 
and durably, in the period ahead. From a systemic perspective, this is in the interests of both 
the financial system and the real economy.  
In the short term, lending by banks is a necessary condition for recovery in the real economy. 
And  a  recovery  in  lending  is  best  achieved  if  banks  believe  new  loans  will  be  profitable. 
Some of the pre-conditions for profitable lending are already in place. For example, margins 
on  new  lending  have  widened  fairly  sharply,  as  new  lending  terms  have  been  re-priced 
(Chart 12). In other industries, this would serve as the price signal inducing existing banks to 
begin lending and for new banks to enter the lending market seeking market share.  
Over the medium-term, global banks have a hefty repayment schedule to governments and 
central  banks.  Encouragingly,  the  flow  of  repayment  has  already  commenced  for  some 
banks.  But repayments  still  total  several  trillion  dollars  and  are  spread  over  several  years. 
Banks’  future  profit  streams  are  a  key  means  of  securing  these  repayments  and  thereby 
restoring banks to normality. Bank profitability may well have been the route into the present 
crisis. But it may also be a route out. 
 
6 
 BIS Review 85/2009
 4000
8000 
6000 
10000
12000 
Chart 1: Cumulative excess returns to finance 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 2: Contributions to year-on-year UK financial equity returns 
 
1900    1920    1940    1960    1980  2000 
Sources: Global Financial Data and Bank calculations. 
-2000 
2000
0 
Return on Assets
Leverage
Percentage points
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
Sources: Global Financial data, MFSD and FRD.
(a)  Using year-on-year observed return on equity and observed unweighted 
leverage ratio to infer year-on-year returns.
(b)  Green lines show period average effect of leverage on year-on-year return 
on equity for 1920-1945, 1945-71, 1971-86 and 1986-2007.
  BIS Review 85/2009 
 7
Chart 3: Return on assets and leverage for global banks, end-2007 
 
Pre tax profit/Total assets
4.0%
3.5%
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
-0.5%
-1.0%
0
10
20
30
40
50
6
0
Source: Bankscope
Total assets/Tier 1 capital
  
 
 
Chart 4: Tier 1 Leverage ratio and Total assets for global banks, end-2007 
 
Tier 1 Ratio (%) 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
0.0 
0.3 
0.6 
0.9 
1.2 
1.5
1.8
Total Assets (£trillion)
 
Source: Bankscope 
 8 
  BIS Review 85/2009
Chart 5: Capital injections and balance sheet size, end-2007 
 
Capital injections ($ billions)
60
50
40
30
20
10
  0.5
1.0
1.5
Source: Bank of England
2.0
Total assets ($ trillions)
2.5
3.0
 
 
 
Chart 6: Probability Densities of UK GDP Growth 
 
Density
1857-2007
1998-2007
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Annual GDP Growth (%)
Sources: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations.
 BIS Review 85/2009 
   9
Chart 7: Long-run capital levels for US commercial banks, 1840-1993 
 
 
 
Chart 8: Daily volumes and values settled in CLS 
 
  10 
 BIS Review 85/2009
Chart 9: CDS premia and network uncertainty – pre-crisis 
 
 
 
Chart 10: CDS premia and network uncertainty – in-crisis 
 
  BIS Review 85/2009 
 11
Chart 11: LCFI return on common equity 
 
Per cent
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
US securities houses
US commercial banks
European LCFIs
UK LCFIs
Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3
2003
04
05
06
07
Sources:  Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a)  Data for European LCFIs and UK LCFIs are half-yearly.
08
  
 
 
Chart 12: Spreads on new mortgage lending by the major UK banks 
 
Maximum-minimum range
Interquartile range
Median
Per cent
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
 Jan
Apr
Jul
Oct
Jan
2007
Source:  Bank of England.
Apr
08
Jul
Oct
Jan
09
  12 
 BIS Review 85/2009
