Martín Redrado: Presentation of the 2009 Monetary Program 
Speech  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  before  the 
Committee  on  Treasury  and  Budget  of  the  National  Senate,  Buenos  Aires,  30  December 
2008. 
 Introduction 
1. 
One  year  ago,  when  I  last  addressed  the  Honorable  National  Senate  to  present  the  2008 
monetary  program,  I  already  emphasized  with  concern  the  hostile  international  financial 
scenario  we  had  to  face.  On  that  occasion,  I  highlighted  the  uncertainty  imposed  by  this 
scenario  on  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  I  underlined  the  advantages  of  our  risk 
management  approach  based  on  three  pillars:  the  money  market  equilibrium,  a  managed 
float, and countercyclical policies that includes a proper regulation and financial surveillance. 
I also mentioned that, from the Central   Bank,  we  successfully  weathered  the  first  turmoil 
since the end of the 2001 crisis. Twelve months later, we have lived through three complex 
situations,  which  proves  us  right  in  the  actions  we  have  taken.  The  first  one  was  the 
beginning  of  the  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  in  the  United  States  (July-October  2007).  The 
second  episode  was  the  abrupt  imbalance  in  the  demand  for  money  after  the  rural  sector 
conflict  (April-June  2008);  and  the  third  relates  to  the  worsening  international  crisis  (mid-
September 2008 onwards). 
The performance of monetary-financial variables and the limited impact of these episodes on 
the  real  economy  prove  the  soundness  of  our  policies.  Throughout  recent  years  we  have 
patiently and persistently built the right instruments to mitigate various shocks. Under a risk 
management  approach  where  a  central  scenario  is  defined  for  the  main  variables,  our 
strategy furnishes us with the right tools to face any deviation. We have mechanisms in place 
to provide or absorb funds as needed while preserving money market equilibrium. We have a 
sound, well-regulated financial system that is in a position to “cushion” any turmoil. All of this 
in  a  framework  of  abundant  liquidity  in  foreign  currency  and  a  managed  float  with  mildly 
fluctuating  financial  variables  to  reflect  the  natural  convergence  between  the  yields  of 
Argentine  peso-  and  US  dollar-denominated  instruments.  This  regime  –  which  provides 
predictability and flexibility at the same time – is undoubtedly the best suited for the current 
economic  stage.  Moreover,  this  regime  takes  into  account  both  our  long  history  of 
macroeconomic  volatility  (and  de  facto  dollarization  of  the  peoples  financial  behavior)  and 
consistency with the macroeconomic program as a whole. 
In  this  presentation,  I  will  firstly  highlight  Central  Bank  actions  to  manage  the  different 
volatility episodes during 2008, including the evolution of monetary aggregates vis-à-vis the 
program  for  this  period.  Secondly,  I  will  explain  the  rationale  behind  the  different  pillars 
underpinning our strategy, especially the managed float. Finally, in the light of my forecasts 
regarding the national and international economic scenario, I will state the monetary targets 
and guidelines set forth by the Central Bank Board of Directors for 2009. 
2008: another challenge for the monetary regime 
2.  
In my view, any recipe to overcome a crisis or financial turmoil should have three essential 
things. 
First: to have a definite reaction. Action should be forceful in order to curb expectations and 
rebuild confidence – it should reflect that authorities are persuaded that the path to follow is 
the correct one.  
BIS Review 1/2009 
 1
to 
related 
to  overcome  complexities 
Second:  simplicity.  The  instruments  used  should  be  transparent  and  clear  in  order  to  be 
more effective. Action can be technically flawless but, if agents have trouble interpreting it, it 
can cause uncertainty and become ineffective. 
Third:  delivery  capacity.  Effectiveness 
the 
implementation  of  any  action  is  an  important  condition  allowing,  at  the  same  time,  to  gain 
credibility. 
This is, in short, the Central Banks view in action. In order to face these crisis episodes, we 
have sequentially adopted a series of measures. In the first place, we reacted in a definite 
way,  acting  firmly  in  an  attempt  to  normalize  the  money  demand  and  stabilize  the  foreign 
exchange market. Then, with simple instruments, we ensured liquidity provision to guarantee 
systemic stability. Finally, in order to make it more “down-to-earth,” we implemented an array 
of measures including reforms on the markets for Central Bank securities, the development 
of  additional  mechanisms  for  liquidity  provision,  changes  to  enhance  futures  market  depth 
and transparency, and instruments to facilitate US dollar supply.  
During the three critical episodes, we noticed a marked mismatch in the demand for money 
that  activated  the  warning  signals  on  our  instrument  panel.  Private  sector  time  deposits 
showed a temporary decline, just as during previous financial crises. The same happened 
with  the  size  of  the  capital  account  reversal.  Having  adequately  assessed  the  costs  and 
benefits of each instrument beforehand, we focused all our efforts on restoring money market 
equilibrium. A quick and “surgical” reaction allowed us, in the first place, to strengthen the 
demand for pesos and facilitate foreign currency supply. In this respect, and in order to put 
the  complexity  of  this  task  into  perspective,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  the  demand  for 
money  is  decided  by  the  public  and  that  our  capacity  to  influence  that  decision  is  mostly 
indirect and limited.  
In fact, through transactions in the spot and futures markets, the potential pass-through of 
depreciation trends to domestic prices has been avoided. At the same time, these actions 
had a positive impact on the recovery of the demand for domestic assets and assurance of 
systemic stability. Once the foreign exchange market was relatively calm, we undertook to 
improve domestic currency liquidity so as to ensure financial stability and a smooth chain of 
payments.  The  sterilization  policy  that  we  developed  in  recent  years  facilitated  our  job, 
furnishing  us  with  the  necessary  tools  to  efficiently  provide  funds  this  time.  Central  Bank 
actions  included  the  repurchase  of  LEBACs  and  NOBACs  in  the  secondary  market  and  a 
partial renewal of those maturing. Thus, the liquidity reserve feature of these securities was 
confirmed: issued in the face of excessive liquidity and redeemed when market conditions so 
require. In fact, the Central Bank securities stock went from almost ARS 51.5 billion in late 
2007  to  approximately  ARS  36.7  billion  at  present.  This  change  in  the  composition  of 
liabilities is perhaps less visible than the trend of reserves, but is a part of our scheme as 
well. 
In turn, we also intervened by purchasing Government securities in pesos or US dollars in 
the  secondary  market,  aiming  to  provide  liquidity  beyond  the  financial  system.  This  is 
something that most central banks in the world do as part of their open market operations. 
More precisely, we took eighteen steps to adapt our scheme to the new scenario:  
• 
• 
The repo market was reformed, offering liquidity at a fixed and floating interest rate; 
The  maturing  Central  Bank  bills  and  notes  (LEBACs  and  NOBACs)  were  partially 
renewed, and there was repurchase in the secondary market; 
We resorted to open market operations by purchasing Government securities that 
can  be  liquidated  in  Argentine  pesos  so  as  to  inject  liquidity  and  preserve  money 
market equilibrium; 
Minimum cash requirements were unified for June and July into a single bi-monthly 
term, thus improving the system liquidity management; 
BIS Review 1/2009
  2 
            A mechanism for US dollar-denominated repos was established, aimed to curb peso 
depreciation expectations; 
The Central Bank started trading in the non-deliverable forward (NDF) market, with 
one-year-maximum  operations  and  counterparties  whose  credit  rating  was  AA  or 
above; 
A new repo window was opened that allows for certain instruments to be used as 
collateral (Bogar and guaranteed loans) that cannot be used in traditional repos; 
The limits to operate in the futures market were extended, both for the Central Bank 
and those agents associated with some of its counterparties. It is worth mentioning 
that our institution only trades with contracts that are cleared in domestic currency; 
The  reference  exchange  rate  for  futures  and  forward  transactions  between  the 
Central Bank and its counterparties was allowed to be set by the Emerging Market 
Traders Association; 
New  maturity  options  were  offered  for  reverse  repos,  readjusting  the  terms  and 
conditions; 
The  liquidity  provision  scheme  was  extended,  allowing  banks  that  hold  (6-month-
maximum) LEBACs and NOBACs to have instant liquidity; 
Repo yields were adjusted twice; 
A  mechanism  has  been  established  for  auctioning  options  on  LEBACs  and 
NOBACs, allowing institutions to on-sell these securities to the Central Bank before 
maturity at a pre-established discount (a spread over BADLAR rate); 
Minimum cash requirements were lowered for foreign currency deposits in order to 
increase the availability of funds to finance foreign trade; 
Financial  institutions’  minimum  cash  requirement  was  unified  for  October  and 
November into a single bi-monthly term; 
A new window was established to rate collaterals for the financial assistance regime;  
In  order  to  meet  reserve  requirements,  institutions  were  temporarily  allowed  to 
include their total cash holdings in the calculation, even items in transit (in the past, 
they were only allowed to include two thirds); 
The fixed-rate repo line was raised from ARS 3 to 10 billion. 
• 
These measures stressed the “buffer” role played by the Central Bank to limit the effects of 
turmoil on the real economy. Also, adequate risk-management mechanisms and the proper 
use of policy tools allowed us to discourage speculative attacks. Thus, even though we are 
going through one of the worst crises in the history of the global financial system, the set of 
policies  implemented  resulted  in  a  satisfactory  trend  of  the  main  monetary  and  financial 
variables. 
The  means  of  payment  (M2)  for  November  reached  a  monthly  average  balance  of  ARS 
159.470  million,  growing  by  14.1  percent  y.o.y.  This  trend  shows  that  we  are  about  to 
accomplish  with  the  ones  for  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  thus  complying  for  22  consecutive 
quarters  with  our  monetary  aggregate  targets.  In  December,  total  means  of  payment  are 
likely to be between the midpoint and floor of the target set. 
In turn, by year-end, private sector means of payment will fluctuate around 9 percent. This 
figure is below the lower limit of the 2008 monetary program target due to a steeper-than-
anticipated decline in the demand for money. This came about because, when the range was 
established, the strength and magnitude of the adverse shocks that affected the demand for 
money  throughout  the  year  were  unforeseeable.  Particularly  important  was  the  uncertainty 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 3
caused  by  a  markedly  deteriorated  international  scenario,  which  led  to  a  change  in  the 
composition  of  the  citizens’  investment  portfolio.  The  outflow  of  funds,  with  capital  taking 
shelter exclusively in US Treasury bonds, had a strong impact on emerging economies as a 
whole. Latin America was no exception. In perspective, the portfolio investment capital flow 
in Brazil, for instance, decreased by 75 percent against the previous year. In September and 
October alone, Brazil showed an investment capital outflow of almost USD 10 billion. Against 
this backdrop, virtually all central banks in the region had to actively intervene in the foreign 
exchange market to reduce pressure on their exchange rates and prevent a feedback loop 
from the plummeting on the domestic demand for money. Thus, the two largest economies in 
the  region  have  sold  around  USD  30  billion  in  the  spot  market.  Meanwhile,  medium-sized 
economies, such as Peru, have sold almost USD 6 billion in order to stabilize their money 
markets  as  from  October.  Moreover,  most  central  banks  in  the  region  have  supplemented 
this generalized direct intervention with strong operations in derivatives markets, especially in 
the form of swaps. This explains why the private sector demand for money was below our 
calculations. 
Given this new scenario, which I will thoroughly address in a few moments, one can see that 
any action towards forcing the trend of this monetary aggregate to comply with expectations 
but  under  very  different  international  conditions  would  have  been  more  detrimental  than 
beneficial  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Finally,  the  wider  aggregate  in  pesos  (means  of 
payment  plus  time  deposits,  or  M3)  is  expected  to  reach  an  annual  growth  rate  of  14.7 
percent by year-end. 
In  spite  of  persistent  volatility  in  international  markets,  domestic  demand  for  money  has 
recovered as from the second half of November. In fact, M2 grew by 1.4 percent throughout 
November, whereas M3 increased by 0.9 percent. 
Bank  funding  to  enterprises  and  households  continues  to  grow,  although  at  a  lower  pace, 
against  a  background  of  limited  credit  risk.  Loans  to  the  private  sector  in  pesos  were 
expected  to  grow  by  about  25  percent  in  2008,  and  account  for  12  percent  of  GDP, 
anticipating a considerable potential for growth in years to come. Consumer loans and credit 
card financing show annual growth rates of around 35 percent, which places them among the 
most dynamic lines. Funding to businesses is still increasing in all productive sectors. Loans 
to trade, industry and services sectors grew above average, with a higher share in overall 
funding.  Policies  implemented  by  the  Central  Bank  to  favor  lending,  combined  with  a 
favorable  macroeconomic  framework,  have  taken  household  and  corporate  financing  to 
around 40 percent of total assets in 2008, almost 4 percentage points higher in y.o.y. terms. 
This  took  place  against  a  backdrop  of  a  historically  low  nonperforming  loan  portfolio  (2.8 
percent of loans to the private sector). Nonperforming loans fell more than half a percentage 
point during the past 12 months due to corporate sector financing. 
The  counterpart  of  the  increase  in  funding  to  the  private  sector  has  been  the  trend  of  the 
system exposure to the public sector, which dropped by 3.3 percentage points of assets in 
2008. It has already accumulated a 27.5 percentage point drop since late 2004, and is now 
14 percent below total assets. These figures – which represent a third of total loans to the 
private  sector  –  are  in  line  with  those  for  other  countries  in  the  region.  Setting  a  general 
ceiling of 35 percent of assets and a maximum limit based on financial institutions’ capital 
and  for  different  jurisdiction,  and  unbiasing  minimum  capital  requirements,  among  other 
actions,  allowed  us  to  reverse  the  crowding-out  of  loans  to  businesses  and  households. 
Furthermore,  if  we  take  both  deposits  and  loans  into  account,  the  Government  has  now 
become a net creditor of the banking system.  
One  of  the  main  structural  reforms  of  recent  years  has  been  the  establishment  of  a 
regulatory  framework  preventing  currency  mismatches  (with  peso-denominated  assets  and 
liabilities and a lender of last resort that lends in pesos as well) and maintaining prudence 
when 
innovations.  Only  12  percent  of  deposits  are  currently 
denominated in foreign currency, and funding is limited to those who can prove repayment 
introducing 
financial 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2009
capability in the same currency. Our system is not funded with foreign resources (these only 
amount to 4 percent of liabilities): peso-denominated deposits are the main source of funds 
for local banks in times when the international financial conditions prevent them from getting 
resources through the capital markets. After growing at a 22 percent annual rate in the past 
four years, private sector placements have come to account for 49 percent of the system’s 
funding.  
In turn, rediscounts granted due to illiquidity during the 2001 crisis have virtually disappeared 
from  the  banks’  balance  sheets  (and  they  represent  only  0.3  percent  of  financial  system 
liabilities). There remains only one institution, out of the 24 that had borrowed under these 
conditions,  that  is  repaying  its  liabilities.  The  accumulated  amortization  of  court-ordered 
payments to depositors derived from asymmetric pesification amounts to around 93 percent 
of such orders, the outstanding balance representing 0.2 percent of total assets.  
Even in a markedly deteriorated global economic and financial framework, our system enjoys 
high  liquidity  and  solvency,  mainly  because  of  prudential  regulations.  Cash  equivalents 
represent around 40 percent of total deposits. During 2008, banks’ liquid assets (including 
the LEBAC and NOBAC position) have increased over one percentage point of total assets.  
As opposed to the trend in the developed world, institutions have virtually doubled their net 
worth  in  the  past  five  years.  As  a  result  of  Central  Bank  action,  short-term  fluctuations  in 
asset prices did not impact on financial intermediation, and turbulences only affected banks’ 
balance sheets moderately. Thus, we are about to achieve four consecutive years of positive 
systemic  profitability.  Profits  from  banking  activity,  together  with  new  capital  injections  by 
financial institutions, boosted a readjustment of solvency.  
Finally, the system is backed by a strong Central Bank in terms of its capital. Current reserve 
levels are historically high and cover over 65 percent of private M3 (vis-à-vis less than 40 
percent before the 2001 crisis). These levels are also 10 percentage points higher than they 
were  by  the  end  of  2004.  The  same  happens  if  we  consider  the  coverage  ratio  against 
Central  Bank  liabilities.  This  strength  facilitates  the  conditions  to  stabilize  the  demand  for 
money, one of the monetary policy priorities during the past few months, in order to minimize 
the impact of shocks on domestic savings and credit. 
The pillars of the monetary regime 
3.  
The  actions  I  have  described  so  far  are  not  about  a  change  of  policy  –  they  are  about 
applying the strategy of the past few years under a different scenario. This is a monetary-
financial regime that factors in the idiosyncrasy of the Argentine citizen who, in the past two 
decades,  has  faced  hyperinflation  and  seizing  of  deposits  twice,  among  other  crises. 
Therefore, we have chosen a policy approach that consists in the early adoption of prudential 
and  countercyclical  measures  to  reduce  the  vulnerability  of  the  economy  in  the  face  of  a 
changing scenario.  
The  risk  management  approach  to  monetary  policy  seeks  to  prevent  disruptions  in  the 
money  and  financial  market  from  spreading  to  the  rest  of  the  economy  and  affecting 
macroeconomic  sustainability.  Under  this  scheme,  we  take  into  account  scenarios  that 
traditionally involve high likelihood of having adverse effects. This entails the development of 
action guidelines in case such scenarios come true. At the same time, it entails preventive 
action  to  reduce  their  likelihood  or  minimize  their  potential  impact  on  the  economy.  In  our 
country, the strategy jells due to the consistency and validity of its three main pillars: (1) a 
robust  monetary  policy  that  ensures  the  equilibrium  between  supply  and  demand  in  the 
money  market;  (2)  a  countercyclical  scheme  to  mitigate  vulnerabilities  and  reduce 
macroeconomic volatility; and (3) a managed float.  
The  trend  evidenced  by  the  means  of  payment  in  2008  reflects  our  prudence.  And  so  do 
financial  regulations,  which  aim  to  prevent  the  growth  of  credit  from  being  hampered  and 
jeopardizing the sustainability of the system. This balanced trend of the means of payment 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 5
was observed against a framework of multicausal inflation that requires coordinated action by 
the economic policy and its different areas – fiscal policy, wages policy, income policy and 
monetary policy. In a context of international commodity prices falling, performance in 2008 
confirms the effects of this joint action. Bearing in mind the stage that Argentine economy 
currently undergoes and the instruments available, overemphasizing only one policy would 
be a proof of short-sightedness. Especially in a phase where we are still lacking many tools 
that  are  typical  in  more  developed  economies.  For  instance,  monetary  policy  transmission 
channels are only just being rebuilt, since credit to the private sector accounts for only 12 
percent  of  the  economy,  still  far  below  the  Latin  American  average.  There  are  many 
examples in Argentine history of monetary regimes unsuccessfully shifting from one extreme 
to  the  other  given  it  inconsistencies.  The  relatively  stable  periods  were  short  due  to 
contradictions in the programs that should have ensured macroeconomic solvency. Suffice it 
to  recall  the  end  of  price  stability  in  the  1990s,  after  a  sharp  appreciation  of  the  domestic 
currency resulting from an exchange rate that was inconsistent with the fiscal position and 
external equilibrium. 
Among the preventive measures, the reserve accumulation and management policy acts as 
an insurance against temporary changes in external financial conditions. This is a strategic 
option – not only a by-product of the managed float, but a prudential policy in itself. Among 
other advantages, such a policy ensures macroeconomic stability, enhances confidence in 
the  domestic  currency,  and  reduces  the  impact  of  external  shocks  as  well  as  the  cost  of 
public and private financing. While this insurance policy is generally a less visible benefit, in 
cases of stress recalling to it provides specific advantages in terms of financial and monetary 
stability, as we could see in the recent critical episodes. 
Finally,  one  more  thing  about  the  managed  float.  Since  several  studies  outlined  the 
theoretical  basis  and  macroeconomic  implications  of  these  kinds  of  regime  three  decades 
ago,  their  use  has  been  growing  among  emerging  countries.  Indeed,  early  research  on 
exchange rate management came into being as a result of the collapse of the international 
monetary system devised at Bretton Woods, where a sort of peg was established between 
the various world currencies and the US dollar as the gold standard currency. 
Empirical work expanding and fine-tuning the analysis of many scholars showed that several 
developed and emerging countries can be considered “managed floaters.” Less than a half of 
inflation targeting countries effectively apply a pure float. In this sense, the literature states 
that the reaction functions of central banks in inflation targeting emerging countries have a 
significant coefficient for the nominal exchange rate. This means that the exchange rate is an 
important variable for monetary policy conduct.  
There  are  several  reasons  to  avoid  sharp  fluctuations  in  the  domestic  currency  and  to 
mitigate  excessive  volatility,  above  all  in  developing  countries  with  a  limited  capacity  to 
absorb external resources through their capital markets. By mitigating fluctuations around a 
trend,  this  regime  combines  the  needs  of  the  various  segments  of  the  economy  while 
preserving  consistency  with  the  whole  of  economic  policy.  Recent  literature  in  foreign 
exchange matters factors in segmentation of and restricted access to financial markets into 
the  analysis.  The  most  relevant  conclusions  suggest  that,  in  terms  of  maximizing  social 
welfare, the best choice is a less flexible foreign exchange regime with more limited access 
to hedge instruments. This argument becomes more convincing where there is nothing like 
an  international  monetary  system  and  a  weakening  economy  in  the  country  with  the  main 
reserve currency in the world.  
This is the most realistic conceptual framework for the current stage at which our economy 
is.  Furthermore,  in  our  case  –  with  a  long  tradition  of  pegs,  high  inflation,  devaluation 
processes, runs to the US dollar, and a shallow capital market – it is necessary to “manage” 
the float as a transition towards a long-term stage.  
In short, through the interaction of these three pillars, the Central Bank of Argentina boasts 
the  adequate  tools  to  provide  two  essential  public  goods  that  have  been  lacking  in  stress 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2009
situations during the past 30 years. Through a set of robust policies to face various kinds of 
shocks, we are, for the first time in decades, in a position to provide monetary and financial 
stability to the Argentine people. 
The international scenario 
4.  
A year ago, when I presented the 2008 Monetary Program asserting that we would be facing 
the worst crisis since the Great Depression, many thought I was exaggerating. At that time, 
the  economies  were  still  growing  at  a  historically  high  pace  and  commodity  prices  were 
showing  an  upward  trend.  Even  though  many  expected  a  deterioration  of  the  international 
scenario, few of us foresaw that the consequences would be as harsh as they have proven 
to be in the past few months.  
The outlook nowadays is quite ominous. Every economy in the world is growing at a lower 
pace, and the main developed countries have fallen into a recession. Commodities reached 
their ceiling by  mid-2008 and then started to plunge. Even today, they are lower that they 
were  a  year  ago.  The  crisis  affects  both  advanced  and  emerging  countries,  and  is  not 
showing any signs of finding a floor in the short term. 
Throughout  this  year,  financial  trouble  persisted,  with  a  marked  deterioration  as  from 
September.  The  international  turmoil  that  was  apparent  since  mid-2007  had  initially  been 
diagnosed as a liquidity shortage. Therefore, the main authorities in the world addressed it by 
essentially providing liquidity to the market. The threats to systemic stability, however, were 
evidenced by key institutions going bankrupt, which led to significant drops in asset prices. 
Growing concern over insolvency in various economic sectors has prompted action to rebuild 
confidence in the global financial system and to curb the damage to the real economy.  
The  current  situation  in  the  United  States,  for  instance,  shows  some  features  that  are 
characteristic of a scenario known in the economic literature as “liquidity trap,” such as that of 
the  Japanese  recession  in  the  1990s  or  the  Great  Depression.  Recession  and  financial 
stability  are  coupled  with  a  new  challenge:  flow  deflation,  where  decreasing  prices  cause 
financial losses to enterprises and households by posing a relative increase in their liabilities. 
Such a scenario – characterized by short-term interest rates close to 0 percent (bonds and 
money  being  virtually  perfect  substitutes)  and  a  low  expansionary  transmission  of 
movements from the money supply to the other monetary aggregates, with banks reluctant to 
lend – is likely to spiraling up, pressuring on the Federal Reserve to a monetization of the 
financing. 
On  the  backup  of  growing  risk  aversion,  we  saw  in  2008  a  widespread  deterioration  of 
financial assets in emerging markets. As in advanced economies, this was combined with a 
strong tendency towards the depreciation of domestic currencies against the US dollar. Thus, 
some countries had to increase their interest rates (for instance, Indonesia and Hungary) or 
stop the cutting cycle (for instance, South Africa, Turkey, and most of Latin America). 
The better scenario suggests that developed economies’ activity would only start picking up 
slowly  by  mid-2009.  In  the  meantime,  emerging  economies  will  face  a  significant 
deceleration,  affected  mainly  through  the  trade  channel  (lower  exports  and  international 
prices of our commodities) and the financial channel (capital outflows and credit constrains). 
This scenario is based on the assumption that the policies implemented will have their impact 
towards mid-2009. We expect the global economy to grow between 1.6 and 0.9 percent next 
year, which is far below our estimates of last year of 3.8 percent. 
During the first part of the year, there was a widespread increase of inflation rates, affecting 
both  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  The  sharp  drop  in  commodity  prices  since  its 
peaks  in  July,  together  with  economic  deceleration,  is  nevertheless  helping  mitigate 
pressures.  Inflation  in  developing  economies  is  also  moderating,  although  more  gradually, 
due  to  persistent  wage  demands,  the  pass-through  effect  of  recent  devaluations,  and  still 
high inflationary expectations. 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 7
Commodity  prices  fell  after  July  as  a  result  of  the  financialization  process  experienced  by 
these products. Yet, in the case of agricultural commodities, there are still certain structural 
factors  that  might  act  as  a  support  for  prices,  preventing  them  from  falling  to  early  2000s’ 
levels. 
Lower inflationary pressures and a weakening economy led to a monetary policy loosening in 
industrialized countries as well as some emerging countries. The bailout and capitalization of 
several financial institutions were supplemented by several fiscal stimulus packages ranging 
from selective tax cuts to increased public spending in infrastructure and subsidized credit 
lines  for  consumption.  Central  banks  in  the  main  economies  responded  via,  among  other 
actions, strong  liquidity  injections  and  reference  rate  cutbacks,  thus  changing  the previous 
year’s trend. These cutbacks entailed an abrupt return to record low interest rates. On the 
other  hand,  many  countries  extended  the  scope  and  the  amount  of  government  deposit 
guarantees, while some banking institutions were nationalized. 
Against this backdrop, while advanced countries are having negative growth rates, emerging 
economies  are  expected  to  continue  on  a  positive  trend,  though  inevitably  lower  than  in 
recent years. 
Given  the  current  framework  and  the  growth  dynamics  of  the  global  economy,  it  is 
fundamental  to  minimize  the  worldwide  effects  of  the  crisis  –  not  only  for  the  benefit  of 
emerging countries, but also due to the urgent need for global growth. Let us not forget that, 
between 2003 and 2007, developing countries accounted for 75 percent of world economic 
growth (in purchasing-power-parity terms).  
In  line  with  action  taken  by  the  main  economies,  and  given  the  deceleration  of  domestic 
demand  and  the  expected  fall  of  exports,  we  emerging  countries  are  also  implementing 
economic  policies  aimed  at  ensuring  financial  system  stability  and  supporting  domestic 
expenditure.  So  far,  most  governments  have  launched  fiscal  stimulus  plans  and  credit 
facilities  protecting  productive  sectors,  to  name  a  few,  even  though  the  adoption  of  new 
policies is not ruled out in the short term.  
5.  
Monetary policy in 2009 
The domestic economic scenario: macroeconomic forecasts 
5.1.  
The magnitude of the world economic crisis not only affects developed countries, but also 
emerging economies. In particular, the 2009 Monetary Program was developed on the basis 
of a still growing Gross Domestic Product, though considerably lower than that for the current 
growth cycle. Therefore, after growing at an average 8.3 percent in the past six years, with 
the  economy  expanding  over  60  percent  in  cumulative  terms  since  the  end  of  the  crisis, 
growth would be around 4 percent, due in part to stimulus measures taken by the Executive 
branch. 
Considering  that  investment  would  grow  at  a  similar  pace  to  that  of  economic  activity,  it 
would  still  represent  around  24  percent  of  GDP.  This  indicator  is  in  line  with  2008  levels, 
which  were  record  high  for  the  past  25  years.  Investment  will  reportedly  exceed  capital 
amortizations  once  again,  thus  expanding  productive  capacity.  Furthermore,  domestic 
savings  still  plays  a  fundamental  role  in  investment  financing,  reducing  the  exposure  to 
external flow volatility.  
As I said before, there has recently been a readjustment in international prices of the main 
export  products  that  sets  them  more  in  line  with  its  long  term  fundamentals.  Financial 
turbulences and markedly weaker oil prices exerted downward pressure on the price of the 
main  grains  used  in  biofuel  generation,  which,  in  turn,  reduced  the  costs  of  transport  and 
agricultural production. Simultaneously, there was an increased estimate for world production 
8 
 BIS Review 1/2009
and stock of the main grains, in a framework of a relatively unchanging demand. Despite the 
sudden drop, however, commodity prices are still at high historical levels. 
Due  to  dwindling  international  prices,  combined  with  reduced  harvest  and  other  factors, 
exports are projected to amount to USD 69 billion – a somewhat lower figure than that for 
2008. Nevertheless, the trade surplus is expected to enable the current account balance to 
remain  positive  for  the  seventh  year  running,  an  unprecedented  event  in  recent  Argentine 
economic history.  
In line with this macroeconomic scenario, prices are expected to grow at a lower pace. As we 
have already discussed, inflation in Argentina can be attributed to several factors and, thus, 
should  be  tackled  from  various  fronts  at  once.  In  this  sense,  in  the  second  half  of  2008, 
inflation was kept in check through the joint efforts by the fiscal, wage, income and monetary 
policies,  as  well  as  the  effect  of  lower  international  foodstuff  and  energy  prices.  For  the 
coming year, we expect inflationary pressures to loosen up by the combined effect of policy 
actions  and  the  international  and  domestic  scenarios,  which  will  be  reflected  on  both 
wholesale and retail prices and on broader based indicator such as the GDP implicit price 
index.  As  to  the  Consumer  Price  Index  for  the  Greater  Buenos  Aires  Area  (CPI-GBA)  in 
2009, the projection is 7 percent for the base case scenario. 
The 2009 Monetary Program 
5.2. 
The design of the 2009 Monetary Program requires us to think of different scenarios for next 
year’s economic trend. To this end, and in line with best international practices, the Central 
Bank combines the projections yielded by several models with the economic policymakers’ 
judgment. On that basis, the Monetary Program envisages the interaction of all the relevant 
variables,  allowing  forecasts  to  be  consistent  with  each  other.  There  would  be  no  point  in 
setting a target exclusively based on the behavior of a single variable, without considering 
how  it  impacts  on  and  is  impacted  on  by  others.  In  other  words,  “experiments”  which 
concentrate on a single aspect of the economy without taking into account the consequences 
on  the  different  actors  and  sectors  should  be  avoided.  But  we  cannot  trust  models  alone. 
This brings the “expert’s judgment” into the picture, to fine-tune projections in the light of their 
expertise in economic policy management beyond what theoretical schemes can capture. It 
is on the basis of this approach that macroeconomic and money demand forecasts are made 
to support the Monetary Program. 
This policy framework is reflected in monetary aggregates trend for the last four years. If we 
take  a  look  at  the  evolution  of  M2  since  the  Monetary  Program  was  established  we  can 
clearly see three stages: a first one between 2003 and 2004 where money expanded at an 
above 30 percent year-on-year rate, against an economy that were growing way bellow that 
level. More recently, in 2005 and 2006 total means of payment grew in line with economic 
activity.  Finally,  in  the  last  two  years  monetary  growth  was  bellow  nominal  GDP, 
guaranteeing the balance between supply and demand for money. All of this is a proof of the 
commitment and action taken by the Central Bank towards monetary and financial stability in 
Argentina. 
This  commitment  also  motivates  my  decision  for  the  last  few  years  to  enhancing  and 
sustaining the improvement on the quality of our applied research, among other things. The 
Economic  Research  area  was  given  a  new  hierarchy  and  equipped  with  appropriate 
resources, becoming one of the most important research centers for macroeconomics and 
monetary economics in both the public and private sectors in Latin America.  
Thus, we have macroeconomic models to make short- and medium-term forecasts within a 
consistency  framework.  These  include  the  study  of  the  economy’s  main  transmission 
mechanisms, which enable creating simulation exercises to assess the impact of economic 
policies.  Furthermore,  they  allow  us  to  include  uncertainty  in  projections  and  simulate  the 
effects of alternative policies. For money demand forecasts, a model has been proposed in 
which a set of economic variables explains the evolution of private M2 real balances. For an 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 9
econometric estimate, we use vector error correction models which allow modeling long-term 
relations between series.  
In  addition,  we  have  been  improving  two  models  for  policy  analysis  and  forecasting 
exercises.  One  of  the  models  characterizes  the  dynamics  of  a  small,  open  economy, 
describing  the  interaction  between  the  main  macroeconomic  variables.  The  other  one  is  a 
structural model, with several theoretical and practical innovations, which include a rule for 
monetary aggregates, the role of fiscal policy and the addition of net exports as a potential 
driver  for  growth.  These  models  offer  alternative  macroeconomic  scenarios  on  an  annual 
basis (this being the Monetary Program time horizon), with monthly and quarterly frequency 
(since the Program’s targets refer to the monthly average balances in the last month of each 
quarter),  and  relate  to  both  public  and  private  aggregates.  They  estimate  the  relation 
between various forms of money and relevant economic variables. Thus, money demand is 
expected to evolve according to the relevant economic scenario, taking into account the most 
probable value for such path, as well as a series of alternative paths. 
Supported by this set of technical tools, and in the framework of an economy still in transition 
towards  its  long  run  path,  the  Central  Bank’s  2009  Monetary  Program  adds  new  tools  to 
previous Monetary Programs. The aim is to provide citizens with increased certainty about 
current and future monetary conditions. In fact, while last year’s elements were the private 
M2  annual  target  and  total  M2  estimates  at  12  months  sight,  the  2009  Monetary  Program 
also  includes  quarterly  estimates  of  the  private  M2  aggregate.  These  aggregates  are 
estimated  for  both  2009  and  scenarios  at  12  months  sight will  be  released  throughout  the 
year. 
Giving  due  consideration  to  the  private  sector  movements  allows  for  more  focus  on 
household and company savings and investment decisions, which can reflect on prices in the 
long  term.  For  this  reason,  the  introduction  of  private  M2  quarterly  estimates  is  a  new 
concrete  step  towards  the  adoption  of  sophisticated  monetary  analysis  that  combine 
predictability  for  decision  making  with  the  flexibility  needed  for  an  optimal  money  market 
response  to  changing  scenarios.  Thus,  the  monetary  market  will  continue  to  mitigate  the 
negative impacts of the external crisis instead of spreading economic imbalances.  
In this path of constant learning and perfection in the use of monetary tools, and taking into 
account the macroeconomic context described for 2009, targets were set on the grounds of a 
base  scenario  where  the  average  M2  and  private  M2  y.o.y.  growth  in  December  is  15.3 
percent and 16.5 percent, respectively. This scenario is circumscribed to a end of year range 
of between 8.7 to 17.8 percent for M2 and between 9.8 and 18.9 percent for private M2. 
The  increase  in  lending  capacity,  derived  from  the  expected  behavior  of  deposits  and  the 
evolution of public sector loans in banks' portfolios, is consistent with a private sector credit 
growth  of  around  30  percent.  This  would  add  to  the  possible  lending  capacity  from  other 
sources (capitalizations, income from financial margin and services, placement of negotiable 
instruments,  among  others).  Part  of  the  loan  dynamics  will  result  from  the  national 
government’s  active  policy  to  boost  consumption  and  investment,  pursuant  to  recently 
implemented operations, using social security funds. 
As  a  counterpart  to  the  expected  credit  dynamics,  the  various  monetary  regulation 
instruments developed and improved by the Central Bank in the past few years will facilitate 
the provision of liquidity for the natural development of the economy. Currently, besides the 
traditional monetary policy instruments such as open market operations, repo transactions or 
changes  in  reserve  requirements,  we  have  a  large  stock  of  LEBAC  and  NOBAC  which 
provide a real liquidity cushion, that can be used through automatic repurchase mechanisms, 
such as repurchases in the secondary market, or by simply partly renewing securities upon 
maturity.  
Finally,  the  Monetary  Program  should  be  interpreted  as  a  general  guideline  for  monetary 
policy. This tool lays down general parameters of how monetary policy instruments should 
adapt  to  changes  in  the  relevant  macroeconomic  variables  (terms  of  trade,  capital  flows, 
10 
 BIS Review 1/2009
inflation rate, output gap, among others). In particular, the program’s bands are designed to 
absorb any moderate changes in the expected base scenario, offering certain flexibility, but 
they can turn out to be insufficient in case of substantial changes. 
Furthermore,  countercyclical  financial  policies  will  continue  to  be  applied  to  manage 
international reserves, together with the development of a solid financial system with limited 
mismatches  and  managed  float,  which  proved  to  suit  the  Argentine  economy  best.  The 
benefits  of  this  regime  are  magnified  in  the  current  context  of  international  turmoil,  where 
sudden capital movements and commodity price volatility affect the foreign exchange rates of 
our main trading partners and impact our terms of trade. 
Nevertheless,  in  a  framework  of  greater  uncertainty,  mainly  due  to  the  international  crisis, 
through the 2009 Monetary Program and supplementary policies implemented if necessary, 
the  Central  Bank  aims  to  offer  a  predictable  monetary  and  financial  environment  for  the 
development of economic activity. 
To sum up, our risk-management approach enabled us to overcome with solvency a alleged 
low-probability scenario such as the three shocks to the Argentine economy in slightly over 
twelve months. We showed with actions, skill, soberly and efficiency, securing two essential 
public goods: monetary stability and financial stability. 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 11
