Heng Swee Keat: Singapore’s commitment to the development of Islamic 
finance 
Opening remarks by  Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary  Authority of 
Singapore, at the Singapore Sukuk Signing Ceremony, Singapore, 19 January 2009. 
 Your Excellency Abdulla Hasan Saif, Chairman, The Islamic Bank of Asia, 
Mr Viswanathan Shankar, Group Management Committee Member, Standard Chartered 
Bank, 
Mr Lucien Wong, Managing Partner of Allen and Gledhill, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you this afternoon to the MAS and to our overseas guests, a 
warm welcome to Singapore.  
Singapore  is  committed  to  the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  The  financial  industry  has 
encouraged us to develop Shariah compliant financial services, by building on our existing 
strengths in banking, trade finance, capital markets and asset management. 
MAS is an integrated regulator – we oversee all forms of financial services. In performing this 
role, we adopt a basic principle that financial products and activities with similar underlying 
risks are given similar regulatory treatment. However, there are distinctive features of Islamic 
finance  that  put  it  at  a  disadvantage,  if  we  were  to  just  apply  the  conventional  regulatory 
framework. 
We are committed to a level playing field, by ensuring that Islamic financial activities with the 
same underlying economic essence are accorded the same regulatory treatment as those in 
conventional  finance.  In  this  regard,  we  have  already  implemented  several  measures, 
including  removing  the  double-imposition  of  stamp  duty  for  Shariah-compliant  financing 
structures, and refining our rules to allow banks to offer Murabaha financing and deposits.  
As  a  further  step,  I  am  happy  to  announce  that  with  effect  from  today,  Singapore-based 
banks  may  enter  into  Murabaha  interbank  placements  and  offer  Ijara  Wa  Igtina  financing. 
These changes will enable the financial institutions offering Islamic finance a wider range of 
instruments in their management of liquidity and in their matching of assets and liabilities. 
These  changes  have  been  made  after  detailed  consultation  with  the  industry.  MAS  will 
continue to work closely with the industry to ensure that our regulatory and tax framework, 
and  other  necessary  infrastructure  and  conditions  are  in  place  to  foster  good  risk 
management and the further growth of Islamic Finance in Singapore.  
I announced at the World Islamic Banking Conference in Bahrain two months ago that we 
were in the final stages of setting up a facility to issue sukuk. 
Today’s signing ceremony marks a further milestone in our developmental efforts. With the 
help of our financial and legal advisers, the work on the legal structure has been completed. 
The  sukuk,  which  is  based  on  the  Al-Ijarah  structure,  has  been  carefully  studied  by  the 
eminent Shariah scholars advising the Islamic Bank of Asia and Standard Chartered Bank for 
its full compliance with Shariah principles. 
This  sukuk  is  the  Sharia-compliant  equivalent  of  Singapore  Government  Securities  (SGS), 
and is of the highest credit standing. The sukuk will be given equal regulatory treatment as 
SGS, such as qualifying as an asset in the computation of capital and liquidity requirements, 
and  as  eligible  collateral  for  tapping  MAS'  liquidity  facility.  The  sukuk  will  be  issued  on  a 
reverse-enquiry basis, based on the demand of financial institutions operating here. 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 1
MAS is committed to the facility, issuing to meet the needs of financial institutions that are 
carrying  out  or  plan  to  carry  out  Shariah-compliant  activities  in  Singapore,  as  this  will 
strengthen their ability to meet their capital and liquidity requirements.  
This  sukuk  issuance  facility  underscores  our  strong  commitment  to  the  development  of 
Islamic  finance  in  Singapore.  We  invite  eligible  financial  institutions  to  approach  MAS  to 
register their interest.  
I  would  like  to  place  on  record  our  appreciation  to  the  Islamic  Bank  of  Asia  and  Standard 
Chartered Bank, as well as Allen & Gledhill, which have been instrumental in creating this 
first sukuk to be issued by a Singapore statutory board.  
Thank you all for joining us this afternoon. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2009
