Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy in 2008 and the outlook 
for 2009   
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 17 April 
2009. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests 
The financial crisis, which first emerged in August 2007, continued to spread during 2008. 
From  mid-September  on,  the  situation  deteriorated  sharply.  Growing  uncertainty  about  the 
stability  of  the  financial  system  gradually  paralysed  the  money  market.  Most  industrialised 
countries implemented relief packages for banks with the aim of improving their refinancing 
conditions, cleaning up their balance sheets or strengthening their capital base. In fact, the 
crisis  led  to  an  unprecedented  level  of  government  intervention.  Far-reaching  guarantees 
were granted, major corporations were put under state control, and a substantial amount of 
risk was transferred from the private to the public sector. 
The difficulty of implementing our monetary policy 
The  waning  ability  of  the  financial  markets  to  function  properly  posed  problems  for  the 
implementation of our monetary policy. The prevalent mood of uncertainty created a strong 
appetite for liquidity, and yet the seizing-up of the interbank market hampered the supply in 
Swiss francs. In view of these two factors, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) had to resort to 
some exceptional measures. 
From the start, the uncertainty engendered by the financial crisis led to a surge in demand for 
liquidity  by  both  banks  and  the  public  in  Switzerland.  The  distrust  characterising  interbank 
relations encouraged certain institutions to stockpile capital. This trend was reinforced by the 
fact  that  numerous  banks  were  unable  to  make  a  reliable  estimate  of  their  own  liquidity 
requirements, particularly in view of the soaring demand for cash on the part of the public. At 
the end of last year, the total value of banknotes in circulation had risen by 11% and banks 
had three times as much money on their SNB sight deposit accounts as at the end of 2007.  
To satisfy this extraordinary demand, the SNB was obliged to expand its repo operations in 
terms of volume and maturity, and to inject liquidity into the market through a new channel – 
that of swap transactions. 
Over the past few years, repos have become the standard tool with which we implement our 
monetary policy. They involve loans to banks denominated in Swiss francs and backed by 
securities. As a rule, these loans are granted for a term of one week. However, in response 
to  the  special  needs  of  the  market  in  2008,  we  had  to  lengthen  the  term  of  our  loans  on 
several  occasions,  extending  maturity  to  as  much  as  twelve  months.  Unlike  other  central 
banks, however, we saw no need to expand the range of eligible securities, since we already 
apply  a  very  liberal  policy,  accepting  top-rated  securities  denominated  not  only  in  Swiss 
francs,  but  also  in  euros,  pounds  sterling,  US  dollars  and  other  currencies.  In  2008,  the 
average amount of our repos rose by 53% against the year before. 
Despite the intensification of our repo operations, tensions on the money market increased 
throughout  the  year  owing  to  the  ongoing  deterioration  of  the  economic  and  financial 
environment,  and  reached  their  peak  in  autumn.  A  particular  source  of  difficulties  was  the 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 1
extremely strong demand for Swiss francs coming from eastern European countries, where 
banks  had  granted  Swiss-franc-denominated  loans  on  a  massive  scale,  refinancing 
themselves  on  the  money  markets.  Since  these  banks  have  no  access  to  our  loans,  they 
found themselves in a delicate position when the Swiss franc money market dried up. The 
increased  demand  for  Swiss  francs  contributed  to  the  rise  in  our  interest  rates,  which  we 
deemed undesirable from a monetary policy perspective.  
To  satisfy  demand  from  eastern  European  banks,  we  sought  the  support  of  the  European 
Central Bank (ECB), to which we remitted Swiss francs under a euros against francs swap 
arrangement.  The  ECB  then  transferred  these  francs  to  its  counterparties.  Similar 
agreements  –  euros  against  Swiss  francs  –  were  subsequently  concluded  with  the  Polish 
central  bank  and  the  Hungarian  central  bank,  enabling  them  to  conduct  analogous 
transactions in their respective countries. Moreover, to ensure a better distribution of francs 
across the market, the SNB itself engaged in swaps with its counterparties. By the end of 
2008,  our  supply  of  Swiss  francs  to  three  central  banks  and  a  certain  number  of  other 
banking institutions by means of swap transactions had reached a total of CHF 50 billion. 
Thus, the demand for liquidity was considerable across the board. The total amount of our 
loans more than tripled, climbing from CHF 31 billion at the end of 2007 to CHF 101 billion at 
the end of 2008. In parallel, as a way of enabling banks to place their liquid means with the 
SNB in a form other than sight deposits, and of introducing a tool which would allow us to 
absorb  large  amounts  of  liquidity  if  need  be,  we  issued  SNB  Bills  for  the  first  time  on  20 
October 2008. By the end of the year, the sum of SNB Bills issued had reached CHF 24.4 
billion. 
Active  Swiss  franc  liquidity  management  enabled  us  to  hold  the  three-month  Swiss  franc 
Libor at the level targeted by our monetary policy. I shall return to this point later. 
Consolidating UBS 
In  autumn  2007,  the  National  Bank  realised  that  Switzerland’s  two  big  banks  would  be 
particularly badly affected by the financial market turbulence. At that point, we intensified our 
contacts  with  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  (SFBC)  (now  the  Swiss  Financial 
Market Supervisory Authority FINMA) in order to ensure ongoing monitoring of the situation 
at  these  two  institutions.  From  spring  2008  on,  in  view  of  UBS’s  growing  vulnerability,  we 
drew  up  a  number  of  solutions  to  protect  it  from  the  consequences  of  a  large  volume  of 
illiquid assets on its balance sheet. In autumn, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the 
US  led  to  liquidity  drying  up  completely  on  the  interbank  market,  UBS  encountered 
increasing refinancing difficulties and was facing a substantial loss of funds. In the opinion of 
the SFBC, urgent action was needed to prevent a dramatic worsening of the situation, with 
potentially very serious consequences for the stability of the entire banking system and for 
the Swiss economy as a whole.  
This was the environment in which we, in close collaboration with the SFBC and the Swiss 
government, prepared the operation that was announced on 16 October last year. 
It  is  not  necessary  here  to  reiterate  the  details  of  a  transaction  that  was  copiously 
commented  on  by  the  media  and  is  described  in  our  Annual  Report.  When  planning  this 
operation, we were fully aware of the financial risks inherent in the asset portfolio we were 
taking over. Yet we were convinced that these risks were adequately compensated for by the 
conditions under which UBS would participate in any losses and, above all, by the collective 
benefit derived from the stabilisation of Switzerland’s biggest bank. Our decision was thus 
based solely on considerations regarding the stability of the financial system.  
Only  in  a  few  years  will  it  be  possible  to  pass  definitive  judgment  on  our  actions.  If,  upon 
completion, the operation proves successful, we might come to wonder whether the support 
measures were actually necessary. If, by contrast, losses are registered, our conclusion will 
be  that  the SNB’s  operation  helped  prevent  the  worst.  In any  case,  whatever  the financial 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2009
outcome, it must be borne in mind that the only motive behind our intervention was to keep 
the uncertainty with regard to the value of UBS’s illiquid assets from destabilising the bank 
and thereby our financial system and economy.  
When  public  funds  are  employed  to  restore  financial  stability,  the  rules  governing  the 
functioning of markets need to be adapted to ensure that such a situation can never arise 
again.  We  therefore  strongly  supported  the  SFBC’s  stance  in  favour  of  a  gradual 
strengthening of the big banks’ capital levels, of capping their leverage ratios and reforming 
their compensation systems. In addition, the SNB is currently working together with FINMA to 
impose  more  stringent  liquidity  requirements.  As  I  already  pointed  out  last  year,  a  small 
country  like  ours  is  entitled  to  define  specific  conditions  under  which  the  systemic  risks 
involved with having two large international banks domiciled on its territory must be limited. 
The  Federal  Council  and  the  SFBC  clearly  recognised  this  situation  and  took  appropriate 
preventive measures. For the future, it would also be advisable to examine the expediency of 
putting  into  place  a  legal  framework  and  organisational  measures  that  permit  an  orderly 
liquidation of systemically important banks. 
The crisis spreads to the real economy 
Ultimately, it was inevitable that the financial market crisis would spread to the real economy. 
And yet the year 2008 began well. Our country was in the midst of solid economic growth 
and was experiencing a strong inflow of foreign workers. In the first three quarters, year-on-
year  growth  amounted  to  2.4%,  buttressed  by  all  components  of  global  demand  except 
construction. 
At the end of summer, however, the situation turned completely. The faltering international 
credit markets and the mounting uncertainty caused global trade to plummet and prompted a 
decline in growth in our export markets; indeed, most of our trading partners actually went 
into  recession.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  Switzerland’s  GDP  receded  to  1.2%  and 
unemployment, which had reached a low-water mark of 2.5%, started to climb again. In our 
quarterly  assessment  of  last  December,  we  predicted  a  0.5-1%  drop  in  GDP  for  2009.  In 
March this year, based on the latest data available, we revised the forecast downwards to a 
2.5-3% decline. 
The SNB’s reaction 
In autumn 2008, as I said, we experienced an abrupt downturn of the economic cycle and, 
owing to plunging commodity prices, a spectacular change in the inflation outlook. Whereas 
inflation had been at 3.1% in July, price stability was entirely re-established from November 
onwards.  
This  reversal  forced  the  SNB  to  take  rapid  and  decisive  measures  to  ease  its  monetary 
policy.  In  a  series  of  five  steps  between  October  2008  and  March  2009,  we  lowered  the 
target range for the three-month Swiss franc Libor and brought down the market rate from 
3% to 0.25%. Thus, by markedly loosening the monetary reins, we aimed to trigger an easing 
of lending conditions and discourage investment in Swiss francs. The volume of lending in 
Switzerland  continued  to  rise,  albeit  at  a  reduced  pace,  but  credit  lines  granted  to  Swiss 
borrowers were now less used. To date, the state of the bank loan market reflects a drop in 
demand  and  a  slight  tightening  of  lending  conditions  in  connection  with  the  decline  of  the 
economy,  rather  than  an  actual  credit  crunch.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  noted  a 
substantial deterioration in financing conditions for companies on the capital market due to 
the prevalent mood of uncertainty and the shortage of liquidity. This is why we decided, on 
12  March,  to  intervene  in  those  market  segments  where  the  imbalances  were  most 
pronounced.  
BIS Review 48/2009 
 3
In  this  delicate  phase  of  worsening  credit  market  conditions,  our  monetary  policy  strategy 
proved to be particularly well chosen. Unlike most other central banks, the SNB has made it 
its  objective  to  stabilise  a  market  interest  rate  –  the  three-month  Swiss  franc  Libor,  which 
serves as a reference for numerous commercial rates – rather than a rate reflecting central 
banks’  short-term  refinancing  conditions  for  commercial  banks.  By  keeping  the  Libor  well 
under control, we have managed to shelter the Swiss market from the kind of degradation of 
credit conditions experienced by markets abroad. Thus, the three-month euro Libor, which 
had  generally  been  1.5%  higher  than  the  three-month  Swiss  franc  Libor,  saw  its  spread 
widen  to  2.2%  in  2007  and  2.7%  in  2008.  Our  policy  of  stabilising  the  three-month  Swiss 
franc  Libor  therefore  enabled  us  to  at  least  partly  shield  the  Swiss  economy  from  the 
repercussions of the international financial crisis. 
Unfortunately, the effect of relaxing monetary conditions since last autumn in order to lower 
the  Libor  was  largely  offset  by  the  continuing  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  the 
euro. Between October 2008 and March 2009, our currency rose by nearly 10% vis-à-vis the 
euro, which was particularly inopportune in a phase of rapidly declining inflation rates and the 
contraction of global demand. On 12 March, to prevent the ongoing appreciation of the franc 
from neutralising the impact of our policy of lowering interest rates, we decided to buy foreign 
currencies  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  conjunction  with  a  further  reduction  of  the 
Libor, with the aim of avoiding any further appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro 
and  injecting  additional  liquidity  into  the  economy.  In  view  of  the  risk  of  deflation,  decisive 
action  was  called  for,  and  we  will  continue  to  pursue  this  strategy  for  as  long  as  the  risk 
remains. 
Therefore, after 15 years of absence, we were obliged to intervene once more in the foreign 
exchange market. This does not, however, represent any reversal of our traditional strategy, 
which is to pursue an independent monetary policy aimed at maintaining price stability. It is 
simply  a  case  of  adapting  the  implementation  of  this  strategy  to  an  environment 
characterised by interest rates close to zero and a Swiss franc once again in the role of a 
safe haven. Contrary to certain reactions aired in the media, the action to counter the rise of 
the  Swiss  franc  against  the  euro  is  not  a  form  of  competitive  devaluation,  which  would 
inevitably  work  against  the  interests  of  our  country  in  the  long  run.  Rather,  it  is  a  key 
operational tool which, under the given circumstances, helps us perform our mandate with 
regard  to  price  stability,  in  other  words  to  preserve  our  economy  from  both  inflation  and 
deflation. 
The outlook for 2009 
The  year  2009  will  see  the  steepest  decline  in  Switzerland’s  GDP  since  1975.  Exports, 
normally  the  driving  force  of  our  economy,  will  continue  to  be  weak,  and  the  lack  of 
confidence  in  the  corporate  sector  will  weigh  on  investment  demand.  Moreover,  all  signs 
point to a further slackening of consumption in view of growing uncertainty about households’ 
purchasing power. All in all, the outlook for the near future is anything but bright. 
Switzerland does not constitute a special case – all industrialised countries are faced with a 
similar downturn, especially those with high exposure to foreign trade.  
All  the  same,  we  are  confident  that  we  are  well  equipped  to  deal  with  the  situation,  for 
several reasons: 
• 
• 
our country has a competitive export sector in terms of both price and technology; 
our companies have posted good results over the past few years and are generally in 
a healthy financial state; 
unlike  other  countries,  Switzerland  did  not  experience  a  housing  market  bubble  in 
recent years; 
BIS Review 48/2009
 4 
   our  economic  structure,  built  on  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  gives  us  an 
edge in terms of flexibility; 
our public finances have been put in order and the country’s balance of payments is 
in a good condition. 
All  these  factors  lead  us  to  believe  that  our  economy  can  rebound  once  the  international 
economic slide has been halted. The International Monetary Fund is forecasting an upturn in 
Europe  from  2010  onwards  in  the  wake  of  a  recovery  expected  to  begin  in  the  US.  In 
Switzerland,  initial  signs  of  stabilisation  are  appearing  here  and  there,  and  the  decline  in 
GDP should gradually become less steep in the near future. But a true reversal of trend is 
unlikely  to  occur  before  next  year  and  recovery  will  be  a  slow  process,  since  the  current 
difficulties  are  more  than  just  cyclical.  They  are  partly  the  result  of  a  profound  crisis  of 
confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  future  growth  potential  of  the 
global economy.  
Faced with collapsing demand, all countries have adopted expansionist monetary and fiscal 
policies.  Interest  rates  have  been  slashed  and  a  number  of  relief  packages  involving 
considerable  sums  launched,  exacerbating  the  public  debt  burden.  Such  strategies  are 
appropriate  in  times  of  emergency.  Nevertheless,  we  should  always  bear  in  mind  that  the 
difficulties confronting us today are in all likelihood the consequence of excessive borrowing 
and of monetary policies that were too accommodating – two factors that helped derail the 
international  economy.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  stimuli  used  in  the  battle  against 
recession today are the very ones that were abused in the past.  
Moreover, once the economy is back on track, the prime political and economic challenge 
will be to put in place the corrective measures needed to ensure a more balanced course in 
future. The subsequent path of growth may not be as steep as it was in the past, but for that 
it will be all the more sustainable. For our part, we are aware that maintaining price stability in 
our country over the medium term will require us to re-establish healthy monetary conditions 
by absorbing excess liquidity in good time. We have both the means and the will to do so. 
 The  global  economy  has  entered  a  painful  phase  of  putting  its  house  in  order;  a  phase 
marked  by  weak  growth  and  high  unemployment.  Profoundly  embedded  as  it  is  in 
international  trade,  the  Swiss  economy  cannot  escape  these  difficulties.  The  SNB  reacted 
swiftly  to  the  deteriorating  economic  situation,  and  many  people  hoped  that  the  monetary 
policy adopted could shield our country from the turmoil experienced elsewhere. However, it 
was not in our power to meet these expectations. We did all we could within the framework of 
our legal mandate. 2009 will be a difficult year for our economy, and the signs are that 2010 
will  be  so  too  because,  even  if  the  downward  trend  is  halted,  the  under-utilisation  of  our 
production resources will still be considerable. 
Dear Shareholders  
Dear Guests 
In  such  a  challenging  environment,  we  shall  once  again  need  the  support  of  everyone,  in 
particular our shareholders. We thank you for the unfailing trust you placed in us throughout 
the year and the interest you have shown in the SNB’s activities. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 5
