Jean-Claude Trichet: State celebrations for the introduction of the euro 
in Slovakia 
Statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the State 
celebrations for the introduction of the euro in Slovakia, Bratislava, 8 January 2009. 
 Dear President, Prime Ministers, Excellencies,  
Dear Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The introduction of a new currency is an historic moment for a country, and the introduction 
of the euro in a Member State through the Treaty-based convergence process is an historic 
moment for Europe. Robert Schuman stated in his founding declaration that Europe will be 
made  through  concrete  achievements  which  create  tangible  solidarity  among  its  people. 
European  monetary  union  is  a  concrete  achievement,  and  the  euro  is  a  tangible  sign  of 
solidarity  among  its  people.  The  euro  is  also  a  tangible  sign  of  increasing  economic 
integration in Europe, which is to the benefit of stability and prosperity for its citizens. Today, 
with Slovakia’s adoption of the euro, we therefore have every reason to celebrate. 
Slovakia’s economic achievements on the way towards euro adoption 
Slovakia  has  made  remarkable  progress  in  both  nominal  and  real  convergence.  This  has 
been reflected in a decline in inflation and a significant economic growth record. Slovakia’s 
performance  is  based  on  the  firm  foundations  of  a  bold  economic  reform  programme 
implemented earlier this decade.  
Cooperation between the ECB and Národná banka Slovenska  
On the side of central banks, this historic moment has been prepared through a very close 
cooperation over the last couple of years between the European Central Bank and Národná 
banka Slovenska under the leadership of Governor Šramko. This cooperation has laid the 
groundwork for the smooth and successful introduction of the euro in Slovakia.  
The sustainability of convergence  
The introduction of the euro in Slovakia will further enhance the benefits of the Single Market. 
The  euro  removes  exchange  rate  uncertainty  between  Slovakia  and  many  of  its  most 
important trading partners, integrates the country into one of the world’s largest economies 
and helps to shield it from some of the effects of the international financial turbulence. 
It  is  also  important  to  stress  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  must  not  give  rise  to 
complacency. In order to ensure that convergence is sustainable and that the Slovak people 
can reap the full benefits of euro adoption, the Slovak public authorities will need to pursue 
ambitious  economic  policies  on  all  fronts.  A  rigorous  and  credible  implementation  of  fiscal 
policy in line with the commitments of the Stability and Growth Pact is particularly important. 
Other  policy  measures  would  need  to  focus  on  Slovakia’s  labour  market  to  improve  its 
functioning  and  on  strengthening  further  the  business  environment  in  order  to  enhance 
productivity  growth.  With  such  policies,  Slovakia  should  be  well  positioned  for  a  long  term 
continued successful economic performance. Ladies and gentlemen, let me congratulate you 
on  all  the  achievements  made  on  the  way  towards  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  your 
country, and extend my warmest welcome to Národná banka Slovenska as the new member 
of the Eurosystem family. Welcome Slovakia! 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 1
