L Wilson Kamit: Opening up opportunities for agriculture and rural 
development 
Address by Sir L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the 
Consultative  and  Implementation  Monitoring  Council  (CIMC),  2009  National  Development 
Forum on “Opening Up Opportunities for Agriculture and Rural Development”, Port Moresby, 
5 August 2009.  
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen  
May I firstly thank the organizers of this conference for the invitation to speak on the financial 
sector in Papua New Guinea. I was asked specifically to comment on the financial sector’s 
outreach to rural areas and low income households.  
Let me start by briefly talking about the macro economy. Acting Secretary Tosali has already 
mentioned most of these developments.  
Macro economy  
Papua  New  Guinea  has,  over  the  last  five  years,  benefited  significantly  from  the  export 
commodity price boom as it resulted in fiscal surpluses, record international reserve levels, 
reduced total public debt and sustained real GDP growth. In the same period there was a 
substantial financial sector reform, which commenced in 2000, that contributed to a sound 
and prudently managed financial system and aided economic growth.  
The  sound  and  prudent  management  of  our  financial  institutions  is  reflected  by  the  high 
capital  adequacy  ratios,  a  liquid  banking  system,  low  level  of  non-performing  loans,  and 
funding  of  loans  by  the  banking  system  from  deposits  rather  than  from  borrowings  from 
overseas. The Central Bank authorized financial institutions also remained highly profitable.  
Prudent monetary and fiscal policies between 2003 and 2007 and a co-ordinated approach in 
their management also contributed to stable exchange rates and price stability (low inflation) 
and  improved  confidence  in  the  domestic  economy.  Together  with  the  low  interest  rate 
environment, this led to a significant increase in lending to the private sector, with a growth of 
between  30-40  percent  during  the  period.  The  removal  of  foreign  exchange  controls, 
particularly on lending to non resident companies also supported the strong growth.  
Agriculture sector  
The agriculture sector continues to be an important one for Papua New Guinea,  providing 
employment and income-earning opportunities for a large number of our people, sustaining 
the  livelihood  of  many  and  providing  foreign  exchange  inflows.  This  sector  contributed  33 
percent to the country’s overall GDP, according to the most recent official National Accounts 
from the National Statistical Office, which is for 2006 (see chart 1). The value of agricultural 
exports in the March quarter of 2009 was K406.8 million, 16.4 percent of total exports (see 
chart 2). This is down from K659.0 million or 17.3 percent in March 2008, and partly reflects 
the impact of the global financial crisis and the economic recession in the major industrialised 
countries.  
BIS Review 114/2009 
 1
  
Despite its significance to the local economy, financial resources channeled to the agriculture 
sector  remains  dismal.  Commercial  banks’  lending  to  the  agriculture  sector,  excluding 
forestry  and  fisheries,  totaled  K147.7  million  in  the  March  quarter  of  2009,  which  was  3.1 
percent of total lending. This compares to K104.1 million and 4.0 percent of total lending in 
March  2008.  These  amounts  compare  poorly  against  lending  to  the  other  sectors  of  the 
economy,  including  commerce  (retail  and  wholesale  trade),  manufacturing,  transportation, 
construction and services such as hotel and real estate (see chart 3).  
2 
 BIS Review 114/2009
 
The financial sector reforms have created the foundation for an efficient and sound financial 
system that assist the course for stability and growth, which provides an opportunity for the 
financial  sector  to  introduce  new  financial  products  that  are  suitable  for  the  Papua  New 
Guinean economy. The new area of banking that has been successful in several developing 
countries is electronic or mobile money banking. Electronic banking products have enabled 
banks to capture the un-banked population, provide financial literacy and significantly reduce 
the cost of banking. Mobile phone banking and branchless banking operating through agents 
have  become  a  norm  to  bring  banking  services  to  the  rural  areas.  The  fragmented 
characteristics of the PNG economy suggest that mobile money or electronic banking is the 
way forward to provide financial services to the mass in the rural areas.  
The  rapid  economic  growth  in  the  last  five  years  has  created  opportunities  for  bank 
expansion.  The  increase  in  business  activities  requires  commercial  bank  presence  in 
respective  regions  of  the  country.  The  presence  of  a  fully  licensed  conventional  bank  can 
increase  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  intermediation  process  and  promote  economic 
development.  However,  many  banks  have  indicated  that  some  of  the  branches  are 
unprofitable due to the high cost of operations. To circumvent the high cost of running full 
branches, the commercial banks have expanded the net work of ATMs and EFTPOS, which 
has  complemented  branch  net  work  and  in  some  instances  have  become  substitutes  for 
branches  to  a  limited  extent.  The  existences  of  ATMs  and  EFTPOS  have  made  banking 
easier and efficient in the rural areas.  
However, these developments will not succeed if:  
• 
transport,  power,  and  communication 
Infrastructure is not in place for investors to build on. Mobile banking and branchless 
banking 
infrastructure.  E.g. 
Namatanai  sub-branch  of  a  bank  closed  down  due  to  communication  and  power 
problems  and  failures.  I  recently  visited  Dogura.  There  is  no  mobile  phone 
communication link between Dogura and Alotau in the Milne Bay province.  
Law and Order/Security issues are a serious concern. The law and order problems 
have caused the banks to reduce the size of their representations throughout PNG. 
requires 
 BIS Review 114/2009 
 3
 Over  the  years,  banks  had  to  close  down  in  provincial  centres.  The  closure  of 
branches in Popondetta twice in the last few years is an illustration.  
An alarming law & order issue is the threat to staff of financial institutions. Officers 
and  families  of  staff  employed  in  the  financial  system  should  not  be  placed  in 
situations of psychological stress and anxiety caused by unsavoury elements of our 
society.  The  cases  of  kidnapping  and  threatening  staff  and  their  families  is  a 
problem that must stop. Bank staff must be allowed to contribute to the development 
of our nation without threat or intimidation in carrying out their duties.  
Microfinance  
Microfinance  institutions  and  development  orientated  institutions  are  important  vehicles  for 
involving those at the bottom of the pyramid to become financially included. The rapid growth 
of  microfinance  institutions  over  the  last  few  years  have  began  to  make  a  positive 
contribution to providing banking services to those in the rural area and the informal sector of 
the economy. Under the BFIA, 2 microbanks were licensed by the BPNG and they continue 
to expand their branch network and outreach to rural areas and informal sector, which were 
previously  under-banked.  To  expand  this  outreach  further  into  the  remote  rural  areas,  the 
PNG-ADB  Microfinance  Project  is  piloting  linkages  of  3  rural  groups  to  the  Nationwide 
Microbank. This linkage involves provision of  financial literacy and banking services to the 
members  of  these  3  groups,  and  will  form  the  basis  for  expanding  these  arrangements  to 
other areas of the country.  
Traditionally, savings and loans societies in Papua New Guinea have been the vehicle for 
providing financial services to members who do not have access to banking services in the 
rural  areas.  Two  types  of  savings  and  loans  societies;  provincial  based  societies  and 
employer  based  societies.  The  provincial  based  societies  have  extensive  branches  at  the 
provincial  level,  particularly  to  those  in  rural  areas,  while  the  employer  based  societies 
provide least expensive financial services to members of that institution.  
The savings and loans movement in Papua New Guinea have grown significantly over recent 
year in assets value. Total assets increased to K730.3 million as at end of March 2009, from 
K232.9  million  as  at  end  of  December  2004.  The  growth  in  asset  values  reflects  good 
performance by the Board and Management of those institutions and on-going supervision 
by  the  Central  Bank.  Membership  also  increased  significantly  from  131,000  in  2004  to 
216,000 as at end of March 2009.  
The National Development Bank (NDB) is an important development institution that provides 
credit to development projects such as those in the agriculture sector. Development lending 
is  usually  targeted  towards  individuals  with  low  capital  and  longer  grace  periods  for  the 
repayment of loans. Efforts to commercialize the NDB from its mandated function may not 
assist in achieving the developments objectives of the Government.  
Payments system  
The Central Bank is also undertaking a strategic project to improve the payments system of 
Papua New Guinea. An efficient payment system is therefore a vital component of a modern 
economy and society.  
Conclusion  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  an  environment  where  many  banks  and  financial  institutions 
around the world affected by the global financial crisis are contracting, it is pleasing to note 
that we in Papua New Guinea are still expanding. Our banking system is sound, liquid and 
prudentially  managed  and  is  prepared  to  take  on  the  challenges  offered  in  the  advent  of 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2009
global  financial  crises,  the  fast  pace  of  private  lending  growth,  development  of  the  LNG 
project and a changed risk landscape of PNG. Everyone must play its part in upholding these 
hard fought gains.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 5
