Bandid Nijathaworn: Thailand’s banking and economic outlook 
Keynote address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
Australian-Thai Chamber Luncheon, Bangkok, 3 April 2009. 
 Let me first thank AustCham Thailand, especially President Andrew Durieux, for the invitation 
to  speak  at  today’s  luncheon.  It  has  been  almost  four  years  since  I  last  spoke  at  an 
AustCham event, so, it is a pleasure to be back. Today I will speak on Thailand’s banking 
and economic outlook, a subject which I am sure will be of interest to all of you. In keeping 
with what a good luncheon speaker should do, I will keep my remarks short and to the point, 
so that we will have plenty of time for desserts and for questions and answers. 
This week is undoubtedly an important week for the global economy, as leaders and finance 
ministers  of  the  world’s  twenty  most  important  economies  gather  in  London  to  map  out  a 
strategy that aims to comprehensively address the current global financial crisis. Up to now, 
policies to tackle the crisis have been left largely to the individual economies in response to 
the  problems  that  arise.  But  as  the  crisis  has  mutated  into  a  major  global  problem,  a 
coordinated  policy  response  at  a  global  level  is  clearly  needed  to  ensure  a  synchronized 
recovery in all the key parts of the global economy. Without coordinated and comprehensive 
policy  response,  a  synchronized  recovery  will  not  take  place.  And  without  a  synchronized 
recovery, the world will be at risk of running into a weak, patchy, and unsustained recovery 
for  a  prolonged  period.  So,  this  week  is  really  an  important  week,  and  what  has  been 
announced  so  far  by  the  world  leaders,  in  terms  of  the  new  resources  that  will  be  made 
available to aid the global recovery, is positive for the market and for the global economy. 
The current global crisis is now in its 20th month. My count is since the Federal Reserve took 
the unprecedented step to reduce its policy interest rate sharply for the first time in August 
2007, signaling the serious nature of the problem. Thailand, being a small open economy, 
could  not  escape  the  impact  of  the  turmoil.  The  impact  on  Thailand,  so  far,  has  been  felt 
through a sharp reversal of capital flows, on account of deleveraging by foreign investors, as 
well  as  through  a  tightening  of  access  to  foreign  capital,  and  through  a  dislocation  in 
economic activities as export and tourism receipts fell sharply. The banking sector, however, 
has been resilient given the low direct exposure to the toxic assets, the low reliance on global 
liquidity as a source of funding, and the strong capital base. The fact that the Thai banking 
sector  remains  safe  and  sound  is  no  accident.  It  is  largely  the  result  of  continuing 
improvement in risk management capacity of the banking sector following the Asian financial 
crisis, under a stronger regulatory framework and risk-based supervision. Compared to some 
countries at this time, the banking sector in Thailand is functioning normally, with the financial 
markets  remaining  relatively  stable  despite  greater  volatility  and  uncertainty  in  the  global 
economy. 
At  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  we  are  optimistic  that  policy  efforts  at  the  global  level  will  be 
successful in stabilizing the financial markets and in providing a comprehensive solution to 
the current crisis. Nevertheless, our view is that the adjustment that follows, and hence the 
process  of  global  recovery,  will  probably  take  time.  More  importantly,  in  the  Thai  context, 
given the global nature of the crisis, and the fact that our economy has been affected mainly 
through  contagion,  it  will  be  difficult  for  an  economy  like  Thailand  to  achieve  a  sustained 
recovery on our own, if the global economy does not recover. Therefore, in the context of 
policy, the focus of policy response in Thailand should be on helping the economy and the 
private  sector  to  adjust  to  the  impact  of  the  crisis,  while  ensuring  that  the  key  economic 
institutions  and  systems  6  most  importantly  the  banking  sector  6  continue  to  function 
normally, so that the economy will be in a position to move forward quickly once the crisis 
storm passes. 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 1
It is in this context that the Bank of Thailand has been shaping our response to the current 
economic downturn. The response so far includes an aggressive easing of monetary policy, 
ensuring adequate liquidity to the financial markets and the banking sector, helping banks to 
better  manage  the  increased  risk  in  lending  by introducing a  government-sponsored  credit 
guarantee scheme for SMEs, and encouraging banks to act early in assisting customers with 
debt rescheduling or debt restructuring so as to ward off the pressure on asset quality and on 
the non-performing loans. 
These are the direction and the measures we have taken in our response to the crisis, and 
more will be done if needed to ensure a smooth adjustment in the economy and the financial 
sector. Judging from what we are seeing in terms of the recent broad global developments, I 
am  confident  that  the  combined  effects  of  the  fiscal  stimulus  by  the  Government  and  the 
financial measures that the Bank of Thailand has put in place, should provide the essential 
cushion for the economy to adjust to shock, and keep the impact of the global financial crisis 
on the economy manageable. 
As for the near-term outlook, latest monthly data still show signs of sharp corrections in the 
domestic economy. Exports and tourism fell by 11 percent and 23 percent, respectively, in 
February  from  a  year  earlier.  Imports,  on  the  other  hand,  fell  by  more  than  40  percent, 
indicating a sharp deterioration in the domestic demand and supply conditions, and this is 
reflected by the continued declines in manufacturing production, capacity utilization, private 
consumption and investment. Domestic credit growth slowed to 6.8 percent in February while 
deposits grew by 6 percent. Contraction in economic activities further eased the pressure on 
prices, with headline inflation declined to a minus 0.2 percent in March. 
Given the sharp dislocation in economic activities in the last few months, market consensus 
now  seems  to  agree  on  a  small  negative  growth  for  Thailand  this  year,  but  with  an 
improvement  in  growth  next  year.  This  means  the  market  expects  the  Thai  economy  this 
year to go through a period of sharp adjustment on account of the global slowdown before 
growth is resumed next year. This view is consistent with the current mainstream view that, 
with the strengthening of the policy efforts at the global level, the world economy should look 
better  next  year  compared  to  this  year.  As  for  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  our  Monetary  Policy 
Committee in its meeting next week, will also be going over this same question in assessing 
the near-term outlook for our deliberation of monetary policy. Whatever growth numbers we 
come  up  with,  they  will  be  conditional  upon  the  prospects  of  the  global  economy  going 
forward, especially after the G-20 announcement of the new global policy. 
Turning now to a more positive note, regardless of the adjustment we have to go through this 
year, or even next year, the Thai economy at this time is fundamentally stronger, and is in a 
better position to weather the crisis, compared with the situations we were in ten years ago 
during the Asian financial crisis. Let me give you six good reasons. 
First, Thailand does not have any imbalances in the economy, and hence there is no bubble 
to speak of. Second, the country’s external position is much stronger now with surpluses in 
the  external  current  account,  low  level  of  foreign  debt,  and  a  large  international  reserves 
position.  Third,  our  banking  sector  is  sound  and  resilient,  and  is  functioning  normally  with 
good liquidity. 
Fourth, the corporate and household sectors are not highly leveraged. They have low debt 
and strong balance sheets. Fifth, the ability of the economy to adjust to external shock has 
improved markedly from before, given the flexibility that we now have in our economic and 
financial systems. The most crucial is a more flexible policy regime, especially the exchange 
rate. And sixth is the low level of public sector debt, now at 39 percent of GDP. This low debt 
gives ample room for the authorities to use fiscal policy to support growth. Such room will 
give the authorities better leverage to cope with any further fallout from the global turmoil. 
The last point I want to make is to assure you that despite the ongoing global credit crunch, 
and the tightened conditions in the international financial markets in terms of funding access, 
our  policy  on  cross-border  capital  flows  will  remain  open  and  liberal,  and  our  policy  on 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2009
access to domestic funding by non-residents will also remain unchanged. This should help 
reduce any fear that you may have about policy tightening in this area, and the current policy 
stance should help foreign-owned Thai resident companies to adjust well to the impact of the 
crisis. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I hope my brief remark today has been useful in updating you on the current situations, and 
that  it  adds  to  the  confidence  that  you  already  have  in  Thailand,  and  in  the  ability  of  our 
economy and the banking sector to weather the current global downturn. We are now living 
in an exceptional time, but our caution and right action, together with a good collaboration 
between private businesses and the authorities, will help see us through. Thank you for your 
attention and again thank you for the invitation. 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 3
