Sada Reddy: Fiji’s economic situation  
Talk by Mr Sada Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the Ministry of Information, 
Communications and Archives, Suva, 22 April 2009. 
 I 
the  world. 
from  what’s  happening  around 
I’m  very  humbled  that  I  had  been  appointed  the  Governor  of  the  RBF.  I  have  taken  this 
responsibility  at  a  time  when  the  whole  world  is  going  through  very  difficult  times.  And,  of 
course, as you know we have our own economic problems here. 
There are a lot of challenges ahead of us but I am very confident that with my appointment I’ll 
be  able  to  make  a  big  difference  in  the  recovery  of  the  Fiji  economy.  I  realize  the  big 
challenges lying ahead. But given my long experience in this organization running RB is not 
going to be difficult for me. I’ve worked in the RBF for last 34 yrs in all the important policy 
areas and have been the Deputy Governor for the last 14 years so. 
It’s the policy choices that I have to make would be the challenge. I need the cooperation of 
the  Government,  of  the  financial  system,  in  particular,  the  banks,  and  the  business 
community to make our policies successful. In the next few months I’ll be actively engaging 
all the key players and explain our policies and what we need to do so that we are able to 
somehow  buffer  ourselves 
think  we 
underestimated the impact of the global crisis on the Fiji economy. It is having a very major 
impact.  
Question 1: And when it comes to taking challenges, I know you have taken the “bull 
by the horn” and the first step was the devaluation of the Fiji dollar. Can you explain 
what is devaluation and why the devaluation?  
Answer: Devaluation is not a new word in Fiji. We devalued our currency, including this time 
around, four times so far. Twice in 1987. Pretty hefty devaluations. Again in 1998. Because 
of  the  Asian  crisis,  we  had  to  devalue  our  currency  by  20per  cent.  Actually,  when  we 
devalued in 1998 the situation was not as bad as now but we could see it could get worse so 
it was a preemptive devaluation. This time around the devaluation had other reasons. 
But  let  me  explain  what  devaluation  means:  devaluation  means  that  the  central  bank,  of 
course, with the approval of the Minister of Finance, reduces the value of the Fiji dollar by a 
certain percentage against foreign currencies like the NZ dollar, US dollar and the Australian 
dollar. So, when we devalued by 20per cent on Wednesday 15th April, 2009, the Fijian dollar 
was 57 cents US before devaluation and after devaluation was 45 cents US; a drop of 12 
cents. By devaluing, what we do is, we make our imports more expensive while our exports 
earn  more.  It  has  two  effects:  it  encourages  our  export  sector  and  discourages  imported 
items and that’s why the need to devalue comes because when I’m talking about exports and 
imports I’m talking about our balance of payment and our foreign reserves.  
Question  2:  And  as  the  purpose  of  the  devaluation  you  have  mentioned,  there  are 
major  sectors  that  are  affected,  Can  you  elaborate  on  what  major  sectors  and  how 
they will be affected?  
Answer: Before I do that, let me explain why we devalued when we devalued. The reason 
why  we  devalued  is  because  we’ve  been  monitoring  our  currency  closely  for  a  number  of 
years now and our balance of payments. 
We’ve been doing a lot of work over the last 6 to 7 years putting in a number of policies. The 
economy  was  growing  quite  strongly  2003-2004  on  the  back  of  booming  building  and 
construction industry. Even some of our exports were doing well; tourism was also doing very 
well. All these were sucking in a lot of imports. That was good, foreign reserves going down 
due to imports, which go into productive areas is good, but our balance of payments could 
not sustain that because our exports were not increasing. So we thought, okay, we will not 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 1
tighten  monetary  policy.  What  we  did  was  we  borrowed  US$150  million  in  Sept  2006  to 
support our balance of payments so that the investment that was happening in the building 
industry and all the other areas will to start to pay off in couple of year’s time. But events 
overtook us and we lost the advantage of the offshore borrowing. In the meantime, of course, 
we were hit by this global crisis and the massive floods in January. 
So, the situation became very critical and foreign reserves gradually started to fall and quite 
rapidly in recent months. Our foreign reserves were as high as 6-7 months few years ago. 
Gradually came down to about 4-5 months to 3 months last year and now 2 or even below 2 
and the outlook is not very good. So, I had no choice but to act at this time. 
The other good thing was that inflation rate had declined substantially so it provided the right 
time  for  devaluation.  The  inflation  rate  was  only  0.5per  cent  recently,  on  an  annual  basis. 
With devaluation inflation rate is going to go up quite rapidly. 
Inflation is low and you have balance of payment problem, so I think, devaluation is the right 
way to go. You also know that there was huge speculation in the market place, even people 
talking  about  certain  percentages  of  devaluation.  So,  when  that  happens  capital  starts  to 
move out of the country. We can’t afford that. So, I had to act very swiftly, which I did on 
Wednesday 15th April to devalue the F$ by 20 percent.  
Question  3:  So  what are  the  benefits  of  the  20per  cent  devaluation  of  the Fiji  dollar 
immediately?  
Answer: The immediate effect is that all our exporters are going to receive 20 per cent more 
in Fijian dollars. Our tourism is going to benefit greatly. The global crisis is really affecting our 
tourism sector and it is going to have greater effect later on. We had to correct this situation. 
We  cannot  go  on  the  way  we  were  doing.  One  more  thing,  because  our  major  source 
markets – Australia and New Zealand are in recession and their currencies had fallen against 
the US $ substantially. In our case, our Fijian dollar was strengthening; Fijian dollar, for few 
months, was stronger than New Zealand dollar. How can you have that? So, it was becoming 
extremely expensive for Australians and New Zealanders to come to Fiji. Now it would be 
cheaper for them to come to Fiji and of course when they come they bring with them foreign 
currency. Our employment in the tourism sector is going to grow and our tourism industry will 
put more investment and I’m sure that it will have very positive effect all around for all the 
exporters.  
Question 4: Were there any other options other than devaluation whereby you could 
have handled the current situation?  
Answer: As I explained to you, I think we had used up all the options and the time was right 
to move on the currency.  
Question 5: Concerns have been expressed that the devaluation would mostly affect 
the poor so how do you think the pinch felt by the poor will be cushioned?  
Answer:  No,  everybody  will  be  affected  by  devaluation.  Not  only  the  poor.  Of  course,  the 
poor will be more affected because of the impact on food prices and so on but there may be 
some  safety  net  to  assist.  Maybe  those  people  who  are  on  welfare  and  so  on,  the 
Government may have to look at some options to support them. But where possible I would 
urge  our  people,  especially  our  rural  people,  in  the  villages  and  the  islands  and  so  on, 
already they are quite self-sufficient, but they should become more self-sufficient in terms of 
local food and fruits. People should rely less and less on imported items.  
Question 6: How can we grow the economy to ensure long-term sustainability?  
Answer: Investment is critical to that process. As you know our level of investment is not 
very high. It reached about 20-22per cent of GDP in 2004-2006 but since then has fallen to 
around 15 per cent of GDP. We need to raise our investment to 20 to 25per cent of our GDP. 
That’s  a  big  challenge  and  there  are  a  lot  of  issues,  which  come  into  investment.  We  are 
trying  our  best  to  increase  investments.  Last  year  Government  announced  a  number  of 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2009
initiatives to promote investment. We have to provide the right environment for investment to 
take place. Now, there are some elements missing. In this regard, with devaluation now out 
of  the  way,  it  provides  a  very  stable  financial  environment  for  people  now  to  consider 
investing. 
I  would  urge  business  sector  to  concentrate  on  business.  Fiji  goes  on,  we  live  on,  we 
increase investment, our people have to survive, and we have to grow our economy. There is 
no choice. We have to invest and make the most of it. I have now provided the right kind 
policy environment for investment to increase. 
In this regard, let me explain a little bit more; we not only devalued the currency, we also 
acted on interest rates. The interest rate environment is now also stabilized. 
I have been very concerned about interest rates in the country.  
Let me explain this particular policy because to me this is more important than devaluation. 
We invited the banks last year at the time of the national budget preparation, and had one on 
one  discussion  with  the  Chief  Managers.  We  said,  look  we  are  going  through  this  very 
difficult  time.  Every  country  is  going  through  difficult  times.  All  sections  of  the  community 
need  to  get  together  as  partners  and  assist  in  this  growth  process.  We  pleaded  with  the 
commercial banks to play a key role in this and they have great ability to do that. I’m sure 
they will do that. But I’m afraid I did not see much progress in this regard. We had asked 
them  that  by  January  this  year;  they  should  come  up  with  some  very  clear  policies  in  this 
regard. When I saw two of the banks increasing interest rates recently, I was dumbfounded. 
After the discussions we had with the banks and for them to go ahead and increase interest 
rates was not acceptable. So I had to introduce some measure whereby we provide a stable 
interest rate environment as well. Now the currency and interest rates are both stabilized for 
investment to take place. 
Let me explain how the interest rate policy is going to work. What I’ve told the banks is that 
the weighted average – it’s a technical term but slowly people will understand, the weighted 
average  interest  rate  of  each  of  the  banks,  say  for  instance  Bank  A,  has  got  a  weighted 
average interest rate of 7per cent in December last year and today their weighted average is 
say 7.5. I told them, your rate should go back to the rate that was at the end of December 
last year. But I left it to them to decide at what rate they will lend. I have not interfered with 
their  decision  as  to  at  what  rate  they  wish  to  lend  to  their  individual  customers.  They  can 
charge any rate, maybe 14 per cent to 5per cent. It’s their choice. They set the rate based on 
the risks of each loan but on average I want them to be at December 2008. 
The  other  thing  I  did  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  control  the 
spread – ie the interest rate spread which is the difference between the lending rate and the 
deposit rate. Now, normally this is not done. I was very reluctant to introduce this policy. I 
have been instrumental in deregulating the financial system in this country. I advised the then 
Governor of RBF, Mr Savenaca Siwatibau, in 1987/88, that the environment was right to free 
up interest rates and Siwa accepted my advice and we freed up interest rates. So, I played a 
very key role in freeing up interest rates and I worked in developing financial instruments; I 
led  the  work  which  set  up  the  Capital  Market  Development  Authority  so  that  the  market 
forces  worked.  However,  as  things  moved  on  I  could  see  certain  trends  developing  in 
banking practices which were not healthy. I had seen banks maintaining their spread even 
when times are bad for the country.  
I’ll give the example of 2007 – the economy declined by 6.6per cent and the Banks made 
huge  profits.  I  have  all  the  information  with  me  –  what  each  bank  makes,  what  is  their 
spread, for how long and how they quickly adjust their rates to maintain their profitability. So, 
it’s the rest of the population which bears the brunt of adjustment while the banks maintain 
their profitability. To me that is unacceptable. I want to give a very clear signal to the banks 
that  I’m  not  interested  in  controlling  the  interest  rates  but  I  want  to  see  banks  behaving 
responsibly in our economy. They must support the growth of our economy. They operate 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 3
here. If we all do well, we all benefit, if we go down, let’s all go down together. I do not like 
some  sections  to  take  advantage  of  the  situation.  That  is my  sole  reason  to  introduce  the 
policy, which is very unprecedented.  
Question 7: How will the devaluation affect the sugar industry and agricultural sector?  
Answer: Very positive – they will get 20 per cent more revenue immediately and they’ll be 
encouraged  to  grow  more  food,  those  who  are  exporting  eggplants,  chilies  and  all  sort  of 
things, I would encourage them to grow more food – not only for exports, but grow more food 
for  local  consumption  as  well.  And  this  devaluation  is  going  to  give  that  nudge  which  was 
required.  
Question 8: Going back to Banks – very soon Banks will be advised to open up Micro 
Finance  units,  what  is  the  purpose  of  Micro-Finance  and  how  will  it  affect  the 
economic growth?  
Answer: That is another area that we have been having long conversations for a number of 
years,  as  far  as  20  years  back.  I’ve  been  personally  talking  to  banks. Please,  can  you  do 
something,  change  your  banking  practices,  and  don’t  just  concentrate  on  big  businesses. 
You’re operating in Fiji. We are a developing country. We are spread along the islands. See 
how  we  can  grow  the  rural  sector.  That’s  where  the  future  of  the  country  is.  It’s  the  rural 
sector we need to grow. Without the right kind of financing structure our rural sector can not 
grow. They have all the resources – Fiji doesn’t lack resources. It’s got all the resources it 
needs.  We  need  somehow  to  get  the  capital  to  work  with  the  resources.  And  the  banking 
system can facilitate that. This is done very successfully in many countries – you go to Asia, 
South  America,  almost  all  the  central  banks  have  special  micro-finance  areas  and  they 
expect all the commercial banks to be actively involved in the rural areas.  
I visited the Chairman of the Bank of Baroda, few years ago, in Mumbai and he briefed me 
on what they are doing in India in terms of Micro-Finance and I was very impressed. 
There is no reason why banks cannot have Micro-Finance specialization in their operation. 
There is no reason. We just have to change their mindset – that’s the key. People are too 
stuck with their own style of operation. We want them now to change their mindset, they are 
operating in Fiji; we are a developing country, we have large number of people in the rural 
areas and we want them to benefit from our banking industry. 
That was the thinking behind making the banks to open Micro-Finance units in each of their 
branches from Jan next year. To assist in that process I have also announced the set up of a 
Micro-Finance  Research  and  Development  Unit  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  headed  by  a  Chief 
Manager, to drive this process. So, in the next few months we’ll be having active discussions 
with all the key stakeholders and we really want to make a difference in a couple years of 
time. 
Question 9: Any comments, any message to the nation?  
Answer: As I’ve said we are going through difficult times. Unfortunately, we had to devalue 
our currency. The circumstances warranted it. I feel for the people, poor people, but we had 
to do something in terms of the economy. Prices are going to increase. I urge our people to 
grow  more  food,  reduce  consumption  of  imported  items  and  be  self-sufficient  as  much  as 
possible. Do not consume too much luxury items; avoid imported items as much as possible. 
This is a subject, very dear to me. I’ll talk a little bit more about this.  
It’s a question of changing mindsets. Sometime ago I went to Navua. I walked about three 
hours up the Navua River and got to this village. I was given cordial juice. I didn’t refuse but I 
was  sitting  under  a  lemon  tree  and  ripe  lemons  were  lying  on  the  grass.  But  here  I  was 
drinking imported cordial juice. So, I said to the Headman, I would have loved to have this 
lemon juice rather than the cordial but I found out they feel honoured to serve imported items 
to a visitor. I said to him, please, this is a wrong thing to do, change your mind – a visitor will 
love local lemonade rather than a cordial made from imported items. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2009
I’ll give you another example; half the country is covered in sugarcane. You never can buy a 
glass of chilled sugarcane juice anywhere in Fiji – I’m told there is one in Nadi somewhere; I 
haven’t seen it. But you go to Asia almost every stall serves chilled sugarcane juice. But, why 
not in Fiji?  
We tend to drink coke etc all imported stuff, we don’t make local fruit juices, our fruits rot. We 
have  the  best  pineapples  and  watermelon  in  the  world,  and  everything  from  guava  to 
mangoes but do you see our people preparing fresh tropical fruit juices that they can serve 
hygienically. No. It’s all a matter of changing mindset. We have to work on these things. I’m 
going to propose certain policies to Government in this regard.  
Another area that I have been very vocal in my public statements is the hotel industry. They 
are the biggest culprits in not utilizing more of our local fruits and vegetables because of the 
mindset. They find it too difficult and their chefs and their systems are all geared to cooking 
imported  food.  You  go  to  Asia  –  almost  everything  is  local,  very  little  imported.  I  think  we 
should learn from our Asian friends. 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 5
