Ewart S Williams: Update on CIB/CLICO/CNMB  
Media address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad & Tobago, 
to update on CIB/CLICO/CNMB, Port-of-Spain, 13 February 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This is the first in a series of media conferences that the Central Bank intends to schedule to 
update  the  national  community  about  progress  with  respect  to  resolving  the  financial 
difficulties in CLICO, CIB and CMMB. The Chairman of the Board will also be communicating 
with the media from time to time. 
Since  the  Media  Conference  of  Friday  30,  January  2009,  much  has  been  achieved  in  the 
implementation  of  the  MOU  signed  between  CL  Financial  and  the  Government  and  in  the 
clarification of the financial situation of the three institutions – CIB, CLICO and CMMB. 
As you are no doubt aware, in accordance with the MOU, a new Board was appointed to run 
the affairs of Clico, in addition to a Manager/CEO (Mr. Andrew Claudius Musaib-Ali) and a 
Chief Financial Controller (Ms Carolyn John). 
CL Financial, the signatory to the MOU has appointed a team to work with the Government 
on the implementation of the MOU. This team and the Government representatives have had 
one meeting but have otherwise been in constant communication with each other. 
Meanwhile, with the assistance of the Manager appointed to Clico by the Central Bank, we 
have  made  much  progress  in  clarifying  the  present  financial  position  of  CLICO,  which 
unfortunately,  appears  to  be  much  worse  than  we  had  envisaged.  Let  me  give  you  some 
examples: 
• 
Based on the audited accounts, Clico had surpluses in the Statutory Fund in 2004, 
2005 and 2006; these surpluses shifted to a deficit of about $600 million in 2007. 
Based on the un-audited accounts for 2008 the Statutory Fund deficit (measured on 
the same basis as in the period 2004-2007) has ballooned to $5.1 billion. If this is 
correct, one interpretation would be that the premium income collected in 2008, and 
which should have been directed to the Statutory Fund, was otherwise utilized. 
Over the last few years Clico’s statutory fund assets have included several inter-
group  assets,  including  deposits  in  CIB  and  securities  issued  by  the  parent  CL 
Financial.  Certainly  at  the  present  time,  these  instruments  appear  to  be  of  little 
value. If we exclude these from the Statutory Fund calculation of 2008, the notional 
deficit rises to $10 billion, on a policyholder liability base of $16.7 billion. 
In  the  CL  Financial  business  model,  Clico  was  a  major  source  of  cash  much  of 
which  was  used  to  finance  investments  held  in  the  name  of  other  entities  in  the 
Group.  In  this  model,  Clico  has  ended  up  as  guarantor  for  many  of  the  Group’s 
assets  most  of  which  are  heavily  pledged.  Of  course,  pledging  limits  the  potential 
proceeds  from  asset  sales.  A  Canadian  firm  has  been  contracted  to  disentangle, 
inter alia, a whole range of complicated financial transactions, to review Clico’s non-
policyholders’ liabilities and the extent to which Clico’s assets are pledged. 
   Turning to the immediate situation: 
• 
As  at  end-January  2009,  Clico  had  policy  surrender  requests  on  maturing 
obligations of $650 million; the monthly payment for pensions and annuities is $40 
million. Clico currently has a bank balance of $15 million, in addition to a sizable 
bank overdraft. 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 1
In accordance with the MOU the Cabinet has approved a first tranche of a funding package 
to begin to ease the liquidity pressures on Clico and British American. In line with the spirit of 
the  MOU,  the  focus  in  the  first  round  will  be  on  meeting  policyholders’  liabilities  and 
payments to pensioners. 
These steps would convince policy holders that Clico has the full backing and commitment of 
the Government and the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago. Policyholders should also feel 
confident that their funds are protected and this should encourage the maximum roll-over of 
policyholder funds. At worst, to facilitate an orderly recovery of Clico we would request that 
policyholders do not seek withdrawals before their maturity dates. 
Ladies  and Gentlemen,  for  years  Clico  has  been  a  most  prominent  domestic  and  regional 
brand.  The  objective  of  this  rescue  exercise  is  to  restore  confidence.  But  this  process  will 
obviously involve considerable public resources for which the Government and the Central 
Bank, as regulator, will be held responsible. 
As I noted earlier Clico’s recent financial operations and the reasons for the emergence of 
very sizable statutory fund deficit in 2008 are still very unclear. The information that we have 
received so far points to a range of complex financial arrangements which have ended up 
with  Clico  as  either  direct  debtor  or  guarantor.  As  regulator  we  need  to  understand  these 
arrangements  more  clearly,  if  we  are  to  continue  recommending  government  financial 
support. 
To facilitate this wide-ranging and very complex exercise, (which is critical to addressing the 
claims of policyholders and creditors in a comprehensive way) the Central Bank has decided 
to invoke the powers provided under Section 44D of the Central Bank Act (as amended) in 
respect  of  CLICO  and  British  American.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  move  is  consistent  with 
Clause 16 of the MOU which states that: 
“The  Memorandum  of  Understanding  does  not  preclude  (a)  the  Central 
Bank  from  requiring  that  CLF,  CIB,  CLICO  and  BA  take  any  other  action 
which  in  the  opinion  of  the  Central  Bank  is  desirable;  or  (b)  the  Central 
Bank  taking  such  action  as  the  Central  Bank  may  think  fit  under  the 
provisions of the Financial Institutions Act, the Insurance Act or the Central 
Bank Act and any of them” 
The invocation of these powers by the Central Bank is designed to achieve several specific 
objectives, including: 
1. 
Conferring legal authority to the Board, appointed in accordance with the MOU, to 
manage all of the business and undertakings of CLICO. 
Providing  the  necessary  authority  for  beginning  the  restructuring  of  CLICO  as 
envisaged under the MOU; 
Providing  the  authority  for  conducting  the  requisite  in-depth  examination  of  the 
business  operations,  contracts  and  arrangements  of  CLICO  that  may  have 
contributed to the current state of the company; 
Providing  a  legal  basis  for  entering  into  negotiations  with  creditors  in  order  to 
facilitate any debt re-structuring that may become necessary; 
Providing  a  legal  basis  for  advancing  the  funding  to  which  the  Government  is 
committed in order to ensure the protection of policyholders of CLICO. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
I would like to assure the public that the exercise of its powers by the Central Bank will not 
cause any disruption of the day to day operations of the two companies. 
The new arrangements that I have mentioned in respect of CLICO (specifically Section 44D 
invocation)  will  also  be  applicable  to  British  American  Insurance  Company.  Next  week  we 
plan to announce a new Board for BA. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2009
As regards CIB, we are working frantically to prepare deposit files that need to be transferred 
to First Citizens Bank Limited. The exercise has turned out to be a major challenge because 
of  the  state  in  which  CIB’s  records  have  been  found.  We  give  the  assurance  that  this 
exercise will be completed in another week and that funds will be available by February 25, 
2009. 
I  apologise  for  the  delay  in  the  execution  of  this  transaction,  and  for  the  inconvenience  it 
would have caused depositors. We are doing our absolute best to have this task completed 
as quickly as possible. 
As you are aware, the MOU provides for the transfer to First Citizens Bank of the shares in 
CMMB as part of the consideration put up by CLF to balance the assets and deposit liabilities 
being transferred to First Citizens. Considerable progress has been made towards this end 
and  the  legal  arrangements  should  be  finalized  within  the  next  ten  days  or  so.  In  the 
meantime, First Citizens continues to provide support and oversight over the operations of 
CMMB and has succeeded in returning a great deal of calm and stability to those operations. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Government and the Central Bank have undertaken a number of 
steps,  including  today’s  actions,  to  protect  policyholders  of  Clico  and  BA,  and  to  maintain 
stability and confidence in the financial system. 
I am pleased to see that the steps we have taken so far have already succeeded in reducing 
the  initial  concerns.  There  is  a  greater  stability  in  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  and 
customers of Clico, CIB and CMMB have shown tremendous maturity in responding to the 
current  financial  situation.  There  is  still  a  considerable  way  to  go  and  I  therefore  urge  all 
members of the public to continue to support Clico and BA based on the commitments made 
by the Government and the Central Bank. 
Remember,  our  banking  system  is  enormously  robust,  well-capitalised  and  generally 
conservative  and  responsible.  Clico/CIB  were  isolated  cases  of  an  overly-aggressive  and 
risky  business  model.  With  the  committed  assistance  of  the  Government  and  the  Central 
Bank, and with the support of the general public, Clico will overcome its current difficulties 
and emerge as a transformed, more resilient part of an even stronger financial sector. 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 3
