Daniel K Tarullo: Bank supervision 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 4 August 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you 
for  your  invitation  to  testify  this  morning.  The  financial  crisis  had  many  causes,  including 
global imbalances in savings and capital flows, the rapid integration of lending activities with 
the  issuance,  trading,  and  financing  of  securities,  the  existence  of  gaps  in  the  regulatory 
structure  for  the  financial  system,  and  widespread  failures  of  risk  management  across  a 
range  of  financial  institutions.  Just  as  the  crisis  had  many  causes,  the  response  of 
policymakers must be broad in scope and multifaceted.  
Improved prudential supervision – the topic of today's hearing – is a necessary component of 
the  policy  response.  The  crisis  revealed  supervisory  shortcomings  among  all  financial 
regulators, to be sure. But it also demonstrated that the framework for prudential supervision 
and  regulation  had  not  kept  pace  with  changes  in  the  structure,  activities,  and  growing 
interrelationships  of  the  financial  sector.  Accordingly,  it  is  essential  both  to  refocus  the 
regulation and supervision of banking institutions under existing authorities and to augment 
those authorities in certain respects. 
In my testimony today, I will begin by suggesting the elements of an effective framework for 
prudential  supervision.  Then  I  will  review  actions  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  within  its 
existing statutory authorities to strengthen supervision of banks and bank holding companies 
in light of developments in the banking system and the lessons of the financial crisis. Finally, 
I  will  identify  some  gaps  and  weaknesses  in  the  system  of  prudential  supervision.  One 
potential gap has already been addressed through the cooperative effort of federal and state 
banking  agencies  to  prevent  insured  depository  institutions  from  engaging  in  "regulatory 
arbitrage" through charter conversions. Others, however, will require congressional action. 
Elements of an effective framework for prudential supervision 
An effective framework for the prudential regulation and supervision of banking institutions 
includes four basic elements. 
First, of course, there must be sound regulation and supervision of each insured depository 
institution.  Applicable  regulations  must  be  well-designed  to  promote  the  safety  and 
soundness of the institution. Less obvious, perhaps, but of considerable importance, is the 
usefulness of establishing regulatory requirements that make use of market discipline to help 
confine  undue  risk-taking  in  banking  institutions.  Supervisory  policies  and  techniques  also 
must be up to the task of enforcing and supplementing regulatory requirements. 
Second, there must be effective supervision of the companies that own insured depository 
institutions.  The  scope  and  intensity  of  this  supervision  should  vary  with  the  extent  and 
complexity of activities conducted by the parent company or its nonbank subsidiaries. When 
a bank holding company is essentially a shell, with negligible activities or ownership stakes 
outside the bank itself, holding company regulation can be less intensive and more modest in 
scope. But when material activities or funding are conducted at the holding company level, or 
when  the  parent  owns nonbank  entities,  the  intensity  of  scrutiny  must  increase in order  to 
protect the bank from both the direct and indirect risks of such activities or affiliations and to 
ensure that the holding company is able to serve as a source of strength to the bank on a 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 1
continuing basis. The task of holding company supervision thus involves an examination of 
the  relationships  between  the  bank  and  its  affiliates  as  well  as  an  evaluation  of  risks 
associated with those nonbank affiliates. Consolidated capital requirements also play a key 
role,  by  helping  ensure  that  a  holding  company  maintains  adequate  capital  to  support  its 
group-wide activities and does not become excessively leveraged. 
Third,  there  cannot  be  significant  gaps  or  exceptions  in  the  supervisory  and  regulatory 
coverage of insured depository institutions and the firms that own them. Obviously, the goals 
of prudential supervision will be defeated if some institutions are able to escape the rules and 
requirements designed to achieve those goals. There is a less obvious kind of gap, however, 
where  supervisors  are  restricted  from  obtaining  relevant  information  or  reaching  activities 
that could pose risks to banking organizations. 
Fourth,  prudential  supervision  –  especially  of  larger  institutions  –  must  complement  and 
support  regulatory  measures  designed  to  contain  systemic  risk  and  the  too-big-to-fail 
problem, topics that I have discussed in previous appearances before this Committee.1 One 
clear lesson of the financial crisis is that important financial risks may not be readily apparent 
if  supervision  focuses  only  on  the  exposures  and  activities  of  individual  institutions.  For 
example, the liquidity strategy of a banking organization may appear sound when viewed in 
isolation but, when examined alongside parallel strategies of other institutions, may be found 
to be inadequate to withstand periods of financial stress. 
Strengthening prudential supervision and regulation 
The crisis has revealed significant risk-management deficiencies at a wide range of financial 
institutions, including banking organizations. It also has challenged some of the assumptions 
and analysis on which conventional supervisory wisdom has been based. For example, the 
collapse of Bear Stearns, which at the end was unable to borrow privately even  with U.S. 
government securities as collateral, has undermined the widely held belief that a company 
can readily borrow against high-quality collateral, even in stressed environments. Moreover, 
the  growing  co-dependency  between  financial  institutions and  markets  –  evidenced  by  the 
significant  role  that  investor  and  counterparty  runs  played  in  the  crisis  –  implies  that 
supervisors must pay closer attention to the potential for financial markets to influence the 
safety  and  soundness  of  banking  organizations.  These  and  other  lessons  of  the  financial 
crisis  have  led  to  changes  in  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices  in  order  to  improve 
prudential  oversight  of  banks  and  bank  holding  companies,  as  well  as  to  advance  a 
macroprudential, or systemic, regulatory agenda. 
Working with other domestic and foreign supervisors, the Federal Reserve has taken steps 
to  require  the  strengthening  of  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk  management  at  banking 
organizations.  There  is  little  doubt  that,  in  the  period  before  the  crisis,  capital  levels  were 
insufficient  to  serve  as  a  needed  buffer  against  loss,  particularly  at  some  of  the  largest 
financial institutions, both in the United States and elsewhere. Measures to strengthen the 
capital  requirements  for  trading  activities  and  securitization  exposures  –  two  areas  where 
banking  organizations  have  experienced  greater  losses  than  anticipated  –  were  recently 
announced  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  Additional  efforts  are  under 
way to improve the quality of the capital used to satisfy minimum capital ratios, to strengthen 
the  capital  requirements  for  other  types  of  on-  and  off-balance-sheet  exposures,  and  to 
establish  capital  buffers  in  good  times  that can be  drawn  down  as  economic  and  financial 
conditions  deteriorate.  Capital  buffers,  though  not  easy  to  design  or  implement  in  an 
                                                 
1   See  Daniel  K.  Tarullo  (2009),  "Regulatory  Restructuring,"  statement  before  the  Committee  on  Banking, 
Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  U.S.  Senate,  July  23;  and  Daniel  K.  Tarullo  (2009),  "Modernizing  Bank 
Supervision and Regulation," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. 
Senate, March 19. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2009
efficacious fashion, could be an especially important step in reducing the procyclical effects 
of the current capital rules. Further review of accounting standards governing valuation and 
loss  provisioning  also would  be  useful,  and might  result  in  modifications  to  the accounting 
rules that reduce their procyclical effects without compromising the goals of disclosure and 
transparency.  
The  Federal  Reserve  also  helped  lead  the  Basel  Committee's  development  of  enhanced 
principles of liquidity risk management, which were issued last year.2 Following up on that 
initiative, on June 30, 2009, the federal banking agencies requested public comment on new 
Interagency  Guidance  on  Funding  and  Liquidity  Risk  Management,  which  is  designed  to 
incorporate  the  Basel  Committee's  principles  and  clearly  articulate  consistent  supervisory 
expectations on liquidity risk management.3 The guidance re-emphasizes the importance of 
cash  flow  forecasting,  adequate  buffers  of  contingent  liquidity,  rigorous  stress  testing,  and 
robust  contingent  funding  planning  processes.  It  also  highlights  the  need  for  institutions  to 
better  incorporate  liquidity  costs,  benefits,  and  risks  in  their  internal  product  pricing, 
performance  measurement,  and  new  product  approval  process  for  all  material  business 
lines, products, and activities. 
With respect to bank holding companies specifically, the supervisory program of the Federal 
Reserve has undergone some basic changes. As everyone is aware, many of the financial 
firms that lay at the center of the crisis were not bank holding companies; some were not 
subject to mandatory prudential supervision of any sort. During the crisis a number of very 
large  firms  became  bank  holding  companies  –  in  part  to  reassure  markets  that  they  were 
subject  to  prudential  oversight  and,  in  some  cases,  to  qualify  for  participation  in  various 
government  liquidity  support  programs.  The  extension  of  holding  company  status  to  these 
firms, many of which are not primarily composed of a commercial bank, highlights the degree 
to which the traditional approach to holding company supervision must evolve. 
Recent experience also reinforces the value of holding company supervision in addition to, 
and  distinct  from,  bank  supervision.  Large  organizations  increasingly  operate  and  manage 
their  businesses  on  an  integrated  basis  with  little  regard  for  the  corporate  boundaries  that 
typically  define  the  jurisdictions  of  individual  functional  supervisors.  Indeed,  the  crisis  has 
highlighted the financial, managerial, operational, and reputational linkages among the bank, 
securities, commodity, and other units of financial firms. 
The customary focus on protecting the bank within a holding company, while necessary, is 
clearly  not  sufficient  in  an  era  in  which  systemic  risk  can  arise  wholly  outside  of  insured 
depository  institutions.  Similarly,  the  premise  of  functional  regulation  that  risks  within  a 
diversified organization can be evaluated and managed properly through supervision focused 
on individual subsidiaries within the firm has been undermined further; the need for greater 
attention to the potential for damage to the bank, the organization within which it operates, 
and,  in  some  cases,  the  financial  system  generally,  requires  a  more  comprehensive  and 
integrated assessment of activities throughout the holding company. 
Appropriate enhancements of both prudential and consolidated supervision will only increase 
the need for supervisors to be able to draw on a broad foundation of economic and financial 
knowledge and experience. That is why we are incorporating economists and other experts 
from non-supervisory divisions of the Federal Reserve more completely into the process of 
supervisory  oversight.  The  insights  gained  from  the  macroeconomic  analyses  associated 
                                                 
2   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008), Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and 
Supervision (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September). 
3   See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Administration (2009), 
"Agencies Seek Comment on Proposed Interagency Guidance on Funding and Liquidity Risk Management," 
joint press release, June 30. 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 3
with the formulation of monetary policy and from the familiarity with financial markets derived 
from our open market operations and payments systems responsibilities can add enormous 
value to holding company supervision. 
The recently completed Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) heralds some of 
the  changes  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  approach  to  prudential  supervision  of  the  largest 
banking  organizations.  This  unprecedented  process  involved,  at  its  core,  forward-looking, 
cross-firm, and aggregate analyses of the 19 largest bank holding companies, which together 
control a majority of the assets and loans within the financial system. Bank supervisors in the 
SCAP  defined  a  uniform  set  of  parameters  to  apply  to  each  firm  being  evaluated,  which 
allowed us to evaluate on a consistent basis the expected performance of the firms under 
both  a  baseline  and  more-adverse-than-expected  scenario,  drawing  on  individual  firm 
information and independently estimated outcomes using supervisory models. 
Drawing  on  this  experience,  we  are  prioritizing  and  expanding  our  program  of  horizontal 
examinations  to  assess  key  operations,  risks,  and  risk-management  activities  of  large 
institutions.  For  the  largest  and  most  complex  firms,  we  are  creating  an  enhanced 
quantitative  surveillance  program  that  will  use  supervisory  information,  firm-specific  data 
analysis, and market-based indicators to identify developing strains and imbalances that may 
affect  multiple  institutions,  as  well  as  emerging  risks  to  specific  firms.  Periodic  scenario 
analyses  across  large  firms  will  enhance  our  understanding  of  the  potential  impact  of 
adverse changes in the operating environment  on individual firms and on the system as a 
whole. This work will be performed by a multi-disciplinary group composed of our economic 
and  market  researchers,  supervisors,  market  operations  specialists,  and  accounting  and 
legal experts. This program will be distinct from the activities of on-site examination teams so 
as to provide an independent supervisory perspective as well as to complement the work of 
those teams. 
Capital  serves  as  an  important  bulwark  against  potential  unexpected  losses  for  banking 
organizations of all sizes, not just the largest ones. Accordingly, internal capital analyses of 
banking  organizations  must  reflect  a  wide  range  of  scenarios  and  capture  stress 
environments that could impair solvency. Earlier this year, we issued supervisory guidance 
for  all  bank  holding  companies  regarding  dividends,  capital  repurchases,  and  capital 
redemptions.4  That  guidance  also  reemphasized  the  Federal  Reserve's  long-standing 
position that bank holding companies must serve as a source of strength for their subsidiary 
banks.  
Commercial real estate (CRE) is one area of risk exposure that has gained much attention 
recently. We began to observe rising CRE concentrations earlier this decade and, in light of 
the central role that CRE lending played in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 
1990s, led an interagency effort to issue supervisory guidance directed at the risks posed by 
CRE  concentrations.  This  guidance,  which  generated  significant  controversy  at  the  time  it 
was proposed, was finalized in 2006 and emphasized the need for banking organizations to 
incorporate  realistic  risk  estimates  for  CRE  exposures  into  their  strategic-  and  capital-
planning processes, and encouraged institutions to conduct stress tests or similar exercises 
to  identify  the  impact  of  potential  CRE  shocks  on  earnings  and  capital.  Now  that  weaker 
housing markets and deteriorating economic conditions have, in fact, impaired the quality of 
CRE  loans  at  many  banking  organizations,  we  are  monitoring  carefully  the  effect  that 
declining collateral values may have on CRE exposures and assessing the extent to which 
banking organizations have been complying with the CRE guidance. At the same time, we 
have taken actions to ensure that supervisory and regulatory policies and practices do not 
inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to sound borrowers. 
                                                 
4   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 09-4, 
"Applying  Supervisory  Guidance  and  Regulations  on  the  Payment  of  Dividends,  Stock  Redemptions,  and 
Stock Repurchases at Bank Holding Companies," February 24 (as revised on March 27, 2009). 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2009
While CRE exposures represent perhaps an "old" problem, the crisis has newly highlighted 
the potential for compensation practices at financial institutions to encourage excessive risk-
taking and unsafe and unsound behavior – not just by senior executives, but also by other 
managers or employees who have the ability, individually or collectively, to materially alter 
the risk profile of the institution. Bonuses and other compensation arrangements should not 
provide incentives for employees at any level to behave in ways that imprudently increase 
risks  to  the  institution,  and  potentially  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  Federal 
Reserve worked closely with other supervisors represented on the Financial Stability Board 
to  develop  principles  for  sound  compensation  practices,  which  were  released  earlier  this 
year.5  The  Federal  Reserve  expects  to  issue  soon  our  own  guidance  on  this  important 
subject to promote compensation practices that are consistent with sound risk-management 
principles and safe and sound banking. 
Finally, I would note the importance of continuing to analyze the practices of financial firms 
and supervisors that preceded the crisis, with the aim of fashioning additional regulatory tools 
that  will  make  prudential  supervision  more  effective  and  efficient.  One  area  that  warrants 
particular  attention  is  the  potential  for  supervisory  agencies  to  enlist  market  discipline  in 
pursuit of regulatory ends. For example, supervisors might require that large financial firms 
maintain specific forms of capital so as to increase their ability to absorb losses outside of a 
bankruptcy  or  formal  resolution  procedure.  Such  capital  could  be  in  contingent  form, 
converting to common equity only when necessary because of extraordinary losses. While 
the costs, benefits, and feasibility of this type of capital requires further study, policymakers 
should  actively  seek  ways  of  motivating  the  private  owners  of  banking  organizations  to 
monitor the financial positions of the issuing firms more effectively. 
Addressing gaps and weaknesses in the regulatory framework 
While the actions that I have just discussed should help make banking organizations and the 
financial  system  stronger  and  more  resilient,  the  crisis  also  has  highlighted  gaps  and 
weaknesses  in  the  underlying  framework  for  prudential  supervision  of  financial  institutions 
that no regulatory agency can rectify on its own. One, which I will mention in a moment, has 
been  addressed  by  the  banking  agencies  working  together.  Others  require  congressional 
attention. 
Charter conversions and regulatory arbitrage 
The  dual  banking  system  and  the  existence  of  different  federal  supervisors  create  the 
opportunity  for  insured  depository  institutions  to  change  charters  or  federal  supervisors. 
While  institutions  may  engage  in  charter  conversions  for  a  variety  of  sound  business 
reasons,  conversions  that  are  motivated  by  a  hope  of  escaping  current  or  prospective 
supervisory  actions  by  the  institution's  existing  supervisor  undermine  the  efficacy  of  the 
prudential supervisory framework. 
Accordingly, the Federal Reserve welcomed and immediately supported an initiative led by 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to address such regulatory arbitrage. This 
initiative  resulted  in  a  recent  statement  of  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination 
Council  reaffirming  that  charter  conversions  or  other  actions  by  an  insured  depository 
institution  that  would  result  in  a  change  in  its  primary  supervisor  should  occur  only  for 
legitimate  business  and  strategic  reasons.6  Importantly,  this  statement  also  provides  that 
                                                 
5   See  Financial  Stability  Forum  (2009),  FSF  Principles  for  Sound  Compensation  Practices,  April  2.  The 
Financial Stability Forum has subsequently been renamed the Financial Stability Board. 
6   See  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (2009),  "FFIEC  Issues  Statement  on  Regulatory 
Conversions," press release, July 1. 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 5
conversion requests should not be entertained by the proposed new chartering authority or 
supervisor  while  serious  or  material  enforcement  actions  are  pending  with  the  institution's 
current  chartering  authority  or  primary  federal  supervisor.  In  addition,  it  provides  that  the 
examination  rating  of  an  institution  and  any  outstanding corrective  action  programs  should 
remain in place when a valid conversion or supervisory change does occur. 
Systemically important financial institutions 
The  Lehman  experience  clearly  demonstrates  that  the  financial  system  and  the  broader 
economy can be placed at risk by the failure of financial firms that traditionally have not been 
subject  to  the  type  of  consolidated  supervision  applied  to  bank  holding  companies.  As  I 
discussed in my most recent testimony before this Committee, the Federal Reserve believes 
that all systemically important financial firms – not just those affiliated with a bank – should 
be  subject  to,  and  robustly  supervised  under,  a  statutory  framework  for  consolidated 
supervision like the one embodied in the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). 
Doing so would help promote the safety and soundness of these firms individually and the 
stability of the financial system generally. Indeed, given the significant adverse effects that 
the failure of such a firm may have on the financial system and the broader economy, the 
goals  and  implementation  of  prudential  supervision  and  systemic  risk  reduction  are 
inextricably  intertwined  in  the  case  of  these  organizations.  For  example,  while  the  strict 
capital, liquidity, and risk-management requirements that are needed for these organizations 
are  traditional  tools  of  prudential  supervision,  the  supervisor  of  such  firms  will  need  to 
calibrate these standards appropriately to account for the firms' systemic importance. 
Industrial loan companies and thrifts 
Another  gap  in  existing  law  involves  industrial  loan  companies  (ILCs).  ILCs  are  state-
chartered  banks  that  have  full  access  to  the  federal  safety  net,  including  FDIC  deposit 
insurance and the Federal Reserve's discount window and payments systems; have virtually 
all of the deposit-taking powers of commercial banks; and may engage in the full range of 
other banking services, including commercial, mortgage, credit card, and consumer lending 
activities,  as  well  as  cash  management  services,  trust  services,  and  payment-related 
services, such as Fedwire, automated clearinghouse, and check-clearing services. 
A  loophole  in  current  law,  however,  permits  any  type  of  firm  –  including  a  commercial 
company or foreign bank – to acquire an FDIC-insured ILC chartered in a handful of states 
without becoming subject to the prudential framework that the Congress has established for 
the  corporate  owners  of  other  full-service  insured  banks.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  several  large 
firms – including Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, GMAC, 
and General Electric – took advantage of this opportunity by acquiring ILCs while avoiding 
consolidated supervision under the BHC Act. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  long  supported  closing  this  loophole,  subject  to  appropriate 
"grandfather"  provisions  for  the  existing  owners  of  ILCs.  Such  an  approach  would  prevent 
additional firms from acquiring a full-service bank and escaping the consolidated supervision 
framework  and  activity  restrictions  that  apply  to  bank  holding  companies.  It  also  would 
require  that  all  firms  controlling  an  ILC,  including  a  grandfathered  firm,  be  subject  to 
consolidated supervision. For reasons of fairness, the Board believes that the limited number 
of firms that currently own an ILC and are not otherwise subject to the BHC Act should be 
permitted  to  retain  their  nonbanking  or  commercial  affiliations,  subject  to  appropriate 
restrictions to protect the federal safety net and prevent abuses. 
Corporate owners of savings associations should also be subject to the same regulation and 
examination  as  corporate  owners  of  insured  banks.  In  addition,  grandfathered  commercial 
owners of savings associations should, like we advocate for corporate owners of ILCs, be 
subject to appropriate restrictions to protect the federal safety net and prevent abuses. 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2009
Strengthening the framework for consolidated supervision 
Consolidated  supervision  is  intended  to  provide  a  supervisor  the  tools  necessary  to 
understand,  monitor,  and,  when  appropriate,  restrain  the  risks  associated  with  an 
organization's consolidated or group-wide activities. Risks that cross legal entities and that 
are  managed  on  a  consolidated  basis  cannot  be  monitored  properly  through  supervision 
directed  at  any  one,  or  even  several,  of  the  legal  entity  subdivisions  within  the  overall 
organization. 
To be fully effective, consolidated supervisors need the information and ability to identify and 
address  risks  throughout  an  organization.  However,  the  BHC  Act,  as  amended  by  the  so-
called Fed-lite provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, places material limitations on the 
ability of the Federal Reserve to examine, obtain reports from, or take actions to identify or 
address risks with respect to both nonbank and depository institution subsidiaries of a bank 
holding company that are supervised by other agencies. Consistent with these provisions, we 
have worked with other regulators and, wherever possible, sought to make good use of the 
information and analysis they provide. In the process, we have built cooperative relationships 
with other regulators – relationships that we expect to continue and strengthen further. 
Nevertheless,  the  restrictions  in  current  law  still  can  present  challenges  to  timely  and 
effective consolidated supervision in light of, among other things, differences in supervisory 
models  –  for  example,  between  the  safety  and  soundness  approach  favored  by  bank 
supervisors and the approaches used by regulators of insurance and securities subsidiaries 
– and differences in supervisory timetables, resources, and priorities. Moreover, the growing 
linkages  among  the  bank,  securities,  insurance,  and  other  entities  within  a  single 
organization  that  I  mentioned  earlier  heighten  the  potential  for  these  restrictions  to  hinder 
effective  group-wide  supervision  of  firms,  particularly  large  and  complex  organizations.  To 
ensure that consolidated supervisors have the necessary tools and authorities to monitor and 
address safety and soundness concerns in all parts of an organization on a timely basis, we 
would urge statutory modifications to the Fed-lite provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. 
Such changes, for example, should remove the limits first imposed in 1999 on the scope and 
type of information that the Federal Reserve may obtain from subsidiaries of bank holding 
companies in furtherance of its consolidated supervision responsibilities, and on the ability of 
the  Federal  Reserve  to  take  action  against  subsidiaries  to  address  unsafe  and  unsound 
practices and enforce compliance with applicable law. 
Limiting the costs of bank failures 
The timely closing and resolution of failing insured depository institutions is critical to limiting 
the  costs  of  a  failure  to  the  deposit  insurance  fund.7  The  conditions  governing  when  the 
Federal  Reserve  may  close  a  failing  state  member  bank,  however,  are  significantly  more 
restrictive than those under which the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may close a 
national  bank,  and  are  even  more  restrictive  than  those  governing  the  FDIC's  backup 
authority  to  close  an  insured  depository  institution  after  consultation  with  the  appropriate 
primary federal and, if applicable, state banking supervisor. The Federal Reserve generally 
may close a state member bank only for capital-related reasons. The grounds for which the 
OCC or FDIC may close a bank include a variety of non-capital-related conditions, such as if 
the institution is facing liquidity pressures that make it likely to be unable to pay its obligations 
in  the  normal  course  of  business  or  if  the institution  is  otherwise  in  an  unsafe  or  unsound 
condition  to  transact  business.  We  hope  that  the  Congress  will  consider  providing  the 
                                                 
7   Similarly,  the  creation  of  a  resolution  regime  that  would  provide  the  government  the  tools  it  needs  to  wind 
down a systemically important nonbank financial firm in an orderly way and impose losses on shareholders 
and  creditors  where  possible  would  help  the  government  protect  the  financial  system  and  economy  while 
reducing the potential cost to taxpayers and mitigating moral hazard. 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 7
Federal Reserve powers to close a state member bank that are similar to those possessed 
by other federal banking agencies. 
In view of the number of bank failures that have occurred over the past 18 months and the 
resulting  costs  to  the  deposit  insurance  fund,  policymakers  also  should  explore  whether 
additional  triggers  –  beyond  the  capital  ratios  in  the  current  Prompt  Corrective  Action 
framework – may be more effective in promoting the timely resolution of troubled institutions 
at  lower  cost  to  the  insurance  fund.  Capital  is  a  lagging  indicator  of  financial  difficulties  in 
most instances, and one or more additional measures, perhaps based on asset quality, may 
be worthy of analysis and consideration.  
Conclusion 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  these  important  matters.  We  look  forward  to 
working with the Congress, the Administration, and the other banking agencies to ensure that 
the  framework  for  prudential  supervision  of  banking  organizations  and  other  financial 
institutions  adjusts,  as  it  must,  to  meet  the  challenges  our  dynamic  and  increasingly 
interconnected financial system. 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2009
