Ewart S Williams: The MSME evolution 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad & Tobago, at the 
Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Conference, Port-of-Spain, 16 September 2009. 
 Let me first of all thank the Chamber of Industry and Commerce and the Nova Committee for 
the invitation to participate in and to make a few remarks at this 2009 Conference on Micro, 
Small  and  Medium-sized  Enterprises.  I  want  to  say  from  the  outset  that  the  Central  Bank 
considers  micro,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (MSMEs)  as  critical  to  Trinidad  and 
Tobago’s current and future prospects. Last year, we engaged a local firm to examine the 
structure, performance and networks of MSME and to make recommendations for improving 
its performance. 
This firm has since submitted its draft final report along with a set of recommendations which 
we are currently assessing. I should also add that the Financial Literacy Programme has also 
been actively involved in the small business sector and is spearheading a project on Living 
the  Entrepreneurial  Dream.  This  project  has  placed  emphasis  on  three  core  areas:  (a) 
starting a business, (b) keeping and managing financial records and (c) sourcing assistance 
for  the  business.  To  assist  budding  entrepreneurs,  the  project  is  currently  finalizing  three 
booklets, which are expected to be launched before the end of the year. 
As I examine the agenda for today’s proceedings, I can’t help but notice that your speakers 
are far more ably qualified to address the specific issues affecting MSMEs in Trinidad and 
Tobago. Accordingly, in my brief remarks today, I want to focus on the bigger picture and 
specifically  on  how  MSME  development  is  becoming  even  more  urgent  given  our  current 
economic circumstances and prospects. 
Over  the  past  decade,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  been  doing  relatively  well  in  a 
macroeconomic sense. Real economic growth between 2000 and 2008 has averaged around 
6.0 per cent a year; the fiscal position has been healthy; international reserve holdings have 
increased  steadily  and  the  exchange  rate  has  remained  stable.  This  vibrant  economic 
performance has largely been built on the back of the energy sector which still remains the 
dominant sector accounting for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and around 60 and 90 per 
cent of government revenue and exports, respectively. 
The energy sector growth facilitated a boom in fiscal revenues and expenditures, the latter 
providing the impetus for vibrant activity in the non-energy sector. 
In these last few years, we have seen an explosion in construction activity, both public and 
private  sector  construction,  in  banking  and  finance  as  well  as  in  retail  distribution.  As  you 
know, there was a significant growth in employment, so much so that we have  had to 
import labour from neighbouring countries and from further afield. 
But, ladies and gentlemen, our economic climate is undergoing profound changes and these 
changes  may  be  structural,  not  merely  cyclical.  Our  economy  has  already  begun  to 
experience  economic  decline  for  the  first  time  since  1993;  while  oil  prices  have  begun  to 
creep up from the lows reached in late 2008, gas prices, which directly determine about 80 
per cent of our energy tax revenues are at their lowest level in several years. Moreover, the 
experts tell us that, given the chronic oversupply in world markets, gas prices could remain 
depressed for a while. And to top it all, there are downside risks as regards the level of our 
gas reserves. 
While it can be argued that some degree of diversification has occurred over the years, most 
of this has taken place within the energy sector. Trinidad and Tobago has now moved 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 1
from  simply  being  an  oil-based  economy  to  one  that  produces  a  relatively  wide  range  of 
energy products including natural gas, methanol, iron and steel, urea and ammonia. Outside 
of energy, the pace of diversification has been slow. 
In summary, notwithstanding our impressive achievements, it is clear that we are confronted 
with  many  challenges  in  sustaining  our  level  of  economic  growth  and  in  addressing  rising 
economic  and  social  inequalities.  To  meet  these  challenges,  we  urgently  need  to  diversify 
our  sources  of  economic  growth  and  to  raise  the  efficiency  of  resource  allocation.  A 
potential source for growth is the micro, small and medium enterprises sector, which 
has contributed importantly to growth and job creation in the past. 
The MSME sector has made remarkable strides over the past few years. Data from the study 
commissioned by the IADB and the Central Bank estimate that there are now about 18,000 
MSMEs,  employing  about  200,000  workers  and  contributing  around  28  per  cent  of  GDP. 
These figures testify to the Government’s considerable efforts through NEDCO and BDC as 
well as to the work of private sector institutions such as the Nova Committee of the Chamber 
and various NGOs. 
Notwithstanding these achievements, if we are to realize the full developmental potential of 
this very important sector we need to modify our approach somewhat – specifically, we need 
to introduce a more entrepreneurial model. 
An article by the NOVA Committee, published in the latest issue of CONTACT, cited the case 
of India where the SME sector is being challenged to move to the next level of development. 
The  same  article  lamented  that  many  of  our  SMEs  seem  to  have  no  interest  in  moving 
beyond  the  micro  and  small  classifications,  preferring  instead  to  remain  in  their  comfort 
zones. 
The  new  model  for  MSME  development  requires  a  shift  in  thinking  by  policy  makers.  It 
requires a change whereby the goal is not merely to earn a minimum income but to create 
jobs and wealth. It requires that our policy makers look beyond simply the creation of new 
MSMEs to encouraging a concentrated focus on productivity and competitiveness. The new 
model requires small businesses to broaden their view of the available economic space from 
the neighbourhood and the community to the country and even the region. 
An essential aspect of the new model is the active promotion of an entrepreneurial culture. 
More  small  business  people  need  to  see  themselves  as  entrepreneurs,  prepared  to  take 
risks and with an interest in innovation and competitiveness, which, as you know, are integral 
features  of  entrepreneurial  behaviour.  Some  of  this  could  be  learned  late  but  empirical 
evidence suggests that there is a strong case for making business education a more integral 
part of our high school curriculum. And as I heard one commentator say a few days ago, “we 
need more people to come out of tertiary education, not looking for the security of a job but 
actually  prepared  to  use  the  ideas  that  they  have  acquired  in  their  studies  and  through 
research at university, to get involved in entrepreneurial behaviour”. 
One step in this direction is for our tertiary institutions to become more actively involved 
in  promoting  innovation  and  in  transforming  these  applications  into  viable  businesses.  I 
would  acknowledge  that  some  of  this  has  begun  to  happen  on  a  limited  scale  through 
programmes being introduced by the University of Trinidad and Tobago (UTT) and E-Teck 
that provide a business incubator for innovative ideas. However, if entrepreneurship is to 
take deeper roots,  this process  has to become part and parcel  of our entire tertiary 
education  system  and  our  MSME  strategy.  The  available  evidence  on  a  global  scale 
suggests  that  entrepreneurship  tends  to  flourish  in  those  countries  where  there  are  strong 
and sustained linkages between innovations in Universities and the business environment. 
While we can all point to success stories in economies like the US and Japan, there is no 
reason why we cannot develop our own success stories here. 
Obviously entrepreneurship and innovation would add up to very little if credit isn’t available 
to finance their realisation. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2009
In  most  countries,  inadequate  credit  availability  has  been  a  major  impediment  to  SME 
development. The reasons behind the chronic lack of access to finance for MSME sectors in 
most developing countries are well-known. One is the entrenched perception that lending to 
MSMEs is inherently risky. Another is a long-standing credit culture that is biased towards 
collateral. Regulatory policies also perpetuate the “collateral bias” as non-secured lending is 
often  discouraged.  The  overemphasis  on  collateral  constrains  the  availability  of  credit  to 
MSMEs, even when cash flows are adequate to service bank loans at commercial interest 
rates. 
This situation invariably leaves the sector exposed to public sector financing arrangements 
which are very often insufficient, unreliable and subject to non-commercial considerations. 
Fortunately,  our  situation  is  changing.  More  finance  is  being  made  available  by  the  public 
sector  institutions  –  NEDCO  and  the  Small  Business  Corporation.  More  importantly,  some 
private sector institutions are also tailoring their operations to cater to the need of MSMEs, 
while  maintaining  high  loan  processing  standards.  In  particular,  one  commercial  bank  has 
already recognized the potential of the small business sector and has developed a lending 
programme specifically targeted to this sector. 
Let me end, Ladies and Gentlemen with yet another reference to the CONTACT Magazine 
which, incidentally, I think is an excellent issue. An article in the issue seems to suggest that 
we  are  deluding  ourselves  into  believing  that  we  are  blessed  with  high  levels  of  native 
creativity.  Citing  our  carnival  experience,  the  author  asks  whether  we  have  done  anything 
truly ground breaking recently and whether our music and architecture, the range of goods 
that  we  produce  and  our  designs  and  services  can  legitimately  be  claimed  as  being  truly 
creative. 
I  happen  to  disagree  with  the  view  that  we  are  not  blessed  with  high  levels  of  natural 
creativity.  I  think  that  our  challenge  is  to  devise  a  framework  that  can  deploy  our  creative 
ideas  in  innovative  ways  to  develop  new  businesses  that  are  sustainable,  employment 
generating and even better still export earning. 
Ladies and Gentlemen let me repeat my belief that building an entrepreneurial culture that 
harnesses  the  untapped  potential  of  the  MSME  sector  will  provide  a  solid  platform  for  the 
sustained diversification and development of our country in future years. 
We need to rise to this challenge. 
I am certain that this is going to be an excellent conference and I wish you every success in 
today’s deliberations. 
Andrew G Haldane: Credit is trust  
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
the Association of Corporate Treasurers, Leeds, 14 September 2009. 
I would like to thank Paul Fullerton, Simon Hall and Salina Ladha for help in the preparation of this speech.  
  It is good to be back in Yorkshire. I say back because I grew up around 10 miles north of 
here. When I left over 20 years ago, Leeds looked and felt very different to today. Nowhere is 
the  contrast  greater  than  in  the  financial  sector.  In  1995,  almost  74,000  people  were 
employed  in  financial  and  related  business  services,  accounting  for  around  20%  of 
employment  in  Leeds.  By  2009  this  had  risen  to  over  116,000,  or  around  30%  of 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 3
employment.  Today,  Leeds  has  a  legitimate  claim  to  be  the  UK’s  second  largest  financial 
centre. 
A short history of banking in Yorkshire 
The foundations for this success were laid much earlier. The history of banking in Yorkshire 
dates back over 250 years.1 Pease and Co of Hull, established in 1754, are thought to be 
Yorkshire’s  oldest  private  bank.  In  the  same  decade,  banks  were  founded  in  Leeds  and 
Bradford. By the end of the 18th century, Yorkshire had a well-established network of over 40 
banks in around 16 regional towns and cities.  
In the first two decades of the 19th century, private banking in Yorkshire continued to thrive, 
spreading to around 30 towns and cities. The financial crisis of 1825 brought an end to this 
rapid  growth.  The  crisis  itself  was interesting  for  its  parallels  with  today.  It  was  sourced  in 
sub-prime lending in (in this case South) America. As fears of loan losses rose, runs began 
on banks throughout England, with more than a dozen institutions failing in Yorkshire alone.  
The crisis brought reform of the banking industry in the form of the Joint Stock Banking Act of 
1826. This removed the Bank of England’s monopoly on joint stock banking. This had long 
been a bone of contention among country banks, not least in Yorkshire. The Bank of England 
itself opened its first branch in Yorkshire – here in Leeds, in fact – the following year in 1827. 
This  was  acknowledgement  of  Leeds’  emerging  importance  as  a  financial  centre.  Yet  the 
reception it received was, to say the least, somewhat mixed.  
Local newspapers and businessmen attacked the Bank’s attempt to spread its “pestilential 
branches” into the regions.2 Bank of England notes were shunned by local shopkeepers. The 
landlady of the Esk Inn near Whitby did so with the words: 
“I’ll ha’ nought to do with them things, I know nought about them; now if it had 
been a Simpson I would ha’ changed it with pleasure”3 
It  is  easy  to  imagine,  though  probably  impossible  to  print,  what  she  might  have  made  of 
Quantitative Easing. 
In the period since, banking and finance in Yorkshire have grown steadily and successfully. 
Among the success stories would be the Yorkshire Penny Bank. This was founded in 1859 in 
Halifax  as  a  means  of  saving  for  the  working  classes.  In  1874,  its  first  School  Transfer 
Department was opened to encourage saving by school children. “Take care of the Pence 
and the Pounds will take care of themselves” intoned the bank’s posters.  
Such was the success of the school scheme that, by the end of the nineteenth century, the 
majority of schoolchildren in Yorkshire had a savings account. The scheme aimed to educate 
children from an early age on the benefits of thrift and financial planning. And having been 
nurtured early, the relationship between bank and customer often lasted a lifetime. In 1959, 
the  Yorkshire  Penny  Bank  became  Yorkshire  Bank  which  today  remains  one  of  the  UK’s 
most successful medium-sized banks.  
The mutual or building society sector’s roots in Yorkshire are just as deep.4 Although the first 
societies  appeared  in  the  Midlands  in  around  1775,  within  a  decade  Yorkshire  had 
                                                 
1   W.C.E  Hartley  (1975),  “Banking  in  Yorkshire”,  Dalesman  Books.  The  author  completed  this  work  while  a 
Houblon-Norman fellow at the Bank of England. 
2   Quoting  Joseph  Brook,  a  prominent  Huddersfield  banker,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Huddersfield  Banking 
Corporation in January 1828. 
3   Hartley (op.cit.). A “Simpson” was a note offered by local bank Simpson, Chapman and Co of Whitby. Through 
a sequence of mergers, this subsequently became part of what is today Barclays Bank.  
4 
 BIS Review 108/2009
established  its  first  society,  the  Hill  House  Bank  Building  Club  in  1785.  By  the  end  of  the 
century,  numbers  had  swelled  to  around  50,  mostly  in  the  Midlands,  Lancashire  and 
Yorkshire.  
The  early  mutuals  pooled  savings  to  buy  property  for  members  and  terminated  once  all 
members’  housing  needs  were  satisfied  –  so-called  “terminating  societies”.  In  1844, 
“permanent societies” were permitted, which allowed for a revolving set of both savers and 
borrowers. But the mutuality principle remained – “to enable a working man to secure himself 
in the course of a few years a dwelling-house as his own freehold property, as a home for 
himself and family.”5 
Numbers of mutuals grew rapidly during the 19th century, reaching around 850 by 1850 and 
over  1500  by  1875,  with  almost  100  in  Yorkshire  alone.  Here  in  Leeds,  the  Leeds  and 
Holbeck Permanent Building Society was founded in 1875 and, having been renamed Leeds 
Building  Society  in  2005,  it  remains  in  the  top  10  building  societies  by  size  nationally. 
Consolidation  and,  latterly,  demutualization  have  reduced  numbers  over  the  past  few 
decades. Today, there are only a handful of independent, indigenous mutuals in the region. 
But they remain some of the strongest in the country.  
The success of Yorkshire’s financial sector over this lengthy period is no fluke. A reading of 
history  reveals  the  same  successful  recipe  being  repeated.  An  awareness  of,  and 
responsiveness to, the needs of the customer, whether saver or borrower. A focus on long-
term relationship-building, often starting from the earliest age. A recognition of the benefits of 
mutualising  both  risks  and  returns.  In  short,  the  importance  of  banks  being  built,  first  and 
foremost, on trust. 
The crisis of trust 
From  the  past,  then,  to  the  present.  A  year  ago  almost  to  the  day,  the  investment  bank 
Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy in the United States. Activity across the globe, financial 
and  non-financial,  froze.  Recently,  there  are  indications  of  some  thawing.  But  a  year  on, 
many economies around the world remain mired in recession. What explains the severity of 
this crisis and how much longer can it be expected to last? 
The words “credit crunch” contain the seeds of an explanation. In Latin, credit means trust. 
So credit crunch is, in essence, a breakdown in trust. Between different parties at different 
times, that loss of trust has been the root cause of the devastating impact felt globally since 
the credit crunch began. It also explains why the road to recovery in credit, and thus in the 
real economy, may be long and winding. In essence, events of the past two years can be re-
told as a story of the progressive breakdown in trust.  
The proximate cause of the crisis was a breakdown of trust between banks and households, 
specifically  sub-prime  mortgage-holders  in  the  United  States.  The  upshot  was  a  loss  of 
credit, and in many cases the homes, of these borrowers from 2006 onwards. Repossession 
rates on US mortgages have more than tripled in the past two years (Chart 1). UK arrears 
and  default  rates,  although  lower,  are  rising.  Some  borrowers  are  now  rationed  out  of  the 
mortgage market. In July 2007, there were around 9500 sub-prime mortgage products being 
advertised in the UK. Today, there are virtually none (Chart 2). 
As losses on these mortgages and other toxic assets accumulated, trust among banks was 
impaired. This saw a seizing-up of inter-bank money markets from the second half of 2007 
onwards. Before the crisis, banks required about 10 basis points of compensation for making 
                                                                                                                                                      
4   See E.J. Cleary (1965), “The Building Society Movement”, Elek Books. See also S.J. Price (1958), “Building 
Societies, their origin and history”, Franey and Company. 
5   S.J. Price (1958), “Building Societies: Their Origin and History”, Franey and Company. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 5
a  three-month  loan  to  one  another  (Chart  3).  By  September  2007,  that  compensation 
premium had risen tenfold to around 100 basis points. By September 2008, it had risen more 
than  thirty-fold  from  pre-crisis  levels.  It  has  since  fallen  back  to  around  35  basis  points. 
These  persistent  funding  pressures  have  constrained  banks’  ability  to  lend  to  the  real 
economy. 
Damaged  by  losses  on  assets  and  constrained  by  funding  costs,  questions  began  to  be 
raised during 2008 about banks’ future profitability and, in some cases, viability. The equity 
prices of banks tumbled, falling 86% on average for the major UK banks between February 
2007 and March this year (Chart 4). In money terms, that is a loss of market capitalisation of 
around  £300bn,  equivalent  to  20%  of  annual  UK  GDP.  Underlying  these  price  falls  was  a 
generalised loss of trust between banks and investors in banks, such as sovereign wealth 
funds and mutual funds.  
What  explained  this  wholesale  loss  of  trust?  In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  banks’  business 
models  were  increasingly  predicated  on  making  loans  for  onward  sale.  Loans  became 
tradable  securities  and  long-term  relationships  gave  way  to  short-term  transactions.  The 
perils of this practice were well understood by Michael Marks, founder of Marks and Spencer 
and of course one of the region’s greatest-ever entrepreneurs: “You either make things or 
you sell them. Don’t try both”.  
Banks  tried  both,  making  loans  with  an  eye  to  subsequently  selling  them.  This  had 
unintended, but in fact entirely predictable, consequences. Without skin in the game, banks’ 
due diligence became slipshod. The quality of tradable loans fell as their quantity rose.  
Investors  in  these  securities  were  not  as  canny  as  the  landlady  of  the  Esk  Inn:  they 
purchased them in size even though “they knew nought about them”. By the time the penny 
had dropped for these investors, the pounds had not taken care of themselves. Global losses 
on  these  securitised  assets  are  now  believed  to  lie  anywhere  up  to  £3  trillion.6  As  losses 
accumulated, trust in these securities was undermined and with it trust in the banks issuing 
them.  
As  credit  was  cut,  trust  in  the  viability  of  some  non-financial  companies  was  questioned. 
Corporate distress began to rise internationally during the course of 2008. And as corporate 
distress rose, in particular after the failure of Lehman Brothers, distrust between companies 
mounted.  The  stream  of  trade  credit  extended  between  firms  dried  to  a  trickle  at  the  end 
2008  and  in  the  first  part  of  2009.  At  that  time,  a  survey  by  the  Bank’s  regional  agents 
reported that around a quarter of contacts had had to turn down potentially profitable orders 
as a result of tighter trade credit. 
This  progressive  hardening  of  the  credit  arteries  also  had  dramatic  effects  between 
countries. Cross-border flows of credit have reversed dramatically in the past year. “Home 
bias” by investors – a lack of trust in foreign investments – has returned with a vengeance. 
Cross-border lending by international banks grew by 20% per year between 2003 and 2007. 
In 2008, it fell 5% (Chart 5). This has had adverse effects on UK companies, around a third 
of whose borrowing comes from foreign lenders. 
Through these successive waves, the world financial system found itself with almost every 
link  in  the  credit  chain  –  in  the  chain  of  trust  –  having  been  weakened  or  broken.  That  is 
evident in surveys of the public’s trust in industry: banking and finance are firmly rooted to 
the foot of the league table of trust, in the UK and internationally (Chart 6). That loss of trust 
is mirrored in aggregate bank lending in the UK, in particular to companies, where annual 
growth has fallen from a peak of 23% in March 2008 to around zero now (Chart 7). And this 
has in turn been reflected in the largest and most synchronous global economic slowdown 
since the Great Depression.  
                                                 
6   For example, Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June 2009.  
6 
 BIS Review 108/2009
Confidence and credit 
So how is trust, and thereby credit, to be restored? To date, the answer has been to rely on 
the one sector whose credit has not been seriously questioned – governments and central 
banks. There has been large-scale provision of government and central bank credit over the 
past two years in an attempt to ease pressures and shore up breaks in the private sector 
credit chain.  
These interventions have been unprecedented in size during peacetime. The total potentially 
on the table is in excess of $14 trillion.7 That is roughly $2000 for every man, woman and 
child  on  the  planet.  Half  of  the  world’s  20  largest  banks  have  needed  direct  government 
support. Central bank balance sheets in the major financial centres, including in the UK, have 
more than doubled in size. And deposit insurance schemes have been extended in at least 
40 countries around the world.  
Extending public sector credit on this scale relies on the deep pockets and prudence of our 
grandchildren. It can be no more than a stop-gap – a temporary bridge – until private sector 
trust can be restored. So far, the bridge has served its purpose. There are signs over recent 
months  from  surveys  that  confidence  is  returning  to  banks,  non-financial  companies  and 
consumers.  And  there  have  been  some  signs  of  a  turnaround  in  the  housing,  equity  and 
some debt markets.  
It  has  been  said  that  every  recession  in  history  has  been  associated  with  a  collapse  in 
confidence.8  This  time’s  was  plainly  no  exception.  So  with  confidence  turning  can  we 
anticipate an imminent return of credit to the economy?  
Rising confidence among firms and consumers is a necessary condition for recovery. But it is 
questionable whether it is sufficient. That is because confidence and trust are subtly different 
concepts.9 Confidence derives from observable, authoritative proof. At the time of the failure 
of  Lehman  Brothers,  people  struggled  to  make  sense  of  the  state  of  the  economy  and 
financial system. Without a compass, they lost their financial bearings. Lacking authoritative 
proof, confidence collapsed. As the banking system has since stabilised, people’s bearings 
have returned and with them confidence. 
Trust  is  an  altogether  different  animal.  It  is  based  on  beliefs,  not  observable  proofs.  It  is 
grounded  in  perceptions  rather  than  evidence.  It  is  as  much  a  psychological  state  as  a 
financial  one.10  A  clean  balance  sheet  might  instil  confidence,  but  it  need  not  repair  trust. 
Because  it  is  a  moral  judgement,  repairing  trust  can  be  a  slow  and  painstaking  business. 
Moral compasses take rather longer to self-correct than magnetic ones. This has implications 
for the path of recovery in the period ahead. 
Historically,  credit  has  tended  to  lag  the  recovery  in  output  in  the  majority  of  recessions, 
especially financial recessions. During the previous three major recessions in the UK – in the 
1970s,  1980s  and  1990s  –  credit  to  business  recovered  slowly  and  in  some  cases  only 
several years after the recovery in activity (Charts 8, 9 and 10). This is consistent with trust 
between  financial  institutions  and  their  customers  being slower  to  recover  than  confidence 
more generally.  
Moreover, unlike the situation today, earlier recessions in the UK were not primarily the result 
of financial factors. International evidence suggests that financial recessions have tended on 
                                                 
7   Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June 2009. 
8   “Animal Spirits”, George Akerlof and Robert J Shiller (2009), Princeton University Press.  
9   For example, see “Restoring Confidence and Trust in UK PLC”, Henley Business School (2009). 
10   David Tuckett provides a fascinating account of the crisis and its aftermath using psychological theories and 
evidence (“Addressing the Psychology of Financial Markets”, Institute for Public Policy Research, May 2009). 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 7
average to be both costlier and lengthier.11 Normal recessions have been associated with a 
recovery in output to its previous peak after around 3½ quarters. Recovery to peak output 
following financial recessions has on average taken around 5½ quarters (Chart 11).  
Like its predecessors, lack of confidence may have “caused” this time’s recession. But it is 
lack of trust – and hence credit – that may shape the recovery. Based on past evidence, as 
the Governor has noted recently, we might anticipate a protracted period of repair. 
Repairing trust – the low road to reform 
So  what  might  be  needed,  beyond  time,  to  repair  trust  in  the  financial  system?  A  raft  of 
reforms to the financial system, nationally and internationally, is currently being assembled. 
These  measures  will  aim  to  strengthen  banks’  financial  resources,  risk  management 
practices and governance. They are about bringing regulatory rules into the 21st century.  
This is the high road to reform – for example, higher buffers of capital and liquidity and higher 
standards of risk management. If successful, these reforms will help cleanse bank balance 
sheets.  It  is  an  open  question,  however,  whether  these  efforts  will  be  sufficient  to  restore 
public trust in the financial system.  
One reason why regulation might not be the whole answer is that trust in financial regulation 
is itself one of the casualties of crisis. Regulation is seen by some as part of the problem, not 
the  solution.  More  generally,  in  repairing  public  trust,  it  would  be  preferable  if  banks  were 
seen  to  be  initiating  root  and  branch  reform  themselves,  rather  than  having  it  thrust  upon 
them by regulators.  
This would be the low road to reform. Low because it would not require any new or complex 
regulatory apparatus. Low because it would not need international negotiation or agreement 
on the contractual fineprint. Instead, what it would require is a self-generated sea-change in 
the structure and strategy of banking.  
So what changes in structure and strategy might be desirable? Without suggesting definitive 
answers,  let  me  discuss  three  areas  where  further  debate  might  be  useful:  banks’  size  in 
relation to the services they provide; banks’ strategy in relation to their resilience; and banks’ 
governance in relation to the incentives this creates.  
Structure – size versus service provision  
• 
Economies  of  scale  typically  arise  in  the  production  of  goods  and  services  which  are 
homogenous and replicable. Henry Ford applied this principle to car manufacture through his 
Ford Motor Company, established almost a century ago. It was a success. That model has 
since served many industries well.  
But  manufacturing  loans  is  not  the  same  as  manufacturing  cars.  Loans  are  neither 
homogenous nor replicable. Making loans relies on bespoke, customer-specific information. 
This information is not obtained by computer algorithm or credit rating agency but through a 
banking  relationship,  ideally  a  long-term  one.  Despite  the  advent  of  social  networking, 
economies of scale are not something we typically associate with long-term relationships. 
So  the  economics  of  banking  do  not  suggest  that  bigger  need  be  better.  Indeed,  if  large-
scale  processing  of  loans  risks  economising  on  the  collection  of  information,  there  might 
even  be  diseconomies  of  scale  in  banking.  The  present  crisis  provides  a  case  study.  The 
desire  to  make  loans  a  tradable  commodity  led  to  a  loss  of  information,  as  transactions 
                                                 
11   “Is  the  US  Sub-Prime  Crisis  So  Different?  An  International  Comparison”,  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth 
Rogoff (2008), NBER Working Paper No.13761. 
8 
 BIS Review 108/2009
replaced  relationships  and  quantity  trumped  quality.  Within  the  space  of  a  decade,  banks 
went from monogamy to speed-dating. 
Evidence  from  a  range  of  countries  paints  a  revealing  picture.  There  is  not  a  scrap  of 
evidence of economies of scale or scope in banking – of bigger or broader being better – 
beyond  a  low  size  threshold.12  At  least  during  this  crisis,  big  banks  have  if  anything  been 
found  to  be  less  stable  than  their  smaller  counterparts,  requiring  on  average  larger-scale 
support.13 It could be argued that big business needs big banks to supply their needs. But 
this  is  not  an  argument  that  big  businesses  themselves  endorse,  at  least  according  to  a 
recent survey by the Association of Corporate Treasurers.14 
Take Grameen Bank – not a household name in the UK, I realise. This grew out of a micro-
finance project in Bangladesh which began in 1976.15 Grameen operates as a set of local 
credit cooperatives, often comprising as few as five members. The bank’s relationship with 
its borrowers is bound not by legal contract but by trust. Like the Yorkshire Penny Bank a 
century earlier, it aims to encourage saving by the poor and supports the education of the 
children of borrowers and savers.  
In  some  respects,  Grameen  Bank  is  about  as  basic  and  small-scale  a  set  of  banking 
arrangements as it is possible to conceive. But its success is only too clear. From the most 
modest  of  beginnings,  Grameen  Bank  now  operates  in  over  40  countries  worldwide,  with 
over 2000 branches and over 7.5 million borrowers. Grameen is a local bank gone global.  
Henry Ford grew an empire on scale economies, centralisation and replication. For the Ford 
Motor  Company,  bigger  was  better.  At  around  the  same  time,  Alfred  P  Sloan  of  General 
Motors  was  following  a  different  business  model.  Size  still  mattered.  But  production  was 
decentralised and specialised. The focus was on customer needs supported by some of the 
first-ever market research on their tastes. In the end, it was Sloan and General Motors whose 
strategy was emulated around the world.  
In meeting the future needs of the real economy, perhaps there is a case for more “Sloans” 
and fewer “Fords” in banking. Perhaps there is a case for a strategic focus on the “local” as 
much as the “global”, for more micro-finance and less macro-finance. Perhaps it is time for 
relationship-banking to make a comeback. 
Strategy – diversity versus diversification 
• 
Customers require a basket of banking services. The provision of some of these services is 
important for the wider economy; they are a quasi-public good. For example, the provision of 
monetary services – basic banking – has a strong public good element. That is why depositor 
protection,  in  the  form  of  deposit  insurance,  is  stipulated  by  the  state  in  many  countries. 
Lending to households and companies can also be thought to contain a public good element. 
Other functions performed by banks may provide more limited social benefits, though their 
private benefit may be significant – for example, proprietary trading in complex instruments. 
                                                 
12  See  A.  Saunders  (1996),  “Financial  Institutions  Management:  A  Modern  Perspective”,  Irwin  Professional 
Publishing. Also see D. Amel, C. Barnes, F. Panetta and C. Salleo (2004), “Consolidation and efficiency in the 
financial sector: A review of the international evidence”, Journal of Banking & Finance Volume 28, Issue 10. 
13 
Haldane 
a 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech397.pdf  
Lessons 
(2009), 
“Small 
From 
Big 
Crisis”. 
See 
14  The  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers  (2009),  “Comments  in  response  to  Turner  Review:  a  regulatory 
response to the global banking crisis and the accompanying FSA discussion paper DP 09/02 – A regulatory 
response to the global banking crisis”. 
15 David Bornstein (1996), “The Price of a Dream: The Story of the Grameen Bank”, Oxford University Press. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 9
If  scale  economies  in  banking  are  weak,  banking  services  could  probably  be  equally  well 
provided  by  either  a  financial  supermarket  or  a  set  of  specialist  banks.  These  different 
structures might not, however, be equivalent from a risk perspective. The supermarket model 
potentially does offer some risk benefits – the benefits of diversification. Profitable business 
lines can compensate for temporarily non-profitable ones. What is lost on the swings may be 
regained on the roundabouts.  
This is a story about which we have heard much over the past few months, especially among 
the biggest global banks. In the first half of this year, big losses on the banking book swings 
have been more than offset by big gains on the trading book roundabouts. Diversification, we 
were told, was paying dividends – and, indeed, bonuses.  
But  memories  can  be  deceptively  short.  Rewind  the  clock  one  year.  Then,  it  was  trading 
book  losses  that  were eroding  confidence in  the  banks.  This  in  turn  prompted  fears  about 
some banks’ solvency, aggravating the very recession which is now generating banking book 
losses. Trading book gains may well be acting as a hedge today. But they are hedging a risk 
they helped create.  
All of this implies that business line diversification can be a double-edged sword. During the 
upswing, banks enjoyed windfall gains from bets at the race-track. This boosted their buffers. 
But  when  those  bets  turned  sour,  these  same  activities  put  at  risk  banks’  day  job  –  the 
provision  of  loan  and  deposit  services  to  the  real  economy.  9500  sub-prime  mortgage 
products at the height of the boom might well have been too many. But zero is surely too 
few. 
There  is  a  second  important  downside  to  diversification.  While  it  might  be  sensible  for  an 
individual firm to diversify its business lines to reduce its risk, if this same strategy is followed 
by all banks the end-result may be greater fragility across the whole system. Why? Because 
in  their  desire  to  look  different  than  in  the  past,  banks’  business  strategies  may  end  up 
looking identical in the present. The financial system could then become more prone to herd-
like upswings and lemming-like downswings.  
There  is  more  than  a  hint  of  this  behaviour  during  the  run-up  to  crisis.  Banking  strategies 
became  a  whirligig.  Building  societies  transformed  themselves  into  commercial  banks. 
Commercial banks tried their hand at investment banking. Investment banks developed in-
house  hedge  funds  through  large  proprietary  trading  desks.  Hedge  funds  competed  with 
traditional investment funds. And to complete the circle, these investment funds imported the 
risk all of the others were shedding. In their desire to diversify, individual banks generated a 
lack of diversity, and thus resilience, for the financial system as a whole. 
So recent crisis experience highlights some of the costs of bundling banking services. Given 
that,  there  is  an  intellectually  defensible  case  for  some  unbundling  of  these  services.  This 
would  reduce  the  risks  of  spill-over  between  privately  and  socially  beneficial  banking 
activities.  And  it  would  help  prevent  banks  making  individually  rational  but  collectively 
calamitous strategic choices.  
There  are  plenty  of  examples  from  the  non-financial  world,  from  genetics  to  geology,  of 
diversity improving the robustness of systems. The financial system may be no different. The 
resulting financial landscape would, however, look rather different. There would be greater 
specialisation and diversity. The shopping experience for a banking customer would be more 
farmers’ market than supermarket.  
Governance – stakeholders versus shareholders 
• 
In  deciding  appropriate  corporate  governance  arrangements,  economists  have  tended  to 
focus  on  the  relationship  between  shareholders  (as  principal)  and  managers  (as  agent). 
Principal-agent  problems  arise  when  these  two  parties’  incentives  are  misaligned.  Profit-
related  pay  is  one  means  of  achieving  alignment,  with  managers  remunerated  in  line  with 
shareholder returns. In addressing one incentive problem, however, this approach may risk 
10 
 BIS Review 108/2009
worsening two others – between shareholders and depositors on the one hand and between 
shareholders and the public sector on the other.  
Limited liability means that returns to shareholders are capped below at zero, but not above. 
That  provides  a  natural  incentive  for  owners  to  gamble,  pursuing  high  risk/high  return 
strategies from which they import the return upside but export the risk downside to depositors 
or  the  public  sector.  During  this  crisis,  the  pursuit  of  those  strategies  has  resulted  in  the 
public  sector  picking  up  the  cheque  for  the  downside  in  an  effort  to  reduce  risks  to 
depositors.  
A  mutual  model  of  corporate  governance  gives  rise  to  a  rather  different  set  of  incentives. 
Instead  of  external  shareholders,  savers  and  borrowers  become  the  owners,  with  profits 
remitted directly to them in the form of higher deposit rates and/or lower borrowing rates. For 
that reason, measured profit margins appear consistently lower for building societies than for 
banks.  
Unlike  in  most  industries,  however,  low  margins  for  a  mutual  are  very  unlikely  to  result  in 
shareholder revolt or a missive to management to gear-up or get-out. They are a reflection of 
corporate governance working for stakeholders, here defined broadly to include depositors 
and borrowers. In this way, mutuality reduces the scope for misaligned incentives between 
shareholders and depositors which might otherwise arise in a joint stock bank.  
This  is  not  to  suggest  that  mutuality  is  a  panacea.  For  example,  it  does  not  address  the 
potential incentive problem between stakeholders and the public sector. Indeed, it could even 
potentially worsen this problem as shareholders and depositors are one and the same under 
mutuality and so must rank equally in the event of a payout from the public purse. Moreover, 
profit margins in the building society sector are currently under some pressure as a result of 
low Bank rate and increased competition for prime residential loans. Some building societies 
have also hit bad loan problems.  
Although painful in the short-term, these margin pressures ought in time to abate. So in the 
heartland  of  mutuality,  I  am  happy  to  say  that  reports  of  the  death  of  the  building  society 
sector are greatly exaggerated. Indeed, mutuality may do a better job of aligning stakeholder 
incentives than some alternative forms of corporate governance. It is a depressing but telling 
fact  that,  of  the  demutualised  former  UK  building  societies,  none  is  today  in  independent 
ownership.  
Thrift, mutuality and relationship-building have long underpinned banking in Yorkshire. These 
principles went missing in the run-up to the present crisis. The costs of that vanishing act are 
now all too apparent. In rebuilding the financial system, to create one which is both stable 
and  better  able  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  real  economy,  these  principles  need  to  be 
rediscovered. They offer a tried and tested – indeed, trusted – roadmap for the period ahead. 
 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 11
Charts 
 
Chart 1: US mortgage foreclosure inventory rates (a) 
 
Per cent 
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
72  76  80  84  88  92  96  00  04
08
 
*Source: Mortgage Bankers Association of America.
 
(a) Proportion of outstanding mortgages in foreclosure process
 
at end of quarter; not seasonally adjusted. 
 
 
 
Chart 2: Number of mortgage products advertised 
 
 Credit impaired buy-to-let
Credit impaired residential
Prime buy-to-let
Prime residential
Thousands
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Feb
Jun
Sep
2007
Jan May
08
Sep
Jan May
09
  Source: Moneyfacts group. 
12 
 BIS Review 108/2009
Chart 3: Three-month inter-bank spreads (a) 
 
Sterling 
US dollar
Euro 
Basis points
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Jan.  May.  Sep.  Jan.  May.  Sep.
2007
08 
Jan. May.
09
 
 
*Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Spread of three-month Libor to three-month overnight indexed 
 
swap (OIS) rates. Five-day moving average
. 
  
 
Chart 4: Major UK banks’ and LCFIs’ equity prices 
 
Index: 2 July 2007 = 100
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
 Jul.
Oct.
2007
Jan.
Apr.
Jul.
08
Oct.
Jan. Apr.
09
Sources:  Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a)  Data to close of business on 12 June 2009.
 BIS Review 108/2009 
 13
Chart 5: BIS banks’ cross-border lending (a) 
 
Percentage changes on a year earlier
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
  10
Domestic lending
Cross-border lending
03
04
05
06
07
08
Sources:  IMF International Financial Statistics, Bank for International 
Settlements and Bank calculations.
(a) The data are weighted averages of fifteen banking systems, where the 
weights are based on the relative size of each  banking system's cross-border 
claims on non-banks.
 
Chart 6: Trust in different industries 
 
  *Source: 2009 Edelman Trust Barometer Report 
14 
 BIS Review 108/2009
Chart 7: Contributions to annual lending growth to UK non-financial companies 
 
Other monetary and financial institutions
Foreign lenders
Major UK-owned banks (b)
Total 
Percentage 
points
25
20
15
10
5
+
0
 -
5
08
09
 Source:  Bank of England.
(a)  Chart shows twelve-month growth rate in the stock of lending.
03
(b)  Includes consolidated banking groups of Barclays, LBG, HSBC, 
Nationwide and RBS. 
04
05
07
06
 
 
Chart 8: 1970s – Real GDP and real lending 
 
Annual growth
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
Annual growth
Mortgage lending 
(lhs) GDP (rhs)
Business lending 
(lhs)
-8
-4
0
4
8
12
Quarters from start of recovery (1975 Q4 = 0)
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
 *  Lending  series  deflated  using  the  GDP  deflator.  Household  M4 
lending is proxied with secured lending prior to 1980. 
 
Source: ONS and Bank of England 
 
 BIS Review 108/2009 
 15
Chart 9: 1980s – Real GDP and real lending 
 
Annual growth
40
30
Annual growth
8
6
Mortgage 
lending (lhs)
GDP (rhs)
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
Business 
lending (lhs)
-8
-4
0
4
8
12
Quarters from start of recovery (1981 Q2 = 0)
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
 *Lending  series  deflated  using  the  GDP  deflator.  Household  M4 
lending is proxied with secured lending prior to 1980. 
 
Source: ONS and Bank of England 
 
 
 
 
Chart 10: 1990s – Real GDP and real lending 
 
Business 
lending 
(lhs)
Annual growth
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
Annual growth
GDP (rhs)
Mortgage 
lending (lhs)
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-8
-4
0
4
8
12
16
Quarters from start of recovery (1991 Q4 = 0)
 * Lending series deflated using the GDP deflator. 
Source: ONS and Bank of England 
 
16 
 BIS Review 108/2009
Chart 11: Recessions and recoveries – median paths 
 
Interquartile range financial recessions
Financial recessions
Normal recessions
Mean time to trough
Mean time to trough
106
104
102
100
98
96
0
6
Quarters from peak in output
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10 11 12
 
*Source:IMF and Bank of England staff calculations 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2009/01/index.htm 
 José Manuel González-Páramo: National Accounts for monetary policy 
making – reflections on the use of the Euro Area Accounts in the light of 
the financial crisis 
Contribution by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European  Central  Bank,  to  the  Eurostat  conference  national  account  2009  “Reading  the 
present to prepare the future”, Session 2: Awakening from the financial and economic crisis 
Brussels, 16 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,16 
It is just over two years ago that Commissioner Almunia and I spoke at the launch of the joint 
compilation of the integrated euro area accounts by Eurostat and the ECB. Only a couple of 
months  later  financial  turmoil  broke  and  turned  into  arguably  the  biggest  financial  and 
economic crisis since the Great Depression. 
In my remarks, let me first share a few thoughts on why I believe the Euro Area Accounts are 
planted on particularly fertile grounds in the aftermath of the crisis. In my view, this has to do 
with  new  challenges  arising  after  the  crisis,  as  well  as  a  noticeable  shift  in  the  intellectual 
climate.  Indeed,  the  Euro  Area  Accounts  underwent  a  baptism  of  fire,  but  they  are  now 
                                                 
16   I am very grateful to Bernhard Winkler and Andreas Hertkorn for their valuable contributions. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 17
growing up at a time, when fewer and fewer people need convincing that they provide critical 
information and a useful framework to underpin policy-making. 
Second,  I  will  briefly  provide  some  examples  where  the  accounts  have  already  played  a 
useful  role  in  our  policy  making  during  the  financial  crisis.  Perhaps  unsurprisingly,  I  will 
mainly focus on the financial side of the accounts. 
Third,  I  will  argue  how  an  expanded  use  of  the  accounts  over  time  fits  in  well  within  the 
ECB’s broad-based approach to monetary policy, in the context of enhancing our monetary 
analysis and enriching our economic analysis. No doubt, in the future we shall also explore 
the role that a flow-of-funds approach and the interaction of sectoral balance sheets can play 
in  helping  us  think  about  systemic  risk  and  macro-prudential  issues  as  the  ECB  assumes 
responsibility in these fields. 
Finally, I will close with a few remarks on statistical challenges ahead for further improvement 
of the accounts. 
The EAA and the crisis fallout 
The  last  two  years  have  been  a  gruelling  time  for  policy-makers.  They  have  also  been  a 
humbling  experience  for  the  economics  profession  as  a  whole,  and,  no  doubt,  also  a 
challenge for statisticians and national accountants.  
Why has no-one seen this coming? This is a pertinent question. 
It needs to be recalled that central bankers have time and again raised their voices to warn 
on fragilities and underpricing of risks, but they could not turn a tide of opinion. And some of 
us have pointed to excessive growth in money and credit, which others considered quite out 
of step with the tune of the time. 
In addition, there have been a few economists, who spent their time looking deeply into the 
intricacies of the national accounts, before pronouncing themselves on the future course of 
events. Their simple message was: what cannot go on forever has to reverse.  
How is it that these economists-accountants appear to have managed to read the writing on 
the wall? It has been recently argued that they got there by looking at the flow-of-funds and 
balance sheets.17 Accounting identities are very useful reminders that things have to add up. 
Assets have to be matched by liabilities, expanding debt on balance sheets leads to rising 
payment  flows,  in  a  closed  system  any  one  sector  will  only  make  outsized  profits  at  the 
expense  of  other  sectors,  the  relationship  between  finance  and  the  real  economy  cannot 
remain out of kilter for long … and so on and so forth. 
I don’t think the accounts by themselves give us a superior crystal ball to gauge the future. 
However, I do believe that the accounts – even if they cannot give all the answers – will be 
increasingly  useful  in  helping  economists  to  address  the  right  questions,  which  will  be  no 
mean achievement. 
Some  economists,  like  Paul  Krugman  and  Barry  Eichengreen,  have  argued  that  the  crisis 
has  shown  that  the  last  30  years  of  macroeconomics  have,  at  best,  been  useless  and,  at 
worst, harmful. I don’t quite agree with such a harsh verdict. It is certainly the case, though, 
that  key  elements  for  understanding  the  financial  crisis,  such  as  the  role  of  financial 
intermediaries, the impact of balance sheets and leverage, the possibility of default and the 
disruption  of  markets,  have  hardly  been  on  the  map  in  the  prevailing  class  of  mainstream 
models. Against this background the euro area accounts can be useful as a comprehensive 
data source and by shaping “systemic” thinking in three dimensions: 
                                                 
17   See the recent survey by Bezemer (2009). 
18 
 BIS Review 108/2009
First,  the  accounts  provide  a  detailed  articulation  of  the  economy  in  terms  of  institutional 
sectors and, importantly, the interaction across sectors. Over the last 30 years the prevailing 
macroeconomic paradigm has conceived of macroeconomics as tracing out the implications 
of the optimizing intertemporal behaviour of a rational representative agent. Much like in the 
1930s, the crisis has powerfully driven home the point that macroeconomic outcomes are the 
result of the behaviour and interaction of heterogeneous agents in the economy, with scope 
for co-ordination failure, multiple equilibria or – disequilibria. 
Second, the integrated sector accounts bring together data on the financial and non-financial 
side  within  a  unified  framework,  which  provides  an  enhanced  basis  for  the  analysis  of 
interaction between financial and real variables as well as interrelations across institutional 
sectors.  Looking  at  the  flow-of-funds  and  the  evolution  of  financial  balance  sheets  in 
conjunction  with  savings,  investment  and  consumption  decisions  more  closely  can  help  to 
better understand feedback loops between financial quantities and the real economy. 
Third, the accounts are already immensely valuable as an organizing device and consistent 
framework which co-determines what we see and shapes how we see things.  
At a deep level one can invoke Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle (Unschärfe-Relation”) of 
particle physics, which establishes that there is no reality independent of measurement. This 
underscores the responsibility of the integrity and independence of statisticians and national 
accountants – although they will never be independent of prior theory – in furnishing the lens 
through  which  reality  is  perceived.  Indeed,  we  know  from  history  that  the  development  of 
national accounts is inextricably linked to advances in economic and monetary theory. This 
applies  to  the  compilation  of  National  Income  and  Production  Accounts  in  the  US  to  give 
expression  to  the  new-born  discipline  of  macroeconomics  after  the  Keynesian  revolution. 
This  also  applies  to  the  first  flow-of-funds  tables,  initially  referred  to  as  “money  flows”, 
compiled by Copeland at the Federal Reserve in the immediate post-war period. It is also no 
co-incidence  that  Irving  Fisher,  the  father  of  the  debt  deflation  hypothesis,  was  both  an 
eminent economist and a first-rate statistician. 
More prosaically, the accounts provide a comprehensive map of what we know, and – even 
more importantly – what we don’t know. To give one example, as the financial crisis broke, 
the ECB was in the very fortunate position to have excellent and timely data on bank balance 
sheets at its disposal, regularly analysed as part of the ECB’s ongoing monetary analysis. 
Much less was known about other financial intermediaries (OFI), which have remained at a 
smaller  scale  in  the  European  context,  and  insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds 
(ICPF). However, within the financial accounts both the OFI and ICPF subsectors were firmly 
part  of  the  picture  in  the  context  of  our  monetary  analysis  even  in  the  absence  of  more 
detailed primary sources.18 
Following the identification of important gaps, improved primary statistics will indeed soon be 
coming  on  stream  in  the  context  of  ECB  regulations  on  financial  vehicle  corporations, 
investment  funds  and  enhanced  information  on  securitisation  activities  by  banks.  I  should 
stress that these gaps were identified as important priorities well before the outbreak of the 
financial crisis.  
Some of the most insightful work on the origins and evolution of the financial crisis has been 
based  on  flow-of-funds  data.  For  example,  back  in  November  2006  at  the  ECB’s  Central 
Banking  Conference  on  the  role  of  money,  H.S.  Shin  pointed  to  the  leverage  targeting 
behaviour by U.S. broker dealers (investment banks) as a crucial pro-cyclical element in the 
credit and asset boom at the time. Subsequently, in a string of papers he has highlighted the 
interaction of sectoral flows and balance sheets, as available from the flow-of-funds, in the 
propagation of the subprime crisis through financial intermediaries and feedback loops to the 
                                                 
18   See e.g. Moutot et al. (2007). 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 19
wider  economy  (see  Adrian  and  Shin,  2008a,  2008b,  and  Shin,  2009),  with  important 
implications  also  for  the  design  of  financial  regulation  as  suggested  in  this  year’s  Geneva 
report (Brunnermeier et al., 2009).  
It  is  now  widely  argued  that  the  Japanese  experience  of  deflation  during  the  1990s,  was 
driven by protracted balance sheet adjustment by firms and the financial sector in the wake 
of the prior bubble in asset markets (Koo, 2008, Hattori et al., 2009), much reminding us of 
Irving Fisher’s debt deflation analysis of the Great Depression. In today’s situation again, the 
health of non-financial and financial sector balance sheets is at the centre of attention as a 
possible constraint on borrowing and lending as well as agents’ capacity to spend. 
Looking  at  the  flow-of-funds  in  conjunction  with  the  international  investment  positions  light 
can also be shed on the international dimension of the crisis. Brender and Pisani (2009) have 
argued  that  the  appetite  for  borrowing  by  U.S.  households  had  its  counterpart  in  excess 
savings  elsewhere,  which  resulted  in  a  concomitant  rise  in  the  supply  of  and  demand  for 
securitised products globally. In the case of Asia excess savings was mainly channelled into 
US government bonds and agency debt as a result of exchange rate interventions with the 
public  sector  acting  as  intermediary  in  the  presence  of  less  developed  and  less  open 
domestic financial markets. Securitised products were quite eagerly snapped up elsewhere, 
as we know, mainly remaining on the balance sheets of financial intermediaries, at least until 
the public sector had to step in as this episode of international risk sharing – or rather risk 
concentration – ended in tears. 
The use of EAA during the financial crisis  
As I have argued at the beginning of my talk, the euro area accounts may have seen the light 
of day at the best possible moment, as the financial crisis broke, which boosted the demand 
for this kind of data. 
At the same time, in other respects it might have been the worst possible moment. In a crisis, 
attention  is  naturally  focused  on  the  latest  data.  By  the  time  the  EAA  arrive,  with  a  lag 
currently of around four months, the situation may have already changed dramatically. Thus 
the headline “news” content is limited in relation to complementing the monetary data, which 
comes  out  within  a  month,  and  with  respect  to  euro  area  GDP  and  national  account  data 
available at national level. 
Moreover,  as  a  relatively  new  dataset,  it  is  not  "tried  and  tested”  and,  for  now,  the 
comparability  with  other  data  remains  limited  in  some  dimensions.  The  accounts  are 
presented in nominal terms and as four-quarter-sums, in the absence of a split into prices 
and volumes and lacking seasonal adjustment for the time being. Other issues relate to the 
degree to which the principle of market valuation (rather than book values) can be applied 
across the accounts and the degree to which sectoral information consolidates intra-sectoral 
flows and balance sheets in practice. 
Finally, the balancing of the accounts between the financial side and the non-financial side 
under the joint responsibility of Eurostat and the ECB truly represents a challenge of historic 
dimension.  The  remaining  discrepancies  for  the  household  and  non-financial  corporations 
sectors provide a measure of additional efforts needed in reconciling the accounts. As I have 
stressed before, the national accounts are useful not only as a framework for putting together 
what we know, but also for identifying what we do not yet know and for pointing to gaps and 
inconsistencies in the primary data. Much of this is work in progress. 
20 
 BIS Review 108/2009
With these caveats in mind let me nevertheless give you just a few examples where the Euro 
Area Accounts have already come into play at the ECB during the crisis complementing and 
enriching our monetary and economic analysis.19  
First  and  foremost,  the  euro  area’s  financial  structure  was  a  key  element  in  shaping  the 
ECB’s choice of non-standard measures. Our pre-dominantly bank-based system of financial 
intermediation in the euro area made it natural to concentrate efforts on easing the strains in 
the banking sector via the provision of liquidity and adapting our collateral requirements in 
our refinancing operations and to target an instrument, as is the case for covered bonds, that 
plays a significant role in securing longer-term funding for the banking sector. Information on 
financial structure was based, inter alia, on the Euro Area Accounts, such as the observation 
that banks accounted for around 70% of financing provided to non-financial corporations in 
the euro area over the period 2004-2008, while the figure was only around 20% in the case 
of the United States (see ECB Monthly Bulletin, April 2009). 
Second, information on financial investment of the money holding sectors complements the 
analysis of portfolio behaviour in the context of our monetary analysis. Of particular interest 
has  been  to  look  into  possible  portfolio  shifts  from  risky  assets  into  money  holdings  by 
households, as had been the case in the wake of the bursting of the equity bubble and period 
of heightened uncertainty after 9/11.  
Third,  on  the  part  of  non-financial  corporations  the  monetary  data  showed  a  decline  in 
deposits, as companies drew down their liquidity buffers initially in the wake of the collapse of 
Lehman, while more recently deposit growth has picked up again. On the basis of the data 
available from the EAA until Q1 2009 the broad picture of a drawing down of liquid assets 
can be confirmed, when including debt securities and mutual fund shares in the picture. At 
the  same  time  on  the  financing  side,  the  broader  perspective  of  the  EAA  suggests  that 
corporations may have been partly able to buffer the impact of the financial crisis in the form 
of  reduced  cash  flow  (and  thus  less  internal  financing)  and  more  difficult  access  to  bank 
lending by greater recourse to market based funding, as corporate bond issuance picked up 
markedly, as well as recourse to inter-company loans (estimated on the basis of the EAA). In 
addition, trade credit extended between non-financial corporations suffered but still appeared 
to decline less than GDP. 
Fourth, the regular macro-economic projection exercises include financial projections, which 
trace  out  the  evolution  of  transactions  and  sectoral  balance  sheets  consistent  with  the 
assumptions and growth and inflation profile provided by the real projections. Typically most 
attention is focused on the household and non-financial corporations sectors and the outlook 
for loan developments, indebtedness and debt service burden. Financial asset flows are also 
included (making use of accounting identities to enforce consistency within the system) and, 
in particular, developments in household net worth can have a bearing on macroeconomic 
developments  via  wealth  effects  on  consumption.  While  derived  to  be  consistent  with  the 
baseline, the financial projections can be used to assess potential risks to the projection of 
real variables stemming from financial developments. 
Fifth, various balance sheet indicators / leverage ratios and estimates of debt service burden 
based on the EAA are also regularly analysed in the ECB’s Financial Stability Reviews and 
more recently a risk-adjusted flow-of-funds model has been introduced as a tool to assess 
interlinkages  between  sectoral  balance  sheets  and  default  risks  (see  Financial  Stability 
Review, June 2009). 
                                                 
19   For an overview of flow-of-funds analysis at the ECB prior to the introduction of the integrated accounts and 
prior to the financial crisis see Be Duc and Le Breton, 2009; for an introduction to the EAA see ECB Monthly 
Bulletin, 2007, and since May 2009 a regular Box on EAA releases at quarterly frequency in the ECB Monthly 
Bulletin. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 21
The potential use of EAA for cross-checking  
Much of what I have said, including the examples on the emerging use of the accounts at the 
ECB, point to the accounts as a suitable platform to link – some may say: bridge – analysis 
conducted under the two pillars of the ECB’s approach. Indeed developing tools for cross-
checking  on  the  basis  of  the  flow-of-funds  and  the  encompassing  and  comprehensive 
framework  of  the  EAA  has  been  included  as  a  means  of  enhancing  monetary  analysis, 
alongside  cross-checking  based  on  dynamic  structural  general  equilibrium  models  that 
include financial frictions for scenario analysis.20  
Analysis  based  on  the  financial  accounts  can,  on  the  one  hand,  complement  and  enrich 
monetary  analysis  based  on  MFI  balance  sheets  in  the  context  of  considering  portfolio 
behaviour and financing decisions across a broader set of financial instruments and across a 
wider  spectrum  of  financial  intermediation  channels.  On  the  other  hand,  analysing  the 
interaction of financial transactions and balance sheets with the behaviour of real variables 
and  asset  prices  can  contribute  to  economic  analysis,  drawing  on  the  consistent  sectoral 
framework of the integrated Euro Area Accounts. 
The challenge remains to underpin and exploit the richness of the accounts by corresponding 
efforts  in  terms  of  modelling.  There have  been  previous  attempts  at  modelling  the  flow-of-
funds.  On  the  theoretical  side,  the  sectoral  balance  sheet  approach  by  Tobin  (1969), 
Brainard  and  Tobin  (1968)  and  others  in  the  late  1960s  remains  the  natural  conceptual 
framework for examining portfolio choice and the interaction with savings behaviour and the 
real  economy.  However,  attempts  to  incorporate  asset  demands  and  balance  sheets  into 
fully-fledged  large  scale  econometric  models  have  faced  recurrent  set-backs  over  recent 
decades. At the same time, a new generation of DSGE models could, in principle, also be 
extended to incorporate the interaction of multiple sectors and portfolio behaviour. 
On the empirical side, VAR approaches can be a suitable way to establish stylized facts on 
how  flow-of-funds  variables  interact  with  macroeconomic  variables  in  the  monetary  policy 
transmission.  Obviously,  diverse  financial  structures  and  the  impact  of  financial  innovation 
are likely to affect relationships over time. 
In  terms  of  the  practical  use  of  the  accounts,  I  do  see  a  promising  future  ahead  after  the 
tsunami of the financial crisis. Among the broader lesson that we have learned: Two pillars 
are  better  than  one  pillar  in  underpinning  a  broad-based  approach  to  monetary  policy-
making.  This  leaves  ample  scope  for  looking  at  facts  and  figures,  digging  deeper  into  the 
data jungle. National accounts remind us that a map is needed to put all the data together. 
Further enhancements to the Euro Area Accounts 
These  insights  show  the  wisdom  of  past  efforts  to  build  up  Monetary  Union  Financial 
Accounts  (MUFA)  for  the  euro  area  and  to  pursue,  jointly  with  Eurostat,  the  goal  of  fully 
fledged integrated Euro Area Accounts. I may also add that this major progress facilitated the 
comparison  of  financial  and  economic  developments  between  the  euro  area  and  other 
economic  areas.  In  particular  comparisons  with  the  US  and  UK,  where  companies  and 
households have relied more on financing from outside the banking sector, benefited from 
the  availability  of  complete  financial  accounts  encompassing  all  financial  instruments  and 
institutional sectors. The joint work of Eurostat and the ECB on the integration of financial 
and non-financial accounts by institutional sector has become an important benchmark in the 
global statistical community.  
                                                 
20   See J. Stark “Enhancing the monetary analysis”, speech at the conference “The ECB and its watchers IX”, 
Frankfurt 7 September 2007 (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_1.en.html). 
22 
 BIS Review 108/2009
At  the  same  time,  the  current  financial  crisis  and  economic  recession  has  made  some 
shortcomings in the availability of euro area macro data for monetary and economic analysis 
even more evident. In order to better monitor the transfer of risks, the Eurosystem is already 
compiling a complete counterpart sector breakdown for deposits and loans within the EAA 
and this will be enhanced in the future by counterpart sector information for security holdings.  
It is essential that the accounts become available with a time lag of 90 days and that they 
can be linked to the main macro aggregates in a consistent and transparent manner. This 
would allow a more detailed economic analysis as well as a more thorough cross-checking 
with  the  financial  transactions  and  balance  sheets.  To  this  aim,  by  mid  2010  the  central 
banks  of  the  Eurosystem  will  start  reducing  the  transmission  time  lag  of  their  input  for 
financial accounts by one month, from 110 days to 80 days. Moreover, the transmission of 
the national non-financial sector accounts to Eurostat, which has currently a time lag of 90 
days, needs to be further reduced by about 10 days, in order to enable the compilation of 
fully consistent Euro Area Accounts at t+90 days. In this context, I also look forward to the 
elimination of the last statistical discrepancies in these accounts, concerning the households’ 
and non-financial corporations sector.  
I would also like to outline two additional important areas for further improvements: (1) the 
timely  availability  of  seasonal  adjusted,  price  and  volume  change  data;  and  (2)  the 
integration of non-financial assets’ balance sheets into the Euro Area Accounts.  
In order to properly assess the latest quarterly developments the EAA need to be seasonally 
adjusted  and  price  and  volume  data,  starting  with  consumption  and  capital  formation  by 
institutional  sector,  needs  to  be  made  available.  In  addition,  real  income  and  saving 
estimates should be made available.  
Furthermore, the links between households’ wealth and consumption discussed earlier can 
only be properly understood if all household wealth components are covered. According to 
the  estimates  published  separately  by  the  ECB  since  2006,  around  2/3  of  euro  area 
households’ wealth is held in housing, while net financial wealth comprises around 1/3. For 
that reason, I am happy to announce that the EAA will incorporate non-financial estimates 
from 2010 onwards. To achieve an even more complete picture, these accounts may in the 
future also provide information on the distribution of income and wealth items across euro 
area household groups based on the Eurosystem household surveys conducted, under the 
auspices of the ECB.  
While I have focused so far on the use of Euro Area Accounts for monetary and economic 
analysis, they are also key to financial stability analysis, in particular when aiming to identify 
the risks and vulnerabilities in the various sectors of the economy and in the markets and 
infrastructures that link these sectors together. A new European Systemic Risk Board will be 
set up and will be in charge of identifying macro-prudential risks in the European Union. The 
euro  area  accounts  with  the  improvements  foreseen  and  extended  to  cover  the  European 
Union as a whole, will undoubtedly also be of great relevance to the work of the Board.  
To conclude, a lot has happened in the two years ago since Commissioner Almunia and I 
spoke  at  the  launch  of  the  regular  simultaneous  compilation  of  euro  area  accounts  by 
Eurostat and the ECB, which is still a unique cooperation world-wide. I would like to thank 
him for this invaluable support and trust that we will both witness the further elaboration and 
intensified usage of this crucial tool for European economic, financial and monetary policy-
making. 
References 
Adrian,  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2008a),  “Liquidity  and  leverage”,  Federal  Reserve  bank  of  New 
York Staff Report No. 328. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 23
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2008b), “Financial intermediaries, financial stability and monetary 
policy",  Proceedings  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium  at  Jackson 
Hole, 2008. 
Be Duc, L. and G. Le Breton (2009), “Flow-of-Funds analysis at the ECB – framework and 
applications, Occasional Paper No. 105, European Central Bank. 
Brender,  A.  and  F.  Pisani  (2009),  Globalised  finance  and  its  collapse,  Dexia  Asset 
Management, Belgium. 
Bezemer,  D.  (2009),  "No  one  saw  this  coming:  understanding  financial  crisis  through 
accounting models”, MPRA Paper No. 15892, Munich, June 2009.  
Brainard, W. and J. Tobin (1968), “Pitfalls in financial model-building”, American Economic 
Review, vol. 58, 99-122. 
Brunnermeier,  M.,  Crockett,  A.,  Goodhart,  C.,  Persaud,  A.D.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2009),  “The 
fundamental principles of financial regulation”, Geneva Report on the World Economy, ICMB 
and CEPR. 
ECB Monthly Bulletin (2007), “The introduction of quarterly sectoral accounts statistics for the 
euro area”, November, European Central Bank. 
ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  (2009),  “The  external  financing  of  households  and  non-financial 
corporations: a comparison of the euro area and the United States”, April, European Central 
Bank. 
Financial  Stability  Review  (2009),  Special  feature  on  “Balance  sheet  contagion  and  the 
transmission of risk in the euro area financial system”, June, European Central Bank. 
Hattori, M., Shin, H.S. and W. Takahashi (2009), "A financial system perspective on Japan’s 
experience in the late 1980s”, IMES Discussion Paper 2009-E-19, Bank of Japan. 
Koo, R. (2008), The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession, 
John Wiley & Sons, Singapore. 
Moutot, Ph. et al. (2007), “The role of other financial intermediaries in monetary and credit 
developments in the euro area", Occasional Paper No. 75, European Central Bank. 
Shin, H.S. (2009), “Securitisation and financial stability”, Economic Journal, vol. 119 (March), 
309-332.  
Tobin,  James  (1969),  "A  General  Equilibrium  Approach  to  Monetary  Theory",  Journal  of 
15-29 
Money, 
(http://ideas.repec.org/a/mcb/jmoncb/v1y1969i1p15-29.html). 
Banking 
Credit 
1(1), 
and 
vol. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
24 
 BIS Review 108/2009
