Glenn  Stevens:  Australia  and  Canada  –  comparing  notes  on  recent 
experiences1 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Canadian 
Australian Chamber of Commerce, Canada-Australia Breakfast, Sydney, 19 May 2009. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  be  here.  As  a  one-time  temporary  resident  of  Canada  and 
graduate  of  a  Canadian  university,  it  is  pleasing  for  me  to  see  the  Canadian  Australian 
Chamber of Commerce contributing to economic interaction between the two countries. 
It  is  surprising  that  Australians  and  Canadians  do  not  spend  more  time  comparing  notes, 
given the things we have in common. Apart from a shared heritage as members of the British 
Commonwealth (though Canada, of course, has the French-speaking heritage as well),2 we 
are  both  federal  states  and  constitutional  monarchies.  Both  nations  have  relatively  small 
populations  that  occupy  physically  large  continents.  We  are  both  commodities  producers. 
Our economies are open, and free flows of trade and capital are very important to us. 
There  are  some  interesting  similarities,  and  the  occasional  informative  difference,  in 
experiences, and examining these is helpful for Australians to understand better the way the 
past six or seven years have evolved. I propose to look at some of those today. 
Looking to the future, both our countries have reason to believe that we will come through 
this episode in reasonable shape. We also have important shared interests in the way the 
international  economic  and  financial  system  evolves  over  the  years  ahead.  In  canvassing 
some of these issues, I am mindful that David Dodge, the former Governor of the Bank of 
Canada, spoke to this group only a few years ago, concerning many of the same questions.3 
I find myself agreeing with the sentiments he expressed then, and repeating many of them 
today. 
Similarities, differences and recent developments 
Australia  and  Canada  have  similar  levels  of  GDP  per  capita  (based  on  purchasing  power 
parity,  nominal  GDP  per  capita  was  around  US$37 000  for  Australia  and  US$39 000  for 
Canada  in  2008).  Since  1990,  Australia’s  growth  in  real  GDP  per  capita  has  been  a  little 
higher than Canada’s. 
In terms of economic structure, the primary production sectors, combined, are of similar size 
in  the  two  countries  (Table 1).  Australia  has  less  manufacturing,  but  more  mining  than 
Canada. There are also some notable differences in the composition of our mining sectors. 
Both these turn out to have been of some importance over recent years, as I shall point out 
shortly. But, overall, the economic structures of the two countries at a very broad level are 
reasonably similar and, beyond the resource sector concentration, not all that different from 
the “norm” among industrialised economies. 
I thank Kathryn Ford and Jennie Cassidy for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
                                                 
1  
2   Canada is, of course, famously bilingual. In both countries, Chinese languages (that is, Cantonese, Mandarin 
and other Chinese languages) are the most commonly spoken languages after English (and after French in 
Canada). 
3   Dodge D (2006), “Prospering in Today’s Global Economy: Challenges for Open Economies such as Australia 
and  Canada”,  address  to  the  Sydney  Institute  and  the  Canadian  Australian  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
6 November. 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 1
 
Trade and financial flows between Australia and Canada are small – Canada accounted for 
around 1 per cent of Australia’s merchandise exports and imports in 2008, and around 1 per 
cent of foreign investment received by Australia. 
But  trade  overall  is  very  important  to  Australia,  and  even  more  so  to  Canada.  Exports  of 
goods and services amounted to just under a quarter of Australian GDP in 2008 and more 
than  a  third  of  Canadian  GDP.  Commodities  make  up  a  significant  share  of  the  value  of 
merchandise exports in both countries, although they are rather more important to Australia, 
as  Canada  also  has  sizeable  exports  of  machinery,  equipment  and  cars  (Table 2).  The 
composition of the two  countries’ commodity exports differs somewhat – Canada’s exports 
include a larger share of crude oil, natural gas and forestry products, while Australia has a 
larger share of exports in coal, iron ore and many metals. 
 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2009
 
Commodity prices tend to vary quite a bit, of course, driven largely by the ebb and flow of the 
world business cycle. This means that fluctuations in the terms of trade have long been an 
important feature of both countries’ economic experiences. For many years, the movements 
seemed to be quite similar – at least until the international downturn of 2001 (Graph 1). 
Graph 1  
BIS Review 61/2009 
  3
In  the  subsequent  global  upswing,  while  both  countries  saw  their  terms  of  trade  increase, 
Australia’s terms of trade began to pull ahead of Canada’s. Between the beginning of 2002 
and the middle of last year, the Canadian terms of trade had risen by more than 30 per cent. 
But over the same period, the Australian terms of trade rose by over 60 per cent.  
Why the difference? The answer is that the more rapid rise for Australia reflected the fact that 
our exports have a higher share of commodities, and within that, a higher weighting towards 
the commodities that had experienced the largest price increases (Table 3). That said, since 
Canada’s trade share of the economy is considerably larger than Australia’s, the smaller size 
of  the  terms  of  trade  rise  in  Canada  still  imparted  a  pretty  significant  boost  to  national 
income. 
 
Income gains driven by the terms of trade are generally expansionary. The boost would be 
expected, other things equal, to result in stronger growth in demand and output relative to 
capacity, more risk of inflation, higher interest rates and a rise in the exchange rate, relative 
to countries that did not share the shock. 
So it seemed to turn out. In the phase of the terms of trade upswing, both our countries saw 
growth  above  average,  interest  and  exchange  rates  rising  and  some  upward  pressure  on 
inflation.  There  were,  nonetheless,  some  differences.  The  Australian  dollar  did  not  rise  as 
much as the Canadian dollar, which is a bit surprising given Australia’s greater rise in the 
terms of trade. Australia also saw somewhat higher growth in demand on average during the 
2002 to 2008 period than Canada. Associated with those trends was a more pronounced rise 
in inflation at the end of the upswing, which saw us deviate further from our inflation target 
than Canada (Graph 2). 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2009
Graph 2  
That said, Australia coped with the terms of trade upswing better this time than in some past 
episodes. An inflation peak at around 5 per cent in 2008 compares to around 25 per cent in 
the commodities boom of the early 1950s and 18 per cent during the boom in the mid 1970s 
(Graph 3). Several economic reforms contributed to this improvement – including the floating 
exchange rate, more flexible labour market and stronger monetary policy framework. 
Graph 3  
   
More recently, the impetus from the global economy has reversed direction for both countries 
as a result of the global recession. Canadians would have sensed the change first, reflecting 
Canada’s  very  close  ties  with  the  United  States –  which  absorbs  around  three-quarters  of 
Canada’s  merchandise  exports,  equivalent  to  around  a  quarter  of  its  GDP.  The  economic 
weakness  in  the  United  States  began  to  take  root  as  problems  in  its  housing  sector  and 
financial system emerged in 2007, reducing demand for Canadian exports and weighing on 
growth, even with the booming terms of trade. 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 5
In  Australia’s  case,  exports  are  not  as  large  a  share  of  the  economy,  as  noted,  and  the 
destinations are both more diverse and more oriented to Asia (China and Korea account for 
more  than  a  fifth  of  the  value  of  Australian  merchandise  exports,  and  Japan  accounts  for 
another fifth). Overall, Asia was initially relatively little affected by the problems in the major 
economies.  It  was  really  only  in  the  second  half  of  2008,  as  the  financial  turmoil  led  to  a 
sharp  drop  in  confidence  among  households  and  firms  around  the  world,  that  a  re-
assessment about Asia’s prospects began. 
Even then, Australia’s export volumes have not weakened to date as much as those of many 
other countries (Table 4). 
 One  reason  is  that  the  slump  in  global  trade  was  initially  concentrated  heavily  in 
manufactures, which is a smaller share of exports for Australia than others. Another is the 
stronger linkage of key commodity exports to China, which appears to have seen a pick-up in 
growth this year. Chinese industrial output fell for four months between July and November, 
but has since recovered all those losses. A similar pattern has been seen in Korea, where 
industrial output suffered a sharp decline around year end but apparently made up about half 
of that over February and March. 
Looking ahead, with commodity prices at present levels, Canada’s terms of trade look like 
they are still somewhat above the average for the preceding couple of decades. Australian 
resource  producers  have  accepted  lower  prices  for  the  year  ahead,  and  this  is  likely  to 
contribute to a decline in the terms of trade by the end of 2009 of about 25 per cent from the 
peak, as shown in the chart. Yet even with that, at this stage Australia’s terms of trade over 
the coming year look like they will still be around 40 per cent above the two-decade average 
up to 2000. 
So in some important respects, not only did the economic upswing that ended during 2008 
provide  a  bit  more  impetus  to  Australia  than  Canada,  but  the  ensuing  global  economic 
downturn has not, to date at least, hit Australia as hard as it has Canada. On a comparison 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2009
of these two countries, the effects of export volume losses in slowing overall demand in the 
economy have been less important in Australia. 
As for inflation, it has moderated. The headline figures overstate the fall in inflation in both 
countries because of the decline in petrol prices, but measures of core or underlying inflation 
are trending lower. Of course in Australia, inflation has further to fall than in Canada, since it 
reached a higher peak. 
Key strengths 
One important feature that our two countries share at present is the relative resilience of our 
banking  sectors.4 Notwithstanding  the  global  credit  crisis,  Canadian  and  Australian  banks 
continue to be profitable and are well capitalised by private investors – something that many 
advanced countries cannot claim. For the 2008 reporting period, the return on equity for the 
five largest Australian banks was 17 per cent, and it was 14½ per cent for Canada’s major 
banks. This was lower than in the preceding few years, which had been ones of exceptional 
profits  for  banks  around  the  world –  and  years  during  which,  in  retrospect,  risk  was 
increasing –  but  still  very  solid.  It  is  noteworthy  that  equity  market  valuations  of  the  two 
banking systems display more confidence in asset quality and potential future earnings than 
for US, European or UK banks, as judged by the market premium over book value (Graph 4). 
Graph 4  
   
The solid performance of these banks reflects a number of factors. Firstly, holdings of the 
complex securities at the centre of the crisis were modest by international standards. 
Secondly, banks in Australia and Canada had more conservative lending practices in their 
home markets than their counterparts in the United States and the United Kingdom. While 
sub-prime mortgages accounted for around 13 per cent of the US mortgage market in mid 
2007, the closest equivalents in Australia and Canada accounted for around 1 per cent and 
less than 5 per cent of their mortgage markets, respectively.  
                                                 
4   The six largest Canadian banks account for around 90 per cent of Canadian banking system assets. Following 
recent mergers, the four largest Australian banks account for around 70 per cent of Australian banking system 
assets. 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 7
Both  countries  have  had  regional  booms  in  housing  markets  in  the  past  few  years, 
associated  with  the  run-up  in  commodity  prices  and  the  associated  effects  of  the  shift  in 
productive resources to those industries and regions that were enjoying the boom. Hence, 
house  prices  in  Alberta  and  in  Western  Australia  had  a  large  run-up  compared  with  most 
other regions in the respective countries (Graph 5). More recently, dwelling prices generally 
have tended to soften. In Australia’s case, the ratio of the median dwelling price to average 
household income has  declined quite noticeably since 2003, without a very large  absolute 
decline  in  housing  prices  (Graph 6).  This  is  evidence  for  at  least  the  possibility  that  these 
adjustments  can  take  place  over  reasonably  lengthy  periods  and  without  being  terribly 
disruptive to the economy. 
Graph 5  
  
Graph 6  
 8 
   BIS Review 61/2009
Of course, with the economy contracting at present, banks in both countries are seeing some 
pick-up in mortgage arrears. Overall, though, Australian and Canadian households appear to 
be having much less trouble servicing their debt than is the case in the United States and the 
United  Kingdom,  as  shown  by  their  relatively  low  rates  of  non-performing  housing  loans 
(Graph 7). This reflects the better lending decisions in earlier years. 
Graph 7  
 Our common external interests 
Of  course,  good  domestic  policies  can  do  only  so  much  to  ameliorate  the  impacts  of  very 
adverse  international  developments.  Both  economies  have  slipped  into  recession  as 
international forces have taken hold, albeit through differing chains of causation. But for the 
reasons articulated above, there are good grounds to think that both countries should be in a 
relatively good position and well placed to take part in a renewed international expansion. It 
is  too  soon  to  say  this  is  beginning  yet,  though  developments  over  recent  months  are 
certainly consistent with the view that a recovery will get under way towards the end of the 
year. That said, most observers think that the early part of any new global expansion will be 
characterised by pretty slow growth. 
Even with the uncertainty over the near-term global outlook, however, it makes sense to look 
forward. So in the final part of this address, I should like to talk about the common interests 
we have at stake in the way the international community responds to the crisis and shapes 
the next expansion. 
First among these is the openness of trade and capital flows. The extent to which trade flows 
slumped late last year perhaps gives a sense of what could happen were trade barriers to go 
up. Everyone would suffer, and badly. This is fully understood at an intellectual level around 
the  world.  Yet  we  know  that  in  times  of  domestic  economic  difficulty,  the  pressures  for 
protectionism increase. Countries like ours need to keep making the point that trade is not a 
zero-sum  game;  it  is  collectively  a  positive-sum  process  that  stimulates  innovation  and 
productivity, increases global growth and raises living standards. 
Secondly,  the  continued  development  of  many  emerging  economies  will  enrich  the 
opportunities for firms and individuals in economies like ours over time. But it will be sensible 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 9
for  emerging  countries  to  have  strategies  that  rely  less  on  the  absorption  of  consumer 
products by the developed world, at least for some years. That will involve, roughly speaking, 
more consumption and investment at home, lower trade surpluses and a step back from very 
large  outflows  of  capital  to  the  developed  world.  This  is  actually  a  rational  choice  for 
emerging market countries. But a lesson many countries took from the Asian crisis was that 
a strategy such as that was dangerous, because the rules of international engagement did 
not  provide  adequate  protection  in  times  of  difficulty.  Their  response  was  the  build-up  of 
reserve  assets  in  the  period  since  1998 –  a  costly  form  of  international  self-insurance, 
involving  sending  hard-saved  capital  from  developing  economies  to  the  rich  world.  It  was 
very much a second-best option but was pursued because first-best seemed unachievable. 
So it is in the interests of many developing countries to alter their growth strategy, but to do 
so they need confidence in the international system – its rules, governance, safety nets and 
so on. At the same time, the countries that have dominated the governance arrangements 
hitherto,  and  which  will  have  to  accommodate  the  emerging  countries,  will  want  to  have 
some confidence that we are all – emerging markets and developed countries alike – reading 
from  the  same  page  about  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  international  financial 
institutions  and  their  member  states.  Australia  and  Canada  have  a  shared  interest  in 
fostering progress on these fronts, which will involve encouraging both emerging countries 
and highly developed countries to move in ways that accommodate each other. I know my 
Canadian  counterparts  have  worked  assiduously  on  these  issues  for  many  years.  We 
support those efforts. 
Thirdly, much work is being done on the lessons we can learn from this episode for financial 
regulation  and  structure.  As  countries  whose  financial  and  regulatory  systems  have 
performed  pretty  well  in  this  episode,  and  which  are  largely  free  of  serious  problems, 
Australia and Canada are perhaps uniquely placed to contribute to the discussion. I think we 
could  hope  to  bring  a  sense  of  emotional  detachment,  balance  and  perspective  to  the 
international discussions on regulatory reform, which can be quite heated at times. 
Conclusion 
The “great white north” and the “great south land” have much in common, as well as some 
very informative differences. Sound policy frameworks and robust business sectors are being 
tested at present, but they can meet the test. 
We both certainly have, at this juncture, much at stake in the global economy recovering to a 
path of balanced growth, with open markets and sustainable policy settings. There is plenty 
we  can  do  together  to  promote  our  common  interests  in  the  world,  as  well  as  our  own 
interaction. Part of this sharing of ideas and co-operation will be spurred on by forums such 
as this one. I wish you every success. 
10 
 BIS Review 61/2009
