Yves Mersch: About the role of central banks in financial stability and 
prudential liquidity supervision, and the attractiveness of Islamic 
Finance  
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the 2nd Islamic 
Financial Services Board Public Lecture on Financial Policy and Stability, Kuala Lumpur, 8 
February 2009. 
The author thanks Li-Chun Yuan and Charles Hurt for their contribution to the preparation of this paper. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the Central Bank 
of Luxembourg’s website.  
 Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
It is my honour and great pleasure to address this distinguished audience at the celebration 
of the 50th anniversary of the Bank Negara Malaysia.  
The current crisis has revealed very strong information-related synergies between the central 
banking  and  the  prudential  supervisory  functions.  To  discharge  their  core  function  of 
maintaining  systemic  stability,  central  banks  are  searching  for  information  relating  to 
individual institutions’ liquidity and solvency positions, intra-group exposures, banks’ liquidity 
and funding policies as well as data related to potential channels of contagion. Supervisory 
authorities on their side look for information on money and financial markets, banks’ liquidity 
positions  and  collateral  provided  by  banks  in  open  market  operations,  patterns  of  banks’ 
recourse to payment systems and volumes in post-trading systems.  
To summarize, liquidity-related information is of the utmost importance both for central banks 
and prudential supervisors. 
This  is  also  the  reason  why  on  1  June  2008  the  Ministers  of  Finance,  the  supervisory 
authorities  and  the  central  banks  of  the  European  Union  signed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  on  cooperation  between  the  financial  supervisory  authorities,  central  banks 
and  finance  ministries  of  the  European  Union  on  cross-border  financial  stability.  This 
Memorandum  applies  both  in  times  of  financial  distress  and  in  normal  periods.  It  has  the 
benefit  of  containing  an  allocation  of  tasks  between  the  authorities  in  charge  of  financial 
stability.  Depending  on  the  nature  of  the  issues  at  stake,  one  of  those  authorities  will 
coordinate,  as  the  “national  coordinator”,  activities  in  order  to  enhance  preparedness  in 
normal times and facilitate the management and resolution of a crisis at the national level in 
a  particular  crisis  situation.  The  national  coordinator  is  designated  by  virtue  of  its  legal 
competences 
the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding confers upon central banks the role of national coordinator in case a liquidity 
crisis could affect a cross-border financial group with a potential for systemic implications1.  
financial  stability.  Consequently 
field  of 
the 
in 
                                                 
1   See,  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  cooperation  between  the  financial  supervisory  authorities,  central 
banks and finance ministries of the European Union on cross-border financial stability, 1 June 2008, point 4.4 
second indent.  
BIS Review 59/2009 
 1
The role of central banks in financial stability 
- 
- 
- 
Liquidity – a central bank remit for financial stability 
The BCL’s new competences with regard to prudential supervision of liquidity 
The importance of liquidity supervision in ensuring confidence in the currency and in 
the financial system 
Islamic Finance and Liquidity 
 Liquidity – a central bank remit for financial stability 
Liquidity is defined as “the ease and speed with which a financial asset can be converted into 
cash or used to settle a liability. Cash is thus a highly liquid asset. The term “liquidity” is also 
often used as a synonym for money”2. 
In this respect, three fundamental tasks contained in the EC Treaty are designed to serve 
financial stability. All of them evolve from the central banks’ role with respect to liquidity. 
• 
Monetary policy stands for liquidity injections in (a) normal times (monetary policy 
operations) and also (b) in times of financial distress (lender of last resort). 
The smooth functioning of payment systems induces (c) the oversight of payment 
and settlement systems as well as payment instruments. 
 The role of a central bank in financial stability or more accurately “systemic stability”3 is to 
prevent  the  economy  from  systemic  risk  defined  as  being  the  risk  that  the  failure  of  one 
participant  in  a  transfer  system,  or  in  financial  markets  generally,  to  meet  its  required 
obligations  will  cause  other  participants  or  financial  institutions  to  be  unable  to  meet  their 
obligations (including settlement obligations in a transfer system) when due. Such a failure 
may cause significant liquidity or credit problems and, as a result, might threaten the stability 
of financial markets and the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism4. 
Liquidity  is  thus  at  the  very  heart  of  systemic  stability.  Due  to  asymmetric  information,  a 
liquidity  crisis  at  one  bank  can  lead  to  increasing  uncertainty  in  the  wholesale  and  retail 
markets  with  respect  to  the  liquidity  situation  of  other  banks,  which  in  severe  cases  could 
lead to a drying-up of money market liquidity and/or to a bank run. In less severe cases, it 
could raise refinancing costs for other banks and increase uncertainty with respect to future 
cash-flows  and  market  conditions,  which  would  exacerbate  liquidity  management.  Second, 
the  large  and  increasing  share  of  interbank  exposures  and  money  market  instruments  in 
banks’  funding  can  cause  a  knock-on  effect,  as  liquidity  problems  at  one  bank  directly 
translate  into  increasing  liquidity  pressure  (e.g.  due  to  reductions  in  cash-inflows  and 
unexpected refinancing requirements) on its interbank counterparties. Third, asset fire sales 
can  lead  to  a  market  meltdown  under  certain  circumstances,  which  in  turn  decreases  the 
counterbalancing capacity of all banks and, consequently, their liquidity risk-bearing capacity. 
In the potential emergence of a liquidity crisis, central banks need to assess the scale of the 
liquidity problem and the potential systemic implications of liquidity stress5. 
                                                 
2   ECB, Glossary; http://www.ecb.eu/home/glossary/html/glossl.en.html. 
3   LAMFALUSSY  Alexandre  Baron  de,  Central  banks  and  financial  stability,  2cd  Pierre  Werner  Lecture,  26 
October 2004, Luxembourg p. 3; http://www.bcl.lu/fr/media/discours/2004/20041026/index.html.  
4   ECB, Glossary, http://www.ecb.eu/home/glossary/html/glosss.en.html. 
5   ECB, Opinion of 10 September 2008 at the request of the Banque centrale du Luxembourg on amendments to 
the draft law improving the legislative framework for Luxembourg as a financial centre and amending the Law 
of 23 December 1998 on monetary status and on the Banque centrale du Luxembourg, (CON/2008/42); 
http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2008_42.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2009
Therefore  central  banks  act  as  overseers  of  payment  systems  which  consist  of  a  set  of 
instruments,  banking  procedures  and,  typically,  interbank  funds  transfer  systems  which 
facilitate the circulation of money6. As payment systems refer to the circulation of money7, 
liquidity is thus also the essence of payment systems and the reason why central banks are 
responsible  for  overseeing  the  smooth  functioning  of  such  payment  systems.  A  major 
malfunctioning of payment systems is likely to affect the stability of financial institutions and 
markets. To prevent that, the Eurosystem operates Target 2 (the Trans European Automated 
Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  Express  Transfer  System)  that  channels  liquidity  through 
accounts held by financial institutions with central banks. The advantage in terms of systemic 
stability is that Target 2 operates in “risk-free” central bank money and provides immediate 
intraday finality and thereby mitigates systemic risks. 
A fortiori, central banks are also concerned with the oversight of private payment  systems 
operating  in  commercial  bank  money  and  with  deferred  settlement  especially  when  they 
carry systemic risk. 
In general interbank markets can become a source of crisis, or even aggravate  a crisis, if 
fundamental  uncertainty  makes  it  too  costly  for  banks  to  assess  counterparty  risks.  This 
possibility, observed in the current crisis, represents a clear example of the endogeneity of 
liquidity.  
The  risk  of  a  macro  liquidity  shock  via  contagion  provides  the  rationale  for  central  banks’ 
involvement in prudential supervision, liquidity regulation, supervision and macro-prudential 
surveillance.  As  Walter Bagehot  pointed  out  in 1873:  “In  wild  periods  of  alarm,  one  failure 
makes many, and the best way to prevent these derivative failures is to arrest the primary 
failure which caused them”. 
The  EC  Treaty  recognizes  this  fundamental  link  between  financial  stability  and  the  core 
functions of the ESCB relating to liquidity and prudential supervision8. For that purpose the 
EC Treaty requires the ESCB to “…contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by 
the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the 
stability  of  the  financial  system”9  and  allows  the  EU  Council  to  confer  upon  the  ECB  “… 
specific tasks concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and  other  financial  institutions  with  the  exception  of  insurance  undertakings”10.  While  the 
extension  of  the  present  mandate  into  macro  prudential  supervision,  including  liquidity 
supervision,  risk  concentration,  stress  testing  and  leverage  ratios,  seems  uncontroversial, 
different models are under discussion concerning regional coordination, mediation, advisory 
and  standardisation  functions.  A  different  set  of  solutions  is  available  when  it  comes  to 
supervision of individual institutions, as suggested by the report issued by the de Larosière 
Group11. 
                                                 
6   ECB, Glossary, http://www.ecb.eu/home/glossary/html/glossl.en.html.  
7   See,  PADOA-SCHIOPPA  Tommaso,  Central  Banks  and  financial  stability:  Exploring  an  intermediate  land, 
Second ECB central banking conference, 24 & 25 October 2002, Frankfurt am Main p. 6.  
8   See, Commentaires J. MEGRET, Le rôle des autorités prudentielles et des banques centrales, in Intégration 
des marches financiers, dir. Dominique Servais, 3 éd., 2007, p. 59. 
9   Article 105 (5) of the EC Treaty. 
10   Article 105 (6) of the EC Treaty.  
11   DE  LAROSIÈRE,  Report  by  the  High-Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  EU,  25  February  2009; 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf.  
BIS Review 59/2009 
 3
The BCL’s new competences with regard to prudential supervision of liquidity  
According to the BCL’s organic law: “The Central Bank shall be responsible for supervising 
the general liquidity situation on the markets as well as evaluating market operators for this 
purpose…”12. 
These  core  central  bank  tasks  in  the  field  of  financial  stability  are  accompanied  by  new 
cooperation mechanisms between the Central Bank and the other prudential supervisors13 
granting the Central Bank access to full supervisory information. 
Moreover a new draft law (which is under way) confers upon the BCL a general oversight 
competence over all payment and settlement systems as well as payment instruments14.  
The scope of the BCL’s competence in the field of liquidity embraces two aspects of liquidity 
supervision. The first aspect focuses on market liquidity. Financial market liquidity is usually 
thought  of  as  a  measure  of  the  ability  of  market  participants  to  undertake  securities 
transactions  without  triggering  large  changes  in  their  prices.  While  it  is  challenging  to 
precisely measure financial market liquidity, it is generally agreed that highly liquid markets 
are characterised by a myriad of buyers and sellers who are willing to trade. Moreover, prices 
in  such  markets  ordinarily  carry  low  liquidity  risk  premiums  –  that  is  the  compensation 
demanded by investors (and bid into expected rates of return) for uncertainties associated 
with the ease with which transactions can be executed in the future15. 
Market liquidity and funding liquidity are strongly linked. Funding liquidity measures the ability 
of a given financial institution to settle an obligation when due. As highlighted in the ECB’s 
financial stability review of December 2008, correlations between market liquidity and funding 
liquidity become perceptible in times of financial crisis. Since the beginning of the financial 
turmoil,  an  increase  in  funding  liquidity  risk  has  gone  alongside  a  decrease  in  market 
liquidity. Unfortunately this correlation can only be evidenced at the outbreak of a financial 
crisis16.  
A  second  aspect  of  liquidity  supervision  therefore  covers  financial  operators’  liquidity  risk 
management. A liquidity shock in a financial institution may disrupt the stability of the money-
market  through  contagion.  This  is  due  to  asymmetric  information,  the  ever  larger  role  of 
interbank markets and the well documented difficulty of economic agents in assessing and 
measuring risk over time. So, liquidity itself can become a contagion channel by triggering 
changes in asset prices, in the capital base of financial institutions, and thus by feedback into 
banks’ funding capacity.  
                                                 
12   Article  2  (4)  of  the  law    of  23  December  1998  concerning  the  monetary  status  and  the  Central  Bank  of 
Luxembourg.  
13   Article 2 paragraphs 4 and 5 of the law of 23 December 1998 concerning the monetary status and the Central 
Bank of Luxembourg. 
14   Under the current legislation, according to Articles 34-3 and 47-1 of the Law of 5 April 1993 on the financial 
sector, the BCL only oversees payments systems in which it participates. The draft law on payment services, 
electronic money institutions and on settlement finality in payment and securities settlement systems extends 
the  BCL’s  oversight  competence  to  all  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems  as  well  as  payment 
instruments; 
see, 
http://www.chd.lu/servlet/DisplayServlet?id=78979&path=/export/exped/sexpdata/Mag/094/712/079131.pdf
15   ECB, Financial stability review, June 2007, p. 10, also see p. 81. 
16   Indeed, a negative relationship between high funding liquidity risk and low market liquidity can be observed 
only after the start of the crisis, while in “normal” times the two indicators show no correlation. This supports 
the thesis that interactions between the two measures emerge only when common shocks to funding liquidity 
push banks to take analogous positions, so that forced asset sales lead to depressed asset prices and dire 
consequences for overall market liquidity. The loop is then closed when lower asset prices and lower market 
liquidity  lead  to  higher  collateral  requirements  in  the  money-market,  which  in  turn  increase  funding  liquidity 
risk, contribute to further asset sales and increase the probability of a downward liquidity spiral. 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2009
What is the subordinated aim of liquidity supervision?  
The importance of liquidity supervision in ensuring confidence in the currency and in 
the financial system 
The  current  crisis  is  a  liquidity  crisis  and  thus  a  crisis  of  confidence.  In  January  the  EU 
Commission  registered  the  lowest  confidence  rate  ever  measured  in  the  Eurozone17. 
Everything started with the developing suspicions relating to the counterparty’s solvency as a 
result  of  the  undervaluation  of  exposures  to  sub-prime  related  financial  instruments  and  a 
lack of transparency concerning reporting accounts. The deterioration of confidence infected 
the entire financial system and its ability to assess the proper value of assets and liabilities. 
In this context, consumption and investment decrease. Portfolio investments are reoriented 
away  from  risk  towards  more  liquid  assets  and  banks  do  not  lend  to  each  other.  Finally 
lending to the real economy is negatively affected18.  
Some observers blame the lack of liquidity as being the outcome of a shift from the classical 
originate-to-hold to the modern originate-to-distribute model.  
Through the originate-and-distribute model, banks are increasingly relying on market-based 
funding and transfer a significant part of their credit risk off-balance sheet. However, this new 
model raises several issues due in particular to the loosening of the link between the debtor 
and  the  creditor.  Whereas  in  the  conventional  model,  banks  favour  customer  relationships 
meaning that banks have the necessary incentives to monitor carefully lending activities and 
assess properly credit risks. The convergence towards the new business model stimulates 
an increasing information asymmetry and uncertainty and thus affects the degree of market 
efficiency. 
Recent  experience  has  shown  the  limits  of  this  model  and  has  revealed  the  opacity  that 
emerged from the use of highly complex instruments and derivatives. In this context, is the 
substitution  process  between  the  two  models  reversible?  If  not,  what  are  the  possible 
alternatives? 
In  this  respect  particular  attention  is  drawn  to  Islamic  finance  grounded  on  fundamental 
principles  like  risk-sharing,  materiality  (a  financial  transaction  must  be  linked  to  a  real 
economic transaction), no exploitation, no financing of sinful activities19.  
Islamic finance and liquidity 
In  the  light  of  the  previous  developments  liquidity  supervision  and  regulation  are  a 
cornerstone  of  financial  stability.  It  is  obvious  that  in  conventional  finance,  the  interest 
element plays a very important role. Interest has been viewed not only as an integral part of 
the  price  mechanism  whereby  savings  and  investments  are  regulated  in  a  "laissez  faire" 
system but also as an important policy instrument with which central bank interventions can 
be  made  to  influence  and  control  inflation  and  in  a  wider  sense  the  economy.  Monetary 
                                                 
17   67,1 points. 
18   See, Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, on 
the panel: “Society, State, Market: a European Answer” at the International Forum Economia e Società Aperta 
“Uscire  della  crisi”,  organised  by  Bocconi  University  and  Corriere  della  Sera  in  cooperation  with  University 
Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, 25 November 2008. 
19   See,  Datuk  Seri  Panglima  Andrew  Sheng,  Islamic  finance  and  financial  policy  and  stability:  an  institutional 
perspective, paper delivered at the 1st Islamic Financial Services Board Public lecture on Financial policy and 
stability, Kuala Lumpur, 26 March 2007, also see, LALDIN AKRAM Mohamad, Fundamentals and practices in 
Islamic  finance,  ISRA  Series  in  Contemporary  Islamic  finance,  volume  1,  2008 ;  also  see,  DUSUKI  DATO’ 
WAJDI  Asyraf,  Islamic  Finance:  An  old  skeleton  in  a  modern  dress,  ISRA  Series  in  Contemporary  Islamic 
finance,  volume  2,  2008 ;  also  see,  BAHRAIN  MONETARY  AGENCY,  Islamic  Banking  &  Finance  in  the 
Kingdom of Bahrain, 2002.  
BIS Review 59/2009 
 5
policy is equated with interest rate management by the central banks. In this respect the ECB 
holds one outstanding instrument for regulating liquidity: determining the key interest rates20. 
In order to preserve the effectiveness of our policy instrument, we have to avoid excessively 
low levels. 
On the other hand the core principle of Islamic finance is the prohibition of “Rhiba” meaning 
the  prohibition  of  interest  rates.  Banks  usually  combine  in  their  balance  sheets  short-term 
liabilities with long-term assets, resulting in maturity mismatches. Banks try to minimize the 
potential  risks  resulting  from  these  mismatches  by  actively  managing  their  liquidity  needs 
typically  through  interbank  money  markets.  Given  that  conventional  interbank  markets  are 
interest-based  markets,  Islamic  banks  cannot  use  these  markets  to  manage  their  liquidity 
positions, and therefore an alternative market design is required21. 
Does this mean that our concepts of financial stability are antagonistic?  
No certainly not! Interest rates are not the only method to regulate the volume of money. The 
Malaysian  government  pioneered  the  issuance  of  Islamic  sovereign  certificates  known  as 
Government Investment Issues. These certificates were introduced to provide Islamic banks 
with  a  sovereign  instrument  in  which  to  invest  their  short-term  excess  liquidity.  Another 
method  for  central  banks  to  regulate  liquidity  is  to  issue  central  bank  securities22.  The 
interest-free  Islamic  Bonds  can  be  regulated  in  such  a  way  as  to  influence  the  monetary 
situation by indirectly controlling the availability of funds.  
The crux is the available market and funding liquidity. 
Liquidity  management  as  part  of  their  risk  management  processes  is  crucial  to  banking 
institutions  and  financial  stability.  This  issue  may  be  even  more  acute  when  it  comes  to 
Islamic finance products, notably because Sukuk are overall still considered of low liquidity 
“due  to  high  originator  concentration,  large  diversity  of  deal  structures,  and  regional 
fragmentation”23.  Because  there  is  virtually  no  global  Shariah-compliant  short-term  money 
market and no Islamic repo market, Islamic banks face difficulties in managing mismatched 
asset and liability portfolios24. At both extremities of the term structures, the very short term 
money market and the long maturities in the capital market, Islamic finance products still lack 
volume. 
Differences in approaches to liquidity regulation and liquidity risk-management are in theory 
merely differences in the use of instruments rather than differences in substance. After all the 
aim is to control the volume of money and thus to protect the economy from systemic risk. 
Whether  this  is  done  through  quantitative  measures  as  in  a  capital control  environment  or 
through qualitative price measures like interest rates or through a scaling of risk distribution 
                                                 
20   Article 12.1 of the ESCB Statute states that: “The Governing Council shall adopt the guidelines and take the 
decisions necessary to ensure the performance of the tasks entrusted to the ESCB under this Treaty and this 
Statute.  The  Governing  Council  shall  formulate  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Community  including,  as 
appropriate,  decisions  relating  to  intermediate  monetary  objectives,  key  interest  rates  and  the  supply  of 
reserves  in  the  ESCB,  and  shall  establish  the  necessary  guidelines  for  their  implementation.  The  key  ECB 
interest rates are: the interest rate on the main refinancing operations (the fixed rate in fixed rate tenders and 
the minimum bid rate in variable rate tenders); the interest rate on the marginal lending facility; and the interest 
rate on the deposit facility. These rates reflect the stance of the monetary policy of the ECB”; also see, ECB, 
Glossary, http://www.ecb.eu/home/glossary/html/glossl.en.html. 
21   SOLE Juan, Introducing Islamic banks into the conventional banking systems, IMF working paper WP/07/175, 
p. 20.  
22   Idem., p. 21-22.  
23   HESSE Heiko, JOBST Andreas, SOLE Juan, Quo vadis Islamic Finance,  
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2593.  
24 EDWARDES Warren, Liquidity Management Issues, Institute of Islamic Banking & Insurance / New Horizon, 
The Islamic Funds Conference, 18 February 2004, http://www.dc3.co.uk/IslamicLiquidity040218.pdf.  
6 
 BIS Review 59/2009
is ultimately dependant on policy decisions influenced by market size, instruments availability 
and  global  integration  capacity  or  willingness.  Liquidity  is  an  elusive  concept  requiring  the 
supervisor  to  adopt  a  dynamic  approach.  The  endogeneity  of  liquidity  calls  for  a  case-by-
case approach where the specificities of Islamic finance can be taken into account.  
With  respect  to  its  specificities  it  is  worth  investigating  how  Islamic  finance  products  and 
institutions are affected by the financial crisis.  
Islamic finance in the current turmoil 
- 
Considerations  concerning  the  impact  of  the  current  financial  crisis  on  Islamic 
finance products and institutions 
Highlights of the developments undertaken by Islamic finance stakeholders towards 
financial stability 
 Considerations concerning the impact of the current financial crisis on Islamic finance 
products and institutions 
Analysts and commentators in the financial industry put the blame for the current crisis on 
the  intensive  use  of  structured  financial  products,  on  derivatives  and  other  assets  whose 
fundamentals are uncertain. 
Conversely, Islamic financial institutions and products are singled out for being less impacted 
directly  by  the  turmoil  due  to  their  conformity  with  the  Shariah  principles  since  these 
principles bring greater discipline to the markets25: 
- 
- 
- 
by eliminating a large number of derivatives transactions, 
by putting a constraint on short sales, 
by motivating the creditor in a good evaluation of the credit risk, thereby minimizing 
the moral hazard risk, 
by preventing the amount of debt to be far above the size of the real economy. 
- 
In effect, these principles are considered as inherent stabilizers. 
Hence, some observers consider that Islamic financial institutions might rebound faster from 
this  crisis  and  be  in  better  conditions  than  the  “conventional”  banks,  thanks  to  restricted 
exposure to “toxic” assets. 
Still,  Islamic  finance  products  are  not  immune  to  adverse  market  conditions  and  could  be 
impacted by the credit crunch or suffer from a property bubble deflation.  
Islamic  finance  has  overall  greatly  expanded,  and  not  merely  in  countries  of  Muslim 
obedience. According to different rating agencies, Islamic finance accounts for $800 billions 
of assets26. Gross issuance of sukuk has quadrupled over the past few years, reaching about 
$30 billion by the end of 200727.  
                                                 
25   CHAPRA  Umer,  The  global  financial  crisis:  can  Islamic  finance  help?  Institute  of  Islamic  Banking  and 
Insurance  2009,  published  by  NewHorizon,  Global  perspective  on  Islamic  banking  and  insurance; 
http://www.newhorizonislamicbanking.com/index.cfm?section=academicarticles&action=view&id=10733.  
26   HESSE 
Heiko, 
JOBST 
Andreas, 
SOLE 
Juan, 
Quo 
vadis 
Islamic 
Finance, 
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2593.  
27   MOODY’S, Global Sukuk Issuance: 2008 slowdown mainly due to credit crisis, but some impact from Shari’ah 
compliance issues, Global Credit Research Announcement, 22 JAN 2009; 
http://www.moodys.com/cust/content/content.ashx?source=StaticContent/Free%20Pages/Products%20and%
20Servi es/Downloadable%20Files/Global%20Sukuk%20Issuance.pdf .  
BIS Review 59/2009 
 7
In 2008 volumes dropped however to around $15 billion28. Several causes are mentioned to 
explain  this  severe  fall:  the  global  credit  crisis,  the  rising  costs  of  borrowing,  the  Gulf’s 
currency  risk,  the  downtrend  of  oil  prices  and  the  diverging  assessments  of  sukuk’s 
compliance to Shariah. Many observers consider the latter cause as the major reason for the 
downturn.  In  November  2007  a  Shariah  scholar  made  a  statement  that  85%  of  the  sukuk 
issued  were  not  Shariah  compliant  due  to  the  repurchase  agreements  they  included.  In 
February  2008,  the  AAOIFI  (Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions) issued new recommendations on the sukuk structure, their issuance and trading. 
Some market practitioners consider these recommendations as impediments to the issue of 
sukuk due to the additional constraints and their subsequent impact on their tradability. 
The judgment by the Kuala Lumpur High Court Justice in July 200829 on the validity of some 
financing schemes also highlights the importance of Shariah compliance and legal certainty 
for the long-term development of Islamic finance. 
These examples demonstrate the need to reduce uncertainty with regard to the standards 
and rules applicable to Islamic finance products and also the need to improve the resilience 
of Islamic finance and its integration into the international financial system.  
Not  being  an  expert  in  Islamic  finance,  I  wish  to  refer  here  to  a  speech  made  by  the 
Honourable Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz a few months ago, when she stated that “There is a need for 
the Islamic financial system to have the capital requirements, effective risk management and 
strong  governance  that  are  fully  equipped  to  manage  the  risks  that  are  specific  to  Islamic 
financial transactions”30. 
Highlights of the developments undertaken by Islamic finance stakeholders towards 
financial stability 
Indeed, despite all the praise accorded to Islamic finance, Islamic finance professionals and 
stakeholders are looking at the developments that are necessary to ensure further stability 
and the resilience of Islamic products and institutions.  
On the issue of capital requirements, I had the opportunity to share my views on the specific 
question  of the  appropriate  capital  regulation  for  Islamic  banks  during  the  IFSB  Summit  in 
2007.  Introducing  some  modifications  within  the  standard  framework  could  enable  the 
adoption of an integrated regulation for both Islamic and conventional banks. The topic is still 
under  discussion,  more  specifically  on  the  ways  to  determine  its  adequacy.  The  guidance 
provided by the AAOIFI and by the IFSB brought useful clarification but has not closed the 
debate, which also remains open as regards conventional banking. 
The  current  turmoil  prompted  the  importance  of  consumers’  confidence  in  the  financial 
system  and  more  specifically  depositors’  trust  in  their  banks  to  avoid  bank  runs.  This  has 
prompted  authorities  around  the  world  to  further  improve  existing  depositors’  protection 
schemes, sometimes by incorporating deposits at Islamic banks. Considering that depositors 
in Islamic banks face the same risks as in conventional banks, depositors’ protection should 
                                                 
28   Idem.  
29   Kuala Lumpur High Court Justice Datuk Abdul Wahab Patail’s judgment on the 18th July 2008 ruled that that 
the  application  of  the  Al-Bai'  Bithaman  Ajil  (BBA)  contracts  were  contrary  to  the  Islamic  Banking  Act  1983 
(IBA)  and  the  Banking  and  Financial  Institutions  Act  1989  (BAFIA).  In  another  case,  he  ruled  that  Istisna 
contracts are void ab initio (from inception). 
30   AKHTAR AZIZ Zeti, Enhancing the Resilience and Stability of the Islamic Financial System, keynote address 
at  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  and  Institute  of  International  Finance  Conference:  "Enhancing  the 
Islamic  Financial  System",  Kuala  Lumpur,  20  November  2008; 
Resilience  and  Stability  of 
http://www.bis.org/review/r081126c.pdf.  
the 
8 
 BIS Review 59/2009
be protected at the same level. Otherwise, Islamic banks could be tempted to invest in riskier 
projects31 and may trigger systemic risk. 
Closely  linked  to  the  issue  of  depositors’  protection  is  the  topic  of  the  Islamic  finance 
“investment  deposit”  which  provides  a  good  example  of  disclosure  and  transparency 
requirements.  Considering  that  such  deposits  are  based  on  a  risk-sharing  agreement  and 
could  not  be  treated  as  a  classical  deposit  which  benefits  from  a  protection  scheme,  the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority recommends improving “financial disclosures on the risk and 
return profiles of the different categories of deposits, as well as their status under the DPS 
[Deposit Protection Scheme], will enable depositors, potential or otherwise, to make informed 
decisions”32. Regarding the importance of overall good corporate governance, the IFSB has, 
in  recent  months,  submitted  for  public  consultation  several  documents  in  relation  to 
governance and to the conduct of business for Islamic finance products. 
With regards to liquidity, constraints are raised by the specificities of Islamic finance. The fact 
is  that  the  issuer  still  has  to  pay  a  premium  over  a  conventional  issue  to  attract  investors 
particularly risk averse ones at this stage. The insufficient depth of the market could in theory 
be addressed by the cooperation of different financial centres to create a regional liquidity 
market, the issue of short-term sukuk or some level of central bank involvement. The same 
central  banks  could  in  theory  encourage  standardisation  of  structures  and  documentation, 
offer and invest in Islamic interbank securities, support the liquidity of a secondary market in 
long-term  Islamic  investments,  encourage  trading  and  establish  trading  infrastructures. 
Several interesting albeit limited solutions have been launched: 
In  2007,  Kuwait  Finance  House-Bahrain  (KFH-Bahrain)  and  Fortis  Private  Real  Estate 
Holding S.A agreed to launch a Shari’a Compliant Overnight Fund (SCOF), as a solution for 
managing  short-term  liquidity  with  the  corresponding  opportunity  to  invest  on  an  overnight 
basis. This fund was incorporated in Luxembourg last year. In a different vein, the Central 
Bank  of  Bahrain  implemented  last  year  the  Islamic  Sukuk  Liquidity  Instrument  in  order  to 
enable  financial  institutions  to  access  short  term  liquidity  against  Government  of  Bahrain 
Islamic leasing bonds (sukuk), issued by the Central Bank of Bahrain. Also of importance in 
terms of stability, efficiency and market development is the operational link between these 
new instruments and real-time gross settlement and securities settlement systems. 
Liquidity  management  is  an  important  part  of  the  overall  risk  management  for  which 
“conventional”  financial  institutions  may  have  recourse  to  derivatives  instruments.  But  the 
majority  of  Shariah  scholars  consider  that  derivatives  instruments  contradict  Shariah 
principles. But one can notice an evolution insofar as a number of academics33 could argue 
that  the  admission  of  such  instruments  in  Islamic  finance  depends  mainly  on  the  type  of 
contract used, their content and their trading format. Contracts on currencies, interest rate 
and  stock  indexes  are  intrinsically  barred.  Otherwise,  forward  and  swaps  contracts  on 
commodities  and  shares  could  seamlessly  be  accommodated  in  Islamic  finance.  Even  the 
trading of options is not found incompatible with Shariah principles. However, further work is 
still  necessary  to  assess  the  implication  for  Islamic  finance  in  terms  of  social  welfare, 
speculation and risk-sharing, and more specifically risk management. 
                                                 
31   ERRICO Luca & FARRAHBAKSH Mitra, “Islamic Banking: Issues in Prudential Regulation and Supervision,” 
IMF  Working  Paper  98/30,  March  1998;  http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/wp9830.pdf;  also  see,  EL 
HAWARY  Dahlia,  GRAIS  Wafik,  IQBAL  Zamir,  “Regulating  Islamic  Financial  Institutions:  The  Nature  of  the 
Regulated,” World Bank Working Paper 3227. 
32   Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Quarterly Bulletin, December 2008.  
33   E.g.  Muhammad  al-Bashir  Muhammad  al-Amine  of  the  International  Islamic  University  of  Malaysia  and 
Manager  of  the  Shariah  Compliance  Department  at  Unicorn  Investment  Bank  (2008),  Andreas  Jobst  (IMF, 
2008), Obiyathullah Ismath Bacha (International Journal of Islamic Financial Services, 2001). 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 9
Islamic finance in Luxembourg: opportunities and challenges34  
- 
- 
Explanation of the business environment 
Challenges for further development 
Explanation of the business environment  
The development of Luxembourg’s international banking activities started in the late 60’s with 
the expansion of the euro bond market. The financial centre extended further in the 80’s with 
private banking services.  
The other core activity of the Luxembourg financial centre is the investment fund industry. 
Our  practitioners  developed  acute  expertise  in  the  domiciliation,  administration  and 
distribution  of  investment  funds  with  the  result  that  the  Luxembourg  financial  sector  is 
positioned among the world’s leading investment centres together with the US and France.  
Islamic finance started to operate in Luxembourg as early as in 1983 with the establishment 
of  the  first  Shariah  compliant  insurance  company  in  Europe  (Takafol  S.A.).  Year  by  year, 
other  Islamic  financial  products  developed  and  there  are  currently  31  Shariah  compliant 
investment funds (September 2008) domiciled and managed in Luxembourg.  
Our stock exchange, started listing Islamic funds in 2002 and is thus the first stock exchange 
in Europe to host sukuk. Its current listing of 14 sukuk with a combined value of $ 5.5 billion 
put it in a competitive position with London. Several of these sukuk have issuers originating 
from the Gulf countries, Malaysia or Pakistan.  
Furthermore, local financial institutions lobby the Treasury to issue Luxembourg sukuk, but 
the volume would be symbolic in international comparison. 
On  the  operational  side,  Clearstream  Banking,  the  Luxembourg  International  Central 
Securities Depository (ICSD) holds under custody and offers the clearing and settlement of a 
range  of  Islamic  securities.  It  has  slightly  adapted  its  technical  processes  to  sukuk’s 
requirements as regards the distribution of payments. 
Earlier this year, Deutsche Bank announced the launch of a new platform "Al Mi'yar" whose 
aim is to facilitate the issuance of Shariah compliant securities. This platform is domiciled in 
Luxembourg.  
It is also worth mentioning that several local market practitioners and support entities (mainly 
law  firms  and  investment  funds  service  providers)  are  expanding  to  the  Gulf  region. 
Competition  for  the  global  lead  in  the  investment  fund  industry  has  attracted  expertise  in 
domiciliation,  administration  and  distribution  of  investment  funds  to  Luxembourg,  including 
Shariah compliant investment funds. 
Working groups encompassing authorities and market players were set up to find out how to 
remove barriers to the development of Islamic finance products. Our national agency for the 
development of the financial centre “Luxembourg for Finance” has issued a leaflet which is 
used during promotional trips to explain the Islamic finance opportunities in Luxembourg. A 
2-day conference is planned for early May to disseminate awareness and knowledge within 
the banking and funds industry35. The BCL participates together with other public authorities 
in a working group, chaired by the Ministry of Finance, on the promotion of Islamic finance in 
Luxembourg.  The  Luxembourg  School  of  Finance  and  the  University  of  Luxembourg  offer 
modules of Islamic finance in their master programmes. 
                                                 
34   See, BATAINEH Sufian & Carole, La finance islamique: Opportunités et Challenges pour le Grand-duché de 
Luxembourg, to be published in a forthcoming bulletin of the Association luxembourgeoise des juristes de droit 
bancaire. 
35   See, Islamic Finance awareness days, Agenda 2009, http://www.alfi.lu/.  
10 
 BIS Review 59/2009
In  reality,  practitioners  in  Luxembourg  consider  that  our  current  legal  framework  is 
compatible  with  Islamic  insurance  products  and  Islamic  finance  products.  It  already  allows 
the  issuance  of  such  products  –  differences  between  conventional  investment  funds  and 
Islamic  funds  are  considered  minimal.  However,  full  Islamic  banking  would  request 
adjustments36.  
The  most  appropriate  structural  category  for  Islamic  funds  is  the  “Specialized  Investment 
Fund” (Fonds d’investissement specialisé – SIF) which is targeted at well-informed investors. 
In addition, this structure is legally easier to establish and it can leverage the possibility of 
defining  its  own  rules  and  restrictions  applicable  to  the  investments  the  fund  may 
undertake37. 
When it comes to the listing of sukuk, the Bourse de Luxembourg is pragmatic as it requests 
only  documentation  concerning  the  underlying  transactions  rather  than  a  comprehensive 
description of the sukuk’s structure38. 
Challenges for further development 
Several impediments were identified in the tax framework. To start with, the several double 
taxation  treaties  that  have  been  signed  with  the  Gulf  countries  but  none  of  them  is  yet  in 
force. The situation is different with  Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia with whom double 
taxation treaties are already implemented.  
Currently,  the  numerous  transactions  involved  in  Islamic  finance  products  trigger  multiple 
taxations making them more expensive. Fiscal policy should take the economic finality into 
account so as to avoid distortion discriminating against Islamic finance products. Dividends 
are still facing differentiated treatment from investors. Luxembourg should envisage enabling 
the  deduction  of  remunerations  other  than  interest  payments,  allowing  the  amortization  of 
leased  goods  outside  conventional  leasing  contracts,  and  recognizing  margins  made  on 
sukuk transactions as interest payments instead of profits.  
In addition, market practitioners request the formal recognition of Islamic finance accounting 
standards. So far, our authorities have proved pragmatic (for instance, tax ruling for special 
business  cases  is  common  practice),  innovative  and  adaptive  to  the  financial  landscape. 
According to discussions currently being held at national level, this will also be the case with 
regard to Islamic finance. 
Conclusion 
Despite the current turbulences, the market practitioners of Islamic finance in Luxembourg 
remain  optimistic  that  Islamic  finance  is  likely  to  grow  steadily  in  the  next  years  based  on 
investors’ appetite for financial products based on sound and ethical principles. 
Numerous  challenges  remain  however,  including  regulatory  changes,  legal  certainty, 
illiquidity  issues,  liquidity  risk  management  concerns,  the  need  for  harmonized  regulation, 
regulatory disparity amongst national supervisors and a potentially unlevel playing field.39 It is 
                                                 
36   BATAINEH  Sufian  et  Carole,  La  finance  islamique:  Opportunités  et  Challenges  pour  le  Grand-duché  de 
Luxembourg, to be published in a forthcoming bulletin of the Association luxembourgeoise des juristes de droit 
bancaire. 
37  Idem. 
38   Idem. 
39   HESSE 
Heiko, 
JOBST 
Andreas, 
SOLE 
Juan, 
Quo 
vadis 
Islamic 
Finance, 
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2593. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 11
crucial to ensure that Shariah principles are able to accommodate the innovative products 
which will allow Islamic finance’s integration into the international financial system.  
Bibliography 
Books 
• 
    AL-BASHIR  Muhammad  &  AL-AMINE  Muhammad,  Risk  Management  in  Islamic 
Finance  –  An  Analysis  of  Derivative  Instruments  in  Commodities  Markets,  Brill 
Academic Publishers, 2008. 
DUSUKI DATO’ WAJDI Asyraf, Islamic Finance: An old skeleton in a modern dress, 
ISRA Series in Contemporary Islamic finance, volume 2, 2008.  
MEGRET  J.,  Le  rôle  des  autorités  prudentielles  et  des  banques  centrales,  in 
Intégration des marches financiers, dir. Dominique Servais, 3 éd., 2007.  
LALDIN  AKRAM  Mohamad,  Fundamentals  and  practices  in  Islamic  finance,  ISRA 
Series in Contemporary Islamic finance, volume 1, 2008.  
BAHRAIN  MONETARY  AGENCY,  Islamic  Banking  &  Finance  in  the  Kingdom  of 
Bahrain, 2002.  
Articles 
• 
        12 
 ARIFF Mohamed, Monetary Policy in an Interest-Free Islamic Economy Nature and 
Scope, Monetary and Fiscal Economics of Islam; 
http://www.financeinislam.com/article/1_36/8/143.  
AMEINFO, CBB set to launch key Islamic financial instrument, 9 June 2008; 
http://www.ameinfo.com/159772.html.  
BACHA & OBIYATHULL I.: Derivative Instruments and Islamic Finance: Some 
Thoughts for a Reconsideration, International Journal of Islamic Financial Services, 
1 1 (1999), p. 9-25. 
BATAINEH Sufian & Carole, La finance islamique : Opportunités et Challenges pour 
le Grand-duché de Luxembourg, to be published in a forthcoming Bulletin of the 
Association luxembourgeoise des juristes de droit bancaire, 2009.  
BURTON John, Issuance of Islamic bonds expected to drop further, Financial 
Times, 23 January 2009; http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d5da10b6-e8a2-11dd-a4d0-
0000779fd2ac.html?nclick_check=1.  
CHAN Francis, Islamic banks “largely insulated” from financial crisis, The Straits 
Times, 12 December 2008; http://www.asianewsnet.net/news.php?id=3081&sec=2. 
CHAPRA Umer, The global financial crisis: can Islamic finance help? Institute of 
Islamic Banking and Insurance 2009, published by NewHorizon, Global perspective 
on Islamic banking and insurance; 
http://www.newhorizonislamicbanking.com/index.cfm?section=academicarticles&acti
on=view&id=10733.  
ČIHÁK Martin & HESSE Heiko, Islamic Banks and Financial Stability: An Empirical 
Analysis, IMF Working Paper, WP/08/16; 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2008/wp0816.pdf. 
DE LAROSIÈRE, Report by the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the 
EU, 25 February 2009; 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf.  
BIS Review 59/2009
             EL-HAWARY Dahlia, GRAIS Wafik, IQBAL Zamir, “Regulating Islamic Financial 
Institutions: The Nature of the Regulated,” World Bank Working Paper 3227. 
ERRICO Luca & FARRAHBAKSH Mitra, “Islamic Banking: Issues in Prudential 
Regulation and Supervision,” IMF Working Paper,WP/98/30, March 1998; 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/wp9830.pdf. 
FLATTER Elie, Développement de l’industrie des fonds Shari’ah et opportunités 
pour le Luxembourg, D'Wort, 25&26September 2007. 
GRAIS Wafik and KULATHUNGA Anoma, Capital Structure and Risk in Islamic 
Financial Services; in Abdel Karim, R. and Archer, S.: Islamic Finance: The 
Regulatory Challenge, John Wiley & Sons, 2007; 
www.erf.org.eg/CMS/getFile.php?id=805.  
HESSE Heiko, JOBST Andreas & SOLE Juan, Quo vadis Islamic Finance?, 24 
November 2008; http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2593.  
JOBST Andreas, The Economics of Islamic Finance and Securitization, IMF 
Working Paper WP/07/117; 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2007/wp07117.pdf. 
KABLAWI Hani, Improving Corporate Governance in Islamic Finance, The Bank of 
New-York Mellon, Innovation series global corporate trust, 2008; 
http://www.bankofny.com/CpTrust/data/tl_islamic_finance.pdf.  
MENAFN, AAOIFI proposals spark fresh Sukuk debate, 21 April 2008; 
http://www.menafn.com/qn_news_story_s.asp?StoryId=1093193587.  
MOHAMAD Illiayas, High Court Decisions Highlight Islamic Banking Concerns, MIF 
Monthly; http://www.mifmonthly.com/10_art.php. 
MOODY’S, Global Sukuk Issuance: 2008 slowdown mainly due to credit crisis, but 
some impact from Shari’ah compliance issues, Global Credit Research 
Announcement, 22 JAN 2009; 
http://www.moodys.com/cust/content/content.ashx?source=StaticContent/Free%20
Pages/Products%20and%20Services/Downloadable%20Files/Global%20Sukuk%20
Issuance.pdf.  
SOLE Juan, Introducing Islamic banks into the conventional banking systems, IMF 
Working Paper, WP/07/175; 
http://www.imfbookstore.org/ProdDetails.asp?ID=WPIEA2007175. 
WILSON Rodney, Credit risk management in Islamic Finance, New Horizon, 1 April 
2007; http://www.newhorizon-
islamicbanking.com/index.cfm?section=academicarticles&action=view&id=10484. 
ISLAMONLINE.NET & NEWSPAPERS, UK Islamic Banks Brave Economic Crisis, 
10 November 2008; 
http://www.islamonline.net/servlet/Satellite?c=Article_C&cid=1225698052303&page
name=Zone-English-News/NWELayout.  
Speeches 
• 
ABBAS ZAIDI Jamal, Overcoming barriers to liquidity; Commoditization, Sukuk, 
promoting issuance and a secondary market, Islamic Finance and Investment World 
Europe 2007, June 25th-8th; 
http://www.iirating.com/presentation/20070625_overcoming_barriers_to_liquidity.pdf
. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 13
          AKHTAR AZIZ Zeti, Enhancing the Resilience and Stability of the Islamic Financial 
System, keynote address at the Islamic Financial Services Board and Institute of 
International Finance Conference: "Enhancing the Resilience and Stability of the 
Islamic Financial System", Kuala Lumpur, 20 November 2008; 
http://www.bis.org/review/r081126c.pdf.  
AKHTAR AZIZ Zeti, Islamic finance – a global growth opportunity amidst a 
challenging environment, Keynote address at the State Street Islamic Finance 
Congress 2008 "Islamic Finance: A Global Growth Opportunity Amidst a 
Challenging Environment", Boston, 6 October 2008; 
http://www.bis.org/review/r081009c.pdf.  
BEIG Mujeeb, Risk Management in Islamic Finance, Seminar on Risk Management 
Framework for Islamic Banking Institutions, State Bank of Pakistan 2008; 
http://www.sbp.org.pk/ibd/IBD_semi2.htm. 
DATUK Seri Panglima, SHENG Andrew, Islamic finance and financial policy and 
stability: an institutional perspective, paper delivered at the 1st Islamic Financial 
Services Board Public lecture on Financial policy and stability, Kuala Lumpur, 26 
March 2007. 
EDWARDES Warren, Liquidity Management Issues, Institute of Islamic Banking & 
Insurance New Horizon, The Islamic Funds Conference, 18 February 2004, 
http://www.dc3.co.uk/IslamicLiquidity040218.pdf. 
HASSAN Najmul, Risk Mitigation through Takaful, Meezan Bank, 14 March 2007.  
KHAN Iqbal, Liquidity Management of Islamic Financial Institutions in the UAE, 
HSBC Amanah Finance, Central Bank of U.A.E., Abu Dhabi, 10 December 2005. 
LAMFALUSSY Alexandre (Baron de), Central banks and financial stability, 2nd 
Pierre Werner Lecture, 26 October 2004, Luxembourg; 
http://www.bcl.lu/fr/media/discours/2004/20041026/index.ht.  
ORCHARD Jamie, Regulatory Treatment of Islamic Finance Firms, International 
Islamic Finance Forum – Istanbul, 28 September 2005.  
PADOA-SCHIOPPA Tommaso, Central Banks and financial stability: Exploring an 
intermediate land, Second ECB central banking conference, 24 et 25 octobre 2002, 
Frankfurt am Main.  
SMAGHI Bini Lorenzo, Society, State, Market: a European Answer, International 
Forum Economia e Società Aperta “Uscire della crisi”, organised by Bocconi 
University and Corriere della Sera in cooperation with University Carlos III de 
Madrid, Madrid, 25 November 2008. 
Publications from monetary authorities 
• 
ECB, Financial stability review, June 2007; 
http://www.ecb.eu/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200706en.pdf. 
ECB, Opinion of 10 September 2008 at the request of the Banque centrale du 
Luxembourg on amendments to the draft law improving the legislative framework for 
Luxembourg as a financial centre and amending the Law of 23 December 1998 on 
monetary status and on the Banque centrale du Luxembourg, (CON/2008/42); 
http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2008_42.pdf. 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Quarterly Bulletin, December 2008; 
http://www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/public/qb200812/qb_all_index_new.htm. 
  14 
 BIS Review 59/2009
 IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2006; 
http://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2006/01/index.htm. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 15
