Ardian Fullani: The importance of consumer confidence indicators  
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Press Conference on 
Publication of Business and Consumer Confidence Surveys, Tirana, 16 February 2009. 
 Distinguished participants, 
We  are  holding  this  meeting  to  announce  business  and  consumer  survey  results.  These 
surveys represent an important long-run project of the Bank of Albania. Starting from today, 
the  Bank  of  Albania  will  quarterly  publish  them,  together  with  supporting  materials  for  the 
user, including a publication schedule, the methodology applied for their compilation and the 
relevant  questionnaires.  Considering  this  day  as  a  special  one,  I  avail  myself  of  the 
opportunity to share some ideas with you on the importance of confidence indicators, their 
methodology and the significance the Bank of Albania has given to this project. 
The publication of business and consumer confidence indicators is an important moment for 
enhancing  Bank  of  Albania’s  transparency.  For  some  years  on  end,  these  indicators  have 
been  produced  and  made  use  of  by  Bank  of  Albania’s  experts  and  by  its  decision-making 
structures, but now it is just the time to share this useful product with potential users of all 
levels. I would like to highlight that the results obtained from the processing of businesses’ 
and  consumers’  answers  are  totally  independent  of  and  not  influenced  by  the  Bank  of 
Albania, by economic, political and social conjunctures at home and abroad. All the users of 
this  information  should  be  aware  that  this  information  does  not  substitute  or  duplicate  the 
official  macroeconomic statistics.  These  qualitative  indicators  are  compiled  on  the basis  of 
opinions and expectations of the interviewed economic agents. 
I would like to be more concrete relate to this point. 
The  Bank  of  Albania,  having  the  awareness,  independence  and  a  certain  degree  of 
institutional transparency, and aiming at achieving high professionalism, plays an active and 
proactive  role  in  the  country’s  economic  development.  Economic  analysis  is  under  direct 
function  of  the  monetary  policy  decision-making  process.  In  essence,  the  decision-making 
precedes the medium-term developments, sustaining the maintaining of price stability as the 
primary policy target drafted and implemented by the Bank of Albania. Profound analysis of 
the  past,  present  and  future  developments  of  the  economy  contribute  to  appropriate 
decision-making. I assure you that building a complete “picture” of the present and the future 
of an economy is a rather difficult process, not only for an emerging economy, such as that of 
Albania,  but  also  for  the  most  advanced  economies  of  the  world.  Economic  and  financial 
developments  are  accompanied  by  elements  of  insecurity,  which  have  become,  as  you 
already know, dominant in last two years. 
Making decisions on the future of this already globalised world of economic links, requires 
professional maturity. Assessing and selecting appropriate and reliable statistical information 
requires profound intuitive abilities. Making the selected data bank beneficial to the decision-
making, requires analytical foresight. As a matter of fact forward-looking decisions should be 
made  on  the  basis  of  an  ever  larger  and  timely  information;  They  should  be  constantly 
consulted with specialized economic and financial market agents. 
The Bank of Albania, likewise other central banks, endeavors to increase the qualitative and 
quantitative  data  base,  in  order  to  improve  analyses  and  the  decision-making  process  in 
making new steps. The finalization of the several-year project of the Bank of Albania, along 
which 
is  an 
accomplishment  of  one  of  the  medium-term  development  strategy  objectives  of  our 
institution. The decision to publish these indicators passed through a prudent process and 
matured only after experts and decision-makers of the Bank of Albania were convinced that 
the  confidence  indicators,  together  with  other  indicators,  revealed  valuable  additional 
the  Business  and  Consumer  Confidence 
Indicator  was  consolidated, 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 1
the  German 
is  assessed  as  statistically  significant, 
Institute  of  Economic  Studies  have  supported 
information  about  the  recent  and  future  developments  in  the  country’s  real  sector  of  the 
economy. 
Allow me to briefly summarize some of the basic concepts on confidence, tendency and the 
foregoing indicators. They have been widely used in many advanced countries of the world, 
particularly  over  the  last  two  decades.  These  indicators  are  constructed  on  the  basis  of 
information  collected  from  surveys,  which  are  technically  referred  to  as  Business  and 
Consumer  Confidence/Tendency  Surveys.  The  Bank  of  Albania  conducts  these surveys  in 
cooperation  with  INSTAT.  Increasing  demand  of  analysts,  decision-makers,  market  agents 
and the broad public for timely economic information and the ability of these indicators to hint 
business cycle turning points, have made them very common and useful. The peculiarity of 
these  indicators  is  that  they  reveal  information  on  the  tendency  of  various  economy 
indicators, based on qualitative opinions of businesses and consumers. 
The Bank of Albania has been working for several years to construct these indicators, based 
on  the  results  from  large-scale  surveys  conducted  with  720  businesses  and  1200 
consumers. The cooperation with global leaders in this area has been very efficient. Experts 
from 
the  process  of 
methodological and economic analysis of business confidence indicators. While working for 
this  project,  Bank  of  Albania’s  experts  have  studied  and  applied  important  aspects  of 
contemporary  methodologies  followed  by  the  OECD  countries  and  by  the  European 
Commission. Until coming to the decision to publish them, researches and tests have been 
constantly  carried  out  on  the  developments,  suggested  by  these  indicators  and  later  on 
verified by the statistics of the INSTAT. The compliance degree of the tendencies from both 
sources 
them  useful.  Various 
methodologies and empirical findings have been introduced in technical round tables, and in 
working papers and articles compiled by the Bank’s experts. For more than four years, the 
results revealed by these indicators have been more and more taken into consideration by 
Bank of Albania’s decision-making, thus contributing to the building of inflation expectations 
indicator. They provide preliminary information on expected producer price performance, an 
important  link  for  the  price-setting  process  in  the  economy.  Consumption  and  savings 
tendencies  of  the  population  are  revealed  through  relevant  indicators.  In  conclusion,  the 
economic  sentiment  indicator  combines  the  businesses’  and  consumers’  opinions,  giving 
hints of the economic prospects in the short run. 
I would like to speak at length about the importance and informational utility of the confidence 
and the foregoing indicators. But, I would rather emphasize the respect the users should pay 
to  such  indicators,  opting  for  being  oriented  to  the  large  information  flow  through  them.  I 
regard this only as the beginning of a comprehensible and transparent cooperation. To this 
end, other special meetings and activities will follow, enriching various groups of interest with 
knowledge on business confidence or tendency indicators. I have confidence in the added 
values  they  will  bring  to  users’  analyses.  But,  I  advise  and  require  of  users,  researchers, 
economic  journalists  of  written  and  electronic  media,  students  and  pupils,  businesses  and 
consumers and the broad public, to rightly understand these indicators, before using them. 
These  tendencies  have  resulted  from  businesses’  and  consumers’  opinions  and  do  not 
constitute the official stance of the Bank of Albania. 
The Bank of Albania has built them on the basis of an advanced methodology. It has made 
use  of  the  information  obtained  from  interviewed  businesses  and  consumers  and  it  has 
confidence  in  their  qualitative  assessments  and  in  those  indicators.  Their  publication 
enhances 
the  decision-making  process  more 
comprehensible. It is up to users to decide whether to use these indicators or not. I assure 
you  that  experts  from  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  stand  by  the  users,  making  them  well-
informed, highlighting that further improvements will be made in this area. 
Thank you for your attention! 
transparency  and  makes 
thus  making 
the  public 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2009
