Lucas Papademos: Presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2008 to the 
European Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  to  the  European  Parliament's  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs 
Strasbourg, 21 April 2009. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a privilege for me to present to you the Annual Report of the European Central Bank 
(ECB)  for  2008.  This  presentation  is  an  essential  element  of  the  ECB’s  democratic 
accountability and is therefore of the greatest value for us. In my introductory remarks, I will 
first briefly review the economic and monetary developments over the past year, present our 
current  assessment  of  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  explain  our  monetary  policy 
decisions. I will then focus on a number of topical policy issues, in particular those pertaining 
to financial stability and supervision.  
But before doing so, I would like to highlight some important events that have taken place 
over the previous 12 months. Last year the ECB, and at the beginning of this year the euro, 
celebrated their tenth anniversaries. We can look back at the past ten years with pride, and 
we  can  justifiably  say  that  the  euro  has  been  a  success.  We  have  delivered  a  stable  and 
credible  currency  that  enjoys  the  confidence  of  now  329  million  fellow  citizens  in  16  EU 
countries.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  citizens  of  Slovakia  on 
having joined the euro area at the beginning of this year. The continuing enlargement of the 
euro area shows that Monetary Union is not a “closed shop”; it remains open to newcomers. 
However, even if the reasons for celebration are manifold, there is no room for complacency, 
as the challenging economic situation and outlook amply demonstrate.  
Economic developments and monetary policy 
For  the  euro  area,  2008  was  an  exceptional  year  characterised  by  severe  and  increasing 
financial  market  tensions  as  well  as  by  significant  and  abrupt  changes  in  the  economy. 
Following  strong  economic  growth  in  the  first  quarter,  economic  conditions  worsened 
progressively,  especially  after  the  extraordinary  intensification  of  the  financial  turmoil  in 
September. For the year as a whole, real GDP in the euro area grew modestly, by 0.8%. The 
latest  available  information  suggests  that  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009  aggregate  output 
recorded a further sizeable decline. We expect economic activity in the euro area to remain 
weak for the remainder of 2009 and to gradually recover in 2010. Taking into account the 
effects  of  the  substantial  macroeconomic  stimulus  in  progress  and  the  measures  taken  to 
restore the functioning of the financial system, the risks to this outlook are assessed to be 
broadly balanced over the medium term, but uncertainty remains unusually high. 
As regards price developments, annual HICP inflation averaged 3.3% in 2008, which is much 
higher  than  in  the  previous  two  years  and  significantly  above  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price 
stability.  However,  headline  inflation  rates  fluctuated  sharply  in  the  course  of  the  year, 
peaking  at  4.0%  in  June  and  July,  mainly  as  a  result  of  developments  in  international 
commodity  prices.  During  the  second  half  of  2008,  annual  inflation  declined  steadily  and 
rapidly.  In March  2009,  it stood  at  0.6%.  By  contrast,  HICP  inflation  excluding  energy  and 
food posted a much smaller decline in 2008 and early 2009. Looking ahead, HICP inflation is 
likely to remain well below 2% in 2009 and may reach negative levels around mid-year. Such 
a phenomenon is expected to be temporary, driven mainly by base effects from past energy 
price  developments,  and  would  not  constitute an  episode of  deflation,  that  is,  a  protracted 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 1
period  of  decline  in  the  price  level  that  can  adversely  affect  inflation  expectations  and 
aggregate demand. Looking at the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, HICP inflation is in 
2010  expected  to  rise  again  but  remain  below  2%,  reflecting  mainly  ongoing  sluggish 
economic activity in the euro area and beyond.  
Monetary policy has been conducted in an extraordinary and rapidly changing economic and 
financial  environment  over  the  past  year.  In  the  first  half  of  2008,  strong  increases  in 
commodity  prices  accompanied  by  signs  of  rising  wage  pressures  and  an  upward  drift  of 
inflation  expectations  implied  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  were 
increasingly on the upside. To counteract these upside risks and ensure the solid anchoring 
of inflation expectations, the Governing Council of the ECB raised its key interest rates by 25 
basis points in July 2008. 
With  the  intensification  of  the  financial  turmoil  from  mid-September  last  year,  the 
macroeconomic situation and outlook changed fundamentally and suddenly. As the financial 
crisis  deepened  and  broadened,  global  demand  and  economic  activity  weakened 
substantially,  commodity  prices  declined  markedly  and,  as  a  result,  inflationary  pressures 
and risks in the euro area diminished. Monetary growth and the expansion of credit to the 
private  sector  decelerated,  confirming  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability  were  abating.  In 
response,  the  Governing  Council  lowered  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  decisively,  by  an 
unprecedented  300  basis  points  between  October  2008  and  April  2009.  The  Governing 
Council will continue to do what is necessary to preserve price stability and ensure the firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations over medium to longer-term horizons. Such anchoring is 
indispensable  to  supporting  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  also  contributes  to 
financial stability. 
Let me also stress that, from the onset of the financial market tensions, the ECB has taken 
forceful action in its liquidity management, also through non-conventional measures, to make 
sure  that  banks  are  able  to  refinance  themselves.  Our  policy-making  has  been  in  a  “non-
standard mode” for a considerable period of time. In October last year, we adopted a fixed 
rate tender procedure with full allotment for all main refinancing operations and longer-term 
refinancing operations with maturities of up to six months. In addition, the ECB expanded its 
list of assets eligible for use as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations.  
As a result, the size of the Eurosystem balance sheet has increased substantially during the 
financial  turmoil,  by  around  €600  billion  between  June  2007  and  March  2009,  mainly 
reflecting the expansion of liquidity provision to the banking system since last autumn. This is 
of  particular  significance  for  the  euro  area  because  the  banking  system  plays  a  more 
important  role  in  the  financing  of  the  private  sector  than  in  other  major  economies.  At  the 
same  time,  owing  to  the  ECB’s  liquidity  management,  overnight  money  market  rates  have 
fallen even more steeply than the key ECB interest rates since last October. Money market 
rates in the euro area are now very low, also in an international comparison.  
Overall, the provision and management of liquidity by the ECB have played a crucial role in 
the  implementation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.  They  have  ensured  that  banks  have 
adequate access to central bank funding so as to continue financing the economy and that 
liquidity constraints and perceived risks have not triggered a systemic crisis. The ECB  will 
continue to foster the orderly functioning of money markets and the intermediation of funds 
by the banking system by taking appropriate measures, be they standard or non-standard. At 
the  same  time,  the  medium-term  orientation  of  our  monetary  policy  provides  a  clear  and 
unambiguous signpost that will allow us to pursue a credible exit strategy from the current 
conditions  of  very  low  interest  rates  and  extraordinary  short-term  liquidity  support  as  the 
economic situation normalises.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Fiscal policies 
The  economic  downturn,  discretionary  fiscal  measures  to  stimulate  economic  activity  and 
government  intervention  to  support  the  financial  sector  have  had  a  substantial  impact  on 
public  finances.  According  to  the  European  Commission’s  January  2009  interim  forecast, 
which  is  cited  in  the  ECB’s  Annual  Report,  the  euro  area  general  government  deficit  was 
expected to increase from 1.7% of GDP in 2008 to 4.0% in 2009 and 4.4% in 2010, with ten 
euro  area  countries  forecast  to  be  above  the  3%  of  GDP  reference  value  in  2010.  More 
recent information indicates an even stronger fiscal deterioration. The current focus of fiscal 
policy  on  economic  recovery  is  certainly  warranted;  but  this  should  not  undermine  the 
integrity  of  the  EU  fiscal  framework.  Especially  in  challenging  times  such  as  these,  it  is 
crucial to preserve the public’s trust in the sustainability of public finances. This requires that 
governments are credibly committed to achieving sound fiscal positions as soon as possible 
and to fully applying the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact, which provides sufficient 
flexibility to deal with adverse economic circumstances.  
Financial stability and supervision 
Let me now focus on the financial sector and issues related to its regulation and supervision. 
The synchronised deceleration in activity in all economies has added to the stresses on the 
financial  system  in  Europe  and  the  euro  area.  The  weakening  of  economic  activity  has 
impaired the quality of bank loans, which has adversely affected banks’ capital positions. As 
financial institutions continue to deleverage their balance sheets, they reduce their securities 
holdings and tighten the credit standards applied to new loans. This feeds back to the real 
economy and in turn constrains the ability of the private sector to service its debts. Therefore, 
there  are  emerging  signs  of  a  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  real  economy  and  the 
banking sector. 
Initially,  the  banking  system  in  Europe  faced  the  financial  turmoil  with  solvency  positions 
generally  well  above  regulatory  minimum  requirements,  following  several  years  of  strong 
profitability.  However,  as  the  financial  market  tensions  intensified  in  the  autumn  of  2008, 
banks’ balance sheets came under significant pressure, as the values of structured finance 
products  declined  further,  securitisation  activity  came  to  a  virtual  standstill,  credit  losses 
started  to  rise  and  income  from  fees  and  commissions  as  well  as  trading  dropped.  As  a 
result, the banking sector has been facing significant challenges. For example, the declared 
cumulated  write-downs  and  credit-market  losses  of  European  banks  so  far1  amount  to 
almost  USD  358  billion  –  of  which  euro  area  institutions  account  for  less  than  USD  173 
billion.  At  the  same  time,  a  total  of  USD  382  billion  of  fresh  capital  has  been  raised  by 
European  banks,  while  capital  newly  injected  into  euro  area  banks  has  reached  USD  190 
billion, thus exceeding the declared losses and write-downs. 
Unfortunately,  more  write-downs  can  be  expected  in  the  coming  quarters.  The  total  write-
downs of banks globally since the eruption of the turmoil are estimated by the International 
Monetary  Fund  to  reach  USD  2.8  trillion,  of  which  USD  737  billion  would  be  borne  by 
European  banks.2  These  estimates  depend  on  the  underlying  projection  of  the  path  of 
economic activity and assumptions about future asset market developments. Coping with this 
stress will pose a particular challenge for financial institutions – and this at a time when their 
shock-absorbing  capacity  has  already  been  severely  tested.  A  number  of  risks  lie  ahead, 
stemming from the external environment, notably a deeper and more prolonged recession in 
advanced economies, as well from the subdued economic activity in the euro area and its 
effect on banks’ balance sheets, notably on the quality of loans to non-financial corporations, 
                                                 
1   Figures are up to 19 April 2009 and include non-EU banks. 
2   See IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, 21 April 2009, p. 28. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 3
in 
the 
financial  system,  but 
as well as to the commercial and residential property sectors. Moreover, financial markets – 
despite  recent  positive  developments  in  equity  markets  worldwide  –  remain  vulnerable  to 
swings  in  investor  confidence  and  risk  aversion,  which  could  adversely  affect  liquidity  and 
asset prices in some markets. 
Against  the  background  of  these  very  difficult  conditions,  significant  policy  measures  have 
been  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments  in  Europe  to  improve  market  liquidity  and 
replenish  capital  buffers.  Governments  created  schemes  for  guaranteeing  new  bank  debt, 
injected capital and, more recently, provided asset relief. These measures were successful in 
preventing  a  meltdown  of  financial  systems  and  they  helped  to  bolster  confidence.  The 
Eurosystem  provided  important  input  into  the  design  of  these  measures,  in  the  form  of 
recommendations aimed at ensuring that such measures would help to safeguard financial 
stability  and  restore  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  private  sector,  while  at  the  same  time 
maintaining  a  level  playing-field  within  the  Single  Market  to  the  maximum  extent  possible, 
and also containing their impact on public finances. 
It is still early to accurately assess the impact of these government measures on the longer-
term funding and the recapitalisation of banks as well as their effectiveness in fostering bank 
lending  to  the  private  sector.  This  is  because  the  evidence  is  relatively  limited,  as  the 
implementation of the measures has been gradual over the past few months. Moreover, it is 
difficult at this stage to disentangle the positive impact of the bank support measures from 
the  effects  of  other  developments,  notably  those  related  to  the  deteriorating  economic 
environment.  
The  causes  and  contributing  factors  of  the  financial  turbulence  are  manifold.  The  crisis 
revealed  several  weaknesses 
it  has  also  highlighted 
inadequacies in the current system of prudential supervision and oversight that prevented the 
nature  and  magnitude  of  the  accumulating  risks  from  being  identified  in  good  time  and 
appropriate remedial action from being taken. At the initiative of the European Commission, 
the  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière  undertook  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  EU 
framework for financial supervision and proposed, among other innovations, the creation of a 
European  Systemic  Risk  Council  with  responsibility  for  macro-prudential  supervision.  The 
ECB  welcomes  the  group’s  report  and  broadly  supports  its  recommendations  for  macro-
prudential  supervision,  as  well  as  the  related  communication  issued  by  the  European 
Commission. The proposed establishment of the Systemic Risk Council under the auspices 
of  the  ECB  and  the  Council’s  composition  are  a  recognition  of  the  extensive  analytical 
capabilities  developed  by  central  banks  in  the  fields  of  monetary  and  financial-stability 
analysis, their relevant expertise, and their closeness to the financial markets. The work of 
the Council will also benefit from the use of the technical infrastructure already in place.  
The  ECB  and  the  entire  European  System  of  Central  Banks  stand  ready  to  assume  the 
macro-prudential supervision tasks envisaged in the report by the de Larosière Group and to 
provide the necessary analytical and logistical support to the Systemic Risk Council. For the 
new Council to function effectively, three key requirements will need to be fulfilled: First, in 
order  to  identify  and  assess  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  EU  financial  system  as  a 
whole, to issue risk warnings and to adopt related macro-prudential policy recommendations, 
the Systemic Risk Council will need to have an information base that draws on both macro- 
and  micro-prudential  supervisory  information.  This  will  allow  the  use  of  all  relevant 
information  for  assessing,  among  other  things,  the  “interconnectedness”  of  financial 
institutions and markets and its implications for financial system stability. Close cooperation 
and  well-functioning  information-sharing  mechanisms  between  the  new  Council,  micro-
prudential  supervisors  and  the  proposed  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  will 
therefore be indispensible. Second, adequate institutional mechanisms need to be in place to 
ensure that the risk warnings and the related recommendations issued by the Systemic Risk 
Council are translated into effective action. The days when risk warnings were issued and 
very few listened – or wanted to listen – should be over! Third, for the Systemic Risk Council 
to  be  effective,  legitimate  and  independent  in  its  decision-making,  a  solid  legal  basis  is 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
essential. Such a basis will also provide legal clarity regarding the necessary access to EU-
wide  macro-prudential  information  as  well  as  to  supervisory  data  concerning  individual 
institutions, subject to adequate confidentiality arrangements.  
The next steps towards the implementation of the de Larosière Group proposals will require 
a number of legal, institutional and organisational issues to be addressed. In this regard, the 
ECB stands ready to contribute to the necessary preparations in a constructive and timely 
manner.  We  look  forward  to  the  communication  from  the  European  Commission  and  the 
decision  of the  European  Council in  June  that  will  lay  the  foundations  of  a  new system  of 
macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  EU.  Speedy  progress  towards  that  goal  is  of  the 
essence, for the strengthening of macro-prudential supervision in Europe is an important and 
urgent  policy  objective  –  and  one  which  the  members  of  this  Committee  have  strongly 
supported in a consistent and, indeed, visionary manner.  
 Madam Chair, honourable members of the Committee, I would like to thank you on behalf of 
the Executive Board and the Governing Council for our enriching exchanges of views over 
the past five years. Owing to the forthcoming elections to the European Parliament, today’s 
presentation  of  our  Annual  Report  is  the  last  before  your  Committee  in  its  current 
composition. I have always appreciated your cooperation and our fruitful dialogue. Thank you 
for your attention.  
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 5
