Joseph Yam: Financial market developments in Hong Kong 
Remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Euromoney 40th Anniversary Gala Dinner, Hong Kong, 16 July 2009. 
  This 
is  a 
to  Financial  Markets". 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  share  the  honour  at  this  evening's  Euromoney  awards 
dinner with so many excellent recipients.  And it is a particular honour to receive the award 
for  "Outstanding  Contribution 
threefold  honour. 
First, because it is awarded by Euromoney, a publication – or rather an institution – with a 
particularly  strong  relationship  with  central  banks  and  markets  in  this  region.   Secondly, 
because the award is presented to the HKMA as a whole, as a recognition of the hard work 
of staff from all parts of the organisation who have helped develop financial markets.  And 
thirdly, because  the  award  highlights  an  area  of  our  work  that  usually  receives  less 
acknowledgement  than  it  should:  the  development  of  financial  markets  not  just  through 
encouraging  product  innovation,  but  also  through  laying  down  the  infrastructure  to  enable 
markets to function and grow. 
It is, I think, entirely appropriate that this evening's event is being held in a restaurant on top 
of the Star Ferry Pier – as we are from time to time reminded by the swaying of the structure 
and the occasional battering from the ferries themselves.  Transport links are a good analogy 
for  financial  infrastructural  links.   They  involve  both  local and  international  networks.   They 
make  use  of  technology  at  many  different  levels:  from  traditional  cross-harbour  ferry  and 
metallic  coins  to  advanced  transcontinental  passenger  planes  and  real-time  electronic 
clearing.   And usually  both  transport  systems  and  financial  infrastructure  receive  attention 
only when something goes wrong.  Financial infrastructure suffers the further handicap that it 
is largely invisible – a matter of wires and electronic pulses – with none of the glamour or 
nostalgia  that  physical  transport  can  sometimes  evoke.   So,  quite  understandably,  the 
general public take it for granted – indeed may not even be aware – that Hong Kong has for 
some  time  had  some  of  the  most  advanced,  efficient  and  secure  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement systems of any financial centre in the world. 
One of the responsibilities of the HKMA is to promote the development of these systems in 
collaboration  with  dedicated  service-providers  and  the  financial  industry  generally.   In 
addition to its responsibility for Hong Kong's domestic systems, the HKMA also has a specific 
responsibility for promoting the development of systems in Hong Kong that facilitate the safe 
and  efficient  conduct  of  international  and  cross-border  financial  activities.   We  have  been 
paying special attention to this aspect of our work in recent years in a way that has a very 
direct bearing on the development of financial markets in the region.  The foundation is the 
development in Hong Kong of multi-currency clearing and settlement systems operated on a 
real-time gross-settlement basis: so far we have systems for the US dollar, the euro, and the 
renminbi, in addition to the Hong Kong dollar; there is the possibility of replicating this for any 
number of currencies, should the demand arise.  To make these systems available in Asian 
time to the rest of the region, we are progressively linking them to other cities in China and 
with  other  countries  in  the  region:  we  established  a  link  with  Malaysia  in  2006  and  have 
agreed  with  Bank  Indonesia  to  establish  a  similar  link  with  Indonesia  in  2010.   I  have  no 
doubt that other links will follow.  In addition, through our Regional CHATS service launched 
in  July  2007,  we  have  made  available  Hong  Kong’s  own  clearing  and  settlement  services 
throughout the region and beyond for cross-border payments.  By June this year, 30 banks in 
Hong  Kong  had  registered  as  service  providers  for  services  covering  over  2,000  payment 
beneficiary points in 42 economies.  
BIS Review 93/2009 
 1
These are examples of how we are helping to build the hardware, or – to use the transport 
comparison – laying down the roads, tracks, junctions and interchanges, for regional financial 
markets.  For the software and the actual traffic, it is of course the case that in a free-market 
economy such as Hong Kong's there is a limit to how much the government should take the 
lead.  Nevertheless, there is much that the government can do to facilitate financial-market 
development  by  clearing  the  way,  particularly  where  this  involves  markets  of  a  regional 
nature.  Three areas of work in which the HKMA – with various partners – is taking an active 
role  are  worth  citing  here.   The  first  involves  the  gradual  introduction  and  expansion  of 
renminbi  business  within  Hong  Kong,  which  requires  primarily  co-operation  between  the 
Mainland and Hong Kong authorities at various levels, including both political and technical. 
The  second  example  is  our  collaboration  with other  central  banks  in  the  region,  under  the 
auspices  of  EMEAP,  on  the  Asian  Bond  Fund,  which  is  intended  not  just  to  encourage 
business  in  the  debt  market,  but  also  to  stimulate  regulatory  reforms  in  economies  in  the 
region.  The third example is our work in encouraging the development of Islamic finance in 
Hong Kong, through ensuring a level playing field, stimulating interest in Hong Kong among 
Islamic  countries,  encouraging  product  development,  and  raising  market  awareness  within 
Hong Kong, particularly through the educational work of the Treasury Markets Association.   
All of this work looks both to the past and to the future for inspiration.  Looking to the past, we 
have the still-recent experience of the Asian financial crisis, one element of which was the 
undeveloped state of some of our financial markets, in particular the debt market.  Many of 
the market-development initiatives on which we have been working have been intended to 
address these deficiencies.  More recently, the current financial crisis serves as a reminder 
that some aspects of market development may be taken too far, where, for example, they 
privilege the process of intermediation and neglect the financial and economic realities that 
lie behind it.  The caution inculcated by the Asian financial crisis, and a natural conservatism 
in many markets in this region, seem to have helped us avoid the worst excesses we have 
seen in more developed markets.  
Looking more positively to the future, this region is poised to become the centre of economic 
growth and wealth creation in the world.  Indeed we are already a long way down that path. 
So far, a great deal of the wealth created has been diverted into markets elsewhere in the 
world.   Market  development  in  this  region,  on  a  foundation  of  efficient  infrastructure  and 
sound regulation, will help retain more of that wealth for investment within the region.  
This  evening‘s  gala  event  celebrates  the  40th  anniversary  of  one  of  the  world’s  foremost 
financial publications.  It is therefore only proper to say something about the vital role of the 
media  in  financial  market  development.   The  media  can,  I  think,  be  seen  as  a  kind  of 
complementary,  parallel  infrastructure  to  the  financial  infrastructure  that  I  have  briefly 
described.  The media are, of course, more visible, and much more  diverse, but they also 
make use of similar technologies, whether advanced or traditional, and at various points they 
intersect  with  the  financial  infrastructure.   Modern  markets  are,  in  fact,  dependent  on  the 
media, whether in their provision of real-time information second by second, or in the more 
reflective analysis of market trends, or in the exposure of scandals and malpractices.  
It is no coincidence that Hong Kong is both a financial centre and a world media centre.  At 
least seventeen international news agencies, 29 international or regional newspapers, and 
another 29 magazines have a presence in Hong Kong, and all of them have some interest in 
financial affairs.  We have 45 daily newspapers printed in Hong Kong and no fewer than 661 
registered periodicals.  Now, of course, some of these publications are what are known as 
ma ging (馬經) or racing papers, and not all of them have their dedicated financial pages. 
Even so, Hong Kong is remarkably well served by the financial media, and one thing that has 
never ceased to impress me during my sixteen years as Monetary Authority has been the 
quality and dedication of the many people in Hong Kong who make up the financial media. 
 The many colleagues in the media play an extremely important part in the development of 
financial markets, and I should like to pay tribute to their professionalism. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2009
I feel entitled to use the word "colleagues", not just because I have enjoyed a very close and 
productive relationship with the financial media, but also because I too, albeit uninvited and 
unpaid, have for the past 11 years served as a columnist in several newspapers through my 
weekly  "viewpoint"  articles.   I should  like  to  thank  those  newspapers  who  have  faithfully 
reproduced  these  articles,  week  after  week,  even  when  the  content  may  not  always  have 
been as newsworthy as they may have hoped. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  evening's  gala  dinner,  in  recognising  excellence  in  financial 
services will provide encouragement for the future development of financial markets in the 
region.   It  is  also  an  opportunity  to  celebrate  Euromoney's  40th  anniversary  and  its  long 
association  with  Hong  Kong  and  this  region.   I  should  like  to  offer  Euromoney  heartiest 
congratulations on its birthday and the very best of wishes for a flourishing future. 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 3
