Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Taking of stock of the Toledo Pact 
Testimony  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Non-Standing  Committee 
the  Toledo  Pact 
Agreements, Madrid, 15 April 2009. 
the  Monitoring  and  Assessment  of 
for 
 Five  years  since  the  last  assessment  of  the  Toledo  Pact,  and  under  a  new  assessment 
process initiated by Parliament in 2008, I appear today before this Committee to convey my 
views on the situation of and possible reforms to the pension system. These opinions are the 
summary of a note drafted by the Banco de España Research Department, which will shortly 
be forwarded to you.  
Before I begin, I should stress that the content of the Toledo Pact, i.e. the pension system 
and its reform, does not come under the purview of the Banco de España. Defining specific 
reforms to the pensions system is an eminently political matter and is thus for the legislature 
to  decide  upon.  Accordingly,  the  note  the  Research  Department  is  finalising  and  whose 
content I shall outline for you today should not be considered as a reform proposed by the 
Banco  de  España.  It  is  simply  a  summary  of  what  may  be  taken  as  a  consensus  among 
experts regarding the diagnosis of our pension system and its attendant problems, and the 
potential  means  for  tackling  them.  Indeed,  the  summary  is  an  update  of  that  presented 
before this same Committee by the Director General of the Research Department in 2000.  
As you know, the Toledo Pact has already been in place for more than 13 years. Over that 
period demographic and, until recently, macroeconomic developments made for a significant 
improvement in the Social Security system's financial position. Since the signing of the Pact, 
the Spanish population has grown strongly by more than 6 million, most of whom immigrants. 
Immigration  has  been  significant  not  only  in  terms  of  volume  but  also  of  its  composition, 
insofar as it tends to be concentrated in the younger age groups. 
In  parallel,  macroeconomic  developments  enabled  this  strong  growth  in  population  to  be 
absorbed by the labour market. Notable in this connection was not only the contribution of 
the foreign population but also the significant role played by female nationals progressively 
joining the labour market. These developments occurred against a background of very low 
growth  in  the  number  of  pensioners  as  retirement  was  centred  on  the  generations  born 
during the Spanish Civil War and the post-war period. 
As a result, Social Security registrations far outgrew pensions in recent years, which explains 
how the Social Security system ran growing surpluses, rising to 1.3% of GDP in 2007. These 
surpluses were assigned, in part, to the Reserve Fund, which reached a significant size of 
close to 5% of GDP at the end of 2008.  
In the past year, however, the impact of the economic crisis has also been felt in the Social 
Security accounts, meaning there has been a rapid deterioration in this surplus, which could 
even disappear within a year. 
Analysis of the Social Security system should not, however, be based on its results in the 
short term. The signing of the Toledo Pact was but an acknowledgement that the viability of a 
pay-as-you-go pension system should be analysed from a long-term perspective.  
Taking  this  perspective,  I  should  stress  that,  according  to  analyses  conducted  by  national 
and international analysts and institutions, neither the Social Security surpluses of the past 
decade  nor  the  foreseeable  worsening  of  the  financial  situation  in  the  coming  years  will 
essentially alter the diagnosis. Accordingly, we may assert that the problems relating to the 
financial sustainability of the current Social Security system were the same ones that led at 
the time, among other reasons, to the signing of the Pact.  
BIS Review 51/2009 
 1
There are essentially two factors at the root of these problems: the sharp reduction in the 
birth rate and the progressive rise in life expectancy, both of which bear on the current and 
future  structure  of  the  Spanish  population  pyramid.  On  one  hand,  the  outcome  of  the 
increase  in  life  expectancy  will  see  the  over-65  segment  progressively  gain  weight  in  the 
population total, while the pyramid base will narrow as a result of the birth rate falling below 
replacement  levels.  Consequently,  the  shape  of  the  population  age  structure  is  changing 
from its current pyramid form to look more like a pillar. This will be so even assuming some 
pick-up  in  the  birth  rate  and  continuing  positive  migrant  inflows  into  Spain.  In  sum,  on 
Eurostat's current population projections, prepared in 2008, the dependency ratio (the over-
65s as a proportion of the working-age population) might more than double between 2008 
and 2050 from 24% to almost 59%.  
Everybody  is  aware  of  the  consequences  of  these  population  developments  for  the 
sustainability  of  our  pay-as-you-go  pension  system.  Growing  pressure  would  build  up  on 
pension spending, meaning that the models currently available, including those devised by 
the Economy and Finance and Labour and Social Security Ministries which incorporate all 
the  legislative  amendments  approved  in  recent  years,  show  that  this  public  spending  item 
would  double  over  the  time  period  referred  to  above.  As  a  result,  the  system  could  run  a 
rising deficit as from 2025. 
It  should  also  be  highlighted  that  the  latest  demographic  developments,  in  particular  the 
heightened  migrant  inflows  into  Spain,  do  not  resolve  the  problem.  At  best,  the  inflow  of 
working-age  immigrants  holds  back  the  increase  in  the  dependency  ratio  derived  from 
population ageing and, therefore, delays the emergence of the problems. But the full scale of 
these problems will persist. 
How can we tackle the challenge that demographics pose for our pension system? The scale 
of the problem calls for a three-pronged strategy. First, the strategy should be far-reaching, 
i.e. blending measures on different fronts. Specifically, the measures should pursue healthy 
public finances, implement structural reforms in the economy and seek to reform the pension 
system,  as  I  shall  now  expand  upon.  Second,  discussion  of  these  measures  should  not 
stretch out over time. And, finally, the reforms should have sufficient scope, acting along the 
lines of the recommendations made in the review of the Toledo Pact. 
Regarding  the  scale  of  the  strategy,  its  first  pillar  should  be  based  on  maintaining  healthy 
public finances. Once again, we should adopt a medium-term perspective here. Irrespective 
of the fact that 2008 saw the re-emergence of a budget deficit and that, almost certainly, it 
will hit significantly higher levels in 2009, two matters will be vital in the medium term, once 
the effects of the economic crisis have abated. We must resume a healthy public finances 
path  and,  above  all,  bring  public  debt  back  onto  the  declining  trend  witnessed  recurrently, 
with the exception of 2008, since 1997. These considerations also clarify why the rise in the 
budget  deficit  cannot  go  unchecked  in  the  current  situation,  so  as  to  prevent  a  strong 
increase  in  public  debt  arising,  which  would  impose  an  excessive  burden  on  future 
generations.  In  this  respect,  commitment  to  the  medium-term  fiscal  rules  laid  down  in  the 
Stability Pact at the European level and in Spanish budgetary stability laws continue to offer 
the best guidelines for conducting fiscal policy. 
Secondly,  as  the  specialist  reports  emphasise,  from  the  macroeconomic  standpoint  the 
public  finance  sustainability  problems  are  eased  if  employment  and  productivity  in  the 
economy  trend  favourably.  Here  the  room  for  improvement  is  extensive  and  calls  for 
structural reforms in many areas, such as the labour market and the markets for goods and 
services, along with education and job training. Once again, the time perspective is important 
here.  The  long-term  view  that  should  underpin  any  analysis  of  the  sustainability  of  the 
pension  system  is  perfectly  compatible  with  the  fact  that  many  of  the  reforms  needed  to 
improve employment and, above all, productivity in the economy can only bear fruit after a 
relatively lengthy period of time.  
2 
 BIS Review 51/2009
These  two  pillars  of  the  strategy  are  evidently  important.  And  tackling  the  problem  of  the 
impact of population ageing on the pension system in the long run will also require reforms. 
Further,  these  pension  system  reforms  will  complement  the  structural  reforms  mentioned 
earlier, in particular those relating to the labour market, and the reform to maintain healthy 
public finances.  
It is this matter which is central to this Committee’s mission. It has been working intensely in 
this  connection  over  the  past  decade,  particularly  on  how  to  modify  the  pension  system’s 
current parameters to ensure its long-term sustainability. That brings me back to two other 
key aspects of the strategy to be agreed: the speed and scope of the changes to be made. 
Although the emergence of the first deficit in the system may appear a long way off, it should 
be  borne  in  mind  that  the  reform  planning  and  implementation  horizon  is  also  long. 
Accordingly, the reforms should be discussed without delay so that, following their gradual 
implementation,  they  may  prove  fully  effective  when  population  ageing  begins  to  exert  a 
more virulent effect.  
Pension system reforms must also be sufficient. Since the signing of the Toledo Pact and its 
subsequent renewal, various legislative amendments – which may generally be seen as in 
the right direction – have been made. Examples include the (still incomplete) separation of 
the  sources  of  financing  of  the  Social  Security  system,  the  unification  of  the  contribution 
bases, the creation of the Reserve Fund and the progressive simplification of the different 
contribution  schemes,  among  others.  However,  among  the  Pact’s  recommendations  are 
other  measures  worthy  of  discussion,  since  they  may  considerably  impact  the  system’s 
sustainability. 
At this stage we should ask ourselves which pension system reforms merit assessment. The 
range of possibilities is an extensive one, and a decision on which reforms should be made 
requires  not  only  an  expert  assessment  but  a  political  one  too.  Resolving  the  system's 
problems may involve changes in the parameters of revenue or expenditure, but choosing 
the right or the most reasonable mix requires considerable political assessment. Yet some 
combinations may be preferable to others from the standpoint of economic efficiency in that 
they may generate greater incentives, for instance, to join the labour market. In this respect, 
what is important from a technical viewpoint is to maintain a high degree of proportionality 
between benefits received and contributions paid, a point that has been underscored from 
the outset in the Toledo Pact recommendations.  
Regarding the various options available, I shall refer to some already deployed by European 
countries and which, therefore, have been tested to some extent. I reiterate that these are 
not proposals of the Banco de España; the aim of my institution is to help this Committee in 
its work by setting out the measures applied in other countries. 
Taking first some of the measures that affect pension spending, some countries have opted 
to  raise  the  legal  retirement  age.  Measures  here  have  been  on  three  fronts.  Firstly,  early 
retirement conditions have tended to be tightened. And this is where the complement to the 
aforementioned structural reforms is greatest: pension system rules should generate the right 
incentives  to  remain  in  the  labour  market,  and  it  should  also  be  sought  to  maximise  this 
permanence through continuous employee training and wage flexibility, tailoring wage rises 
to  productivity.  There  have  also  been  incentives  to  continue  working  beyond  the  legal 
retirement age. And finally, decisions have been made to put back the legal retirement age, 
although only a small number of countries have admittedly adopted this measure. This is so 
in Germany, where a gradual increase in the retirement age from 65 to 67 has recently been 
approved.  The  various  simulations  available  indicate  that  this  is  a  measure  with  a  strong 
effect in terms of reducing pension spending.  
Secondly,  and  continuing  on  the  expenditure  side,  other  countries  have  opted  to  raise 
significantly the number of years of contributions used to calculate the amount of the pension 
(the "regulatory base"). Here, the application of a similar measure in Spain would draw us 
closer to other European countries. Specifically, France has recently lengthened the period 
BIS Review 51/2009 
 3
for  calculating  the  pension  entitlement  from  10  to  25  years,  while  Austria  has  extended  it 
from  15  to  40  years  and  a  significant  number  of  countries  (Finland,  Poland,  Portugal  and 
Sweden) have extended it to cover the entire working life. This reform would be in line with 
the recommendations of the Toledo Pact and would increase the system’s proportionality, i.e. 
the relationship between pensions received and contributions made. Connected to this issue, 
there  would  be  a  possibility  in  Spain  of  furthering  the  reforms  in  recent  years  aimed  at 
bringing  the  different  Social  Security  schemes  onto  a  more  equal  footing,  so  as  to  ensure 
that the contributions made under the different schemes are similar. 
Thirdly,  some  countries  have  lowered  the  income  replacement  rate,  defined  as  the  net 
pension  divided  by  net  income  prior  to  retirement,  by  reducing  the  percentage  of  the 
regulatory  base  received  after  having  contributed  for  the  minimum  period  (currently  set  at 
50%),  by  extending  this  minimum  period  or  by  reducing  the  rates  with  which  this  initial 
percentage increases for each additional year of contributions.  
A more novel alternative has involved linking pensions to life expectancy. Insofar as part of 
the problem arises as a result of the rise in life expectancy, adjusting pension amounts more 
or  less  automatically  to  these  increases  would  be  conducive  to  the  sustainability  of  the 
system. Currently, this type of measure has been proposed or applied, to differing degrees, 
in almost half the OECD countries.  
As  regards  updating  pensions,  many  countries  have  ceased  to  take  wage  growth  as  a 
reference  and  have  instead  used  price  indices,  as  in  Spain.  In  this  case,  potential  reform 
options might address the possibility of compensation for differences between forecast and 
actual inflation acting both in favour of and against pensioners.  
On the revenue side of the system, there appears to be no headroom for increasing social 
contributions, since that might greatly impair employment. However, accelerating the process 
of separation of funding sources should be considered so that social contributions cease to 
cover  the  portion  of  top-ups  to  minimum  pensions  that  they  currently  finance,  as  should 
earmarking  the  entire  Social  Security  surplus  (and  not  only  a  portion  as  to  date)  to  the 
reserve fund.  
Significantly, all these reforms can be made without having to alter the current pay-as-you-go 
system,  through  changes  in  its  parameters.  Some  countries  have  opted  to  frame  these 
changes  within  a  single,  large-scale  change,  at  least  in  formal  terms.  Sweden  and  other 
Central and Eastern European countries have set up a system of notional accounts. Under 
this system, the model remains on a pay-as-you-go basis, but a virtual account is set up for 
each individual which reflects the individual contributions of each pension scheme contributor 
and  the  notional  returns  that  these  contributions  generate  throughout  working  life,  returns 
that are calculated according to a notional rate linked to some macroeconomic variable. This 
system provides for a closer relationship between individual contributions and pensions. And, 
above all, it significantly improves individuals' perception of this relationship, which may lead 
to  incentives  systems  and  their  impact  on  agents'  decisions  in  the  labour  market  working 
more appropriately, reducing individuals' uncertainty over future income. 
In my address I have referred to the projections of various organisations on the sustainability 
of the system and to the reforms being applied in other European countries, summarising the 
content of the Research Department document that I shall send you this week. But let me 
conclude by highlighting the importance of the work entrusted to this Committee, especially 
at  this  current  juncture  where,  for  other  reasons,  economic  agents  are  under  a  cloud  of 
uncertainty.  
The  agreement  reached  in  Toledo  whereby  pension  sustainability  may  not  be  used  as  a 
political battering ram is an achievement of which you should all be proud. This agreement, 
moreover,  does  not  mean  you  should  not  react  to  the  problems  that  may  emerge  in  the 
pension system as a result of future demographic changes. On the contrary, the agreement 
obliges  us  all  to  examine  the  problems  and  seek  solutions.  I  am  sure  you  will  be  able  to 
convey  to  the  general  public  that  these  problems  can  be  resolved  if  the  appropriate 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2009
measures are taken and that, moreover, if they are taken without delay, they need not be 
traumatic. And I am convinced that moderate reforms adopted in sufficient time will not only 
help resolve long-term problems but, by offering reassurance and reducing uncertainty over 
the  future,  they  will  also  have  favourable  effects  in  the  short  run  in  the  difficult  economic 
circumstances currently besetting us. 
BIS Review 51/2009 
 5
