Duvvuri Subbarao: Role and response of the IMFC in Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, India and Sri Lanka 
Statement by Mr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, as leader of the
the Indian Delegation to the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington, 
DC, 25 April 2009.  
On  behalf  of  Mr  Palaniappan  Chidambaram,  Member,  IMFC  representing  the  Constituency  consisting  of 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Sri Lanka. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
The IMFC meets today in extraordinarily complex and challenging times. The financial crisis 
became full-blown in the second half of 2008, and has morphed through negative feedback 
to real activity, plunging the global economy into the deepest recession since World War II. 
What  started  off  as  a  sub-prime  crisis  in  the  US  housing  mortgage  sector  has  turned 
successively into a global banking crisis, global financial crisis and now a global economic 
crisis  spreading  from  the  littoral  Atlantic  regions  across  the  world  to  Europe,  Asia-Pacific, 
Latin America, and most unfortunately, to Africa. The crisis now threatens the recent gains in 
human livelihood and well-being. It also challenges many of our fundamental beliefs about 
economic resilience and financial market stability. 
The global economy and financial markets 
The most frequently asked question today is whether the worst is behind us. While there are 
incipient signs of business confidence and consumer spending trying to gain toehold, rising 
unemployment,  high  inventories  and  financial  stress  weigh  heavily  on  overall  demand 
conditions.  In  financial  markets,  although  spreads  have  narrowed  from  September  2008 
levels,  they  remain  elevated  while  bank  credit  has  declined  and  other  markets  remain 
impaired.  The  estimates  of  the  expected  write-downs  by  banks  on  global  exposures  are 
rising  rapidly.  For  all  financial  institutions  taken  together,  the  expected  write-downs  over 
2007-10  is  estimated  at  $  2.8  trillion  on  US-based  assets  and  $  1.4  trillion  in  Europe  and 
Japan. The retrenchment from emerging markets is outpacing the overall de-leveraging that 
is underway, raising serious concerns about refinancing and even default risks. 
Global  economic  activity  is  expected  to  contract  by  an  annualized  6  percent  in  the  first 
quarter of 2009 – the same as in the fourth quarter of 2008. Policy making around the world 
is  in  clearly  uncharted  territory.  Governments  and  central  banks  across  countries  have 
responded to the crisis through big, aggressive and unconventional measures. Emboldened 
by  falling  inflation,  monetary  authorities  in  advanced  countries  have  cut  policy  rates  to 
unprecedented  lows  and  when  credit  markets  failed  to  thaw,  central  bank  balance  sheets 
have  been  expanded  alongside  funding  and  guarantees  to  financial  intermediaries.  Fiscal 
stimuli  have  been  employed  in  conjunction,  with  large  discretionary  impulses  boosting 
automatic  stabilizers.  Even  with  current  levels  of  policy  intensity  the  trough  of  the  global 
recession  is  not  seen  until  the  end  of  2009  and  could  get  pushed  out  further  if  the  policy 
responses fail to gain traction. 
While the recession has intensified in the advanced economies, emerging economies have 
been  dented  by  the  collapse  in  external  demand  and  commodity  prices,  the  tightening 
constraints on access to external financing and the retrenchment of capital flows. Emerging 
and  developing  economies  could  experience  capital  outflows  of  the  order  of  1  percent  of 
GDP  in  2009  with  growth  expected  to  slump  to  1.5  percent.  Their  prospects  could  indeed 
worsen  if  external  financing  constraints  tighten  further,  trade  and  financial  protectionism 
escalates and stress in domestic financial systems heightens and spreads. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 1
Inflation  is  subsiding  across  the  world  with  cooling  demand  and  weakening  commodity 
prices; however, this has not translated into gains in purchasing power in the face of high job 
losses and eroded profit margins for firms. In many emerging economies, this has resulted in 
overvaluation of currencies, partly reflecting the appreciation in the key reserve currencies. 
As international reserves have been drawn down to stabilize foreign exchange markets, the 
cushion against the global crisis has been eroded further.  
Current  estimates  of  write-downs  on  toxic  assets  suffered  by  banks  globally  are  highly 
contingent on  the  hope that  the  global  economic  situation does  not  worsen  further.  Of  the 
write-downs of $ 3 trillion only a third has been capitalized. Uncertainty about potential losses 
has kept spreads in financial markets elevated with the securities market still impaired and 
the  credit  market  yet  to  thaw.  In  this  context  the  key  challenge  is  to  impart  credibility  to  a 
restructuring  strategy  comprising,  loss  recognition;  realistic  valuation;  cleansing  balance 
sheets;  and  recapitalization  and  distress  resolution.  These  issues  need  to  be  speedily 
addressed so that economic recovery takes root in the mature economies and capital flows 
to emerging and developing economies are revived. 
The role and response of the Fund 
The sharp deterioration in the global economic and financial situation has evoked vanguard 
national  efforts  towards  crisis  resolution  on  a  scale,  mix  and  duration  that  is  perhaps 
unprecedented  in  recent  history.  With  the  G20  Leaders’  Summits  in  Washington  in 
November, 2008 and in London earlier this month providing direction, a more comprehensive 
multilateral response involving a range of institutions, with the Fund in the forefront, has now 
been crafted. 
Surveillance 
Core to the very existence of the IMF is its surveillance role – monitoring global, regional and 
national economies to assess whether countries' policies are consistent not only with their 
own interest but also with the interest of the international community. The on-going crisis has 
highlighted the relevance and importance of strengthening and appropriately focusing Fund’s 
surveillance. I reiterate the need for greater focus on systemically important countries – the 
more systemically important the country the greater should be the rigour of surveillance. In 
parallel, the gap between multilateral and bilateral surveillance should be bridged. The IMF’s 
surveillance should not add to the obligations of developing countries. 
While  the  Fund’s  traditional  emphasis  has  been  on  exchange  rates,  the  crisis  has  pushed 
macro-financial  sector  issues  onto  centre-stage  in  IMF  surveillance.  A  key  aspect  is  the 
integration  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  sector  surveillance.  The  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Programme (FSAP) should be made more focused and forward-looking so that 
it  could  be  integrated  more  effectively  into  bilateral  surveillance.  National  authorities  are 
closer  to  the  terrain  realities  of  their  financial  sectors  and  self-assessment  of  regulatory 
frameworks based on internationally agreed methodologies should be a priority. As we have 
learnt, prescription of standards for the financial sector in itself cannot prevent crises. There 
is a need for on-going review of the standards by international bodies and greater national 
commitment for implementation. National authorities should also commit to assist each other 
in enhancing their capacity to strengthen regulatory frameworks and the IMF has a crucial 
role to play in this coordination. 
The  IMF  has  recently  stepped  up  its  collaboration  with  the  expanded  Financial  Stability 
Board on developing a framework on early warnings for identifying and mitigating systemic 
risks and vulnerabilities. We welcome this collaboration and while recognizing the potential 
utility  of  the  exercise,  we  look  forward  to  more  details,  particularly  on  the  methodology. 
Strengthening  information  availability  is  a  key  pre-requisite.  The  effectiveness  of  this 
collaboration should be regularly reviewed by the IMFC. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2009
Lending role of the Fund  
The  Fund  as  a  financing  institution  should  have  the  lending  instruments  and  the  financing 
capacity  to  address  potential  borrowing  needs.  We  welcome  the  proactive  and  prompt 
measures taken by the Fund to reform its lending instruments and policies. The introduction 
of the Flexible Credit Line (FCL) and the high access precautionary stand-by arrangements 
(HAPAs)  are  timely,  positive  steps.  The  streamlining  of  modalities  for  applying  Fund 
conditionality,  including  greater  use  of  ex-ante  conditionality,  appropriately  balance  the 
financing needs of the membership with safeguards for Fund resources. 
These  reforms  could  enable  the  Fund  to  re-emerge  as  the  financier of  choice  not  only  for 
balance  of  payments  needs  and  programmes  designed  for  macroeconomic  stability  and 
structural  adjustment,  but  for  insurance  in  these  uncertain  times.  Many  member  countries 
who were far removed from the epicentre and had no role or responsibility in the making of 
the crisis have nevertheless been adversely affected by it. The Fund would have to assist 
them and ensure that the fallout of the crisis in emerging markets and developing countries is 
contained.  We  expect  that  these  facilities  will  be  implemented  in  an  appropriately  flexible 
manner.  The  Fund  should  work  closely  with  its  membership  to  ensure  that  support  is 
provided  in  a  timely  manner  to  prevent  crises  at  an  early  stage.  In  this  context,  the  initial 
response to the FCL is heartening.  
We also welcome the initiative of the Fund to reform the financing instruments for low income 
countries  (LICs)  to  better  reflect  their  diverse  needs  and  circumstances  and  heightened 
exposure  to  global  volatility.  Appropriate  precautionary  arrangements  with  higher  access 
levels  and  ex-ante  conditionality  for  strong  performers  amongst  low  income  countries  also 
warrant  consideration.  We  call  for  an  early  completion  of  this  exercise.  The  doubling  of 
access  limits  for  concessional  lending,  including  the  rapid  access  component  of  the 
Exogenous Shocks Facility (ESF), is a good interim measure. 
We also support the initiatives that are underway to bridge the gaps in trade financing and 
restore  normalcy  to  markets  for  trade  finance  flows  and  rollovers.  We  urge  the  IMF  to 
collaborate  with  other  international  financial  institutions  (IFIs)  and  bilateral  agencies  to 
support  a  truly  multilateral  effort.  The  unimpeded  flow  of  trade  financing  to  low  income 
countries for imports of essential items such as food, fertilizer, fuel and capital goods should 
also be ensured. 
Augmenting the IMF’s resources 
In response to the increasing demand for Fund financing to manage the crisis the London 
Summit of G20 Leaders rightly focused on measures to enhance the resources available with 
the Fund. These decisions should be speedily implemented. 
The  Fund  is  a  quota  based  organization  and  quotas  have  to  be  the  primary  mechanism 
through which the resource needs of the Fund are ultimately met. This calls for two tasks on 
the way forward. The first task is to ensure that the April 2008 package of quota and voice 
reform  is  ratified  at  the  earliest.  The  second  task  is  advancing  the  completion  of  the  14th 
General Review of Quotas from January 2013 to January 2011. This quota review should, at 
the minimum, aim at doubling the quota resources. A time-sliced work plan should be laid 
down, commencing at the earliest so that the quota review can be completed in the targeted 
year and a half time frame. 
Since  the  process  of  increasing  and  allocating  quotas  could  take  some  time,  the  Fund  is 
working on securing alternate resources, including borrowing. We support these efforts but 
these should be seen as bridging mechanisms until the quota review is complete. 
We  appreciate  the  bilateral  commitments  made  so  for.  We  believe  that  the  Fund’s 
borrowings  should  adhere  to  certain  key  principles,  consistent  with  the  London  Summit 
decisions. First, the Fund’s borrowings should not be seen as a substitute for a substantial 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 3
quota  increase.  Second,  an  appropriate  mix  should  be  maintained  between  the  quota 
resources and borrowings of the Fund. Third, Fund borrowings should be based broadly on 
present quota shares, preferably within a multilateral framework like a modified NAB. Fourth, 
to  provide  greater  flexibility  for  member  countries  to  contribute  to  the  Fund’s  resources, 
various modalities should be explored, including note purchase mechanisms. Fifth, resources 
lent to the Fund should be treated as part of the country’s international reserves. 
An  early  decision  on  these  modalities  would  enable  a  quicker  mobilization  of  the  targeted 
resources from a wider group of members. On our part, India is prepared to take on its share 
of responsibility to augment the Fund’s resources. We would be able to commit on the extent 
of participation once the modalities are evolved in keeping the principles enunciated.  
We  call  for  an  early  and  front-loaded  allocation  of  SDRs  worth  $250  billion  which  would 
amount  to  about  three-quarters  of  the  present  quota  size  of  the  Fund.  This  would  provide 
developing countries with additional liquidity of about $100 billion, of which $ 19 billion will go 
to low income countries. There is a need to widen and deepen the market for SDRs through 
an expansion of the voluntary agreements. An SDR allocation is a reversible measure and 
the allocation could be re-considered when the global economic situation shows significant 
improvement. 
We call on the Fund to finalize the modalities for raising both loan and subsidy resources for 
concessional assistance to low income countries. A number of available options need to be 
explored. We support the proposal to utilise the additional income from the investment of the 
higher proceeds of the agreed gold sale under the New Income Model to expand subsidized 
lending  to  low  income  countries.  Members  participating  in  the  multilateral  borrowing 
arrangements with the Fund should have the option of earmarking a portion of their lending 
for assistance to low income countries. Vigorous efforts to increase donor contributions to the 
subsidy resources should be pursued. 
Governance 
Governance  continues  to  be  critical  to  the  legitimacy,  credibility  and  effectiveness  of  the 
Fund. The most crucial issue is the continuance of the process of realignment of quotas and 
voice. The ensuing quota review should ensure that the IMF is comprehensively reformed so 
that it reflects the changing economic weights in the world economy and is more responsive 
to future challenges. Emerging and developing economies should have substantially greater 
voice  and  representation  in  the  Fund.  This  principle  was  reiterated  in  the  Washington 
Declaration  of  the  G20  Leaders  and  endorsed  by  the  London  Summit  as  well.  We  now 
expect that the quota review will result in a comprehensive reform of the governance of the 
Fund. 
The initiative towards internal governance reform within the Fund is also relevant, although it 
should follow the quota and voice reform. We now have the Independent Evaluation Office 
(IEO) report on Corporate Governance, the report of the Trevor Manuel Committee, and the 
inputs  from  civil  society.  We  expect  that  these  inputs  would  be  thoroughly  analyzed  and 
discussed  in  the  Executive  Board  and  appropriate  recommendations  for  action  would  be 
made  so  that  the  IMFC  could  become  a  more  effective  forum  and  the  Fund  is  also 
strengthened.  
We call for the introduction of an open, merit-based process, irrespective of nationality and 
geographical preferences, for the selection of the senior management of the Fund. The next 
Managing Director of the IMF should be selected in this manner. 
Developments in the constituency 
I now turn to developments in my constituency. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2009
India 
The global financial crisis interrupted India’s growth momentum. Since downside risks have 
materialized, the GDP growth for 2008-09 is now projected to turn out to be in the range of 
6.5  to  6.7  per  cent  after  clocking  annual  growth  of  8.9  per  cent  on  an  average  over  the 
preceding five years (2003-08). Domestic demand, in the form of both private consumption 
and investment expenditure, has slackened although government final consumption rose on 
account of discretionary fiscal stimulus measures. The global crisis brought to the fore the 
strong  interactions  between  funding  liquidity  and  market  conditions.  Both  the  Government 
and the Reserve Bank responded to the challenge of minimising the impact of the crisis on 
India  in  a  coordinated  and  consultative  manner.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  response  was 
aimed  at  containing  the  contagion  from  the  global  financial  crisis  while  maintaining 
comfortable  domestic  and  forex  liquidity.  The  Government  launched  three  fiscal  stimulus 
packages which came on top of an already announced expanded safety-net programme for 
the rural poor, the farm loan waiver package and payout following the Sixth Pay Commission 
report. The combined impact of these fiscal measures is about 3 percent of GDP. Through 
the Reserve Bank’s actions, the cumulative amount of primary liquidity potentially available to 
the  financial  system  is  about  7  percent  of  GDP.  There  are  several  challenges  on  the  way 
forward  :  implementing  the  fiscal  stimulus  packages,  particularly  stepping  up  public 
investment; revival of private investment demand; unwinding of fiscal stimulus in an orderly 
manner;  maintaining  the  flow  of  credit  while  ensuring  credit  quality;  preserving  financial 
stability along with provision of adequate liquidity; and ensuring an interest rate environment 
that supports the return of the economy to a high growth path. 
Going forward, the fiscal and monetary stimulus measures initiated during 2008-09 coupled 
with  lower  commodity  prices  will  cushion  the  downturn  by  stabilising  domestic  economic 
activity. On balance, with the assumption of normal monsoon, real GDP growth for 2009-10 
is placed at around 6.0 per cent. Inflation, as measured by variations in WPI, is projected to 
be  around  4.0  by  end  March,  2010.  Consumer  price  inflation  too  is  declining,  albeit  less 
sharply. Notwithstanding several challenges, the Indian economy remains resilient with well 
functioning markets and sound financial institutions. The macro-economic management has 
helped  in  maintaining  lower  volatility  in  both  financial  and  real  sectors  in  India  relative  to 
several other advanced and emerging market economies. 
Sri Lanka 
The Sri Lankan economy was resilient in the face of unfavourable external conditions and 
registered growth of 6.0 percent in 2008. High oil and import commodity prices threatened 
macroeconomic  stability  resulting  in  a  sharply  widening  current  account  deficit  and  rapidly 
rising inflation. The global financial turmoil triggered a reversal of capital inflows causing a 
depletion  of  reserves  and  substantial  imbalances  in  the  external  sector.  Despite  these 
challenging  circumstances,  prudent  macroeconomic  policies  supported 
the  growth 
momentum while headline inflation dropped to 5.2 percent in March 2009 from a high of 28.2 
percent  in  July  2008.  The  fiscal  deficit  has  remained  at  a  reasonably  low  level  and  public 
debt relative to GDP has been on the decline for the fourth consecutive year. Unemployment 
has dropped to a historic low of 5.2 percent while poverty has been falling for the last several 
years and is currently around 15.0 percent. Against the back drop of a deteriorating global 
outlook, growth is expected to drop sharply but would remain around 4.0 percent in 2009, 
bolstered  by  prudent  macroeconomic  policies  and  expansion  of  the  domestic  economy 
particularly  in  the  eastern  and  northern  provinces  of  the  country.  As  normalcy  returns, 
optimism  about  a  resumption  of  the  high  growth  trajectory  and  a  step-up  in  the 
developmental process is gaining ground.  
BIS Review 52/2009 
 5
Bangladesh 
Bangladesh’s economy has stood up well in the face of the surge in international food and 
commodity  prices  in  the  first  half  of  2008  and  the  outbreak  of  the  global  crisis  since 
September 2008. Real GDP growth is expected to remain strong in 2008-09 (July-June) at 
around 6.0 percent, benefiting from a favourable agricultural performance and the fall in food, 
fuel  and  commodity  prices  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  As  a  result  and  reinforced  by  a 
combination of supply management and monetary-fiscal policies, inflation fell on a year-on-
year basis to 6.1 percent in January 2009 from 11.4 percent a year ago. Public finances have 
come  under  some  strain  with  growth  in  tax  revenues  falling  short  of  target  which  is  being 
offset by reduced expenditure due to sluggish demand and lower Annual Development Plan 
utilization. With the deepening global downturn affecting major export markets, Bangladesh’s 
balance of payments has come under some pressure, aggravated by some slowing down of 
remittances although they continue to hold up well. Gross international reserves stood at US 
$ 5.9 billion at the end of February 2009, close to three months of imports. Bangladesh has 
also welcomed the decisions of the G 20 to deal with the current crisis within a multilateral 
framework while shunning trade protectionism and competitive devaluations. Bangladesh is 
striving  to  weather  the  crisis  with  a  modest  stimulus  package  aimed  at  boosting  domestic 
demand  with  investment  in  rural,  agricultural  and  infrastructure  sectors,  propping  up  the 
export  sectors,  buttressing  food  and  social  security  measures  and  undertaking  additional 
employment programmes. 
Bhutan 
In  Bhutan,  2008  was  a  year  of  momentous  historical  significance  when  the  country 
transitioned into a constitutional monarchy with new democratic institutions. This provides the 
backdrop  for  the  implementation  of  the  development  agenda.  Financing  for  the  10th  Plan, 
which  aims  to  double  development  spending  with  a  focus  on  poverty  reduction  through 
industrial development, balanced regional growth and infrastructure investment has been tied 
up. Real GDP growth in 2007/08 was 21.4 per cent reflecting the doubling of hydro power 
generation capacity with the coming on stream of the Tala hydro project. GDP growth rate is 
expected to return to a trend level of 5.6 per cent in 2008-09. Regional integration through 
enhanced trade relationships with neighbouring countries, especially India and Bangladesh 
are helping growth and diversification. On the external sector, while reserves of convertible 
currency are comfortable, rupee reserves require careful management to meet the needs for 
imports. 
Concluding remarks 
The  crisis  has  put  to  test  the  collective  leadership  of  the  world  and  the  competence  and 
relevance of multilateral institutions. We are grappling with a crisis that has afflicted the entire 
world whether at the core or in the periphery. Much depends on a quick and internationally 
coordinated  approach  to  a  daunting,  but  not  an  insurmountable,  challenge.  The  IMF  is 
central to this endeavour and all of us have a stake in the role of the Fund in orchestrating 
the road to recovery. The Fund’s capacity to deliver is ultimately connected to how much and 
how  soon  we  empower  it  with  resources,  better  governance,  greater  accountability  and  a 
redefined mandate that keeps pace with the requirements of the changing world. Within the 
IMF  too,  a  radical  shift  in  approach,  culture  and  strategy  is  urgently  warranted  so  that  it 
divests itself of its past and much of the fallibility that goes with it. The world we will emerge 
into  after  the  crisis  will in  all likelihood  not  be the  same  again,  and  the  challenge  is  to  re-
fashion the IMF so that it becomes more relevant, useful and effective in the future. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2009
