Daniel K Tarullo: Modernizing bank supervision and regulation 
Testimony  of  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 19 March 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman  Dodd,  Ranking  Member  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate  this  opportunity  to  present  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  on  the 
important issue of modernizing financial supervision and regulation.  
For the last year and a half, the U.S. financial system has been under extraordinary stress. 
Initially, this financial stress precipitated a sharp downturn in the U.S. and global economies. 
What has ensued is a very damaging negative feedback loop: The effects of the downturn – 
rising unemployment, declining profits, and decreased consumption and investment – have 
exacerbated  the  problems  of  financial  institutions  by  reducing  further  the  value  of  their 
assets. The impaired financial system has, in turn, been unable to supply the credit needed 
by households and businesses alike. 
The catalyst for the current crisis was a broad-based decline in housing prices, which has 
contributed  to  substantial  increases  in  mortgage  delinquencies  and  foreclosures  and 
significant declines in the value of mortgage-related assets. However, the mortgage sector is 
just the most visible example of what was a much broader credit boom, and the underlying 
causes of the crisis run deeper than the mortgage market. They include global imbalances in 
savings and capital flows, poorly designed financial innovations, and weaknesses in both the 
risk-management  systems  of  financial  institutions  and  the  government  oversight  of  such 
institutions. 
While stabilizing the financial system to set the stage for economic recovery will remain its 
top priority in the near term, the Federal Reserve has also begun to evaluate regulatory and 
supervisory  changes  that  could  help  reduce  the  incidence  and  severity  of  future  financial 
crises. Today's Committee hearing is a timely opportunity for us to share our thinking to date 
and to contribute to your deliberations on regulatory modernization legislation. 
Many conclusions can be drawn from the financial crisis and the period preceding it, ranging 
across  topics  as  diverse  as  capital  adequacy  requirements,  risk  measurement  and 
management at financial institutions, supervisory practices, and consumer protection. In the 
Board's  judgment,  one  of  the  key  lessons  is  that  the  United  States  must  have  a 
comprehensive strategy for containing systemic risk. This strategy must be multifaceted and 
involve oversight of the financial system as a whole, and not just its individual components, in 
order to improve the resiliency of the system to potential systemic shocks. In pursuing this 
strategy, we must ensure that the reforms we enact now are aimed not just at the causes of 
our current crisis, but at other sources of risk that may arise in the future. 
Systemic risk refers to the potential for an event or shock triggering a loss of economic value 
or  confidence  in  a  substantial  portion  of  the  financial  system,  with  resulting  major  adverse 
effects  on  the  real  economy.  A  core  characteristic  of  systemic  risk  is  the  potential  for 
contagion  effects.  Traditionally,  the  concern  was  that  a  run  on  a  large  bank,  for  example, 
would lead not only to the failure of that bank, but also to the failure of other financial firms 
because  of  the  combined  effect  of  the  failed  bank's  unpaid  obligations  to  other  firms  and 
market uncertainty as to whether those or other firms had similar vulnerabilities. In fact, most 
recent episodes of systemic risk have begun in markets, rather than through a classic run on 
a bank. A sharp downward movement in asset prices has been magnified by certain market 
practices or vulnerabilities. Soon market participants become uncertain about the values of 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 1
those assets, an uncertainty that spreads to other assets as liquidity freezes up. In the worst 
case,  liquidity  problems  become  solvency  problems.  The  result  has  been  spillover  effects 
both within the financial sector and from the financial sector to the real economy. 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  discuss  several  components  of  a  broad  policy  agenda  to  address 
systemic  risk:  consolidated  supervision,  the  development  of  a  resolution  regime  for 
systemically important nonbank financial institutions; more uniform and  robust authority for 
the  prudential  supervision  of  systemically  important  payment  and  settlement  systems; 
consumer protection; and the potential benefits of charging a governmental entity with more 
express responsibility for monitoring and addressing systemic risks in the financial system. In 
elaborating this agenda, I will both discuss the actions the Federal Reserve is taking under 
existing authorities and identify areas in which we believe legislation is needed. 
Effective consolidated supervision of systemically important firms 
For the reasons I have just stated, supervision of individual financial firms is not a sufficient 
condition  for  fostering  financial stability.  But  it  is  surely  a  necessary  condition.  Thus  a  first 
component  of  an  agenda  for  systemic  risk  regulation  is  that  each  systemically  important 
financial firm be subject to effective consolidated supervision. This means ensuring both that 
regulatory  requirements  apply  to  each  such  firm  and  that  the  consequent  supervision  is 
effective. 
As to the issue of effectiveness, many of the current problems in the banking and financial 
system  stem  from  risk-management  failures  at  a  number  of  financial  institutions,  including 
some firms under federal supervision. Clearly, these lapses are unacceptable. The Federal 
Reserve has been involved in a number of exercises to understand and document the risk-
management  lapses  and  shortcomings  at  major  financial  institutions,  including  those 
undertaken  by  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group,  the  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial 
Markets, and the multinational Financial Stability Forum.1  
Based  on  the  results  of  these  and  other  efforts,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  taking  steps  to 
improve regulatory requirements and risk management at regulated institutions. Our actions 
have  covered  liquidity  risk  management,  capital  planning  and  capital  adequacy,  firm-wide 
risk  identification,  residential  lending,  counterparty  credit  exposures,  and  commercial  real 
estate. Liquidity and capital have been given special attention.  
The crisis has undermined previous conventional wisdom that a company, even in stressed 
environments, may readily borrow funds if it can offer high-quality collateral. For example, the 
inability of Bear Stearns to borrow even against U.S. government securities helped cause its 
collapse.  As  a  result,  we  have  been  working  to  bring  about  needed  improvements  in 
institutions' liquidity risk-management practices. Along with our U.S. supervisory colleagues, 
we are closely monitoring the liquidity positions of banking organizations – on a daily basis 
for the largest and most critical firms – and are discussing key market developments and our 
supervisory  analyses  with  senior  management.  We  use  these  analyses  and  findings  from 
examinations  to  ensure  that  liquidity  and  funding  management,  as  well  as  contingency 
funding  plans,  are  sufficiently  robust  and  incorporate  various  stress  scenarios.  Looking 
beyond  the  present  period,  we  also  have  underway  a  broader-ranging  examination  of 
liquidity requirements. 
Similarly,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  closely  monitoring  the  capital  levels  of  banking 
organizations on a regular basis and discussing our evaluation with senior management. As 
                                                 
1   See  Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008),  "Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent 
Market Turbulence)," March 6; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on 
Financial  Market  Developments,"  March  13;  and  Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  "Report  of  the  Financial 
Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience," April 7. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2009
part of our supervisory process, we have been conducting our own analysis of loss scenarios 
to anticipate the potential future capital needs of institutions. These needs may arise from, 
among other things, future losses or the potential for off-balance-sheet exposures and assets 
to come on balance sheet. Here, too, we have been discussing our analyses with bankers 
and ensuring that their own internal analyses reflect a broad range of scenarios and capture 
stress environments that could impair solvency. We have intensified efforts to evaluate firms' 
capital planning and to bring about improvements where needed.  
Going  forward,  we  will  need  changes  in  the  capital  regime  as  the  financial  environment 
returns closer to normal conditions. Working with other domestic and foreign supervisors, we 
must  strengthen  the  existing capital  rules  to  achieve  a  higher  level  and  quality  of required 
capital.  Institutions  should  also  have  to  establish  strong  capital  buffers  above  current 
regulatory  minimums  in  good  times,  so  that  they  can  weather  financial  market  stress  and 
continue to meet customer credit needs. This is but one of a number of important ways in 
which the current procyclical features of financial regulation should be modified, with the aim 
of counteracting rather than exacerbating the effects of financial stress. Finally, firms whose 
failure would pose a systemic risk must be subject to especially close supervisory oversight 
of their risk-taking, risk management, and financial condition, and be held to high capital and 
liquidity standards.  
Turning  to  the  reach  of  consolidated  supervision,  the  Board  believes  there  should  be 
statutory coverage of all systemically important financial firms – not just those affiliated with 
an insured bank as provided for under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (BHC Act). 
The current financial crisis has highlighted a fact that had become more and more apparent 
in recent years – that risks to the financial system can arise not only in the banking sector, 
but  also  from  the  activities  of  financial  firms  that  traditionally  have  not  been  subject  to  the 
type of consolidated supervision applied to bank holding companies. For example, although 
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  had  authority  over  the  broker-dealer  and 
other SEC-registered units of Bear Stearns and the other large investment banks, it did not 
have  statutory  authority  to  supervise  the  diversified  operations  of  these  firms  on  a 
consolidated basis. Instead, the SEC was forced to rely on a voluntary regime for monitoring 
and  addressing  the  capital  and  liquidity  risks  arising  from  the  full  range  of  these  firms' 
operations.  
In  contrast,  all  holding  companies  that  own  a  bank  –  regardless  of  size  –  are  subject  to 
consolidated supervision for safety and soundness purposes under the BHC Act.2 A robust 
consolidated  supervisory  framework,  like  the  one  embodied  in  the  BHC  Act,  provides  a 
supervisor the tools it needs to understand, monitor and, when appropriate, restrain the risks 
associated with an organization's consolidated or group-wide activities. These tools include 
the  authority  to  establish  consolidated  capital  requirements  for  the  organization,  obtain 
reports from and conduct examinations of the organization and any of its subsidiaries, and 
require the organization or its subsidiaries to alter their risk-management practices or take 
other actions to address risks that threaten the safety and soundness of the organization.  
Application  of  a  similar  regime  to  systemically  important  financial  institutions  that  are  not 
bank holding companies would help promote the safety and soundness of these firms and 
the stability of the financial system generally. It also is worth considering whether a broader 
application  of  the  principle  of  consolidated  supervision  would  help  reduce  the  potential  for 
risk-taking to migrate from more-regulated to less-regulated parts of the financial sector. To 
                                                 
2   Through the exploitation of a loophole in the BHC Act, certain investment banks, as well as other financial and 
nonfinancial  firms,  acquired  control  of  a  federally  insured  industrial  loan  company  (ILC)  while  avoiding  the 
prudential framework that Congress established for the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks. 
For the reasons discussed in prior testimony before this Committee, the Board continues to believe that this 
loophole in current law should be closed. See Testimony of Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel of the Board, 
before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Oct. 4, 2007. 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 3
be fully effective, consolidated supervisors must have clear authority to monitor and address 
safety  and  soundness  concerns  in  all  parts  of  an  organization.  Accordingly,  specific 
consideration  should  be  given  to  modifying  the  limits  currently  placed  on  the  ability  of 
consolidated  supervisors  to  monitor  and  address  risks  at  an  organization's  functionally 
regulated subsidiaries.  
Improved resolution processes 
The importance of extending effective consolidated supervision to all systemically important 
firms  is,  of  course,  linked  to  the  perception  of  market  participants  that  such  firms  will  be 
considered  too-big-to-fail,  and  will  thus  be  supported  by  the  government  if  they  get  into 
financial difficulty. This perception has obvious undesirable effects, including possible moral 
hazard effects if firms are able to take excessive risks because of market beliefs that they 
can fall back on government assistance. In addition to effective supervision of these firms, 
the  United  States  needs  improved  tools  to  allow  the  orderly  resolution  of  systemically 
important nonbank financial firms, including a mechanism to cover the costs of the resolution 
if  government  assistance  is  required  to  prevent  systemic  consequences.  In  most  cases, 
federal  bankruptcy  laws  provide  an  appropriate  framework  for  the  resolution  of  nonbank 
financial institutions. However, this framework does not sufficiently protect the public's strong 
interest in ensuring the orderly resolution of nondepository financial institutions when a failure 
would pose substantial systemic risks. 
Developing  appropriate  resolution  procedures  for  potentially  systemic  financial  firms, 
including bank holding companies, is a complex and challenging task that will take some time 
to complete. We can begin, however, by learning from other models, including the process 
currently  in  place  under  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act  (FDIA)  for  dealing  with  failing 
insured  depository  institutions  and  the  framework  established  for  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie 
Mac  under  the  Housing  and  Economic  Recovery  Act  of  2008.  Both  models  allow  a 
government agency to take control of a failing institution's operations and management, act 
as conservator or receiver for the institution, and establish a "bridge" institution to facilitate an 
orderly sale or liquidation of the firm. The authority to "bridge" a failing institution through a 
receivership  to  a  new  entity  reduces  the  potential  for  market  disruption,  limits  the  value-
destruction  impact  of  a  failure,  and  –  when  accompanied  by  haircuts  on  creditors  and 
shareholders – mitigates the adverse impact of government intervention on market discipline.  
Any new resolution regime would need to be carefully crafted. For example, clear guidelines 
are  needed  to  define  which  firms  could  be  subject  to  the  new,  alternative  regime  and  the 
process for invoking that regime, analogous perhaps to the procedures for invoking the so-
called  systemic  risk  exception  under  the  FDIA.  In  addition,  given  the  global  operations  of 
many large and diversified financial firms and the complex regulatory structures under which 
they  operate,  any  new  resolution  regime  must  be  structured  to  work  as  seamlessly  as 
possible with other domestic or foreign insolvency regimes that might apply to one or more 
parts of the consolidated organization.  
In  addition  to  developing  an  alternative  resolution  regime  for  systemically  critical  financial 
firms, policymakers and experts should carefully review whether improvements can be made 
to the existing bankruptcy framework that would allow for a faster and more orderly resolution 
of  financial  firms  generally.  Such  improvements  could  reduce  the  likelihood  that  the  new 
alternative  regime  would  need  to  be  invoked  or  government  assistance  provided  in  a 
particular instance to protect financial stability and, thereby, could promote market discipline. 
Oversight of payment and settlement systems 
As suggested earlier, a comprehensive strategy for controlling systemic risk must focus not 
simply on the stability of individual firms. Another element of such a strategy is to provide 
close oversight of important arenas in which firms interact with one another. Payment and 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2009
settlement  systems  are  the  foundation  of  our  financial  infrastructure.  Financial  institutions 
and  markets  depend  upon  the  smooth  functioning  of  these  systems  and  their  ability  to 
manage  counterparty  and  settlement  risks  effectively.  Such  systems  can  have  significant 
risk-reduction  benefits  –  by  improving  counterparty  credit  risk  management,  reducing 
settlement risks, and providing an orderly process to handle participant defaults – and can 
improve  transparency  for  participants,  financial  markets,  and  regulatory  authorities.  At  the 
same  time,  these  systems  inherently  centralize  and  concentrate  clearing  and  settlement 
risks.  Thus,  if  a  system  is  not  well  designed  and  able  to  appropriately  manage  the  risks 
arising  from  participant  defaults  or  operational  disruptions,  significant  liquidity  or  credit 
problems could result.  
Well before the current crisis erupted, the Federal Reserve was working to strengthen the 
financial  infrastructure  that  supports  trading,  payments,  clearing,  and  settlement  in  key 
financial  markets.  Because  this  infrastructure  acts  as  a  critical  link  between  financial 
institutions and markets, ensuring that it is able to withstand – and not amplify – shocks is an 
important aspect of reducing systemic risk, including the very real problem of institutions that 
are too big or interconnected to be allowed to fail in a disorderly manner.  
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major joint initiative by the public 
and  private  sectors  to  improve  arrangements  for  clearing  and  settling  credit  default  swaps 
(CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. As a result, the accuracy and timeliness 
of trade information has improved significantly. In addition, the Federal Reserve, working with 
other  supervisors  through  the  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets,  has 
encouraged  the  development  of  well-regulated  and  prudently  managed  central  clearing 
counterparties  for  OTC  trades.  Along  these  lines,  the  Board  has  encouraged  the 
development of two central counterparties for CDS in the United States – ICE Trust and the 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange. In addition, in 2008, the Board entered into a memorandum of 
understanding with the SEC and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to promote the 
application of common prudential standards to central counterparties for CDS and to facilitate 
the sharing of information among the agencies with respect to such central counterparties. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  is  consulting  with  foreign  financial  regulators  regarding  the 
development and oversight of central counterparties for CDS in other jurisdictions to promote 
the application of consistent prudential standards. 
The  New  York  Federal  Reserve  Bank,  in  conjunction  with  other  domestic  and  foreign 
supervisors, continues its effort to establish increasingly stringent targets and performance 
standards for OTC market participants. In addition, we are working with market participants 
to enhance the resilience of the triparty repurchase agreement (repo) market. Through this 
market, primary dealers and other major banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts 
of  secured  financing  from  money  market  mutual  funds  and  other  short-term,  risk-averse 
investors.3  We  are  exploring,  for  example,  whether  a  central  clearing  system  or  other 
improvements  might  be  beneficial  for  this  market,  given  the  magnitude  of  exposures 
generated and the vital importance of the market to both dealers and investors.  
Even  as  we  pursue  these  and  similar  initiatives,  however,  the  Board  believes  additional 
statutory  authority  is  needed  to  address  the  potential  for  systemic  risk  in  payment  and 
settlement  systems.  Currently,  the  Federal  Reserve  relies  on  a  patchwork  of  authorities, 
largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on moral suasion to help 
ensure  that  critical  payment  and  settlement  systems  have  the  necessary  procedures  and 
controls in place to manage their risks. By contrast, many  major central banks around the 
world  have  an  explicit  statutory  basis  for  their  oversight  of  these  systems.  Given  how 
important robust payment and settlement systems are to financial stability, and the functional 
                                                 
3   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York.  The  New  York  Reserve  Bank's  Open  Market  Desk  engages  in  trades  on  behalf  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System to implement monetary policy. 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 5
similarities between many payment and settlement systems, a good case can be made for 
granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment 
and settlement systems.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  significant  expertise  regarding  the  risks  and  appropriate  risk-
management  practices  at  payment  and  settlement  systems,  substantial  direct  experience 
with  the  measures  necessary  for  the  safe  and  sound  operation  of  such  systems,  and 
established working relationships with other central banks and regulators that we have used 
to  promote  the  development  of  strong  and  internationally-accepted  risk  management 
standards  for  the  full  range  of  these  systems.  Providing  such  authority  would  help  ensure 
that  these  critical  systems  are  held  to  consistent  and  high  prudential  standards  aimed  at 
mitigating systemic risk. 
Consumer protection 
Another lesson of this crisis is that pervasive consumer protection problems can signal, and 
even lead to, trouble for the safety and soundness of financial institutions and for the stability 
of the financial system as a whole. Consumer protection in the area of financial services is 
not,  and  should  not  be,  limited  to  practices  with  potentially  systemic  consequences. 
However, as we evaluate the range of measures that can help contain systemic problems, it 
is  important  to  recognize  that  good  consumer  protection  can  play  a  supporting  role  by  – 
among other things – promoting sound underwriting practices. 
Last  year  the  Board  adopted  new  regulations  under  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity 
Protection  Act  to  enhance  the  substantive  protections  provided  high-cost  mortgage 
customers, such as requiring tax and insurance escrows in certain cases and limiting the use 
of prepayment penalties. These rules also require lenders providing such high-cost loans to 
verify  the  income  and  assets  of  a  loan  applicant  and  prohibit  lenders  from  making  such  a 
loan without taking into account the ability of the borrower to repay the loan from income or 
assets other than the home's value. More recently, the Board adopted new rules to protect 
credit card customers from a variety of unfair and deceptive acts and practices. The Board 
will  continue  to  update  its  consumer  protection  regulations  as  appropriate  to  provide 
households with the information they need to make informed credit decisions and to address 
new unfair and deceptive practices that may develop as practices and products change. 
Systemic risk authority 
One issue that has received much attention recently is the possible benefit of establishing a 
systemic risk authority that would be charged with monitoring, assessing and, if necessary, 
curtailing systemic risks across the entire U.S. financial system.  
At a conceptual level, expressly empowering a governmental authority with responsibility to 
help  contain  systemic  risks  should,  if  implemented  correctly,  reduce  the  potential  for  large 
adverse  shocks  and  limit  the  spillover  effects  of  those  shocks  that  do  occur,  thereby 
enhancing the resilience of the financial system. However, no one should underestimate the 
challenges involved with developing or implementing a supervisory and regulatory program 
for  systemic  risks.  Nor  should  the  establishment  of  such  an  authority  be  viewed  as  a 
panacea that will eliminate periods of significant stress in the financial markets and so reduce 
the need for the other important reforms that I have discussed.  
The  U.S.  financial  sector  is  extremely  large  and  diverse  –  with  value  added  amounting  to 
nearly $1.1 trillion or 8 percent of gross domestic product in 2007. Systemic risks may arise 
across  a  broad  range  of  firms  or  markets,  or  they  may  be  concentrated  in  just  a  few  key 
institutions  or  activities.  They  can  occur  suddenly,  such  as  from  a  rapid  and  substantial 
decline in asset prices, even if the probability of their occurrence builds up slowly over time. 
Moreover, as the current crisis has illustrated, systemic risks may arise at nonbank entities 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2009
the 
from 
(for  example,  mortgage  brokers),  from  sectors  outside  the  traditional  purview  of  federal 
supervision  (for  example,  insurance  firms),  from  institutions  or  activities  that  are  based  in 
other  countries  or  operate  across  national  boundaries,  or 
linkages  and 
interdependencies among financial institutions or between financial institutions and markets. 
And,  while  the  existence  of  systemic  risks  may  be  apparent  in  hindsight,  identifying  such 
risks ex ante and determining the proper degree of regulatory or supervisory action needed 
to  counteract  a  particular  risk  without  unnecessarily  hampering  innovation  and  economic 
growth is a very challenging assignment for any agency or group of agencies.4
For these reasons, any systemic risk authority would need a sophisticated, comprehensive 
and  multi-disciplinary  approach  to  systemic  risk.  Such  an  authority  likely  would  require 
knowledge  and  experience  across  a  wide  range  of  financial  institutions  and  markets, 
substantial analytical resources to identify the types of information needed and to analyze the 
information  obtained,  and  supervisory  expertise  to  develop  and  implement  the  necessary 
supervisory programs.  
To be effective, however, these skills would have to be combined with a clear statement of 
expectations  and  responsibilities,  and  with  adequate  powers  to  fulfill  those  responsibilities. 
While the systemic risk authority should be required to rely on the information, assessments, 
and  supervisory  and  regulatory  programs  of  existing  financial  supervisors  and  regulators 
whenever possible, it would need sufficient powers of its own to achieve its broader mission 
– monitoring and containing systemic risk. These powers likely would include broad authority 
to obtain information – through data collection and reports, or when necessary, examinations 
–  from  a  range  of  financial  market  participants,  including  banking  organizations,  securities 
firms, key financial market intermediaries, and other financial institutions that currently may 
not be subject to regular federal supervisory reporting requirements.  
How might a properly constructed systemic risk authority use its expertise and authorities to 
help  monitor,  assess,  and  mitigate  potentially  systemic  risks  within  the  financial  system? 
There  are  numerous  possibilities.  One  area  of  natural  focus  for  a  systemic  risk  authority 
would  be  the  stability  of  systemically  critical  financial  institutions.  It  also  likely  would  need 
some role in the setting of standards for capital, liquidity, and risk-management practices for 
financial firms, given the importance of these matters to the aggregate level of risk within the 
financial system. By bringing its broad knowledge of the interrelationships between firms and 
markets to bear, the systemic risk authority could help mitigate the potential for financial firms 
to be a source of, or be negatively affected by, adverse shocks to the system.  
It  seems  most  sensible  that  the  role  of  the  systemic  risk  authority  be  to  complement,  not 
displace, that of a firm's consolidated supervisor (which, as I noted earlier, all systemically 
critical  financial  institutions  should  have).  Under  this  model,  the  firm's  consolidated 
supervisor would continue to have primary responsibility for the day-to-day supervision of the 
firm's risk- management practices, including those relating to compliance risk management, 
and for focusing on the safety and soundness of the individual institution.  
Another key issue is the extent to which a systemic risk authority would have appropriately 
calibrated  ability  to  take  measures  to  address  specific  practices  identified  as  posing  a 
systemic  risk  –  in  coordination  with  other  supervisors  when  possible,  or  independently  if 
necessary. For example, there may be practices that appear sound when considered from 
the  perspective  of  a  single  firm,  but  that  appear  troublesome  when  understood  to  be 
widespread in the financial system, such as if these practices reveal the shared dependence 
of firms on particular forms of uncertain liquidity. 
                                                 
4   For example, while the existence of supra-normal profits in a market segment may be an indicator of supra-
normal risks, it also may be the result of innovation on the part of one or more market participants that does 
not create undue risks to the system. 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 7
Other activities that a systemic risk authority might undertake include: (1) monitoring large or 
rapidly increasing exposures – such as to subprime mortgages – across firms and markets; 
(2)  assessing  the  potential  for  deficiencies  in  evolving  risk-management  practices,  broad-
based increases in financial leverage, or changes in financial markets or products to increase 
systemic risks; (3) analyzing possible spillovers between financial firms or between firms and 
markets,  for  example  through  the  mutual  exposures  of  highly  interconnected  firms;  (4) 
identifying  possible  regulatory  gaps,  including  gaps  in  the  protection  of  consumers  and 
investors, that pose risks for the system as a whole; and (5) issuing periodic reports on the 
stability of the U.S. financial system, in order both to disseminate its own views and to elicit 
the considered views of others.  
Thus,  there  are  numerous  important  decisions  to  be  made  on  the  substantive  reach  and 
responsibilities  of  a  systemic  risk  regulator.  How  such  an  authority,  if  created,  should  be 
structured  and  located within  the  federal  government  is  also  a  complex  issue.  Some  have 
suggested  the  Federal  Reserve  for  this  role,  while  others  have  expressed  concern  that 
adding this responsibility would overburden the central bank. The extent to which this new 
responsibility might be a good match for the Federal Reserve, acting either alone or as part 
of a collective body, depends a great deal on precisely how the Congress defines the role 
and  responsibilities  of  the  authority,  and  how  well  they  complement  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve's long-established core missions. 
Nevertheless,  as  Chairman  Bernanke  has  noted,  effectively  identifying  and  addressing 
systemic  risks  would  seem  to  require  some  involvement  of  the  Federal  Reserve.  As  the 
central  bank  of  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  a  critical  part  to  play  in  the 
government's responses to financial crises. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was established by 
the  Congress  in  1913  largely  as  a  means  of  addressing the  problem  of  recurring  financial 
panics.  The  Federal  Reserve  plays  such  a  key  role  in  part  because  it  serves  as  liquidity 
provider of last resort, a power that has proved critical in financial crises throughout modern 
history. In addition, the Federal Reserve has broad expertise derived from its other activities, 
including  its  role  as  umbrella  supervisor  for  bank  and  financial  holding  companies  and  its 
active monitoring of capital markets in support of its monetary policy and financial stability 
objectives.  
It seems equally clear that each financial regulator must be involved in a successful overall 
strategy  for  containing  systemic  risk.  In  the  first  place,  of  course,  appropriate  attention  to 
systemic issues in the normal regulation of financial firms, markets, and practices may itself 
support  this  strategy.  Second,  the  information  and  insight gained  by  financial  regulators  in 
their  own  realms  of  expertise  will  be  important  contributions  to  the  demanding  job  of 
analyzing  inchoate  risks  to  financial  stability.  Still,  while  a  collective  process  will  surely  be 
valuable in assessing systemic risk, it will be important to assign clearly any responsibilities 
and  authorities  for  actual  systemic  risk  regulation,  since  shared  authority  without  clearly 
delineated responsibility for action is sometimes a prescription for inaction. 
Conclusion 
I have tried today to identify the elements of an agenda for limiting the potential for financial 
crises,  including  actions  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  taking  to  address  systemic  risks  and 
several measures that Congress should consider to make our financial system stronger and 
safer.  In  doing  so,  we  must  avoid  responding  only  to  the  current  crisis,  but  must  instead 
fashion  a  system  that  will  be  up  to  the  challenge  of  regulating  a  dynamic  and  innovative 
financial system. We at the Federal Reserve look forward to working with the Congress on 
legislation that meets these objectives.  
8 
 BIS Review 33/2009
