Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Brussels, 30 March 2009. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
économique  et  monétaire,  je  me  réjouis  d’être  entendu  pour  la  troisième  fois  par  le 
Parlement  européen  depuis  le  début  de  cette  année,  et  pour  la  deuxième  fois  par  votre 
commission. Je n’oublie pas non plus la rencontre conjointe du Parlement européen et des 
parlements nationaux en février. La rencontre d’aujourd’hui est la dernière prévue au cours 
de  cette  mandature.  Elle  revêt  donc  une  importance  particulière.  Permettez-moi  dès  à 
présent de vous remercier pour les échanges de vues stimulants et riches que nous avons 
eus  au  cours  des  cinq  dernières  années.  Il  ne  s’agit  pas  moins  de  ma  vingt-et-unième 
audition devant votre commission, ce qui atteste de l’intensité des relations entre la BCE et 
les représentants élus des citoyens européens. 
Heute möchte ich mich auf vier Themen konzentrieren: die aktuelle wirtschaftliche Lage, die 
Struktur der Finanzierung privater Immobilien im Eurogebiet, die Auswirkungen der Krise auf 
eine  zukünftige  Einführung  des  Euro  in  den  Mitgliedstaaten  in  Mittel-  und  Osteuropa  und 
schließlich  die  Vorschläge  zur  Reform  der  Bankenaufsicht  in  Europa.  Ich  hoffe,  dass  ich 
damit  auf  einige  der  wichtigsten  Themen  eingehe,  bevor  ich  mich  wie  üblich  Ihren  Fragen 
stelle. 
Economic and monetary developments  
Let me begin with the economic situation and our recent monetary policy decisions. Please 
note that, with only three days before our next monetary policy meeting this Thursday, I am 
in  the  so-called  "purdah"  period  and  will  therefore  duly  remain  with  what  I  said  at  my  last 
press conference. Since my appearance before the European Parliament on 21 January the 
economic  situation  and  outlook  have  weakened  further.  Inflationary  pressures  have 
diminished further, as confirmed by monetary and credit trends. In February the inflation rate 
remained  low,  at  1.2%.  As  you  know,  the  decline  in  inflation  since  last  summer  primarily 
reflects the sharp falls in global commodity prices over this period. Looking ahead, we expect 
inflation  rates  well  below  2%  for  this  year  and  2010.  The  risks  to  this  outlook  are  broadly 
balanced, but surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty. 
Following  the  substantial  weakening  of  the  world  economy  in  the  wake  of  the  financial 
turmoil, real GDP growth in the euro area contracted markedly, by 1.5% on a quarterly basis, 
in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008.  The  latest  information  suggests  that  economic  activity  has 
deteriorated further in the first quarter of 2009. Looking ahead, we expect demand to remain 
very weak throughout 2009, both at the global level and in the euro area, before gradually 
recovering in the course of 2010. As is the case for inflation, this outlook remains surrounded 
by  uncertainty.  Risks  to  this  outlook  seem  to  be  more  balanced.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
positive  impact  of  governments’  recent  rescue  packages  for  the  banking  sector  and  the 
macroeconomic  stimulus  that  is  now  under  way  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated.  On  the 
other hand, the impact that the ongoing financial turmoil has on the real economy could be 
stronger than expected. In addition, protectionist tendencies are giving rise to considerable 
concern. 
It  was  against  this  background  that  the  Governing  Council  reduced  the  key  ECB  interest 
rates by another 50 basis points in early March. This took the overall reduction in our key 
rates to 275 basis points since October of last year. Overall, we expect price stability to be 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 1
maintained over the medium term. We will continue to deliver on our mandate and ensure 
the  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  over  longer-term  horizons.  Such  anchoring 
supports sustainable growth and employment and also contributes to financial stability.  
Let me also recall that the ECB has adjusted its liquidity management framework in order to 
counter  the  dysfunctional  nature  of  the  euro  area  money  market.  The  most  important 
measures decided upon in October 2008 were the use of fixed rate tender procedures with 
full  allotment  for  both  main  and  longer-term  refinancing  operations  and  the  extension  until 
end-2009 of the list of assets eligible for use as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations. 
We have thereby provided the banking system with unlimited liquidity support, at fixed rates, 
with maturities of up to six months. We have just decided to maintain this procedure for as 
long  as  needed,  and  in  any  case  beyond  the  end  of  2009.  As  a  result  of  all  of  these 
measures,  most  of  which  are  highly  non-standard,  banks  have  continued  to  have  broad 
access to euro liquidity. 
Structural Issues Report on housing finance in the euro area  
Let me now turn to the second topic, namely housing finance, which is covered in this year’s 
ECB Structural Issues Report. As in previous years, I will present to you the general thrust of 
our report, which will be published later today.  
The  report  analyses  trends  and  differences  in  the  characteristics  of  housing  loans,  in  the 
funding of bank loans, and in the spread between mortgage interest rates and the funding 
costs of banks.  
It  also  compares  housing  finance  in  the  euro  area,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States. Generally, euro area banks are significantly stricter in terms of non-interest conditions 
on loans, partly explaining the significantly smaller sub-prime  market  here. On the funding 
side, relatively stable bank deposits continue to be the main source of funding for bank loans 
in  the  euro  area,  with  much  less  emphasis  on  the  “originate-to-distribute”  function.  These 
observations support the conclusion that housing finance in the euro area should be more 
resilient to shocks.  
Housing finance has an impact on the transmission of monetary policy to the economy. Two 
observations deserve particular attention. On the one hand, a higher degree of competition 
among mortgage suppliers leads to a strengthening of that transmission. On the other hand, 
the introduction of greater flexibility in mortgage contracts via the temporary suspension of 
payment  or  maturity  extensions  would  result  in  interest  rate  changes  having  a  smaller 
immediate impact on the economy.  
Finally, it is clear that we have to assume a greater amount of retention on the part of banks, 
both as regards the amount and the characteristics of loans granted to households and as 
regards their sources of funding. 
Implications of the current crisis for euro area enlargement  
Let me now turn to the third topic, which relates to the implications of the current crisis for 
euro  area  enlargement.  The  global  economic  situation  has  deteriorated  significantly  since 
September  2008  as  a  result  of  the  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis.  Some  central  and 
eastern  European  countries  have  also  been  hit  hard, 
thus  highlighting  previous 
vulnerabilities. These weaknesses relate in particular to domestic and external imbalances, 
unsound  fiscal  policies,  and  domestic  and  external  debt  positions.  However,  it  is  very 
important to differentiate between the various countries in the region. A number of countries 
have shown a significant degree of resilience in these exceptionally difficult circumstances. 
And,  not  surprisingly,  the  countries  that  are  most  affected  by  the  crisis  are  unfortunately 
those that had built up large imbalances and vulnerabilities in the past.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2009
Overall,  the  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  avoiding  macroeconomic 
imbalances  and  following  a  sustainable  growth  path  supported  by  a  sufficient  degree  of 
structural reform. This is particularly true for “catching-up” economies, which have to balance 
the  desire  for  swift  convergence  with  the  need  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the 
convergence process. 
The adoption of the euro can not be a substitute for the need of domestic policy adjustment. 
This  would  go  against  the  economic  logic  which  underlies  the  convergence  process  in 
Europe. And it is important to bear in mind that the premature adoption of the euro can make 
it  more  difficult  for  a  country  to  cope  with  the  challenges  ahead.  Without  sustainable 
convergence, the monetary policy stance of the ECB would be inappropriate for the country 
concerned. In this case, the country in question could face the risk of excessive output and 
inflation volatility, as it would lack important tools to stabilise economic conditions at home. 
Thus,  euro  adoption  cannot  take  place  until  major  imbalances  in  the  country  have  been 
eliminated  and  provided  appropriate  sustainable  convergence  has  been  achieved  as 
required by the Treaty.  
What role for the ECB in the area of financial market supervision? 
I will now turn to the final topic, the review of the framework for financial supervision in the 
European  Union.  Already  last  autumn  the  European  Parliament  asked  the  ECB  and  the 
ESCB to play an active role in macro-prudential supervision and financial stability. Such a 
role  is  envisaged  in  the  report  by  the  high-level  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière.  I 
welcome  its  proposals  on  macro-prudential  supervision,  which  relate  in  particular  to  a 
European Systemic Risk Council under the auspices of the ECB. Let me provide you with a 
few observations on this matter.  
First,  the  output  of  the  Systemic  Risk  Council  will  make  a  major  contribution  to  financial 
stability in the EU. In accordance with the de Larosière report, it will identify and assess risks 
and vulnerabilities in the EU financial system, issue risk warnings and adopt related policy 
recommendations.  This  will  substantially  improve  the  present  arrangements  for  risk 
assessment at EU level.  
Second, the proposed composition of the Systemic Risk Council reflects a recognition of the 
role played by central banks in macro-prudential supervision.  
Third, the fact that the Systemic Risk Council would be set up under the auspices of the ECB 
and  the  ESCB  would  allow  it  to  benefit  from  the  analytical  capabilities  and  technical 
infrastructures developed by central banks in its analysis of monetary and financial stability. 
In this context, the Systemic Risk Council will have to rely on a wide range of macro- and 
micro-prudential data. This implies that the ECB and the ESCB should have access to the 
relevant micro-prudential information from supervisors. 
Fourth, for the proposed macro-prudential framework to function as intended, it is crucial that 
risk warnings be translated into policy action as effectively as possible. In this context, the 
Systemic Risk Council should report its risk warnings and relevant recommendations to the 
ECOFIN Council. 
Finally,  we  should  provide  an  appropriate  institutional  basis  for  the  establishment  of  the 
Systemic Risk Council and the related new macro-prudential tasks of the ECB and ESCB, in 
order to ensure the necessary authority, accountability and legal capabilities. The activation 
of Article 105(6) of the Treaty could be a very useful avenue in this context.  
I could not conclude today’s introductory remarks without very warmly thanking you, Madame 
la Présidente, and all the honourable members of the Committee for our regular exchanges 
of views over the past five years. These 21 hearings have been important opportunities to 
 BIS Review 40/2009 
 3
receive feedback from the members of Parliament. Thank you for your kind cooperation and 
thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2009
