Lars E O Svensson: Evaluating monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lars E O Svensson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, 13 March 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Sveriges 
Riksbank’s website. 
 2. 
Ten years ago – on 1 January 1999 – a number of legislative changes came into force that 
made the Riksbank more independent. As a result, the monetary policy decisions since then 
have been made by an Executive Board consisting of six members who are not permitted to 
seek or take instructions in the course of their work. These legislative changes can be seen 
as part of an international trend that has now been underway for a couple of decades – a 
trend towards an institutional framework for monetary policy with the aim of making monetary 
policy  more  effective  and  more  able  to  promote  monetary  stability  and  stability  in  the  real 
economy.  
This institutional framework for monetary policy rests on three pillars: 
1. 
A government or parliamentary mandate for monetary policy, which is normally to 
maintain price stability. 
Independence  for  the  central  bank  to  conduct  monetary  policy  and  fulfil  the 
mandate. 
Mechanisms for accountability and supervision. 
3. 
The central bank's independence gives its governors a lot of power. In a democratic society, 
it is natural that the activities of the central bank are monitored and evaluated and that its 
independent management can be called to account. Transparency and regular evaluations 
are necessary to maintain the legitimacy of the central bank's operations. They also give the 
central bank stronger incentives to fulfil its mandate and motivate the central bank to develop 
the monetary policy analysis in the best possible way.  
It  also  appears  that  detailed  evaluations  of  monetary  policy  are  becoming  increasingly 
common.  In  Sweden,  the  parliamentary  Committee  on  Finance  conducts  an  annual 
evaluation of the monetary policy conducted over the last three years. An external and more 
comprehensive evaluation of the monetary policy conducted in Sweden between 1995 and 
2005  was  carried  out  on  behalf  of  the  Committee  on  Finance  by  professors  Francesco 
Giavazzi  and  Frederic  Mishkin.  The  Committee  on  Finance  has  decided  that  Swedish 
monetary policy should be evaluated by external experts every fourth year. Norges Bank (the 
central bank of Norway) includes an evaluation of its monetary policy in its Annual Report. 
On behalf of the Norwegian Ministry of Finance, an annual evaluation is also carried out by 
Norges Bank Watch, which consists of a group of independent experts. I myself have taken 
part in two evaluations – an evaluation of ten years of monetary policy in New Zealand on 
behalf of the country's Minister of Finance in 2001 and an evaluation of monetary policy in 
Norway as Chairman of Norges Bank Watch in 2002.1  
Evaluations  of  monetary  policy  are  thus  important  and  appear  to  be  becoming  common 
practice. One must therefore ensure that reasonable principles and appropriate methods for 
evaluations are developed and applied. This is what I intend to talk about today. What should 
we  consider  when  we  evaluate  monetary  policy?  What  are  the  principles  for  a  good 
                                                 
1   The evaluation of monetary policy in New Zealand and Norges Bank Watch 2002 are available on my website: 
www.larseosvensson.net. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 1
evaluation  of  monetary  policy  and  what  is  practically  possible?  How  can  principles  and 
practice be developed compared with how evaluations are carried out today? Here I present 
a number of preliminary proposals for such development.  
Why not just examine whether inflation deviates from the target? 
An increasing number of central banks focus their monetary policy on achieving an inflation 
target.  My  discussion  today  will  therefore  be  about  evaluations  of  monetary  policy  with  an 
inflation target.  
Given  this,  you  may  ask  why  an  evaluation  of  monetary  policy  should  be  so  complicated. 
When there is an inflation target, is it not simply enough to compare the actual outcome for 
inflation with the inflation target; that is to evaluate monetary policy after the fact? There are 
at least two circumstances that make such an evaluation inadequate. 
Unforeseen shocks affect outcomes 
First,  monetary  policy  does  not  provide  complete  control  over  inflation.  A  central  bank  is 
therefore  unable  to  ensure  that  inflation  will  be  exactly  on  target  at  every  point  in  time.  In 
actual  fact,  monetary  policy  is  conducted  under  conditions  of  great  uncertainty.  Our 
knowledge of the economic situation is not complete, and neither is our knowledge of how 
monetary  policy  affects  inflation  and  the  real  economy,  the  so-called  transmission 
mechanism.  There  is  a  considerable  time  lag  before  monetary  policy  measures  have  an 
impact  on  inflation,  and  the  duration  of  this  time  lag  also  varies  depending  on  the 
circumstances. This impact is normally gradual and becomes apparent over the course of a 
couple of years.  
As monetary policy works with a time lag, it is most effective if it is based on forecasts. In 
order to achieve an inflation rate of two per cent, it is therefore best to set the policy rate so 
that  the  inflation  forecast  a  couple  of  years  ahead  corresponds  to  the  inflation  target. 
However,  during  the  time  it  takes  for  changes  in  the  interest  rate  to have  a  full  impact  on 
inflation the economy will be affected by new and unexpected shocks. The inflation outcome 
a  couple  of  years  ahead  will  therefore  have  been  affected  by  events  that  could  not  be 
predicted when the monetary policy decisions were made.  
A direct comparison of outcomes and targets for inflation may therefore lead to the wrong 
conclusions. The inflation outcome may be in line with the target even if the monetary policy 
decisions  were  incorrect  because  the  central  bank  was  lucky  and  unexpected  shocks 
nevertheless resulted in the right inflation outcome. Alternatively, the inflation outcome may 
deviate  from  the  target  even  if  the  monetary  policy  decisions  were  correct  because  the 
central  bank  was  unlucky  and  unexpected  disruptions  resulted  in  the  wrong  inflation 
outcome. 
Inflation targeting is flexible 
A  second  circumstance  that  means  that  a  simple  comparison  of  outcomes  and  targets  for 
inflation is inadequate is that the Riksbank and all the other central banks that have inflation 
targets conduct flexible inflation targeting rather than strict inflation targeting. Under a flexible 
inflation  targeting  regime,  the  central  bank  strives  not  only  to  stabilise  inflation  around  the 
inflation target but also to stabilise the real economy. Under a strict inflation targeting regime, 
the  central  bank  strives  only  to  stabilise  inflation  without  concerning  itself  about  the 
consequences for the real economy.  
In  many  situations,  a  conflict  of  objectives  may  arise  between  stabilising  inflation  and 
stabilising  the  real  economy.  Let  us  assume  that  a  shock,  such  as  a  sharp  rise  in  the  oil 
price, has driven up inflation at the same time as production has slackened significantly. If, in 
such  a  case,  the  aim  of  monetary  policy  is  to  quickly  bring  inflation  back  to  the  target,  a 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2009
significant interest rate increase may be required which will dampen production even further. 
By quickly stabilising inflation – which would be the case with strict inflation targeting – the 
central bank would destabilise the real economy. By not aiming to bring inflation back to the 
target as quickly as possible, the central bank would help to stabilise the real economy. How 
long it should take to return inflation to the target depends, among other things, on the type, 
magnitude and duration of the shock that has occurred and the importance that the central 
bank attaches to real economic stability.  
A difference between the outcome and the target for inflation may thus be deliberate. It may 
be  part  of  an  appropriate  compromise  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  the  real 
economy. It is, therefore, simply not good enough to just compare outcomes and targets for 
inflation in an evaluation of monetary policy.  
What does flexible inflation targeting entail?  
Before I begin to discuss what evaluations of monetary policy should focus on, let me go into 
a little more detail about what characterises flexible inflation targeting. 
As I have already said, flexible inflation targeting entails the central bank striving to stabilise 
inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  at  the  same  time  to  stabilise  the  real  economy. 
Stabilising  the  real  economy  may  be  more  precisely  described  as  stabilising  resource 
utilisation at a normal level.  
There is an asymmetry between the impact of monetary policy on inflation and its impact on 
the real economy that it is very important to understand. Monetary policy can affect both the 
average  level  and  the  variability  of  inflation.  Monetary  policy  can  not,  on  the  other  hand, 
affect  the  average  level  of  real  quantities  such  as  production,  employment  and  resource 
utilisation.  Historically,  attempts  to  use  monetary  policy  to  affect  the  average  level  of  real 
variables  such  as  employment  and  unemployment  have  led  to  serious  mistakes  and  high 
inflation. In the case of the real economy, monetary policy can only affect, and to a certain 
extent  dampen,  fluctuations  in  real  variables  around  their  average  levels.  For  monetary 
policy,  it  is  thus  meaningful  to  select  a  certain  target  for  average  inflation,  but  it  is  not 
meaningful and in fact counterproductive to select a certain target for average production or 
employment, other than the normal level that is determined by the workings of the economy 
and factors other than monetary policy.  
With a flexible inflation targeting regime, the central bank then has to set a policy rate and 
choose a policy rate path that make the forecast for inflation and resource utilisation together 
"look good". By a forecast that looks good I mean a forecast in which inflation is on target 
and resource utilisation is normal, or in which inflation is approaching the target and resource 
utilisation  is  approaching  a  normal  level  at  an  appropriate  pace.  To  be  more  precise,  it 
means a forecast for inflation and resource utilisation that as effectively as possible stabilises 
inflation around the inflation target and resource utilisation around its normal level and, in the 
event of conflicting objectives, achieves a reasonable compromise between inflation stability 
and  resource  utilisation.  Different  central  banks  express  this  in  slightly  different  ways.  The 
Riksbank has often used the term "a well-balanced monetary policy".  
We can formalise and specify this reasoning somewhat by saying that it is a case of selecting 
a policy rate path that minimises a forecast loss function, written as the following common 
quadratic form: 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 3
 2
Evaluation ex ante – given the information available at the time of the decision 
So, given that a central bank conducts flexible inflation targeting, how should we evaluate the 
monetary policy the bank conducts? When evaluating monetary policy, as when evaluating 
decisions in general, we may adopt one of two different starting points. The first option is to 
base  our  evaluation  on  the  information  that  is  currently  at  hand;  that  is  also  including  the 
information that has become available since the decision was made. This is, in other words, 
an evaluation after the fact. We can call this an ex post evaluation. The second option is to 
put ourselves in the position of the decision makers at the time the decision was made and to 
try to evaluate the decision given the information that was then available. We can call this an 
ex ante evaluation. 
When evaluating monetary policy, the most interesting question is not whether the decision 
could have been better after the fact. As I said earlier, monetary policy is conducted under 
conditions of great uncertainty – there is a time lag before monetary policy has an impact on 
inflation and the real economy and  the economy is constantly subject to new shocks. It is 
almost self-evident that monetary policy could have been better if the decision-makers had 
been  aware  that  these  shocks  would  happen  when  they  made  their  decision.  It  is  often 
equally self-evident that it was not possible to foresee the shocks at the time the decision 
was made. The relevant question is therefore primarily whether monetary policy could have 
been  better  given  the  information  on  the  state  of  the  economy  and  other  factors  that  the 
central bank had access to when the decisions were made.  
How then should an ex ante evaluation of monetary policy be carried out? I believe that we 
must  take  flexible  inflation  targeting  seriously.  For  a  central  bank  that  conducts  flexible 
inflation targeting it is important, as I mentioned earlier, to choose a policy rate path so that 
the  forecasts  for  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  "look  good"  in  terms  of  stabilising  both 
inflation and the real economy and, in the event of conflicting objectives, entail a reasonable 
                                                 
2   The loss function should be minimised under commitment in a timeless perspective in order to be consistent 
over  time.  The  former  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank,  Jarle  Bergo,  has  discussed  this  in  a  pedagogical 
manner  in  the  speech  ”Interest  rate  projections  in  theory  and  practice”,  26  January  2007,  www.norges-
bank.no. For a more technical approach see, for example, Malin Adolfson, Stefan Laséen, Jesper Lindé and 
Lars  E.O.  Svensson  (2008),  "Optimal  Monetary  Policy  in  an  Operational  Medium-Sized  DSGE  Model", 
www.larseosvensson.net. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2009
balance between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real economy. An ex ante evaluation 
should then aim to assess whether the central bank has succeeded in doing this. 
Before  making  such  an  assessment  of  the  central  bank's  forecasts  it  is  natural  to  first 
examine the general quality of the forecasts. Any assessment of the quality of the forecasts 
obviously  entails  an  ex  post  analysis  with  the  help  of  historical  forecast  errors.  If  the 
assessment is that the forecasts are of a reasonable quality it then becomes a question of 
assessing  the  monetary  policy  deliberations  held  on  the  basis  of  the  forecasts  the  central 
bank makes. This primarily entails an ex ante analysis.  
Were the forecasts good enough? 
The first question we should ask is thus whether the central bank's forecasts are normally 
good enough. It would of course be going too far to demand that the central bank's forecasts 
should be perfect. As I have said, the economy is constantly subject to unexpected shocks, 
which means that the forecasts are always likely to be incorrect to some extent. Analysing 
the accuracy of a forecast in an individual year thus provides limited information. A significant 
forecasting error may indicate that the forecast was poor, but it may also be due to the fact 
that a shock occurred that could not have been predicted.3   
Do the forecasts systematically over- or underestimate the actual outcomes? 
A reasonable demand is that the forecasts for inflation, resource utilisation and so on do not 
systematically  over-  or  underestimate  the  actual  outcomes.  In  other  words,  the  forecasts 
should not have any bias. If, for example, the forecasts for inflation over a long period of time 
on average over- or underestimate the actual inflation outcome then this is a sign that there 
is  information  that  the  central  bank  is  missing  and  that  could  be  used  to  improve  the 
forecasts.  It  is,  however  difficult  to  determine  whether  the  forecasts  are  unbiased  on  the 
basis of a small number of outcomes, especially if we take into account the uncertainty in the 
functioning of the economy.  
How do the central bank's forecasts compare with other forecasts? 
Another reasonable demand is that the central bank's forecasts are on average not poorer 
than those of other forecasters. If the central bank's forecasts are systemically poorer than 
those  of  other  forecasters,  then  this  is  obviously  an  indication  that  it  would  have  been 
possible to make better assessments than those made by the central bank. This also means 
that better information was available which the central bank would have been able to use as 
a basis for its decision-making.  
It  is  important  to  remember,  however,  that  the  preconditions  governing  forecasting  at  a 
central bank differ somewhat compared to those for many other forecasters. For the central 
bank it is not enough that the forecasts are accurate. This is one very important quality, but 
there are others. It must be possible, for example, to understand the driving forces behind 
the forecasts – why does the forecast look the way it does? How is the forecast affected by 
changes in assumptions regarding, for instance, demand abroad or the oil price? The central 
bank also needs a forecasting apparatus that can effectively investigate the consequences of 
an alternative monetary policy. For the Riksbank, which publishes it own interest rate path, 
this is extremely important. To put it more technically, the central bank must use so-called 
structural  models  to  assess  the  consequences  of  various  policy  rate  paths,  while  other 
forecasts can mainly be produced with the help of statistical models alone. Normally, there 
                                                 
3   Uncertainty and the revisions of GDP figures and other data make forecasting more difficult and also make it 
more difficult to evaluate the forecasts. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 5
are good reasons for believing that structural models provide poorer forecasts than statistical 
models. However, the Riksbank's main structural model, Ramses, has very good forecasting 
properties.4
When  making  historical  comparisons  between  the  forecasts  of  central  banks  and  those  of 
other analysts, we also face a number of other difficulties. The first is that it is not certain that 
the central bank's forecasts are based on what the bank really believes is the best forecast of 
the  policy  rate  and  other  variables.  For  a  long  time,  the  Riksbank,  for  example,  based  its 
forecasts  on  the  assumption  that  the  policy  rate,  that  is  the  repo  rate,  would  remain 
unchanged  during  the  forecast  period.  Some  central  banks  base  their  forecasts  on  both  a 
constant interest rate and a constant exchange rate, which are often completely unrealistic 
assumptions. In such cases, the forecasts for inflation and the real economy are of course 
not the best forecasts. For a while, the Riksbank instead used the assumption that the repo 
rate  would  follow  the  market's  expectations  regarding  the  development  of  the  repo  rate. 
Although this is a more realistic assumption, it is not necessarily the same as the Riksbank's 
best  forecast.  These  difficulties  no  longer  apply  to  the  Riksbank's  forecasts  as,  since 
February 2007, the forecasts are based on the Riksbank's best forecast for the repo rate.  
In order to arrive at a fair comparison of the forecasts of various analysts, we should also 
take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  forecasts  are  made  at  different  times  and  are therefore 
based on different quantities of information. A forecaster that, for example, always publishes 
its  forecasts  later  than  other  analysts  has  generally  speaking  more  information  on  the 
economic  situation  when  the  forecasts  are  made.  A  comparison  of  the  accuracy  of  the 
forecasts should therefore make adjustments for the forecasts being made at different times. 
Such a forecast comparison is included in the material for the evaluation of monetary policy 
in the period 2006-2008 that the Riksbank published a month ago.5  
Figures 1 and 2 show a comparison of the accuracy of the forecasts in the period 1999-2008 
for CPI inflation and GDP growth for a number of analysts. The red bars show the absolute 
mean error adjusted for differences in publication dates. The blue bars show the mean error 
with positive or negative sign. The shorter the blue bars, the smaller the systematic over- or 
underestimation has been – and the less bias the forecasts have had. If the bar is above the 
zero line the mean error has been positive and the forecasts have on average been too low, 
and vice versa. In the case of both inflation and GDP growth, the Riksbank's accuracy has 
been relatively good and its bias relatively small compared to other forecasters.  
Was monetary policy well-balanced ex ante? 
Given that it has been determined that the central bank's forecasts are normally satisfactory, 
the next step is to analyse, ex ante, the monetary policy deliberations the central bank has 
conducted on the basis of the forecasts.  
The  first  question  to  answer  is  whether  the  monetary  policy  conducted  has  been  efficient. 
Given  the  information  available  at  the  time  the  decision  was  made,  would  it  have  been 
possible,  by  selecting  a  different  interest  rate  path,  to  have  stabilised  inflation  or  the  real 
economy better without stabilising the other less well? Would it even have been possible to 
achieve a better stabilisation of both?  
The idea behind an efficient monetary policy can be illustrated using a modified Taylor curve, 
named after the economist John Taylor.6 As I have said, under a flexible inflation targeting 
                                                 
4   Adolfson,  Malin,  Stefan  Laséen,  Jesper  Lindé  and  Mattias  Villani  (2008),  "Evaluating  an  Estimated  New 
Keynesian Small Open Economy Model", Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, p. 2690-2721. 
5   Material for assessing monetary policy 2006-2008, Sveriges Riksbank, www.riksbank.com. 
6   The original Taylor curve relates to variances of outcomes ex post. Se Taylor, John B. (1979), "Estimation and 
Control  of  a  Macroeconomic  Model  with  Rational  Expectations."  Econometrica  47,  p.  1267-86.  A  modified 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2009
regime the central bank aims to stabilise inflation and resource utilisation; that is to minimise 
the deviations from the inflation target and the normal level for resource utilisation. In Figure 
3, the sum of squares for the inflation-gap forecast is measured along the horizontal axis and 
the sum of squares for the output-gap forecasts along the vertical axis. The curve through 
points  A,  B  and  C  is  the  modified  Taylor  curve,  that  is,  all  the  efficient  combinations  of 
forecasts for inflation and resource utilisation respectively that it is possible to achieve in a 
certain decision-making situation with the help of different interest rate paths. Points to the 
left and below the curve cannot be reached due to the initial state of the economy and the 
transmission mechanism between inflation, resource utilisation and the repo rate. Points to 
the  right  and  above  the  curve  are  inefficient  in  the  sense  that  it  is  possible  for  monetary 
policy to achieve a smaller sum of squares for the inflation-gap forecast for a given sum of 
squares for the output-gap forecasts, or vice versa. 
In the Monetary Policy Reports, the Riksbank usually presents alternative scenarios with a 
different  repo  rate  path  in  addition  to  the  main  scenario.  These  generate  other  paths  for 
inflation  and  the  output  gap.  Figures  4  and  5  show  examples  from  February  2008  and 
February 2009. The sums of squares that can be calculated from these paths are shown in 
Figure  6.  Two  observations  can  be  made  here.  The  first  observation  is  that  the  sums  of 
squares  in  the  main  scenario  are  smaller  than  in  the  alternative  scenarios  –  the  main 
scenario is closer to origin in Figure 6. The main scenario is thus more successful in terms of 
stabilising  both  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  The  alternative  scenarios  are  clearly 
inefficient compared with the main scenario. This does not necessarily mean, however, that 
monetary policy is efficient in the sense that the main scenario lies on the modified Taylor 
curve. There may be a repo rate path that would stabilise inflation and resource utilisation 
even  better.  Excluding  this  possibility  requires  a  comparison  with  many  more  alternative 
scenarios.  
The  second  observation  is  that  the  position  of  the  modified  Taylor  curve  may  vary 
considerably depending on the initial state of the economy. The situation in February 2008 
was much more favourable than in February 2009. The point in Figure 6 that corresponds to 
February 2008 is not far from origin, while the point that corresponds to February 2009 is a 
long  way  from  origin  and  represents  substantial  sum  of  squares  for  the  inflation-gap  and 
output-gap forecasts.  
Assessing whether monetary policy has been efficient thus entails attempting to determine 
whether  monetary  policy  has  been  on  the  modified  Taylor  curve  or  not.  The  analysis  is 
therefore  ex  ante,  which  means  that  the  starting  point  is  the  central  bank's  forecasts  for 
inflation and resource utilisation rather than the actual outcomes. In practice it is of course 
difficult to perform a more precise analysis, it becomes rather a question of determining to 
what extent monetary policy has been clearly inefficient in the sense that it is easy to find 
another  repo  rate  path  that  would  stabilise  inflation  more  without  stabilising  resource 
utilisation less, or that would even stabilise both more. A factor that can make the analysis 
even more complicated is if the central bank, apart from inflation and a measure of resource 
utilisation, also includes other targets or limitations in its monetary policy deliberations. On 
such conceivable factor is so-called interest-rate smoothing, in other words that the central 
bank also chooses to even out the changes in the policy rate and ensure that they are made 
in relatively small and regular steps, for example by 0.25 percentage points at a time. With 
such  a  restriction,  monetary  policy  will  be  located  at  a  point  above  and  to  the  right  of  the 
modified  Taylor  curve.  Alternatively,  it  can  be  said  that  an  additional  axis  and  thus  an 
additional  dimension  are  required  that  correspond  to  the  sum  of  squared  changes  in  the 
interest rate, so that the modified Taylor curve becomes a three-dimensional, bowl-shaped 
Taylor surface.  
                                                                                                                                                      
Taylor curve for analysis ex ante applies instead to the sum of squares of the inflation-gap and output-gap 
forecasts ex ante. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 7
A major difficulty in this analysis is that it may be unclear what is meant by stabilising the real 
economy.  From  a  monetary  policy  perspective  it  is  the  stabilisation  of  resource  utilisation 
rather than GDP growth that is relevant. This means stabilising resource utilisation around a 
normal level. The problem is that resource utilisation can be measured in several ways. A 
reasonable and commonly used measure of resource utilisation is the so-called output gap; 
that is the difference between actual production and potential production. However, potential 
production is not a magnitude that can be observed directly – it must be estimated. There is 
considerable uncertainty, both theoretically and empirically, about the best way to estimate 
and forecast potential production. The output gap shown in the figures is the so-called HP 
gap, which has significant weaknesses.7 It is important and desirable from several points of 
view  that  the  Riksbank  and  other  central  banks  develop  better  and  clearer  measures  of 
resource utilisation and potential production and that they publish their measurements and 
forecasts. Such work is underway at the Riksbank.  
Assuming, however, that we nevertheless conclude that monetary policy has not been clearly 
inefficient in the sense that I described earlier, the next step is to focus on what combination 
of the stabilisation of inflation and the real economy the central bank actually selected or, in 
other words, which of all the possible points on the Taylor curve the central bank selected. 
There are many different efficient monetary policy alternatives to choose between every time 
a monetary policy decision is made. But did the central bank make a good choice? In the 
event  of  a  conflict  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  the  real  economy,  did  the 
combination chosen by the central bank represent a reasonable balance between the two? 
Did the central bank attach reasonable importance to the stabilisation of the real economy in 
relation to the stabilisation of inflation? 
In the literature, as in the case of the forecast loss function I presented earlier, the constant 
that is the relative weight that the central bank gives to the stabilisation of the real economy 
in relation to the stabilisation of inflation is usually denoted by the Greek letter lambda, λ. In 
Figure  3,  we  can  show  the  forecast  loss  function  with  the  help  of  iso-loss  curves  for 
combinations  of  sums  of  squared  inflation-gap  and  output-gap  forecasts  that  generate 
equally large losses. Such iso-loss curves are in this case downward-sloping, straight lines 
with  a  slope  of  1/λ,  the  reciprocal  of  lambda.  Iso-loss  lines  closer  to  origin  correspond  to 
lower losses. The ideal, but normally unattainable, situation would be an iso-loss line at the 
origin, which represents a loss of zero and means that the forecast for inflation is exactly on 
target  and  that  the  forecast  for  resource  utilisation  is  exactly  equal  to  the  normal  level. 
However, the modified Taylor curve shows the minimum sums of squares that are possible 
on  each  decision-making  occasion.  The  best  monetary  policy  therefore  entails  selecting  a 
point on the Taylor curve so that the iso-loss line for the loss function is as close to origin as 
possible. This is the point at which the iso-loss line is a tangent to the Taylor curve. Figure 3 
shows an iso-loss line that is a tangent to the Taylor curve at point B. For the given lambda, 
which determines the slope of the iso-loss lines, this point thus represents a well-balanced 
monetary policy.  
As  I  have  emphasised,  the  position  of  the  Taylor  curve  depends  on  the  initial  state  of  the 
economy  at  the  time  the  decision  is  made.  In  a  situation  in  which  it  is  more  difficult  to 
stabilise resource utilisation, the Taylor curve  will be closer to the vertical axis than to the 
horizontal axis, for example like the dashed curve above point A. The point of tangency for 
an iso-loss line with the same slope, which represents a well-balanced monetary policy, will 
then be at D. In a situation in which it is more difficult to stabilise inflation, the Taylor curve 
will  instead  be  closer  to  the  horizontal  axis  than  to  the  vertical  axis,  for  example  like  the 
dashed curve to the right of point C. The point of tangency for an iso-loss line with the same 
slope will then be at E.  
                                                 
7   The term HP gap stems from the fact that potential production is estimated using a so-called Hodrick-Prescott 
filter. 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2009
A central bank that has a low numerical value for lambda, that is a lower weight placed on 
the stability of the real economy, has steeper iso-loss lines. For a central bank with such a 
lambda, the point of contact with a given Taylor curve for a given decision-making situation 
will be higher up to the left in the figure, for example at point A, where the Taylor curve is 
steeper. The inflation forecast will then be closer to the target, but the forecast for resource 
utilisation will deviate more from the normal level. A central bank with a high numerical value 
for  lambda,  that  is  a  high  weight  placed  on  the  stability  of  the  real  economy,  has  iso-loss 
lines that are flatter. In the case of such a lambda, the point of contact will be lower down to 
the left, for example at point C, where the Taylor curve is flatter. The inflation forecast will 
then be further from the target while the forecast for resource utilisation will be closer to a 
normal level.  
It  is  of  course  not  so  easy  to  determine  what  a  reasonably  large  lambda  should  be  for  a 
central bank. Neither the Riksbank nor other central banks have yet announced whether they 
apply a specific lambda and if so what this lambda is. In those cases where the decisions are 
made by a committee made up of several members, as at the Riksbank, it is also possible 
that  different  members  attach  different  degrees  of  importance  to  the  stability  of  the  real 
economy. A question that then arises is how these different views should be aggregated. Nor 
is  it  entirely  certain  that  monetary  policy  decision-makers  are  even  clearly  aware  of  the 
importance they attach to stability compared with the stability of inflation.  
If the central bank's forecasts are only based on a known model, like the Riksbank's main 
model  Ramses,  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  position  of  the  modified  Taylor  curve  and 
which point the Riksbank's main scenario in each Monetary Policy report corresponds to.8 In 
practice,  the  Riksbank's  forecasts  and  those  of  other  central  banks  are  based  on  several 
different models and a great deal of judgement. This means that it is not quite as easy to 
determine the position of the modified Taylor curve. It is still possible, however, to enter the 
position  of  various  forecast  alternatives  on  the  graph  and  at  least  assess  whether  the 
forecast is extreme in any respect with regard to the deviation of inflation from the target and 
the deviation of resource utilisation from the normal level. As yet, it is in practice mainly a 
question  of  whether  the  choice  of  interest  rate  path  was  extreme  in  either  direction  in  the 
sense that the central bank gave considerable or very little relative weight to the stability of 
the real economy. Another interesting aspect to investigate is whether the weight attached to 
the  stability  of  the  real  economy  actually  has  been  constant  over  time.  If  it  has  not  been 
constant then the central bank's loss function has not been consistent over time, or it is more 
complicated than the quadratic loss function that I have discussed here and that is regarded 
as normal and reasonable in the literature on monetary policy.  
Figures 4 and 6 can be studied more closely in the light of this discussion. In Figure 4 we can 
see that the main scenario for February 2008 leads to resource utilisation being stabilised 
rather well, but that the CPI forecast is a little high in relation to the target of 2 per cent. In 
Figure  6,  we  can  also  see  that  the  sum  of  squares  for  the  output-gap  forecast  is  much 
smaller than for the inflation-gap forecast. A higher repo rate path should have been able to 
push  down  both  the  inflation  forecast  and  the  forecast  for  resource  utilisation.  This  would 
have reduced the sum of squares for the inflation-gap forecast but not increased the sum of 
squares for the output-gap forecast by very much. This would move the point for February 
2008 in Figure 6 to the left and somewhat upwards. Unless the iso-loss line for the forecast 
loss  function  is  very  flat,  that  is  unless  the  weight  given  to  the  stabilisation  of  resource 
utilisation is very high, this should give rise to a lower loss and thus to a more well-balanced 
monetary  policy.  The  main  scenario  in  February  2008  would  thus  be  an  example  of  a 
monetary  policy  that  was  not  well  balanced.  However,  in  February  2008  the  Riksbank 
                                                 
8   This  can  be  done  using  the  methods  developed  in  Adolfson,  Malin,  Stefan  Laséen,  Jesper  Lindé  and  Lars 
E.O.  Svensson  (2008),  "Optimal  Monetary  Policy  in  an  Operational  Medium-Sized  DSGE  Model", 
www.larseosvensson.net. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 9
attached more importance to the CPIX forecast than to the CPI forecast. The CPIX forecast 
gives  rise  to  much  smaller  deviations  from  the  target  than  the  CPI  forecast;  see  Figure  7. 
With regard to the CPIX forecast, monetary policy in February 2008 was better balanced. 
Figures  8  and  9  show  the  Riksbank's  forecasts  for  inflation  and  the  output  gap  since  the 
beginning of 2007 and the sum of squares for the inflation-gap and output-gap forecasts.9 It 
is apparent that the initial situation for the forecasts can be very different. If, for example, we 
compare  the  forecast  in  February  2007  with  the  latest  forecast  from  February  2009,  it  is 
obvious that it was much easier to make the earlier forecast "look good". The forecast at that 
time indicated that the deviations for the inflation target and the output gap were small – the 
sums of squares were close to origin. This can be contrasted to the situation in early 2009 
when the fluctuations in both of the forecasts were considerable and the sums of squares 
were far up to the right in the figure.  
Finally, before I move on to discuss the evaluation of monetary policy after the event, I would 
like to say that ex ante evaluations have the major advantage that they can be carried out on 
an  ongoing  basis  in  real  time  and  that  you  do  not  need  to  wait  several  years  to  see  the 
outcomes  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  I  would  like  to  see  competent  ex  ante 
evaluations become a lasting feature of the ongoing public debate on monetary policy so that 
they  could  constantly  encourage  the  central  banks  to  improve  their  analyses  and  their 
policies.  
Evaluation ex post – after the event 
The most relevant starting point for an evaluation of monetary policy is, as I said earlier, the 
information and data that was available when the monetary policy decisions were made. That 
is an ex ante evaluation. However, an ex post analysis may also be relevant. The forecast 
evaluation that I discussed earlier was, for example, ex post. But an evaluation of monetary 
policy  after  the  event  can  also  provide  valuable  insights  regarding  the  monetary  policy 
conducted.  
The question we should then ask is: given what we know today, what form would a better 
monetary policy have taken? Would it have been possible with a different monetary policy to 
achieve a better stabilisation of resource utilisation without undermining the stabilisation of 
inflation, or vice versa? As this is an analysis in which we know what actually happened and 
what the results were, it is rather likely that we will discover that this would in fact have been 
possible. We would then have to get to the bottom of why such a monetary policy was not 
chosen.  Could  any  of  the  outcomes  have  been  predicted ex  ante?  Anyone  may  of  course 
have  luck  with  a  single  forecast.  But  was  there  another  analyst  who  in  a  convincing  way 
actually  predicted  the  shocks  to  the  economy  that  occurred  and  that  the  central  bank 
missed?  
A  large  part  of  this  analysis  will  thus  concern  evaluating  and  explaining  forecast  errors  – 
even individual errors – and deviations from the central bank's targets. It is actually fairer to 
focus on forecast errors as deviations from targets under a flexible inflation targeting regime 
may be deliberate on the part of the central bank.  
Evaluating  the  central  bank's  forecasts  is  thus  important;  that  is  investigating  whether  the 
forecasts systematically over- or underestimate outcomes and so on. It is also interesting to 
compare forecast errors for inflation, for the real economy – irrespective of the measure of 
resource  utilisation  used  –  and  for  the  interest  rate  if  the  central  bank  publishes  such  a 
                                                 
9   The output gap in the figures is the output gap in real time. As the output gap is revised backwards when new 
data  is  published,  the  gap  in  the  figures  does  not  correspond  to  the  gap  published  in,  for  instance,  the 
Monetary  Policy  Reports.  (10)  A  preliminary  analysis  is  carried  out  in  Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  (2009), 
"Transparency under Flexible Inflation Targeting: Experiences and Challenges", www.larseosvensson.net. 
10 
 BIS Review 29/2009
forecast. Which forecast errors are most relevant for explaining why monetary policy, with the 
benefit of hindsight, could have been better? What were these forecast errors due to? 
A disadvantage of an ex post evaluation is that we have to wait at least a couple of years for 
the  outcomes  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy  for  the  full  impact  of  the  monetary  policy 
measures to become apparent. As I emphasised earlier, an ex ante evaluation can on the 
other  hand  be  performed  in  real  time  as  a  part  of  the  ongoing  public  debate  on  monetary 
policy.  
Was monetary policy credible? 
The credibility of monetary policy is always an important factor. The credibility of an inflation 
targeting  regime  is  usually  measured  by  to  what  extent  inflation  expectations  for  different 
time horizons correspond to the inflation target. The greater the degree of correspondence, 
the higher the degree of credibility. This provides a direct indication of the level of confidence 
in the ability of the central bank to meet the inflation target.  
Figure 10 shows how inflation expectations among money market agents developed in 2008 
and early 2009. It is evident that expectations for both one and two years ahead have been 
revised significantly downwards recently, which is hardly surprising given the development of 
the economy. In the longer term, however, the expectations are well anchored around the 
target.  
How well inflation expectations are anchored around the target also has a direct impact on 
how well the central bank succeeds in meeting the target and on the possibilities the central 
bank has to also stabilise the real economy. This is because inflation expectations directly 
affect  price  and  wage  setting  in  the  economy.  Stable  inflation  expectations  eliminate  a 
potential source of shocks and make it easier for the central bank to stabilise both inflation 
and the real economy. More stable inflation expectations shift the Taylor curve in Figure 3 
closer to origin and make the balance between the stability of inflation and the stability of the 
real economy more favourable. 
As  the  central  bank's  inflation  forecasts  in  the  short  and  medium  terms  may  deliberately 
deviate from the target, it is also interesting to compare inflation expectations with the central 
bank's  inflation  forecasts.  If  the  economic  agents  share  the  central  bank’s  view  of  how 
inflation will approach the target, inflation expectations at different time horizons should be 
close  to  the  central  bank’s  forecasts.  The  degree  of  correspondence  between  inflation 
expectations  and  the  central  bank's  inflation  forecasts  then  becomes  a  measure  of  how 
credible  the  central  bank's  inflation  forecasts  and  analyses  are.  Such  a  correspondence 
between  expectations  and  forecasts  is  of  course  also  desirable  for  forecasts  for  the  real 
economy and, not least, for forecasts for the policy rate, which I will now discuss. 
Was the implementation of monetary policy effective? 
I have spoken earlier about what characterises efficient monetary policy decisions. This was 
in relation to the balance between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real economy given 
the  information  available  at  the  time  of  the  decision.  Another  important  aspect  is  to 
investigate how  effective  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  has  been,  in  the sense  of 
affecting  the  economy  in  the  desired  direction  and  to  the  right  amount.  An  effective 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  presupposes  that  there  is  a  high  level  of  private-sector 
confidence in the central bank with regard to both the inflation target and the monetary policy 
analysis. It also requires that the central bank is successful in communicating its analysis and 
intentions. In other words, a precondition for an effective monetary policy implementation is 
that the central bank is open and transparent.  
Most central banks use a short-term interest rate as the policy rate to implement monetary 
policy. However, the actual policy rate in the two months prior to the next monetary policy 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 11
decision plays a very minor role in the economy. Expectations regarding future policy rates, 
on the other hand, do play an important role. They affect interest rates with longer maturities 
which  in  turn  are  the  interest  rates  that  have  an  impact  on  the  economic  decisions  of 
households  and  companies.  The  Riksbank  and  a  few  other  central  banks  have  taken  this 
seriously  and  publish  their  own  policy  rate  paths  to  facilitate  the  formation  of  expectations 
regarding future policy rates and to influence these expectations more effectively.  
If the central bank is successful in its communication, the market participants should be able 
to  predict  rather  well  how  new  information  or  new  shocks  will  affect  the  central  bank's 
forecast for the policy rate. If the central bank's analysis is credible, the market's expectations 
regarding the future policy rate should also change in line with the revised interest rate path 
of  the  central  bank.  One  way  of  evaluating  how  effectively  the  central  bank  implements 
monetary  policy  is  therefore  to  simply  investigate  how  well  the  market  participants  have 
predicted the changes in the central bank's interest rate path. We can also analyse how well 
the  expectations  regarding  the  future  interest  rate  adapt  to the  central bank's  new interest 
rate path after the announcement.10 Figures 11 and 12 are examples of the type of figure 
that can be studied in this case. These relate to the first interest rate decision I was involved 
in making, in June 2007, and to the latest decision from February this year.  
Summary 
Let me now sum up by first returning to the question I raised at the start: when evaluating 
monetary policy with an inflation target, why is it not enough to simply compare outcomes 
and  targets  for  inflation?  One  reason  is  that  inflation  reacts  with  varying  time  lags  and  to 
different degrees to monetary policy measures. Inflation is also affected by shocks that are 
difficult  to  identify  or  that  occur  at  a  later  date.  The  central  bank  does  not  therefore  have 
complete control over inflation. Inflation can be on target even if the central bank has acted 
wrongly but been lucky, or deviate from the target even if the central bank has acted correctly 
but been unlucky. Another reason is that the Riksbank and other central banks with inflation 
targets  conduct  flexible  inflation  targeting,  which  means  that  they  strive  to  both  stabilise 
inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  to  stabilise  the  real  economy.  Inflation  may  then 
deliberately deviate from the target if this provides a better balance between stable inflation 
and a stable real economy. 
As  there  is  a  significant  time  lag  before  monetary  policy  measures  have  an  impact  on 
inflation and the real economy, monetary policy is best when it is based on forecasts. With a 
flexible inflation targeting regime, it is thus a question of choosing a repo rate path so that the 
forecast  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy  stabilises  inflation  and  the  real  economy  as 
effectively as possible. It is thus possible and desirable to evaluate monetary policy ex ante 
and in real time by assessing to what extent the central bank's forecasts optimally stabilise 
both inflation and the real economy. However, before we do this it is necessary to assess 
whether the central bank's previous forecasts have been reasonably accurate and of good 
quality, for example in comparison with those of other forecasters. 
It is also of interest to evaluate monetary policy ex post, that is, after the event. As target 
deviations  and  forecast  deviations  are  unavoidable  due  to  the  great  degree  of  uncertainty 
about  the  future  development  of  the  economy  and  the  delayed  impact  of  monetary  policy 
measures, an ex post evaluation is mainly a question of whether it would have been possible 
to  predict  the  shocks  and  deviations  that  occurred,  particularly  if  other  analysts  have 
systematically been able to predict them. 
                                                 
10   A preliminary analysis is carried out in Svensson, Lars E. O. (2009), "Transparency under Flexible Inflation 
Targeting: Experiences and Challenges", www.larseosvensson.net. 
12 
 BIS Review 29/2009
It is also of interest to measure the credibility of monetary policy in terms of how well inflation 
expectations  correspond  to  the  inflation  target.  The  degree  of  correspondence  between 
expectations  and  the  central  bank's  forecasts  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy  is  also  a 
measure of the credibility of the central bank's analyses and forecasts.  
As  monetary  policy  is  mainly  about  managing  expectations,  particularly  expectations 
concerning future policy rates, it is of great interest to see to what extent a published repo 
rate path has been predicted by the market and other analysts. It is also interesting to know 
to what extent market expectations are adapted to the new repo rate path. This can be seen 
as a measure of how effectively the central bank implements monetary policy.  
I  am  grateful  to  Björn  Andersson,  Mikael  Apel,  Paolo  Giordani,  Gabriela  Guibourg,  Tora 
Hammar, Lina Majtorp, Mattias Villani and Staffan Viotti for their help with this speech. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 13
