Spencer Dale: Separating fact from fiction – household balance sheets 
and the economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Spencer  Dale,  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  at  a  lunch  hosted  by  the  Exeter  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Exeter,  24  September 
2009. 
I would like to thank Andrew Benito, Rohan Churm and Richard Williams for their considerable help in preparing 
these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the 
Monetary Policy Committee. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Exeter  Chamber  of  Commerce  for  this  invitation  to  speak  to  you 
today. 
I have strong ties to this part of the country. My family moved to Exmouth when I was 16. My 
father still lives in Exmouth and my parents-in-law in Exeter. So I visit here often. 
Exeter was the place that I first studied economics. My family moved to Devon just after I had 
completed my “O levels” and I studied for my “A levels” at Exeter college, just a few minutes 
walk from here. In fact after today’s lunch, I am going back to Exeter college to see my old 
economics tutor – who still teaches “A level” economics – and to spend some time meeting 
the current students. 
So it is a real pleasure to be here. 
The economy appears to have turned. Following the extraordinary falls in output at the end of 
last  year  and  the  beginning  of  this  year,  output  appears  to  have  stabilised.  And  the  most 
recent output data and business surveys suggest that we are likely to see positive growth in 
the second half of 2009. 
These indicators have prompted numerous headlines declaring an end to the recession. In a 
strict, technical sense that may be right – we may be moving into a period in which positive 
growth  is  resumed.  But  I  would  caution  against  drawing  too  much  comfort  from  those 
headlines. Even if output does expand in the second half of this year, for many families and 
businesses it may still feel like we are in the economic doldrums. Unemployment is likely to 
continue rising for a period and firms will still face sluggish demand. The recovery may be 
slow and protracted. 
This  caution  is  often  characterised  as  the  Bank  being  gloomy.  But  I  fear  that  misses  the 
point. Let me be clear, compared with the situation we faced only six or nine months ago, the 
economic  outlook  has  improved  significantly.  Output  is  no  longer  in  free  fall,  the  banking 
system  has  stabilised,  confidence  levels  have  improved,  and  the  risk  of  a  really  bad 
economic  depression  has  receded.  To  repeat,  the  economy  appears  to  have  turned  an 
important corner on the road to recovery. 
But we are only just starting along that road. The level of national output is estimated to have 
fallen by around 5.5% over the past year – the largest four-quarter fall experienced in the 
post-war  period.  Employment  has  also  fallen  substantially.  These  falls  have  resulted  in  a 
significant degree of economic slack opening up in the economy. Firms are operating below 
normal capacity; increasing numbers of people are unable to find jobs. This slack detracts 
from our well-being. And, if it persisted, would pull inflation down well below 2% – the target 
that  I  and  my  colleagues  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  are  mandated  to  aim  for.  To 
meet our target, we need to see a sustained period of robust growth that brings the level of 
activity better into balance with the supply capacity of our economy. It is a recovery in the 
levels of output and employment that matters, not just a return to positive growth. 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 1
The turnaround in growth is underpinned by the extraordinary loosening in monetary policy 
undertaken by the Monetary Policy Committee  over the past 12 months. Only a year ago, 
Bank Rate was still at 5% and quantitative easing was something we had studied only from 
afar.  Since  then,  Bank  Rate  has  been  cut  to  an  historical  low  of  0.5%  and  the  Bank  is  a 
significant  way  through  a  programme  of  asset  purchases  totalling  £175  billion.  Economic 
activity is being supported further by the easing in fiscal policy, the substantial depreciation in 
sterling,  and  by  the  fact  that  the  inventory  adjustment  appears  to  be  beginning  to  run  its 
course. 
But  there  are  a  number  of  headwinds  that  are  likely  to  slow  the  pace  of  recovery.  Credit 
conditions  remain  tight  as  banks  repair  their  balance  sheets.  And  the  global  nature  of  the 
economic  downturn  further  highlighted  the  need  for  a  rebalancing  of  trade  flows  between 
countries  with  large  current  account  surpluses  and  deficits.  Both  adjustments  are  likely  to 
occur only gradually and each has the potential to derail the recovery. 
I want to spend a little time today considering a third factor that will shape the recovery: the 
extent to which households need to rebuild their balance sheets following the big increase in 
household debt. 
Spend, spend, spend? 
Much has been said about the increase in household debt, both in terms of its role in the 
build  up  to  the  financial  crisis  and  the  extent  to  which  it  may  dampen  the  recovery.  The 
theme of  much of this comment is that our current economic difficulties are a payback for 
past excesses. Households, it is said, were seduced by easy credit and rising asset prices, 
leading to a debt fuelled spending boom. As a result, we now face a period of retrenchment 
as we make amends for our former spendthrift ways. 
Like much conventional wisdom, these views contain a kernel of truth. But their repetition has 
led to exaggeration and distortion. Separating fact from fiction is vital when forming a view on 
the  economic  outlook.  Consumer  spending  accounts  for  two-thirds  of  total  demand  in  our 
economy;  decisions  made  by  consumers  up  and  down  the  country  will  be  critical  in 
determining the strength and sustainability of the recovery. 
A natural place to start would be with the “consumption boom”, which is often presumed to 
have  preceded  the  bust.  But  in  fact  there  was  no  such  boom.  Between  the  turn  of  this 
century and the onset of the financial crisis, consumer spending increased no faster than it 
had done, on average, over the past 40 years.1 Moreover, the fraction of our national output 
consumed by households did not increase. 
The kernel of truth in the consumption boom story is that changes in the distribution of our 
national  income  meant  that  this  stable  growth  of  aggregate  consumer  spending  was 
associated with a sharp decline in the household savings ratio. The proportion of income that 
households  set  aside  fell  from  close  to  10%  in  1997  to  a  little  over  2%  ten  years  later. 
Although  there  was  no  spending  boom,  households  were  making  less  provision  for  the 
future. 
Where did all the debt go? 
But how does the absence of a spending boom fit with the headlines about the rise in debt. 
The big increase in household debt over the past decade is certainly not a myth. Household 
                                                 
1   Consumption  growth  was,  however,  unusually  strong  in  the  period  1996-2000.  My  colleague  Andrew 
Sentance has stressed the importance of analysing trends in consumption over longer periods (eg Sentance 
2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2009
debt as a proportion of income increased from 100% to 165% in the 10 years to 2007. If this 
big run up in debt was not used to finance a surge in spending, where did it all go? 
The answer to this question lies in developments within the housing market. House prices 
trebled  in  the  ten  years  to  2007.  And  mortgage  debts  were  accumulated  to  pay  for  the 
housing that had become so much more expensive. The conventional wisdom that the sharp 
increase in household debt was associated with the house price boom of the past decade is 
well founded. 
But what is less often appreciated is that much of that rise in household debt was matched 
by a comparable increase in the value of financial assets held by households. The value of 
housing assets purchased by households did increase, through additions and improvements 
to the housing stock. But the main counterpart to the rise in borrowing was increased saving. 
To make this point more concretely: while households accumulated an additional £1trillion of 
debt between 2000 and 2008, they also acquired over £750 billion of financial assets over 
the same period.2
What  was  going  on?  To  caricature  things  only  a  little,  older  households  (or  rather  those 
trading down within the housing market) benefited from selling homes at much higher values. 
They  were  the  winners.  The  big  losers  were  younger  households  (or  those  trading  up), 
paying  more  for  those  houses  and  accumulating  higher  debts.  The  money  borrowed  by 
young families ended up in the bank accounts of older households. That money wasn’t used 
to fuel a spending boom. Rather, it was left on deposit or used to invest in other financial 
assets. The huge increase in borrowing by one part of the population was broadly matched 
by a big increase in saving by another part. 
The  increase  in  house  prices  over  the  decade  to  2007  –  and  the  massive  financial  flows 
associated  with  that  appreciation  –  represent  a  huge  redistribution  of  wealth  between 
different households within our society. 
Two important points should be drawn from this episode. 
First, any analysis of the increase in household debt over the past decade has to pay equal 
attention to the record accumulation of financial assets. They are two sides of the same coin. 
Second, changes in house prices do not result in significant changes in aggregate household 
wealth:  for every  winner  gaining  from  higher  house  prices  is  a  loser  facing  less  affordable 
housing.  But  that  does  not  mean  that  changes  in  house  prices  can  not  have  significant 
implications  for  the  macroeconomy.  House  price  changes  may  directly  affect  aggregate 
spending both through their effect on the value of housing collateral, and hence on the ability 
of households’ to access credit, and through the different propensity of winners and losers to 
spend their “windfalls”. 
A debt hangover? 
Even though the accumulation of debt was not driven by excessive consumption spending, 
the  sharp  falls  in  asset  prices  associated  with  the  financial  crisis  have  led  to  a  marked 
deterioration in households’ financial position – assets are worth less but the debts still need 
to  be  repaid.  The  market  value  of  households’  financial  and  housing  assets  has  fallen  by 
over  10%  over  the  past  two  years.  Does  this  mean  that  there  is  some  form  of  hole  in 
households’ balance sheets that will weigh on the recovery as they seek to repair it? 
                                                 
2   This increase reflects purchases of assets. It does not include the returns from these investments. 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 3
Any real or perceived need for households to rebuild their balance sheets may play an active 
role in determining their levels of spending.3 For example, the cost of financing debt and the 
uncertainty about future employment prospects may make households reluctant to exceed a 
certain level of net borrowing. In this case, the deterioration in the financial position of some 
households may cause them to spend less in order to repay debt or increase savings. The 
“payback period” I mentioned earlier. 
This  possibility  has  focussed  much  recent  attention  on  the  state  of  households’  balance 
sheets. But standard measures of households’ financial position – such as the ratio of debt to 
assets  –  may  exaggerate  the  severity  of  the  problem.  That  is  because  these  conventional 
measures suffer from a “missing” asset and a “missing” liability. 
Let me explain. 
The “missing” liability is the cost of purchasing a house in the future. This argument is directly 
related  to  the  redistribution  argument  I  discussed  earlier.  Measured  in  conventional  terms, 
the marked decline in house prices seen over the past two years has led to a pronounced 
deterioration in households’ balance sheets: house prices have declined by around 15% but 
the value of outstanding mortgage debt is largely unaffected. The lower level of house prices 
will  eventually  be  reflected  in  a  lower  level  of  mortgage  debt  than  otherwise  as  first-time 
buyers  (and  those  trading  up  the  housing  ladder)  enjoy  the  benefits  of  more  affordable 
housing. But this effect will not fully materialise until the entire housing stock is turned over at 
the new lower price level, which may take a considerable time. In the meantime, not taking 
account  of  this  missing  liability  exaggerates  the  deterioration  in  households’  underlying 
position. 
Moreover, by considering only the fall in prices of housing and financial assets, we could be 
exaggerating  the  extent  to  which  people  are  actually  less  wealthy.  For  some  households, 
these are their only form of assets. This is most obviously the case for the retired. But the 
largest asset owned by most people is not measured at all. It is the value of what they expect 
to earn in the future or, what economists refer to as “human capital”. Most estimates suggest 
the value of future earnings is significantly greater than the sum of net financial wealth and 
gross  housing  assets  which  typically  forms  the  basis  for  balance  sheet  measures.4  The 
significance  of  this  missing  asset  is  that,  even  though  recent  events  may  have  impaired 
households’ future income prospects, the scale of  this reduction is likely to be significantly 
less than the falls seen in financial wealth.5
And it is important to remember that households may opt to mitigate the fall in their wealth 
not only through greater saving, but also by working more. Labour demand has, of course, 
weakened during the recession and with it the number of hours worked has fallen. But even if 
households are not able to increase their supply of labour now, they may plan to do so in the 
future,  perhaps  by  delaying  their  eventual  retirement.  This  may  still  help  to  moderate  the 
extent to which spending falls in the near term. 
                                                 
3   Simple textbook models which tie consumption to permanent income would not predict this sort of behaviour. 
However,  models  which  recognise  imperfections  in  financial  markets  are  often  consistent  with  this  type  of 
behaviour,  particularly  when  the  effects  of  uncertainty  are  explicitly  considered.  For  a  discussion  of 
consumption  and  saving  theory  see  Berry,  Waldron  and  Williams  (2009).  For  a  discussion  of  interactions 
between household debt, house prices and consumption, see Benito, Waldron, Young and Zampolli (2007). 
4   For example, Bakhshi (2000) estimated that the value of future earnings (human wealth) represented around 
80%  of  household  wealth,  whereas  net  financial  wealth  and  gross  housing  assets  together  represented 
around 20%. 
5   The sum of households’ net financial and gross housing wealth has declined by over 10% since the start of 
the crisis. In contrast, external estimates of the loss of supply capacity as a result of the recession, to which 
the fall in human capital is likely to be closely related, are around the 4-5% range. See, for example, HMT 
(2009) and IMF (2009). 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2009
None of this is to deny that households’ balance sheets have been affected by recent falls in 
wealth. But the extent of that deterioration and hence the pressure on households to repair 
their balance sheets might be exaggerated by failing to take a more comprehensive view of 
their assets and liabilities. 
Nevertheless, it is clear that, even putting balance sheets to one side, the financial crisis has 
affected households and families in ways that have caused them to spend less. Most directly, 
the  recession  has  led  to  a  pronounced  weakening  of  the  labour  market,  with  employment 
falling and incomes squeezed. 
The recession and the sharp rise in unemployment may also have led households to revise 
their  beliefs  about  the  stability  of  the  economy  and  with  it  the  predictability  of  their  own 
incomes.  The  period  from  the  early  1990s  up  to  the  financial  crisis  has  been  dubbed  by 
economists  as  the  Great  Moderation.  The  UK  economy  enjoyed  over  60  consecutive 
quarters of positive economic growth accompanied by low and stable inflation. It is possible 
that  some  households  planned  on  the  basis  that  this  increased  economic  stability  would 
persist indefinitely. If so, the events of the past two years would have come as a substantial 
shock. 
Households’  consumption  has  slowed  sharply  since  the  beginning  of  2008.  Indeed, 
consumption is estimated to have fallen for the past five consecutive quarters, the first time 
this has happened since records began in 1955. Relative to an average rate of increase, the 
level  of  consumer  spending  has  fallen  by  around  7½%  since  the  start  of  2008,  and  the 
savings  rate  has  increased  sharply.  There  has  already  been  a  considerable  adjustment  in 
households’ spending. 
In the near-term, the prospects for consumption depend importantly on the performance of 
the labour market. Although there has been a substantial fall in employment over the past 
year or so, the size of this adjustment to date has, if anything, been less than we might have 
feared given the falls in output. This may partly reflect the greater degree of wage flexibility 
that has been apparent in this recession compared to that in either the 1980s or 1990s.6 This 
greater flexibility has meant that more of the burden of firms’ adjustment to the recession has 
been spread over the workforce as a whole, rather than on those losing their jobs. This may 
help to mitigate the slowing in consumption, both because households may find it easier to 
borrow to smooth their consumption if they still have a job and because it may limit the extent 
to which households increase their savings as a precaution against the possibility of future 
job losses. 
Further out, the prospects for consumption will depend importantly on the extent to which the 
deterioration  in  households’  financial  position  does  indeed  cause  them  to  scale  back  their 
spending. As I have argued, there are good reasons for thinking this may happen. But it is 
also  important  to  remember  that  there  has  already  been  a  substantial  adjustment  in 
consumption; and that conventional measures of household balance sheets may exaggerate 
the scale of deterioration. 
Policy 
Let me conclude with a few remarks on policy. 
The  current  focus  of  monetary  policy  is  on  ensuring  that  there  is  sufficient  stimulus  in  the 
economy to generate the strong and sustained recovery necessary to bring demand better 
into balance with supply and so ensure that inflation is on track to meet the inflation target. 
As I have said, the structural adjustments that need to occur – to the structure of the banking 
system;  to  the  balance  of  global  trade  flows,  and  to  the  level  of  public  and  possibly 
                                                 
6   For more information see the box on page 29 of the August 2009 Inflation Report. 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 5
household debt – have the potential to delay and derail the recovery. But monetary policy 
can not – and should not – seek to prevent those adjustments. They are necessary for the 
long-run stability of our economy. Rather the job of monetary policy – and of public policy 
more generally – is to ensure that these adjustments occur in an orderly manner and within 
an economic environment which is consistent with hitting the 2% inflation target. 
Because it is new and untested, there is understandably considerable nervousness about the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s asset purchase programme – a.k.a. quantitative easing. How is 
it supposed to work? Will it work? 
The essence of the asset purchase programme is to increase the supply of money and credit 
in the economy. An important point to stress is that the success of the programme does not 
depend on banks returning to a position in which they are able to lend normally. The policy 
works  by  supplying  money  directly  into  the  economy,  not  through  the  banks.  Much  of  the 
money is being injected by purchasing government bonds from institutional investors, such 
as insurance companies and pension funds. These purchases encourage investors to switch 
their portfolios away from gilts into corporate bonds and equities, so improving the supply of 
credit  to  businesses.  Companies’  access  to  credit  is  further  enhanced  by  the  Bank’s 
purchases of commercial paper and corporate bonds, which improve the functioning of these 
markets. 
But is it working? The objective of the asset purchases is to increase the growth of nominal 
spending. As with changes in interest rates, it will take some time before we see the impact 
of  our  purchases  feeding  through  into  higher  aggregate  spending  and  inflation.  However, 
there  are  some  encouraging  signs  that  the  medicine  is  working.  The  growth  of  underlying 
broad money has picked up in recent months, especially relative to the weak growth rates we 
might otherwise have seen. Interest rates have fallen. Corporate bond spreads have declined 
substantially. And the amount of finance raised by companies in bond and equity markets is 
at record levels. Not all of these developments can be attributed solely to our actions. But I 
have no doubt that asset purchases have played an important role. 
At our policy meeting in August, the Monetary Policy Committee voted to maintain Bank Rate 
at  0.5%  and  to  increase  the  scale  of  our  asset  purchase  programme  to  £175  billion.  That 
level of Bank Rate and scale of asset purchases were maintained at the MPC meeting earlier 
this month. 
You  may  have  notice  that  at  our  meeting  in  August  there  was  a  split  vote  amongst  the 
Committee.  A  majority  of  the  Committee  –  including  myself  –  voted  to  increase  the  asset 
purchase  programme  to  £175  billion,  whereas  a  minority  preferred  a  larger  expansion  to 
£200 billion. It is important not to make too much of this difference; all members were of the 
view that a further degree of monetary stimulus was needed to meet the inflation target. 
My own judgment was that the uncertainty surrounding both the economic outlook and the 
effects of asset purchases made it difficult to have a strong view as to the relative merits of 
increasing the asset purchase programme to £175 billion or £200 billion. Indeed, the inflation 
projection that was published in the August Inflation Report suggested that either policy was 
consistent with hitting the inflation target, depending on the future path of interest rates. For 
me,  the  decision  came  down  to  an  assessment  of  the  risks  of  doing  too  much  versus  the 
risks of doing too little. 
With  regard  to  the  potential  risks  of  doing  too  little,  my  main  concern  was  that  nominal 
demand would not recover to a level consistent with hitting the inflation target. My main worry 
with doing too much stemmed from the uncertainty associated with using asset purchases as 
a  policy  instrument.  We  do  not  have  much  experience  of  conducting  monetary  policy  via 
asset purchases and there is a risk that their effects will be transmitted through the economy 
in ways we do not predict and do not want. For example, the substantial injections of liquidity 
might result in unwarranted increases in some asset prices that could prove costly to rectify. I 
placed considerable  weight  on  both  risks  and  thought  that they  were  best  balanced  by  an 
expansion of the programme to £175 billion. 
6 
 BIS Review 114/2009
I am hopeful that we have started along the road to recovery. The journey is likely to be long 
and not without difficulty. But the Monetary Policy Committee stands ready to do whatever it 
takes to ensure that the economy moves into better balance and inflation remains on track to 
hit the target. 
References 
Bakhshi,  H  (2000),  “The  sensitivity  of  aggregate  consumption  to  human  wealth”,  Bank  of 
England Working Paper no. 108. 
Benito, A., Waldron, M., Young, G. and Zampolli, F. (2007) “The role of household debt and 
balance sheets in the monetary transmission mechanism” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 
Volume 47, no. 1, pp 70-78. 
Berry,  S.,  Waldron,  M.  and  Williams,  R.  (2009)  “Household  saving”  Bank  of  England 
Quarterly Bulletin Volume 49, no. 3, pp 191-201. 
HM Treasury (2009), “Budget 2009, Building Britain’s future”. 
International Monetary Fund (2009), “United Kingdom: 2009 Article IV Consultation”. 
Sentence, A (2007), “The changing pattern of savings: implications for growth and inflation”, 
Royal Bank of Scotland / Scottish Economics Society lecture. 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 7
