Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Opening statement at the press briefing for 
the signing of T2S Memorandum of Understanding 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  signing  ceremony  for  the  T2S  Memorandum  of  Understanding, 
Frankfurt, 16 July 2009. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to welcome you today and I would like to thank you for your interest in this 
project.  
A  year  ago,  the  Governing  Council  gave  green  light  to  launch  T2S.  The  purpose  of  the 
project  is  to  create  one  single  settlement  platform,  a  harmonized  settlement  process 
throughout Europe and a common pool of securities.  
This should create efficiency gains, further financial market integration and the completion of 
a single market for financial services as set out in the Lisbon Agenda. With T2S we continue 
our  efforts  in  building  up  stable  and  harmonized  infrastructures  to  the  benefit  of  financial 
stability.  Stable  and  efficient  infrastructures  have  been  fundamental  during  the  financial 
crisis,  dampening  the  destabilizing  shocks  to  the  financial  system  and  prevented  further 
damaging contagion.  
During the last year much has been achieved: I would very much like to thank all that have 
supported us in this endeavour – all market participants in the T2S Advisory Group and its 
sub-structures  and  particularly  the  CSDs.  There  are  only  a  few  months  left  in  the 
specification  phase  before  the  Eurosystem  will  start  the  work  on  developing  the  new 
settlement platform early next year.  
Today, the Eurosystem will sign a Memorandum of Understanding with 27 CSDs, which will 
set out the mutual relationship between the Eurosystem and the CSDs in preparation of the 
next important stage of the project.  
I would like to take the opportunity to give you a brief update on the status of the project. One 
of the most important workstreams in the coming months is the finalisation of the technical 
documentation.  The  last  version  of  the  User  Requirements  Documentation  has  just  been 
published  on  the  ECB  website,  and  in  its  last  meeting  the  Advisory  Group  agreed  that  it 
should now be largely “frozen”. We are currently in the process of updating the final version 
of the General Functional Specification, the draft of which was already published earlier this 
year  for  discussion  with  the  market.  And  we  are  now  working  on  the  other  technical 
documentation, in particular the User Detailed Functional Specification.  
Another  important  workstream  is  the  preparation  work  for  the  formal  contractual  relations 
between the Eurosystem and the CSDs, which will continue with all those CSDs that signed 
today’s Memorandum of Understanding.  
One  of  the  key  aspects  that  will  need  to  be  included  in  the  contract  with  the  CSDs  is  the 
costs associated with using T2S when it is operational. As you know, T2S will be operated on 
full cost recovery, so the Eurosystem needs to estimate not only the total cost of building the 
platform and operating it, but also to make assumptions on transactions volumes many years 
in the future. Workshops with market participants have been held to discuss pricing issues. 
There are still a number of issues to be resolved but I am confident that we will succeed by 
the end of this year in order to provide assurance to CSDs in the contractual arrangement to 
be prepared next year.  
BIS Review 91/2009 
 1
Much  has  been  achieved,  much  remains  to  be  done.  With  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding of today – a year after we have started – we are on track to meet the ultimate 
deadline of having T2S operational by 2013. 
I would now first invite my colleagues from the CSDs to say a few words on T2S, before I 
give  the  floor  to  Jean-Michel  Godeffroy,  the  newly  appointed  Chairman  of  the  T2S 
Programme Board. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2009
