Sada Reddy: National economic update and a path to sustainable 
tourism growth  
Presentation by Mr Sada Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the Fiji Tourism 
Forum 2009, Suva, 14 August 2009. 
 Introduction 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am delighted to be here today to provide an economic update on the Fiji economy in the 
context  of  the  global  economic  crisis  and  share  some  thoughts  on  how  to  make  tourism 
growth in Fiji more sustainable.  
Ladies and gentlemen, in light of the global economic and financial meltdown over the last 2 
years, economies the world over are grappling with policy issues that will usher in economic 
development,  progress  and  stability.  For  most  of  these  countries,  major  adjustments  and 
paradigm shifts were required. People needed to think outside of the box and move out of 
their comfort zone. The situation also demanded them to think creatively and in some cases 
implement  very  unpopular  policies  to  work  themselves  out  of  the  economic  and  financial 
challenges.  
In the quest to be more competitive and survive in this world, which is increasingly becoming 
a challenge for countries like us, we need to constantly review our performance, identify the 
constraints to our progress and be willing to shift paradigms to realise our goals. It is logical 
that change will often be resisted and initially difficult to accept. But if we are determined in 
our efforts and have a clear vision of where we want to go and what we want to achieve, then 
our determination, enthusiasm and creative thinking will not be restrained. 
Our country is at a juncture now when we need to direct our energy to making the economy 
grow. To make the economy grow and grow sustainably, we need to reform. The key word in 
this regard is reforms. This is a word that is sometimes viewed with scepticism. All sorts of 
thoughts preoccupy the mind at the mention of reform, most common of which is that people 
will lose their jobs. Whilst this is understandable, we need to dismiss this myth. As has been 
proven around the world, reforms are necessary. They allow for more efficient and effective 
operations.  
Reforms enable a country to manage its resources well and gain mileage in their usage. It 
also  facilitates  the  generation  of  government  revenue  and  improved  government  funding 
position. Reforms help attract investment. The ease of doing business in Fiji in this regard 
therefore becomes critical. The global economy is competing for the same dollar. We have 
not ranked well under the World Bank’s ranking of the ease of doing business. Singapore is 
ranked first in the world. What lessons can we learn from them? I am positive that we can 
address this particular structural issue and improve our world ranking. Investments will create 
domestic economic activities and help the country grow sustainably.  
The sustained performance of the economy is important for employment generation, poverty 
alleviation,  improving  confidence  and  ensuring  stability.  Like  in  any  other  country, 
unemployment  and  poverty  could  become  major  issues  if  we  do  not  grow  the  economy 
sustainably.  The  2003  “Working  Out  of  Poverty”  Report  by  the  International  Labour 
Organisation  stated  that  “Poverty  elimination  is  impossible  unless  the  economy  generates 
opportunities for investment, entrepreneurship, job creation and sustainable livelihoods. The 
principal  route  out  of  poverty  is  work.”  We  have  to  manage  the  things  that  are  within  our 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 1
control  whilst  adjusting  to  those  that  are  beyond  us.  Reforms  in  this  respect  are  therefore 
vitally critical.  
This is actually the new economic paradigm that we are pursuing in Fiji. We need to commit 
to the reform agenda that the government has developed. Our growth performance has been 
less than impressive over the years. We need to change the way we do things. We need to 
address the structural reforms necessary to unleash our economic growth potential. We have 
identified these structural challenges in various forums over the years. Addressing them will 
be part and parcel of building a better Fiji for all. We have to continue the reform momentum. 
Other countries are doing it in their endeavour to better their performance. To do otherwise 
could mean isolation for us whilst our neighbours and others progress.  
We must not lose sight of this reality. We need to share this common vision that change is 
inevitable for us to maximise and put to good use the limited resources we have, improve 
productivity  and  efficiency,  address  poverty  and  hold  our  ground  in  this  increasingly 
integrated global economy. We have to remain competitive. To do nothing or progress at a 
snail’s pace would be to our disadvantage.  
I  cannot  emphasise  enough  the  importance  of  undertaking  reforms  now  and  maintaining 
momentum. The improved livelihood of our future generation will depend on the sacrifices we 
make now through economic adjustments or reforms. When we begin to reap the rewards of 
the reforms in future, though difficult some of them may be, we can stand back and say at 
that juncture that it has been worth it all.  
Ladies and gentlemen, we meet at a time when the global economy continues to go through 
turbulent  times.  The  numerous  downward  revisions  of  world  growth  by  the  IMF  are  an 
indication of the uncertainties that we face. The recently revised global growth projection for 
this year shows a contraction of 1.4 percent. However, consensus forecasts of recent months 
show that the global economy is  beginning to emerge out of recession. This is now being 
popularly referred to as “green shoots”. A growth of 2.5 percent is forecast for next year. 
Our  trading  partners  have  been  quite  significantly  affected  as  well.  Most  of  them,  namely 
New Zealand, the US, Euro zone and Japan are in recession this year with modest recovery 
expected for 2010. Basically, it means that demand for our goods and services will decline, 
which will be reflected in our trade performance and current account balance.  
Naturally  when  the  economies  of  our  tourism  source  markets  enter  into  recession  people 
from these countries tend to travel less. We have been seeing the effects of this downturn on 
our visitor arrivals since last year. 
The  global  economic  recession  has  not  only  slowed  trade  and  tourism,  but  also  affected 
investments through tight funding conditions globally. The effects of these are still being felt 
by  many  countries,  including  Fiji,  but  the  situation  has  improved  a  little  as  of  late. 
Nevertheless, major adjustments by countries are still necessary to sustain these challenging 
times. 
In my view we can now quite safely say that the worst is over in terms of the global recession 
while  acknowledging  that  the  recovery  will  be  prolonged.  We  are  looking  at  maybe  2  to  3 
years before the benefits of global economy begin to pass through the Fiji economy. 
You may ask how Fiji fared in these very difficult times. 
Well, Fiji’s economy was affected on many fronts. The demand for a number of our exports 
was quite adversely affected. Remittances, which used to form a substantial part of foreign 
exchange  earnings,  virtually  collapsed.  Of  course,  as  I  mentioned  before,  tourism  arrivals 
were significantly affected as well. We also saw that with the massive shifts in global financial 
flows in the last 12 months the currencies of our major trading partner countries depreciated 
significantly against the US dollar. This actually led to the Fiji dollar appreciating against the 
currencies of important tourism source markets like Australia and New Zealand. For a brief 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2009
period  early  this  year  the  F$  was  even  stronger  then  the  NZ$.  This  made  Fiji  very 
uncompetitive in terms of tourism. 
These impacts on the Fiji economy, of course, had major macroeconomic implications. One 
of the most significant was the impact on our balance of payments which saw Fiji’s foreign 
exchange  reserves  plummeting  very  rapidly.  This  led  to  extremely  tight  liquidity  in  the 
banking system resulting in very tight credit conditions early in the year. 
This situation led to our decision to devalue the Fiji dollar by 20 per cent on 15th April this 
year. 
At  this  juncture,  let  me  say  that  unlike  in  many  other  countries,  we  have  not  seen  any 
financial distress during this period of global turmoil. No financial institution has gone out of 
business nor needed financial support or backing. Neither have we seen people losing their 
homes  and  collapse  in  the  real  estate  industry  to  the  scale  that  have  been  seen  in  many 
other  countries.  We  have  managed  well  so  far  in  light  of  the  prevailing  global  conditions 
given our limited resources and stage of economic development. We cannot be complacent 
though.  We  need  to  continue  to  be  vigilant,  innovative  and  undertake  reforms  or  changes 
that will drive our growth performance. 
In terms of GDP, the adverse effects of the global crisis plus the floods in the early part of 
this year significantly affected the economic growth of Fiji this year. We initially expected a 
positive growth of over 2 percent for this year but this has now been revised down to minus 
0.3 percent. All in all we should take comfort in the fact that the Fiji economy did not get that 
badly affected as many other countries. 
At this point in time we expect our economy to start recovering and register a positive growth 
of around 2 percent next year. 
The pace and extent of our economic recovery will, of course, depend on how quickly the 
world economy picks up. 
Much would depend on the tourism sector that you all are a part of. It is absolutely critical for 
Fiji that the tourism industry recovers and recovers quickly. 
At present, tourism is the major sector in our economy. Obviously, our economy will only be 
as resilient as the tourism sector, which comprises about 24 percent of our GDP.  
The  tourism  industry  will  be  the  key  driver  for  economic  recovery  in  the  next  two  years. 
Therefore, all the tourism stakeholders and the Government need to work together to ensure 
that we increase the visitor arrivals from the current levels. Tourism has the greatest potential 
at present, compared to the other industries in Fiji, to be the engine to lift the country out of 
the current difficulties. Owing to significant investment in the industry in the last few years, 
room inventory has grown substantially – with the existing capacity on the ground, tourism is 
ready to drive Fiji’s growth again, as it has done in the past. 
At this stage let me highlight some of the major sectoral developments in the Fiji economy. 
Sugar industry  
The sugar industry started slowly this season due mainly to the teething problems associated 
with  the  mill  up-grades.  Of  course,  the  flood  damage  to  cane  crops  and  cane  farm 
infrastructure did not help. But once these up-grades are completed, I am sure, we will see 
the benefits of a much higher level of efficiency and production in the coming years. But we 
must continue with great urgency in bringing about all other necessary reforms in the industry 
to make sure that we have a viable and enduring industry. I believe, the Government and the 
key stakeholders in the sugar industry are working hard to resolve some of the long standing 
structural and other issues the sugar industry has been faced with for a number of years. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 3
I  do  not  wish  to  overstress  this  point  but  for  the  Fiji  economy  to  be  put  on  a  sustainable 
footing it is vitally important that the sugar industry once again takes it proper place in the 
economy given its high local value added and a very high economic multiplier compared to 
many other industries. 
The  inevitable  reduction  in  our  preferential  prices  from  the  EU  market  remains  the  major 
challenge  to  the  industry.  The  EU  sugar  prices  are  expected  to  decline  by  25  percent  in 
October this year. Fiji enjoyed preference sugar prices which were 3 times the world market 
prices.  With  the  reductions  this  will  now  be  about  1.5  times  the  world  market  price.  We 
therefore  have  to  adapt  and  adjust very  quickly  to  overcome  this  major  reduction  in  sugar 
prices.  
In line with expectations, sugar earnings is now forecast to decline by 29 percent this year, 
compared to a growth of around 34 percent in 2008. The large decline in 2009 is to some 
extent accentuated because of the higher exports in 2008 due to some 2007 stock exported 
in 2008. 
Mineral water  
The global economic recession has had a major impact on the demand for our mineral water 
exports.  Latest  figures  cumulative  to  May  this  year  show  a  55  percent  decline  in  mineral 
water  export  earnings.  However,  mineral  water  exports  are  expected  to  recover  next  year 
with the expected recovery in demand in the major export markets. 
Gold  
Gold production has seen a significant improvement from last year, as the mine slowly gains 
momentum led by buoyant world gold prices. Gold exports are anticipated to be just over $60 
million this year, compared to $27 million last year. Exploration of gold and other minerals 
such as copper and bauxite are continuing and there are some encouraging developments in 
this regard. 
Fishing 
Fish export earnings have fared quite well over the last couple of years. Fish export earnings 
was close to $135 million in 2008. In the first five months of this year, fish export receipts 
were around 22 percent higher than last year. 
Again, this industry holds great promise and very clear policies and strategies need to be put 
in place for sustained growth. 
It is very unfortunate that due to our failure to address quality and standard issues we ran 
into  difficulties  in  exporting  fish  to  the  EU  market.  However,  these  issues  are  now  being 
addressed and hopefully our exports to EU will pick up in due course. 
Forestry 
The  forestry  sector  has  been  adversely  affected  by  the  global  economic  slowdown.  Both 
exports of woodchips and mahogany have declined. Last year, timber exports fetched $60 
million. However, with the sluggish demand, earnings from timber are forecast to decline by 
15 percent. 
The mahogany industry also holds great future for us as the global economy picks up in the 
next couple of years. Hopefully we would have put in place strategies to take advantage of 
the huge mahogany reserves that Fiji has. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2009
Other economic sectors 
In 2010, all sectors are projected to grow with the exception of the Community Social and 
Personal Services Sector.  
Balance of payments  
Fiji has substantial current account deficit. As a percent of GDP, Fiji’s current account deficit 
is just over 20 percent. This is relatively large for an economy of our size. 
One of the main reasons for this persistent and large current account deficit has been the 
lack lustre performance of our major exports. Exports have been relatively flat over the last 
four to five years at around $1.3 billion. 
On the other hand imports have been growing steadily. Fuel and food make up the bulk of 
our total imports. In 2008, Fiji’s total domestic fuel bill was $810 million while food imports 
accounted for $520 million. In total fuel and food make up 51 percent of our total domestic 
imports. 
Therefore, to bring about a sustainable balance of payments, we have to do certain things. 
Either  we  increase  our  exports  substantially  to  make  up  for  the  increasing  imports  or  we 
reduce our import bill. We just can’t sit back and expect that the balance of payments will 
take care of itself. 
It is for this reason that you will find that the Reserve Bank’s policies are geared very much 
towards correcting the perennial current account deficit that Fiji is facing. If we don’t, then our 
economy, and your industry in particular, cannot grow in a sustainable manner. 
I will go into the policy details shortly but before that I wish to share with you a few more 
economic indicators so you have a better appreciation of the state of the Fiji economy. 
Government finances 
During  the  first  five  months  of  this  year  Government  revenue  surpassed  budget  by  6.7 
percent while expenditure was below forecast by almost 26 percent. 
Overall,  given  the  economic  situation,  this  is  a  very  positive  outcome  for  Government 
finances.  One  of  the  concerns  of  a  central  bank  is  that  if  the  economy  contracts  and  the 
government  is  unable  to  maintain budget  discipline,  it  leads  to the  central  bank  ending  up 
financing  the  government  budget.  This  is  normally  referred  to  as  printing  of  money.  Many 
countries have resorted to central bank financing in these difficult times. Normally, this is a 
recipe for disaster. But I am very pleased that this has never been a problem in Fiji. 
The Government has been very proactive in containing non-essential expenditure and has 
embarked on major reforms of the civil service and the public sector. These measures should 
ensure  that  the  budget  deficit  is  kept  in  check.  It  is  vitally  important  that  more  and  more 
Government  expenditure  is  directed  towards  capital  expenditure.  Unfortunately,  so  far  this 
year  capital  expenditure  has  not  kept  pace  with  the  budget  but  hopefully  things  will  turn 
around in the next 4 months. 
The Government has been able to fund most of its cashflow requirements through flotation of 
treasury bills and bonds in the domestic market. The increase in the liquidity in the banking 
system  has  meant  that  all  of  the  government’s  issues  are  fully  subscribed  mainly  by 
institutional investors. 
It is pleasing to see that the Government is now able to release a greater amount of VAT 
refunds than in the past. This must be a big relief to the business sector, which has been 
raising this as a major issue for a number of years. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 5
Inflation rate 
In line with the devaluation of the Fiji dollar, inflation has risen and is forecast to keep rising 
in the coming months. Consumer prices rose 2.2 percent on an annual basis in July 2009. 
Prices  are  expected  to  rise  in  the  coming  months  as  the  effects  of  the  devaluation  feed 
through the economy. There are also risks in terms of increases in fuel prices as the global 
economy picks up. 
Inflation  has  been  forecast  at  9.5  percent  for  this  year  and  next  year  we  expect  to  see  it 
falling gradually to 2.0 percent. 
Foreign reserves 
Foreign reserves are now around $760 million. It is a little difficult at this stage to be precise 
in  this  measure  as  we  do  not  have  sufficient  time  series  data  on  imports.  As  you  can 
understand, with the devaluation, imports have started to decelerate and it will take us a few 
months to know exactly what the impact of devaluation is on total imports. 
Foreign reserves had fallen to critically low levels in the first three months of this year. 
This is what triggered the 20 percent devaluation. 
I expect foreign reserves to continue to increase in the coming months. 
Commercial bank liquidity and interest rates 
In line with the fall in foreign reserves in the first 3 months of this year, bank liquidity, that is, 
the amount of free cash balances that the banks have on a daily basis, fell to a low of around 
$12 million. 
However, with the various policy measures put in place by the Reserve Bank the liquidity has 
reached levels of over $250 million now. This level of liquidity, hopefully, will engender further 
downward pressure on interest rates in the coming months. 
Government support to the tourism industry 
The Government has taken numerous initiatives to position the tourism industry in Fiji to be 
competitive in light of the global crisis and the growing influence of other tourist destinations 
in the region. Some of the initiatives include: 
• 
Increased  budget  allocation  to  the  Fiji  Islands  Visitors’  Bureau  (FIVB)  to  facilitate 
marketing and promotional efforts;  
Consolidation of the Fiji Islands Visitors’ Bureau (FIVB); 
Re-branding of the FIVB to Tourism Fiji; and 
Increased presence of Department of Tourism staff in Nadi. 
• 
• 
• 
In recognition of the importance of the tourism industry to Fiji’s development and growth, and 
the challenging global market, the Government designed incentive package for the industry. 
The incentives, which you all maybe well aware of, include: 
• 
• 
10 year tax holiday for SLIP investments capital investments not less than $7 million; 
Import  duty  exemption  on  all  capital  goods  not  available  in  Fiji,  that  is  used  for 
carrying out the investment; and 
55  percent  investment  allowance  on  total  capital  expenditure  provided  there  is  no 
shift of revenue offshore. 
BIS Review 97/2009
 6 
 These  incentives  were  in  addition  to  the  existing  tourism  related  duty  concessions.  The 
existing customs incentives are: 
• 
Building material, furnishing and fittings; and 
Specialised boat and vessels 
10 percent fiscal duty, free import exercise and 12.5 percent VAT levied on:  
o 
o 
5 percent fiscal duty, free import exercise and 12.5 percent VAT levied on heavy plant 
and machinery for project development work. 
 RBF policies 
The RBF announced a number of proactive policies in response to the threat to our balance 
of payment position owing to the large trade deficit that was compounded by the impact of 
the global recession and natural disasters that we suffered. I had mentioned the devaluation 
above. The others included: 
• 
• 
Exchange Controls that were tightened, similar to December 2006.  
Interest  Rates  were  capped  to  December  2008  levels  and  interest  rate  spread 
(between the lending rate and deposit rate) was fixed at 4 percent. 
Lending Policies – priority sector lending will continue and special approval above the 
ceiling will still be considered by the RBF.  
Taking  proactive  “hands  on”  approach  in  the  development  of  the  key  areas  of  the 
economy (which are normally beyond the scope of a traditional central bank’s role) 
through 
the  new  Financial  System  Development  and 
Compliance Group to look at issues like microfinance & SME development, sustaining 
remittances flows, financial literacy, rural banking, local value adding and policies to 
discourage the importation of high value luxury goods. 
the  establishment  of 
  Let  me  correct  some  mis-reporting  especially  in  the  overseas  media  with  respect  to 
exchange controls and foreign reserves. 
Yes, the RBF did tighten exchange controls in April this year. These measures are absolutely 
essential  to  prevent  capital  flight  when  there  are  huge  speculations  and  expectations  of 
currency adjustments. However, let me state here that there are no restrictions on any trade 
transactions whatsoever. All payments in and out of Fiji are as normal as can be expected. 
However, we do control Fiji residents’ investments abroad. Policies in this regard are either 
tightened or relaxed depending on how our foreign reserves perform. 
On foreign reserves, I did mention earlier that our reserve levels had started to fall rapidly 
since  last  year  with  the  onset  of  the  global  crisis.  Most  countries  went  through  similar 
situation. We all had to take various actions to reverse the trend. This does not mean that we 
are not capable of meeting our overseas commitments. 
Fiji  has  never  failed  to  meet  any  of  its  foreign  obligations.  Our  reserve  levels  are  now 
reaching  comfortable  levels  and  I  am  sure  this  should  give  more  comfort  to  our  trading 
partners. 
RBF policies towards a sustainable tourism growth  
One  of  the key  policies  that  the  RBF  has  announced  this  year  is  the  Local  Valued  Added 
Content Requirement for the tourism industry. The Local Value Adding policy announcement 
by the Reserve Bank requires that any domestic borrowing by the hotel industry from banks 
for extension or development purposes should have a local value content included. This is to 
encourage the use of local goods and services. It would help reduce dependence on imports.  
 BIS Review 97/2009 
 7
Why did we have to introduce this policy? I am sure there is lot of interest in this audience on 
this subject. 
As  I  mentioned  previously,  there  is  no  doubt  that  tourism  plays  an  important  role  in  Fiji. 
Tourism  industry  is  multi-sectoral  by  nature;  therefore,  it  supports  a  number  of  local 
industries,  like  wholesale  &  retail,  transport  sector,  etc.  Furthermore,  tourism  remains  our 
largest gross foreign exchange earner and also has the most significant growth potential. 
You  may  recall  that  during  my  presentation  to  this  Forum  last  year,  I  highlighted  that  the 
retention rate of tourism in Fiji is around 44 percent, compared to 60 percent in developing 
countries and between 80-90 percent in advanced economies. 
There are a number of reasons for the relatively low retention of our tourism dollar. Earlier I 
alluded to the persistent current account deficit that Fiji is facing. Tourism industry is one of 
the  highest importers  of  food  and  other  tourism  inputs  given  that  every  year  we  look  after 
more than half the population of Fiji in terms of number of visitors.  
Therefore, it is in the long term interest of the tourism industry that every effort is made to 
increase the local value added. We can take incremental steps now to reverse this retention 
scenario and move towards the levels achieved in other developing and advanced countries. 
This is why the RBF has taken steps in this direction. 
In our view, the industry can contribute more to the economy and the people of Fiji, through: 
Buying and encouraging local products – e.g. fruits, vegetables, furniture and using 
• 
local  timber  for  furnishing  needs.  Of  course,  we  have  to  improve  consistency  of 
supply  and  quality  standards  to  fulfill  this  requirement.  I  believe  that  relevant 
government agencies are also taking steps in this regard, particularly the Ministry of 
Agriculture.  As  mentioned  in  the  National  Budget,  improving  the  links  between 
domestic agriculture and tourism is a priority of the Ministry of Agriculture. Imported 
agricultural  produce  for  tourist  consumption  represents  a  loss  of  scarce  foreign 
revenue  and  represents  opportunity  cost  of  potential  employment  and  income  that 
could be generated domestically. As such, methods to increase backward economic 
linkages,  including  utilising  local  food  products,  must  be  found  and  developed, 
ultimately leading to an industry that consistently provides a sufficient quantity of high 
quality produce. 
Harnessing  the  use  of  natural  resources  –  e.g.  solar  energy,  energy  efficient 
buildings. Just ask yourself how many hotels in Fiji use alternative sources of energy? 
Very  few  indeed!!  How  many  hotels  have  solar  panels  fitted  to  use  the  abundant 
sunlight? Very few. While we market the sun, sand and sea, we don’t seem to use 
these here in our building designs!! 
Our  architects  and  engineers  have  to  adopt  more  greener  and  energy  efficient 
designs. We hope that the Town and Country Planning will put in policies which will 
ensure  that  future  large  projects  have  designs  that  will  conserve  energy  and  are 
environmentally friendly. 
Contribute more to Environmental Protection – especially coastal areas & eco-tourism 
sites 
  In our continuous effort to encourage use of local resources in hotels, the Reserve Bank will 
look to sponsor from this year the most promising graduate from the Catering and Hospitality 
Schools  to  train  in  one  of  the  Asian  countries  to  study  the  use  of  local  resources  in  food 
preparation. I hope that the tourism industry will do likewise. 
Similarly, the RBF will be sponsoring the Prime Minister’s Award to the most innovative hotel 
in utilising local products & environment protection. 
We whole heartedly acknowledge and support the ongoing inclusive approach taken by the 
industry and relevant government ministries to link tourism with agriculture. This is another 
8 
 BIS Review 97/2009
economic paradigm shift. In this regard, I am aware that the Ministry of Agriculture, with the 
support of the FITHA will be working on the pilot Farmers Import Substitution Project (FISP) 
in Sigatoka. 
I was very pleased to read in the papers a couple of days ago that the Cabinet has approved 
the FISP programme as a pilot project in Sigatoka. 
This is a step in the right direction and I wish the project every success. Such projects can 
become catalytic for future related projects in the industry that will help reduce food imports.  
I am also aware that some of the large hotels have their own farms. Some, I believe, meet 
40-60 percent of their food needs. I commend such initiatives and hope these import saving 
schemes provide the impetus for other hotels/resorts in the industry to follow. 
Conclusion 
Fiji, like most other countries, is feeling the impact of the global financial crisis. The domestic 
economy will contract marginally this year but we expect a positive growth next year. 
The  challenges  for  small  and  open  economies  like  us  are  multiplied  due  to  our  limited 
resources and vulnerability to these forces, including natural disasters. To sustain ourselves 
during  this  period,  we  need  the  concerted  efforts  of  government,  the  RBF,  the  industry 
players in the various sectors of the economy and the community at large. We all want to see 
the economy develop and grow. 
The tourism industry has the greatest potential to be the engine of growth in the next two 
years when the other sectors of the economy may not be doing that well. 
It is my hope that the players in the tourism industry will continue to be innovative. In this 
regard,  I  look  forward  to  seeing  the  industry  build  appropriate  response  mechanisms  to 
mitigate  the  effects  of  the  economic  crisis.  Similarly,  that  the  industry  would  continue  to 
improve  resilience  through  collaboration,  market  research  &  forward  looking  policies  to 
weather  the  effects  of  any  threats.  For  a  sustainable  tourism  in  Fiji  we  wish  to  see  the 
industry working towards a “Green Tourism Industry” – to lead the way on the transformation 
to carbon-clean operations, environment management and energy efficient building.  
We need to continue to work together for a better Fiji. 
I wish the Forum well in its deliberations. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 9
