Thomas Jordan: Financial crisis dispersing? Economy changing 
direction? 
Speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, 
at the general assembly of the Handels- und Industrieverein des Kantons Schwyz, Schwyz, 
25 August 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  situation  on  the  international  financial  markets  has  recently  brightened  again.  This  is 
mainly due to the positive keynote in company earnings reports and a series of unexpectedly 
favourable economic data. The relaxation of monetary policy was pursued further through the 
implementation  of  unconventional  measures  in  March  2009,  and  this  is  also  likely  to  have 
had  a  calming  effect.  Price  advances  since  March  should,  however,  be  partly  seen  as 
corrections  to  excessive  downward  movements  in  the  previous  period.  Considerable 
uncertainties  still  prevail  and 
the  danger  of  setbacks  should  not  be  carelessly 
underestimated. 
The recessionary developments in the world economy weakened significantly in the second 
quarter of 2009. Expansionary monetary policy around the world, together with fiscal support 
programmes, have probably played an important role in this respect. Economic indicators are 
also  showing  a  turn  for  the  better  in  the  Swiss  economy.  Nevertheless,  in  view  of  the 
exceedingly low level of utilisation of production capacity, industrial investment will probably 
continue falling. Given the increasingly gloomy outlook for employment, private consumption 
is also likely to put a damper on the resumption of cyclical activity. Consequently, the current 
overall situation of the Swiss economy remains difficult despite the many rays of hope with 
regard to the economic cycle. Also, the danger of deflation does not yet seem to have been 
entirely averted.  
We  have  not  yet  reached  the  moment  for  a  change  of  direction  in  monetary  policy  in 
Switzerland.  After  analysing  the  available  economic  data  and  forecasts  and  taking  various 
risk considerations into account, there is no need for the SNB to take monetary policy action 
at  present.  The  SNB  can  afford  to  adopt  a  holding  stance.  However,  this  holding  stance 
should  not  be  mistaken  for  inactivity.  The  SNB  continues  its  firm  implementation  of  an 
extremely expansionary monetary policy and the unconventional measures launched on 12 
March  2009.  The  Swiss  franc  money  market  is  still  being  provided  with  a  generous  and 
flexible  supply  of  liquidity,  interest  rates  remain  low,  Swiss  franc  bonds  are  still  being 
purchased  to  dampen  the  level  of  risk  premiums  on  the  Swiss  franc  bond  market  as  and 
when needed and the appreciation of the Swiss franc will continue to be prevented. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
