Radovan Jelašić: New economic challenges in 2009 in view of the global 
financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  General 
Meeting  of  the  Serbian  Chamber  of  Commerce  Dedicated  to  Considering  New  Economic 
Challenges in 2009 in view of the Global Financial Crisis, Belgrade, 23 December 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow me to thank the Serbian Chamber of Commerce for inviting me here today. I hope that 
my short speech will, if not help resolve numerous issues our economy is currently facing, 
than at least point to the challenges that lie ahead. 
Looking  at  the  macro  level,  we  can  see  that  after  pursuing  restrictive  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies  over  the  past  few  decades,  all  developed  economies  have  recently  opted  for 
unprecedented relaxation of their policy stance (the US budget deficit, for instance, will be 
around  15%  in  the  current  fiscal  year).  Like  many  other  countries  of  the  region,  however, 
Serbia cannot resort to similar measures for several key reasons:  
- 
Even in the best of times, Serbia ran a high fiscal deficit and the money, primarily 
from  privatization,  was  spent  rather  than  set  aside  into  reserves  for  the  present 
challenging times;  
Extra money paid into the budget over the past several years was used for wages, 
pensions or material costs, etc. rather than for investment purposes.  
Serbia is not an EU member and has no access to substantial additional sources of 
finance (e.g. EU loan to Hungary equalled EUR 6.5 billion and to Latvia – EUR 3.1 
billion).  
  This  is  a  consequence  of  a  slow  and  inefficient  transition  process,  but  also  of  a  populist 
response to spending demands. 
It is, however, important to note that, by agreeing on an arrangement with the IMF, Serbia 
has made a significant step in the right direction. In these turbulent times, this will provide not 
only  a  firm  macroeconomic  anchor,  but  will  also  enable  the  conduct  of  a  coherent  and 
transparent macroeconomic policy.  
Like  all  other  countries  of  the  world,  Serbia  has  to  adjust  to  the  new  global  economic 
circumstances  which  will  reflect  on  all  aspects  of  business  activity:  from  the  number  of 
employees to the volume of operations, from  market analysis to, perhaps even undesired, 
selling off parts of businesses. This reminds me of a story about two men in the woods who 
suddenly notice a bear standing only a couple of meters away. And the moral of the story is: 
any danger could also be seen as an opportunity – most of all for the one who can run faster! 
In  addition  to  measures  relating  to  price  stability,  exchange  rate  and  the  financial  sector, 
other measures enacted by the NBS relate to:  
- 
Natural persons – no change in the classification of receivables, even if: 
o 
o 
Loan repayment period is extended for one year; 
Foreign currency-indexed loans are converted into dinar loans, and CHF-
indexed loans are converted into EUR-indexed loans; 
Indexed  financial  lease  receivables  exceed  the  30/50%  ratio  due  to 
depreciation of the dinar.  
o 
 Banks: 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 1
o 
o 
o 
Reserve  requirements  on  foreign  credit,  subordinated  credit  and  financial 
leasing are abolished (until June 2010); 
Reserves for general banking risks are abolished in the event of expansive 
growth; 
Gross household lending/share capital = 150% – no penalty in the event of 
non-compliance caused by the depreciation of the dinar.  
 Legal entities: 
o 
o 
Loans  for  agriculture  and  loans  to  entrepreneurs  for  other  activities  are 
exempted from the gross household lending to share capital ratio (150%) 
Negotiations  with  the  EIB  on  a  loan  of  EUR  250  million  to  SMEs,  and 
negotiations with other international financial institutions (e.g. EBRD, KfW) 
and governments (e.g. Italy).  
the  capital  base,  c)  announced  substantial  public  works,  primarily 
True,  the  list  of  measures  relating  to  legal  entities  is  the  shortest,  but  we  are  making 
intensive efforts to lengthen it. 
But, what have other countries done so far? The governments have a) greatly improved the 
deposit  insurance  scheme,  b)  promised  notable  support  to  the  financial  sector  in  order  to 
strengthen 
in 
infrastructure. From their part, central banks a) provided substantial additional liquidity, and 
b) cut the key policy rate in order to lower the cost of credit. In terms of specific activities, 
however, central banks have done their part, but the measures announced by governments 
(excluding deposit insurance) are still being elaborated. For example, not a single euro has 
yet been approved to Austrian banks simply because the authorities waited for an approval 
of terms from Brussels.  
The 21st century and market economy call for different models and methods than a decade 
or two ago. But before we go into details, it is important to pay attention to the following facts:  
The  ownership  structure  of  both  enterprises  and  banks  has  changed  significantly, 
- 
and this will have a major impact on the way we confront the current challenges;  
Problem resolution in the EU will affect Serbia as much as the turbulences have (the 
example of the car industry);  
Some  problems  cannot  be  resolved  in  Serbia before  they  are  resolved  in  Vienna, 
Frankfurt, Milan or Paris.  
  “Helicopter Ben” is currently a popular nickname of the Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, 
Ben Bernanke. Mr. Krugman, this year’s Nobel laureate, recently stated that it was time to 
“shovel money into the economy”. The question, however, is: in what way, to whom and how 
much? 
But let us turn back to the case of Serbia. For instance, if you were to offer an interest-free 
loan to US Steel in order for it to maintain the present volume of operations and keep all its 
employees, they would decline it as that would mean producing goods not for sale but for 
replenishing stocks(!). The same is true for Tigar – Michelin. What these companies need are 
buyers, i.e. a car industry that can produce and sell cars. Sometimes, it is more profitable to 
halt  production  altogether,  than  to  take  out  a  loan,  even  if  it  is  interest-free!  The  problem 
therefore lies in the market, i.e. in the lack of buyers! 
And finally, what is to be done:  
- 
We should significantly increase budgetary investments, primarily for financing the 
Corridor 10 highway, building additional energy producing capacities, implementing 
infrastructural  projects  from  irrigation  to  railway  lines,  i.e.  creating  additional  jobs 
where demand for products/services is guaranteed! But the share of investment can 
only increase if spending goes down!  
2 
 BIS Review 1/2009
  Serbia  has  many  institutions  that  ought  to  intensify  their  activities  in  the  period 
ahead:  SMECA,  AOFI,  Development  Fund  and  various  other  guarantee  funds 
providing start-up credits as well as loans for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
We have the framework set up, but much needs to be done in terms of effort, people 
and money!  
In Serbia, if inflation goes down, so will the key policy rate and, consequently, the 
cost  of  borrowing.  This,  however,  will  not  resolve  our  problems  but  will  only 
moderate their impact to a certain extent.  
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 3
