William C Dudley: The Federal Reserve's liquidity facilities  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Vanderbilt  University  Conference  on  Financial  Markets 
and Financial Policy Honoring Dewey Daane, Nashville, Tennessee, 18 April 2009. 
 Thank you for having me here today. It is a great honor to be on a panel with Peter Fisher 
and Bill Poole. I am the neophyte here in terms of central banking experience! 
Before I begin, let me emphasize that my comments represent my own views and opinions 
and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  of  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
I am going to talk today about the Fed’s provision of liquidity to banks and dealers and to 
market participants more generally. 
I would break down our actions into three broad classes. 
First,  we  addressed  the  acute  seizing  up  of  inter-bank  financing  markets.  For  banks,  we 
introduced the Term Auction Facility in December 2007 and for the primary dealers, the Term 
Securities Lending Facility and Primary Dealer Credit Facility in March 2008. In addition, the 
Federal Reserve entered into FX swap agreements with major global central banks in order 
to channel dollar liquidity to banks overseas. 
Second,  we  expanded  our  provision  of  short  term  financing  beyond  banks  and  dealers  in 
order to alleviate constraints on highly rated corporate borrowers. The two most noteworthy 
examples  of  this  are  the  Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility,  which  was  introduced  in 
October  2008,  and  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Lending  Facility  (announced  in 
November 2008, but not up and running until last month.) 
Third, once policy rates were near the zero-bound, we expanded the type of assets that the 
Fed purchased. In order to put downward pressure on general longer term borrowing rates, 
particularly  mortgage  rates,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  purchased  the  debt  of  the  GSEs, 
namely, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the mortgage-backed-securities they issue, and, 
more recently, longer-term Treasuries. 
So why has the Fed done so much in terms of special programs?  
As I see it, there are four major reasons behind the dramatic expansion of the Fed’s liquidity 
programs: 
• 
To  provide  liquidity  to  banks  and  dealers  in  order  to  slow  down  the  deleveraging 
process.  
To  expand  the  balance  sheet  capacity  of  the  private  sector  to  counteract  the 
shrinkage underway in the non-bank financial sector.  
To restore and improve market function.  
To ease financial market conditions.  
• 
• 
This  financial  crisis  has  been  marked  by  the  rapid  deleveraging  of  the  non-bank  financial 
sector.  This  deleveraging  has  been  driven  mainly  by  the  collapse  of  securitization  activity, 
pressure on dealers to reduce leverage and the spillover of these efforts on to other financial 
players such as hedge funds.  
This deleveraging process, in turn, has put intense pressure on the balance sheet capacity of 
the banking sector. Not only can banks no longer securitize assets as before, but assets that 
they thought were off their books have come back on. 
 BIS Review 48/2009 
 1
Although the deleveraging process is inevitable following periods when the financial system 
has become overextended, it does matter how this deleveraging process takes place. In the 
current crisis, the deleveraging process at times has been very violent and dangerous, with 
powerful  reinforcing  feedback  loops  intensifying  the  process.  During  these  episodes, 
bystanders who did not engage in excess may be trampled and fail. This may exacerbate the 
tightening  in  financial  conditions,  intensifying  the  constraint  on  credit  availability  and  the 
downward pressure on economic activity.  
For  example,  in  March  2008,  in  the  run-up  to  Bear  Stearns’  demise,  the  deleveraging 
process intensified. Market volatility increased; this caused lenders to increase the haircuts 
they  assessed  against  collateral  to  secure  their  lending.  The  higher  haircuts,  in  turn, 
squeezed highly leveraged investors who were forced to sell assets. This drove down asset 
prices and increased price volatility further, leading to still-higher haircuts. This intensified the 
deleveraging process, which led to more mark-to-market losses.  
The Federal Reserve’s facilities for banks and dealers have been designed, in part, to slow 
down the deleveraging process. The TAF, the TSLF and the PDCF have provided assurance 
to  banks  and  dealers  that  they  have  a  place  where  they  can  obtain  funding  for  their  less 
liquid collateral. As a result, they will not be forced to dump assets, further depressing market 
prices, increasing volatility and the upward pressure on haircuts. The deleveraging will still 
take place – and we have seen it – just not so quickly and violently that it would destabilize 
the entire financial system.  
The second major intent of the liquidity facilities has been for the Fed to expand its balance 
sheet and, by doing so, offset some of shrinkage that has been occurring among non-bank 
financial  intermediaries.  The  fact  is  the  banking  system  is  capital-constrained,  with 
insufficient capital to expand its balance sheet fast enough to offset the shrinkage evident in 
the non-bank sector. Although the Federal Reserve cannot create capital for banks, it can 
provide  funding  directly  to  the  private  sector,  attenuating  the  consequences  caused  by  a 
balance-sheet-constrained banking system.  
The CPFF and the TALF are both important in restoring the flow of credit to borrowers. The 
CPFF  essentially  jump-started  the commercial  paper  market,  which  had  largely  shut  down 
following the failure of Lehman Brothers in September.  
The  TALF’s  purpose  is  to  restart  the  securitization  markets,  and  thereby  lower  the  cost  of 
borrowing to households and business. The TALF does this by providing term, non-recourse 
loans  to  investors  against  AAA-rated  collateral.  Investor  demand  for  these  loans  leads  to 
downward pressure on AAA-rated financing rates, lowering the cost of credit. Although TALF 
is  off  to  a  relatively  slow  start  –  hurt,  in  part,  by  the  reluctance  of  some  investors  to 
participate because of worries about the potential implications for them of the TARP funding 
that is involved in the TALF program, it has helped to restart the securitization markets in the 
consumer asset-backed securities area and has brought down funding costs for consumer 
ABS issuers.  
The  third  goal  of  these  policy  interventions  has  been  to  improve  market  function.  By 
dramatically reducing rollover risk, the Federal Reserve’s willingness to serve as the lender 
or  investor  of  last  resort  has  helped  improve  market  function  in  a  broad  number  of  areas. 
Rollover risk is the risk that a borrower may not be able to obtain new funding in order to 
repay an investor when the investor needs the funds for other uses. If rollover risk is high, the 
investor is going to be concerned about getting its funds back and, thus, may be unwilling to 
make the investment in the first place. The impact of the Fed’s intervention on rollover risk 
has  been  especially  important  in  the  triparty  repo  market  and  in  the  commercial  paper 
market.  
The triparty repo market is a market in which investors such as money market mutual funds 
lend funds, mostly on an overnight basis, to securities dealers, with the loans collateralized 
by high-quality securities. During the crisis, this market became less stable. As the financial 
condition of some of the major securities dealers worsened, the clearing banks became more 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2009
reluctant  to return  the  cash  that  the  triparty  repo  investors had  invested  the  prior evening. 
The clearing banks were worried that if a dealer were to fail, they could be stuck with a large 
obligation. The  nervousness  of  the  clearing  banks,  in  turn,  spilled  back  to  the  investors.  If 
there  is  some  chance  that  I  might  not  get  my  cash  back  and  instead  be  stuck  with  the 
collateral,  do  I  really  want  to  make  the  loan  in  the  first  place?  The  Primary  Dealer  Credit 
Facility  essentially  broke  this  dynamic  by  putting  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  position  of 
lender  of  last  resort  in  the  triparty  repo  system.  With  the  Federal  Reserve  willing  to  lend 
against collateral, the clearing banks no longer have significant intraday risk exposure. The 
triparty  repo  investors  have  been  reassured  that  they  would  be  paid  back.  As  a 
consequence, they were willing to keep investing.  
The TAF and the dollar facilities offered by foreign central banks provided the same antidote 
to  rollover  risk  in  the  interbank  funding  markets.  Banks  that  were  reluctant  to  lend  to  one 
another  because  of  rollover  risk  became  willing  to  reengage  because  they  knew  that  the 
Federal Reserve and foreign central banks would lend against high-quality collateral.  
By  eliminating  rollover  risk,  the  CPFF  also  helped  to  restore  market  function  in  the 
commercial  paper  market.  Commercial  paper  investors  who  had  shunned  the  market 
returned  because  they  were  no  longer  worried  that  they  could  get  their  money  back.  In 
extremis,  the  Federal  Reserve  could  purchase  the  commercial  paper  from  the  issuer, 
generating the funds to repay the private investors’ commercial paper investment.  
The fourth and final goal of the Fed’s liquidity facilities has been to ease financial conditions. 
This  has  been  particularly  important  in  the  current  environment  because  the  federal  funds 
rate  cannot  be  pushed  below  zero  (the  so-called  zero-bound  constraint).  This  means  that 
with the federal funds rate having been effectively lowered as far as it can go, the Federal 
Reserve  has  had  to  turn  to  other  tools  such  as  asset  purchase  programs  if  it  is  to  ease 
financial conditions further as warranted given macroeconomic conditions.  
The Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency debt, agency MBS and longer-term Treasuries 
have  been  implemented  mainly  with  one  goal  in  mind  –  reduce  longer-term  private  sector 
interest rates, and thereby provide stimulus to the U.S. economy.  
The  Federal  Reserve’s  Treasury  purchase  program  is  designed  to  hold  down  the  level  of 
longer-term interest rates. To the extent that a lower level of long-term Treasury rates pulls 
down the level of private long-term rates, then these purchases should also ease financial 
market conditions.  
So how have the Fed’s facilities worked in practice?  
In  general,  I  think  the  facilities  have  worked  quite  well.  In  those  areas  where  the  facilities 
have been active, we generally have seen an improvement in market conditions.  
But  the  facilities  have  not  been  a  panacea  for  three  reasons.  First,  the  facilities  cannot 
address  the  fundamental  problem  –  the  shortage  of  capital  in  the  banking  system.  The 
facilities can slow down the deleveraging process, but until the banking system is viewed as 
being sufficiently well-capitalized and is able to expand its lending activity significantly, the 
limits on credit availability caused by an impaired banking system will make it more difficult to 
generate a sustainable economic recovery.  
Second, there are limits on what the Fed can do legally. For example, the Fed can only lend 
if  it  is  secured  to  its  satisfaction.  There  has  to  be  sufficient  collateral  available.  The  Fed 
cannot  lend  on  an  unsecured  basis  or  provide  guarantees.  And  the  Fed  cannot  purchase 
assets  other  than  Treasuries,  agencies  and  agency  MBS,  and  short-dated  general 
obligations of states and municipalities.  
Third,  the  effectiveness  of  some  of  the  Fed  facilities  have  been  undercut  by  stigma  –  the 
discount window is the best example of this – or by worries about what other strings are or 
might be attached to the use of the facilities – the TALF comes to mind in this respect.  
BIS Review 48/2009 
 3
One  reason  why  the  TALF  has  gotten  off  to  a  relatively  slow  start  is  the  reluctance  of 
investors  to  participate.  Issuers’  interest,  not  surprisingly,  dwarfs  investor  demand  at  this 
stage of the program. Some investors are apparently reluctant not because the economics of 
the program are unattractive, but because of worries about what participation might lead to. 
The TARP loans to banks led to intense scrutiny of bank compensation practices given that 
TALF loans are ultimately secured by TARP funds, investor anxiety about using the program 
has risen.  
My own view is that these fears are misplaced. The TARP funds in the TALF program only 
come in on the backend of the program when loans are put back to the Fed. The lending to 
investors  on  the  front  end  is  completely  a  Federal  Reserve  program  and  operation.  That 
being  said,  I  understand  the  reasons  for  the  anxiety  given  the  political  discourse  on  this 
subject.  I  think  it  is  worth  emphasizing  that  actions  that  lead  investors  to  shun  taking  risk, 
especially  in  this  environment,  are  ultimately  detrimental  to  the  ability  of  households  and 
businesses to secure credit at reasonable borrowing rates. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  liquidity  facilities  and  asset  purchase  programs  have  led  to  a 
substantial  expansion  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  since  September  2008. 
Currently, the Fed’s balance sheet totals about $2.2 trillion, up from about $900 billion last 
fall prior to Lehman’s failure.  
In thinking about this balance sheet expansion, I would make three broad points. First, in my 
mind, the goal is not the expansion of the balance sheet per se, but the objectives that I laid 
out  earlier.  In  this  respect,  the  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet  differs  considerably  from 
Japan’s  experience  with  quantitative  easing.  In  the  current  circumstance,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  liquidity  programs  act  on  the  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet  as  the  Fed  lends 
funds against less liquid collateral and expands its asset holdings via purchases of agency 
debt, agency MBS and Treasuries. The goals are to slow down the pace of deleveraging to 
reduce  the  risk  of  catastrophic  failure,  improve  market  function  and  ease  financial  market 
conditions.  
In contrast, the Bank of Japan worked on the liability side of the balance. Their goal was to 
expand the amount of excess reserves held by the banking system so that the banks would 
be more willing to expand their credit provisions. Although the Fed’s activities have led to a 
big jump in excess reserves, this increase is incidental – a byproduct rather than goal of the 
asset-oriented programs.  
Second,  as  a  consequence  of  this  my  point,  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet,  is  not  a  good 
metric for measuring the impact of the Fed’s facilities or the amount of stimulus that the Fed 
is  providing  via  these  programs.  For  example,  consider  the  impact  of  the  Fed  facilities  on 
rollover risk. A Fed facility that eliminates rollover risk might not be used at all. There might 
be  no  balance  sheet  impact.  Nevertheless,  the  facility  could  have  an  important  impact  on 
market function and financial market conditions.  
It is not possible to mechanically map the size of the balance sheet back onto the impact on 
financial market conditions. That is because the balance sheet size is being driven by a large 
number of different actions. Is a dollar of TAF lending equivalent to a dollar extended through 
the CPFF or to a dollar of Treasury purchases? How important is the PDCF? It backstops 
lots of lending, but outstanding amounts are very low. The differences between the various 
programs and activities mean that the balance sheet size should be interpreted in light of the 
impact on market function and financial market conditions, not by the impact on the size of 
the balance sheet.  
The size of the balance sheet is also not a good standard because the use of the different 
facilities depends on the degree of impairment in market function. If market conditions were 
to  deteriorate,  I  would  expect  that  usage  of  the  Fed’s  facilities  would  increase  and  the 
balance sheet would grow in size. This would be appropriate. The Fed’s balance sheet would 
act  as  a  shock  absorber,  cushioning  the  impact  of  the  shift  in  market  conditions.  In  such 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2009
circumstances, the balance sheet would act as a counter-cyclical dampening mechanism. I 
would view that as a desirable outcome.  
In  contrast,  if  the  Fed  were  committed  to  a  particular  balance  sheet  trajectory,  then,  as 
market conditions improved and financial conditions eased and usage of the Fed’s liquidity 
facilities diminished, the Fed would have to offset this by increasing the scope of its liquidity 
facilities or by expanding its asset purchase programs. It is unclear to me why the Federal 
Reserve  would  want  to  apply  more  stimulus  at  a  time  when  market  conditions  were 
improving. This suggests that some variability in the trajectory of the Fed’s balance should be 
expected and might even be desirable. And, in fact, this is what we have seen in practice.  
Third,  I  am  not  worried  at  all  that  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  expansion  will 
generate  an  inflation  problem.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  the 
ability to manage down the size of its balance sheet over time once financial conditions and 
the  economy  improve.  Many  of  the  liquidity  facilities  will  shrink  automatically  as  financial 
conditions normalize. With the exception of TAF loans, all of the other Fed liquidity facilities 
charge  rates  that  are  higher  than  what  one  would  expect  during  more  normal  financial 
circumstances. And, if we want the TAF loans to shrink, we can either shrink the amounts on 
offer  or  raise  the  interest  rate  we  charge,  or  both.  The  other  assets  such  as  Treasury 
securities and agency MBS can be sold or the impact on reserves be offset by repurchase 
operations that drain reserves from the banking system.  
More importantly, the Federal Reserve now has the tools to allow the conduct of monetary 
policy to be separated from the size of the balance sheet and the amount of excess reserves 
in the banking system. In September 2008, the Federal Reserve gained the authority to pay 
interest on excess reserves. This provides a tool that allows Fed officials to tighten monetary 
policy and raise private sector interest rates by raising the rate paid on excess reserves.  
Some skeptics note that when interest on excess reserves was first implemented, the federal 
funds rate traded somewhat below the rate on excess reserves. This has created worry in 
some quarters that paying interest on excess reserves might not work very well as a tool for 
controlling the federal funds rate.  
On this issue, two points are warranted. First, the relatively large gap between the interest 
rate on excess reserves and the federal funds rate was due, in large part, to the impaired 
condition  of  the  banking  system,  which  inhibited  the  willingness  of  banks  to  arbitrage  that 
gap. Because balance sheet capacity was scarce, banks were reluctant to use their balance 
sheets to purchase federal funds at a slight discount to the interest on excess reserves rate. 
As the banking system returns to health, this arbitrage is likely to become more attractive, 
causing the gap between the interest rate on excess reserves and the federal funds rate to 
narrow.  
Second, the Federal Reserve could alter its monetary policy framework in order to increase 
its control of monetary policy in a large excess reserve environment. It is beyond the scope 
of this speech to get into the details, but we have plenty of options in devising incentives for 
banks to hold reserves at the Fed that would improve our ability to control the federal funds 
rate. The challenge will be deciding on the best option, not in finding a workable approach.  
Thank you for your attention. 
I am happy to take any questions. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 5
