Sanusi Lamido Aminu Sanusi: Assessment of current development in 
the Nigerian economy and the CBN policy action 
Speech by Mr Sanusi Lamido Aminu Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the 
Maiden Press Conference, Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), Abuja, 7 July 2009.  
 It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to my maiden briefing on the activities of the 
CBN in addressing the challenges faced by the financial sector owing to the downturn in the 
global economy. I, therefore, take this opportunity to appraise the CBN monetary actions in 
the recent past and indicate the way forward in the immediate future. 
As  someone  just  coming  from  the  other  side  of  the  aisle  of  the  financial  sector  (the 
regulated), you will appreciate that my remarks today as a regulator must be viewed as one 
that is not bereft of the first-hand knowledge of what regulation means. 
As you are well aware, the primary objective of the CBN is to promote sustainable output and 
employment  while  maintaining  price  stability  over  time.  These  goals  are  not  unique  to  this 
country.  Indeed,  most  central  banks  pursue  the  same  objectives.  The  pursuit  of  these 
objectives is central to eliminating uncertainties and distortions of high and variable inflation, 
thereby, providing an economic environment that is conducive to growth. 
The Central Bank of Nigeria has in recent times pursued these goals by influencing financial 
conditions, that is, the cost and availability of credit as well as asset prices. 
The  growth  performance  of  the  Nigerian  economy,  has  until  recently,  been  sustained  at  a 
relatively high level due largely to the sustenance of macroeconomic stability – a product of 
effective  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  financial  sector  reforms  and  relative  improvement  in 
fiscal prudence. The current global financial melt-down has weakened growth considerably in 
the  first  quarter  of  2009  to  4.85  per  cent  from  5.75  per  cent  estimated  for  2008  and 
projections for the future are not encouraging. 
To  ameliorate  the  situation,  CBN  took  measures  to  encourage  the  flow  of  credit  for 
productive  investment.  The  MPR  was  reduced by  175  basic  points  in April  2009 while  the 
liquidity and cash ratios declined from 30 per cent and 2 per cent to 25 per cent and 1 per 
cent  respectively.  As  these  actions  did  not  seem  to  have  yielded  the  desired  economic 
outcomes in time, the Bank resorted to direct control measures involving interest rate caps 
and the re-introduction of exchange control measures. 
The failure of the economy to respond favourably to the monetary easing measures reflected 
mainly  the  under-developed  character  of  the  financial  market  and,  concomitantly,  the 
weakness of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
The  major  challenge  facing  the  CBN,  therefore,  is  the  critical  need  to  strengthen  the 
implementation of the on-going financial sector reforms to achieve enhanced efficiency of the 
financial markets on which the effective conduct of monetary policy depends. 
In this regard, the CBN policies will continue to support government endeavours to promote 
strong and sustainable growth without compromising its mandate to ensure the maintenance 
of  price  stability.  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  will  be  driven  by  market-based 
mechanisms,  thereby,  building  on  the  progress  we  have  made  since  we  abandoned  the 
direct  control  measures  in  1993.  Consequently,  interest  rate  policy,  which  is  an  essential 
component  of  monetary  policy  will  be  flexible  and,  as  much  as,  practicable  market-
determined in order to ensure allocative efficiency in the financial markets. 
We  will  address  some  of  the  failures  leading  to  high  lending  rates,  including  operational 
efficiency in the financial system. 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 1
Finally,  an  efficient  and  effective  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  can  only  be 
assured in an environment of safe, sound and competitive banking system. 
In  this  regard,  the  CBN  surveillance  activities  will  receive  new  impetus  to  ensure  efficient 
management  and  good  corporate  governance  that  will  complement  the  gains  made  under 
the banking consolidation. 
Please, permit me to elaborate on the four points just outlined. 
Deepening the financial market 
The financial market has not as yet attained the depths that are necessary to have efficient 
transmittal of policy stance. As a result, the short term interest rates which should ordinarily 
affect  the  lending  rates  to  the  real  sector  have  not  played  this  role.  Bank  lending  rates 
remained  high  and  the  spread  between  lending  and  deposit  rates  has  been  unacceptably 
wide. 
The role of the financial system in economic development cannot be overstated. Apart from 
the critical role financial markets play in mobilizing savings and allocating them to productive 
investment, an efficient financial market would provide a more stable source of financing for 
both private and public sector. At present, there is a near total absence of debt instruments in 
the  capital  market.  As  a  result,  banks  are  responsible  for  almost  100  per  cent  of  the  loan 
taken by the private sector. 
The  Central  Bank  will  work  with  the  Tax  Authorities  to  have  a  tax  free  yield  curve  and 
encourage the development of a bond market. The Bank will also collaborate with Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Nigerian Stock Exchange (NSE) to reduce the cost of 
bond issues so as to diversify funding sources away from banks. 
Interest rates 
A major impediment to the realization of development through the intermediation role of the 
banking industry is the wide and persistent spread that exists between deposit and lending 
rates.  The  interest  rate  spread,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  bank’s  earnings  from 
loaned  funds  and  its  cost  of  funds  is  influenced  by  non-interest  expense,  prudential  and 
reserve requirements, market structure, inflation, credit risk and profit expectation of banks, 
among others. 
Available studies on interest rate margins and profitability determinants show that high non-
financial costs are largely responsible for the wide intermediation spread in Nigeria. These 
costs often reflect inefficiencies in the operations of the banking system which very often are 
passed  on  to  consumers.  The  data  also  show  a  positive  relationship  between  net  interest 
margin and overhead costs. 
The Central Bank will work with banks to improve efficiency in the banking system. We will 
encourage the banks to explore the idea of infrastructure sharing to improve efficiency and 
reduce cost of operations. Other areas of cost cutting are through innovations that will reduce 
the cost of delivery of banks products. It is expected that gains from banking efficiency and 
other financial system reforms will reduce intermediation spreads. 
In addition to these measures, it is expected that banks will realize that excessive interest 
charges increase the risk of huge loan losses and financial instability in the medium term. It 
is,  therefore,  necessary  for  banks  to  moderate  short-term  profit  expectations  and  curtail 
expenditure on compensation and bloated overheads. The CBN will work with the Bankers’ 
Committee  and,  through  moral  suasion,  encourage  a  consensus  on  what  constitutes  a 
reasonable  margin.  It  is  clear  that  in  the  present  arrangement,  all  but  the  most  powerful 
companies are at the mercy of banks as fund providers, and the regulator must play the role 
of consumer protection and ensure that banks charges are reasonable and consistent with 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2009
both the profit motive of the individual banks and in the interest of the system. Real interest 
rates  in  double  digits  are  much  higher  than  the  growth  potential  of  GDP  given  structural 
constraints. 
in 
the 
including 
framework 
regulations, 
introduction  of 
Reform of the payments system 
The payments system plays a crucial role in any economy as a channel of inter-sector, inter-
industry  and  inter-company  financial  resource  flows,  thus,  promoting  economic  growth. 
Understandably,  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  (CBN)  accorded  the  payments  system  due 
priority in its reform agenda of the financial system. Thus, the CBN in partnership with other 
stakeholders embarked on extensive reforms of the payments system to enhance its safety, 
efficiency  and  reliability.  This  effort  culminated 
institutional 
arrangements,  operational  mechanisms,  interrelated  IT  infrastructure  and  instruments  that 
are gaining wide acceptability among service consumers in the banking industry. 
The emerging payments landscape in Nigeria has generally been significantly influenced by 
financial  liberalization  and  integration  across  the  globe  and,  in  particular,  developments  in 
payments 
information  and 
communications  technology.  The  first  major  step  towards  reforming  the  National  Payment 
Systems (NPS) by the CBN was the articulation of national payments system framework and 
guidelines  for  all  payments  system  initiatives  with  the  objectives  of  generally,  ensuring 
availability  without  interruption,  meeting  as  much  of  the  users'  needs  as  possible,  and 
operating at minimum risk and reasonable cost. 
In retrospect, the CBN’s payments system reform agenda has produced salutary outcomes. 
The major developments so far have been in the areas of deployment of several requisite 
infrastructures since 2002 and the establishment of the institutional framework to drive the 
payments system reforms. 
Therefore, the NPS would be a major driver of changes in the financial markets, and would 
serve  as  a  platform  for  supporting  the  integration  of  the  Nigerian  wholesale  and  retail 
payments  system  with  that  of  the  West  African  Monetary  Zone  (WAMZ).  The  Bank  will 
continue  to  pursue  the  payments  system  reforms  as  outlined  in  the  Financial  System 
Strategy FSS 2020. Specifically, the implementation of the seven key initiatives that will drive 
the  usage  of  electronic  payments  will  be  vigorously  pursued.  These  initiatives  include 
Government supplier payments, person-to-person trade, salary and bill payments, business 
and individual taxes and securities settlement. 
infrastructure  and 
Financial stability issues 
The Bank has since March 2006 adopted a new code of corporate governance to engender 
confidence  in  the  industry  and,  hence,  attract  foreign  investors  in  the  sector.  Risk-based 
supervision and consolidated supervision have also been adopted in the industry to further 
boost  confidence  and  ensure  stability  of  the  system.  In  addition,  common  accounting  year 
end for all banks and international financial reporting standards aimed at improving integrity 
and comparability of both financial reports and data is to be adopted in the industry by the 
end of 2009 and 2010, respectively. Also, greater emphasis has been placed on e-FASS as 
a tool for banks’ returns analysis for speedy identification of early warning signals. 
The Bank has also reviewed the Contingency Planning Framework for Systemic Distress in 
banks. Others include the introduction of Credit Bureau, deployment of resident examiners to 
banks since January 2009 as well as standby teams of target examiners being deployed to 
any bank at any given time to ensure timely regulatory action when necessary. 
Despite the measures taken by the CBN, there have been concerns in recent times about the 
health of the Nigerian banking system occasioned largely by the system’s exposure to the 
capital market and the effect of the global financial crisis as well as exposure to oil marketers 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 3
and  Ministries,  Departments  and  Agencies  (MDA).  While  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  banks 
were challenged in the face of these developments, there is no evidence, thus far, that our 
banking  system  is  facing  a  crisis  as  has  been  reported  in  some  newspapers  recently.  All 
reports  purporting  to  suggest  that  some  named  banks  are  not  sound  or  shaken  are 
unfounded  and  we  urge  journalists  to  exercise  caution  and  show  more  responsibilities  in 
reporting  and  quoting  unofficial  sources.  Our  view  is  that  there  are  stress  points  in  banks’ 
balance  sheets  (margin  loans,  proprietary  positions,  oil  marketing  names,  unsecured  large 
exposures)  and  these  are  being  dimensioned.  An  appropriate  resolution  framework  will  be 
developed  in  consultation  with  reputable  independent  advisers,  and  the  market  will  have 
information on steps being taken at appropriate junctions in the process. We reiterate that, 
based on the totality of information available to the regulator, there is no basis for suggesting 
that the system is at risk. We also re-affirm our commitment to stand behind every financial 
institution  and  work  with  its  board  and  management  to  ensure  a  smooth  resolution  of  any 
issues that may arise as an outcome of the diagnostic process. No bank will be allowed to 
fail. 
Going  forward,  the  CBN  will  strengthen  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  and 
enhance monitoring of the operations of the DMBs to ensure that they remain safe, sound 
and  healthy  to  support  the  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the  government,  in  general,  and 
monetary policy, in particular. 
To this end, the CBN will continue to ensure the maintenance of public confidence through 
appropriate  disclosure  and  would  reinvigorate 
tolerance  on  all 
unprofessional  and  unethical  conduct.  Banks  would  also  be  required  to  further  strengthen 
their risk management process, while the present supervisory methodology of risk-based and 
consolidated  supervision  with  special  emphasis  on  macro-prudential  regulation  and  sound 
stress testing practices would be pursued more vigorously. 
More  and  rigorous  emphasis  would  be  placed  on  the  implementation  of  the  Code  of 
Corporate  Governance  for  banks  in  Nigeria.  Banks  that  have  not  fully  complied  with  the 
requirements  of  the  code  would  be  encouraged  to  do  so.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubts, 
enforcement of the code of conducts on the board and top management of banks, especially 
in  the  areas  of  display  of  professionalism  and  high  ethical  standard  shall  not  be 
compromised. In addition, we will put in place a code of conduct for regulators to ensure that 
our own staff live up to the high expectation of the nation. 
Meanwhile,  the  on-going  assets’  quality  audit  by  the  CBN  and  NDIC  would  ensure  that 
appropriate policies are put in place to address identified lapses. 
It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  determination  of  the  health  of  banks  is  a  continuous 
exercise. The CBN on its part will continue to monitor developments in the sector and proffer 
appropriate policies to ensure that the Nigerian banking system remains sound and stable. 
The decision of the MPC this morning to guarantee inter-bank exposures and Pension Funds 
Administrators  (PFA)  placements  in  the  banks  is  aimed  at  reassuring  the  market  and 
stabilizing  the  system  while  the  reform  process  continues  over  the  next  6-9  months.  This 
should stop the current overheating in the system and exert a downward pressure on interest 
rates. 
the  policy  of  zero 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  conduct  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy  will 
continue to be dictated by the prevailing domestic economic conditions. Thus, the monetary 
policy framework will continue to be transparent and market-driven using standard monetary 
policy  instruments,  like  cash  reserve  requirements,  appropriate  interest  rate  policy,  open 
market  operations,  discount  window  operations,  foreign  exchange  market  intervention, 
amongst other market-related tools. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2009
Furthermore,  while  achieving  a  low  interest  rate  regime  remains  the  principal  target  of 
monetary policy, the determination of interest rate will continue to be flexible and driven by 
market  forces  –  demand  and  supply  conditions,  amongst  other  factors.  Similarly,  our 
exchange rate policy will be transparent and dictated by our economic fundamentals while 
remaining market-driven at all times, but with due cognizance of ensuring that instability does 
not creep into the various segments of the foreign exchange market. 
Overall, our ultimate goal is to establish a credible monetary policy regime that will facilitate 
the  attainment  of  our  two  key  mandates  of  ensuring  price  and  monetary  stability  and 
promoting  financial  soundness  and  stability,  to  support  government’s  macroeconomic 
objectives of high and sustainable economic growth and low unemployment, in the medium- 
to long-term. 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 5
