Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Report to the Congress 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington, DC, 21 July 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve's  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress.  
Economic and financial developments in the first half of 2009 
Aggressive policy actions taken around the world last fall may well have averted the collapse 
of  the  global  financial  system,  an  event  that  would  have  had  extremely  adverse  and 
protracted consequences for the world economy. Even so, the financial shocks that hit the 
global economy in September and October were the worst since the 1930s, and they helped 
push the global economy into the deepest recession since World War II. The U.S. economy 
contracted sharply in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year. More 
recently,  the  pace  of  decline  appears  to  have  slowed  significantly,  and  final  demand  and 
production  have  shown  tentative  signs  of  stabilization.  The  labor  market,  however,  has 
continued  to  weaken.  Consumer  price  inflation,  which  fell  to  low  levels  late  last  year, 
remained subdued in the first six months of 2009. 
To  promote  economic  recovery  and  foster  price  stability,  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) last year brought its target for the federal funds rate to a historically low 
range  of  0  to  1/4  percent,  where  it  remains  today.  The  FOMC  anticipates  that  economic 
conditions are likely to warrant maintaining the federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels 
for an extended period. 
At the time of our February report, financial markets at home and abroad were under intense 
strains,  with  equity  prices  at  multiyear  lows,  risk  spreads  for  private  borrowers  at  very 
elevated  levels,  and  some  important  financial  markets  essentially  shut.  Today,  financial 
conditions remain stressed, and many households and businesses are finding credit difficult 
to obtain. Nevertheless, on net, the past few months have seen some notable improvements. 
For  example,  interest  rate  spreads  in  short-term  money  markets,  such  as  the  interbank 
market  and  the  commercial  paper  market,  have  continued  to  narrow.  The  extreme  risk 
aversion  of  last  fall  has  eased  somewhat,  and  investors  are  returning  to  private  credit 
markets.  Reflecting  this  greater  investor  receptivity,  corporate  bond  issuance  has  been 
strong. Many markets are functioning more normally, with increased liquidity and lower bid-
asked spreads. Equity prices, which hit a low point in March, have recovered to roughly their 
levels at the end of last year, and banks have raised significant amounts of new capital. 
Many  of  the  improvements  in  financial  conditions  can  be  traced,  in  part,  to  policy  actions 
taken by the Federal Reserve to encourage the flow of credit. For example, the decline in 
interbank  lending  rates  and  spreads  was  facilitated  by  the  actions  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
and other central banks to ensure that financial institutions have adequate access to short-
term liquidity, which in turn has increased the stability of the banking system and the ability of 
banks  to  lend.  Interest  rates  and  spreads  on  commercial  paper  dropped  significantly  as  a 
result of the backstop liquidity facilities that the Federal Reserve introduced last fall for that 
market. Our purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities and other longer-term assets 
have helped lower conforming fixed mortgage rates. And the Term Asset-Backed Securities 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 1
Loan Facility (TALF), which was implemented this year, has helped restart the securitization 
markets for various classes of consumer and small business credit. 
Earlier  this  year,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  federal  banking  regulatory  agencies 
undertook  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  (SCAP),  popularly  known  as  the 
stress test, to determine the capital needs of the largest financial institutions. The results of 
the SCAP were reported in May, and they appeared to increase investor confidence in the 
U.S.  banking  system.  Subsequently,  the  great  majority  of  institutions  that  underwent  the 
assessment have raised equity in public markets. And, on June 17, 10 of the largest U.S. 
bank holding companies – all but one of which participated in the SCAP – repaid a total of 
nearly $70 billion to the Treasury. 
Better  conditions  in  financial  markets  have  been  accompanied  by  some  improvement  in 
economic prospects. Consumer spending has been relatively stable so far this year, and the 
decline  in  housing  activity  appears  to  have  moderated.  Businesses  have  continued  to  cut 
capital spending and liquidate inventories, but the likely slowdown in the pace of inventory 
liquidation  in  coming  quarters  represents  another  factor  that  may  support  a  turnaround  in 
activity. Although the recession in the rest of the world led to a steep drop in the demand for 
U.S. exports, this drag on our economy also appears to be waning, as many of our trading 
partners are also seeing signs of stabilization. 
Despite these positive signs, the rate of job loss remains high and the unemployment rate 
has continued its steep rise. Job insecurity, together with declines in home values and tight 
credit, is likely to limit gains in consumer spending. The possibility that the recent stabilization 
in household spending will prove transient is an important downside risk to the outlook. 
In conjunction with the June FOMC meeting, Board members and Reserve Bank presidents 
prepared  economic  projections  covering  the  years  2009  through  2011.  FOMC  participants 
generally expect that, after declining in the first half of this year, output will increase slightly 
over  the  remainder  of  2009.  The  recovery  is  expected  to  be  gradual  in  2010,  with  some 
acceleration in activity in 2011. Although the unemployment rate is projected to peak at the 
end  of  this  year,  the  projected  declines  in  2010  and  2011  would  still  leave  unemployment 
well  above  FOMC  participants'  views  of  the  longer-run  sustainable  rate.  All  participants 
expect that inflation will be somewhat lower this year than in recent years, and most expect it 
to remain subdued over the next two years. 
Policy challenges 
Monetary policy 
In  light  of  the  substantial  economic  slack  and  limited  inflation  pressures,  monetary  policy 
remains  focused  on  fostering  economic  recovery.  Accordingly,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the 
FOMC believes that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will be appropriate 
for an extended period. However, we also believe that it is important to assure the public and 
the  markets  that  the  extraordinary  policy  measures  we  have  taken  in  response  to  the 
financial  crisis  and  the  recession  can  be  withdrawn  in  a  smooth  and  timely  manner  as 
needed, thereby avoiding the risk that policy stimulus could lead to a future rise in inflation.1 
The FOMC has been devoting considerable attention to issues relating to its exit strategy, 
and  we  are  confident  that  we  have  the  necessary  tools  to  implement  that  strategy  when 
appropriate. 
                                                 
1  
For further discussion of the Federal Reserve's "exit strategy" from its current policy stance, see "Monetary 
Policy as the Economy Recovers" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), Monetary 
Policy Report to the Congress (Washington: Board of Governors, July), p. 34-7. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2009
To some extent, our policy measures will unwind automatically as the economy recovers and 
financial  strains  ease,  because  most  of  our  extraordinary  liquidity  facilities  are  priced  at  a 
premium over normal interest rate spreads. Indeed, total Federal Reserve credit extended to 
banks and other market participants has declined from roughly $1.5 trillion at the end of 2008 
to less than $600 billion, reflecting the improvement in financial conditions that has already 
occurred. In addition, bank reserves held at the Fed will decline as the longer-term assets 
that  we  own  mature  or  are  prepaid.  Nevertheless,  should  economic  conditions  warrant  a 
tightening  of  monetary  policy  before  this  process  of  unwinding  is  complete,  we  have  a 
number of tools that will enable us to raise market interest rates as needed. 
Perhaps the most important such tool is the authority that the Congress granted the Federal 
Reserve  last  fall  to  pay  interest  on  balances  held  at  the  Fed  by  depository  institutions. 
Raising the rate of interest paid on reserve balances will give us substantial leverage over 
the federal funds rate and other short-term market interest rates, because banks generally 
will not supply funds to the market at an interest rate significantly lower than they can earn 
risk free by holding balances at the Federal Reserve. Indeed, many foreign central banks use 
the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves  to  help  set  a  floor  on  market  interest  rates.  The 
attractiveness to banks of leaving their excess reserve balances with the Federal Reserve 
can be further increased by offering banks a choice of maturities for their deposits. 
But interest on reserves is by no means the only tool we have to influence market interest 
rates. For example, we can drain liquidity from the system by conducting reverse repurchase 
agreements,  in  which  we  sell  securities  from  our  portfolio  with  an  agreement  to  buy  them 
back at a later date. Reverse repurchase agreements, which can be executed with primary 
dealers,  government-sponsored  enterprises,  and  a  range  of  other  counterparties,  are  a 
traditional and well-understood method of managing the level of bank reserves. If necessary, 
another means of tightening policy is outright sales of our holdings of longer-term securities. 
Not only would such sales drain reserves and raise short-term interest rates, but they also 
could put upward pressure on longer-term interest rates by expanding the supply of longer-
term assets. In sum, we are confident that we have the tools to raise interest rates when that 
becomes necessary to achieve our objectives of maximum employment and price stability.  
Fiscal policy 
Our  economy  and  financial  markets  have  faced  extraordinary  near-term  challenges,  and 
strong  and  timely  actions  to  respond  to  those  challenges  have  been  necessary  and 
appropriate.  I  have  discussed  some  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
promote  economic  growth  and  financial  stability.  The  Congress  also  has  taken  substantial 
actions, including the passage of a fiscal stimulus package. Nevertheless, even as important 
steps have been taken to address the recession and the intense threats to financial stability, 
maintaining  the  confidence  of  the  public  and  financial  markets  requires  that  policymakers 
begin  planning  now  for  the  restoration  of  fiscal  balance.  Prompt  attention  to  questions  of 
fiscal  sustainability  is  particularly  critical  because  of  the  coming  budgetary  and  economic 
challenges  associated  with  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation  and  continued 
increases in the costs of Medicare and Medicaid. Addressing the country's fiscal problems 
will require difficult choices, but postponing those choices will only make them more difficult. 
Moreover, agreeing on a sustainable long-run fiscal path now could yield considerable near-
term economic benefits in the form of lower long-term interest rates and increased consumer 
and  business  confidence.  Unless  we  demonstrate  a  strong  commitment 
fiscal 
sustainability, we risk having neither financial stability nor durable economic growth. 
to 
Regulatory reform 
A clear lesson of the recent financial turmoil is that we must make our system of financial 
supervision and regulation more effective, both in the United States and abroad. In my view, 
comprehensive reform should include at least the following key elements: 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 3
      a prudential approach that focuses on the stability of the financial system as a whole, 
not just the safety and soundness of individual institutions, and that includes formal 
mechanisms for identifying and dealing with emerging systemic risks;  
stronger  capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  financial  firms,  with  more-stringent 
standards for large, complex, and financially interconnected firms;  
the  extension  and  enhancement  of  supervisory  oversight,  including  effective 
consolidated  supervision,  to  all  financial  organizations  that  could  pose  a  significant 
risk to the overall financial system;  
an  enhanced  bankruptcy  or  resolution  regime,  modeled  on  the  current  system  for 
depository  institutions,  that  would  allow  financially  troubled,  systemically  important 
nonbank  financial  institutions  to  be  wound  down  without  broad  disruption  to  the 
financial system and the economy;  
enhanced protections for consumers and investors in their financial dealings;  
measures to ensure that critical payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements are 
resilient to financial shocks, and that practices related to the trading and clearing of 
derivatives and other financial instruments do not pose risks to the financial system 
as a whole; and  
improved coordination across countries in the development of regulations and in the 
supervision of internationally active firms.  
to 
the 
improve 
increase 
the  resiliency  of 
financial  system,  and 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  and  will  continue  to  take  important  steps  to  strengthen 
supervision, 
the 
macroprudential  orientation  of  our  oversight.  For  example,  we  are  expanding  our  use  of 
horizontal  reviews  of  financial  firms  to  provide  a  more  comprehensive  understanding  of 
practices and risks in the financial system. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  remains  strongly  committed  to  effectively  carrying  out  our 
responsibilities for consumer protection. Over the past three years, the Federal Reserve has 
written  rules  providing  strong  protections  for  mortgage  borrowers  and  credit  card  users, 
among many other substantive actions. Later this week, the Board will issue a proposal using 
our  authority  under  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act,  which  will  include  new,  consumer-tested 
disclosures as well as rule changes applying to mortgages and home equity lines of credit; in 
addition,  the  proposal  includes  new  rules  governing  the  compensation  of  mortgage 
originators.  We  are  expanding  our  supervisory  activities  to  include  risk-focused  reviews  of 
consumer compliance in nonbank subsidiaries of holding companies. Our community affairs 
and research areas have provided support and assistance for organizations specializing in 
foreclosure  mitigation,  and  we  have  worked  with  nonprofit  groups  on  strategies  for 
neighborhood  stabilization.  The  Federal  Reserve's  combination  of  expertise  in  financial 
markets,  payment  systems,  and  supervision  positions  us  well  to  protect  the  interests  of 
consumers in their financial transactions. We look forward to discussing with the Congress 
ways to further formalize our institution's strong commitment to consumer protection. 
Transparency and accountability 
The Congress and the American people have a right to know how the Federal Reserve is 
carrying  out  its  responsibilities  and  how  we  are  using  taxpayers'  resources.  The  Federal 
Reserve is committed to transparency and accountability in its operations. We report on our 
activities in a variety of ways, including reports like the one I am presenting to the Congress 
today, other testimonies, and speeches. The FOMC releases a statement immediately after 
each regularly scheduled meeting and detailed minutes of each meeting on a timely basis. 
We have increased the frequency and scope of the published economic forecasts of FOMC 
participants. We provide the public with detailed annual reports on the financial activities of 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2009
the Federal Reserve System that are audited by an independent public accounting firm. We 
also publish a complete balance sheet each week. 
We have recently taken additional steps to better inform the public about the programs we 
have  instituted  to  combat  the  financial  crisis.  We  expanded  our  website  this  year  to  bring 
together already available information as well as considerable new information on our policy 
programs  and  financial  activities.2  In  June,  we  initiated  a  monthly  report  to  the  Congress 
(also  posted  on  our  website)  that  provides  even  more  information  on  Federal  Reserve 
liquidity programs, including breakdowns of our lending, the associated collateral, and other 
facets of programs established to address the financial crisis.3 These steps should help the 
public understand the efforts that we have taken to protect the taxpayer as we supply liquidity 
to the financial system and support the functioning of key credit markets. 
The  Congress  has  recently  discussed  proposals  to  expand  the  audit  authority  of  the 
Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO)  over  the  Federal  Reserve.  As  you  know,  the 
Federal  Reserve  is  already  subject  to  frequent  reviews  by  the  GAO.  The  GAO  has  broad 
authority to audit our operations and functions. The Congress recently granted the GAO new 
authority to conduct audits of the credit facilities extended by the Federal Reserve to "single 
and  specific"  companies  under  the  authority  provided  by  section  13(3)  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Act, including the loan facilities provided to, or created for, American International 
Group and Bear Stearns. The GAO and the Special Inspector General have the right to audit 
our TALF program, which uses funds from the Troubled Assets Relief Program. 
The Congress, however, purposefully – and for good reason – excluded from the scope of 
potential  GAO  reviews  some  highly  sensitive  areas,  notably  monetary  policy  deliberations 
and  operations,  including  open  market  and  discount  window  operations.  In  doing  so,  the 
Congress carefully balanced the need for public accountability with the strong public policy 
benefits  that  flow  from  maintaining  an  appropriate  degree  of  independence  for  the  central 
bank in the making and execution of monetary policy. Financial markets, in particular, likely 
would see a grant of review authority in these areas to the GAO as a serious weakening of 
monetary  policy  independence.  Because  GAO  reviews  may  be  initiated  at  the  request  of 
members  of  Congress,  reviews  or  the  threat  of  reviews  in  these  areas  could  be  seen  as 
efforts  to  try  to  influence  monetary  policy  decisions.  A  perceived  loss  of  monetary  policy 
independence  could  raise  fears  about  future  inflation,  leading  to  higher  long-term  interest 
rates  and  reduced  economic  and  financial  stability.  We  will  continue  to  work  with  the 
Congress to provide the information it needs to oversee our activities effectively, yet in a way 
that does not compromise monetary policy independence. 
 See "Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet" on the Board's website.  
See the monthly reports on the Board's website at "Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance 
Sheet," Congressional Reports and Other Resources, Federal Reserve System Monthly Reports on 
Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet. 
2  
3  
 BIS Review 92/2009 
 5
