Shyamala Gopinath: Lessons for financial policymaking – interpreting 
the dilemmas 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, at the 10th FIMMDA-PDAI Annual Conference, Mumbai, 3 March 2009. 
Assistance provided by Vaibhav Chaturvedi in preparation of the speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
 I was really struggling to select a theme for today’s address. I intended it to be relevant but 
not  repetitive,  comprehensive  but not  broad  brush,  having  a  policymaker’s  perspective  but 
not  too  uni-dimensional.  Finally  the  theme  I  zeroed  down  on  emerged  out  of  this  very 
exercise of the balancing act – the dilemmas and conflicts thrown up for the policymakers by 
the paradoxical character of recent turn of events in the global financial markets. It is rather 
surprising for a crisis of this magnitude not to give clear directions for the future. Yes, there is 
now  a  generally  accepted  sequence  of  events  and  the  reasons  for  this  crisis  are  well 
understood. Also the global nature of the crisis in which all the advanced economies have 
been impacted is striking. The failure of market discipline and self regulation is also apparent. 
We already have the report on a framework for financial stability by the Group of Thirty, the 
High Level Group on Financial Supervision in EU, and the G-20 has set up several working 
groups.  While  some  involve  action  that  can  be  considered  in  the  immediate  future  most 
recommendations  are  long-term  in  nature  since  the  priority  now  is  to  stabilize  financial 
markets and support growth and mitigate the consequences of the fall-out. It is quite possible 
that the financial system post-crisis will be different from the one existing before the crisis. 
However, the inherent paradoxes could constrain a fundamental breakout from the existing 
framework.  Importantly,  implementation  of  longer  term  measures  is  dependent  on  the 
outcomes  of  the  responses  to  the  present  crisis.  I  intend  to  touch  upon  some  of  these 
paradoxes which are also relevant in our context. 
Prudential regulatory framework – limitations of the current capital centric approach 
Since 1999, the predominant focus of the international supervisory community has been the 
formulation and implementation of the Basel II framework. The assumptions underlying the 
new  framework  were  that  the  financial  systems  had  become  extremely  sophisticated  and 
banks had in place strong risk management systems and therefore, it was possible to have a 
capital  adequacy  framework  which  is  based  on  the  Internal  Ratings  Based  (IRB)  models 
rather  than  a  set  of  uniform  risk  weights,  as  was  the  case  with  Basel  1  regime.  Similarly, 
where the banks did not have such risk management systems in place, it could be based on 
external credit ratings. The expectation was that under this framework, capital will get more 
responsive to the risk profile of a bank. The current crisis, however, has called into question 
the  assumptions  about  the  efficacy  of  internal  risk  management  systems  and  a  serious 
failure  of  risk  governance  systems  has  been  amply  evident.  Moreover,  model-based  risk 
assessments underestimated the exposure to common shocks and tail risks and thereby the 
overall risk exposure. Furthermore, banks were found to be indulging in regulatory arbitrage 
and  through  off-balance  sheet  vehicles,  expanded  their  business  significantly  without 
maintaining capital, even though the risks were not entirely hived off and continued to remain 
with the bank. 
Almost  all  the  prognostic  analyses/reports  on  the  crisis  agree  that  current  financial 
regulations tend to encourage pro-cyclical risk taking which increases both the likelihood as 
well  as  accentuates  the  severity  of  financial  crises.  One  suggestion  is  to  establish  capital 
benchmarks as a broad range, rather than as a point prescription, within which capital ratios 
should  be  managed.  The  supervisory  expectation  should  be  that  when  markets  are  in  an 
upturn and there is a tendency to under price the risks, banks should operate at the upper 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 1
end of the range. A simpler alternative could be to tighten capital requirements during good 
times and reduce them in downturns without actually specifying a range but working through 
the  Supervisory  Review  Process  under  Pillar  2  of  Basel  II  Framework.  In  effect,  it  would 
mean building up capital buffers in good times for using them when needed. 
Dynamic provisioning 
Simultaneously  it  may  be  necessary  to  adopt  counter  cyclical  provisioning  measures.  The 
case  of  Spain  has  been  widely  quoted,  which  introduced  across  the  board  increase  in 
provisioning requirements, the dynamic provisioning approach. This is based on the premise 
that  loans  given  at  the  top  of  the  cycle  tend  to  have  higher  losses  as  the  cycle  turns.  In 
downturns  defaults  tend  to  emerge  requiring  more  provisions.  Banks  should  therefore  be 
required to set aside a general provision against likely future loss each time they write a loan 
on the basis of a formula which is sensitive to the cycle. This being an accounting provision, 
would  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  distributable  profits,  and  will  thereby  constrain  the 
dividends  and  profit-linked  bonuses.  These  provisions  could  then  be  drawn  down 
automatically as losses appear. In effect, this approach requires banks to build up reserves 
in the upswing of a cycle which can cushion their losses during the downswing. 
We,  in  India,  also  adopted  a  similar  approach  through  a  calibrated  increase  in  the  risk 
weights and provisioning requirements during the period of rapid credit growth. However, the 
important  difference  was  that  our  approach  entailed  sector-specific  prescriptions.  The 
objective was not so much to lean against the wind of rising asset prices but as a cautionary 
measure to contain the exposure of the banking sector to sensitive asset classes where rapid 
credit  expansion  was  observed.  It  is  commonly  agreed  now  that  the  monetary  authorities 
can’t avoid creation of bubbles by targeting asset prices. However, they should communicate 
their  concerns  on  the  sustainability  of  strong  increase  in  asset  prices  and  contribute  to  a 
more objective assessment of systemic risks.  
However,  this  is  where  there  is  a  tension  between  the  regulatory  approach  and  the 
accounting  rule  makers  who,  view  such  counter-cyclical  measures  as  being  liable  to  be 
misused for profit smoothening and find it against their basic principles of transparency and 
reporting plain economic reality. According to the critics, dynamic provisioning is a form of 
“cookie-jar accounting” and has the potential for misuse. Earnings management of an entity 
is  not  something  which  is  acceptable  to  the  accounting  profession  since  there  have  been 
accounting  frauds  which  involved  cookie  jars.  A  solution  that  is  being  considered  for 
resolving  this  tension  is  to  add  a  separate  line,  further  down  the  balance  sheet  into 
shareholders’  equity  instead.  The  envisaged  counter-cyclical  provisions  will,  therefore,  be 
made after the net profit has been arrived at and will be in the nature of an appropriation of 
profits. This would be called something like “undistributable reserves” and to my mind, should 
also not be allowed to be included in regulatory capital – even though the general provisions 
are allowed to be treated as a part of Tier II capital, subject to the prescribed caps. 
Going beyond “capital” 
As you are aware, over the years, the definition of “regulatory capital” of banks has gradually 
widened to include certain innovative and hybrid forms of capital also. For instance, besides 
the  Tier  I  capital,  banks  are  allowed  to  treat  their  external  liabilities,  meeting  certain  well 
defined criteria, as part of Tier II capital. A portion of capital towards securities business is 
also allowed in certain countries to be maintained as Tier III capital. The expectation was that 
yields  on  subordinated  debt  would  reflect  the  perceived  strength  of  the  bank  and  would, 
therefore,  function  as  an  instrument  of  market  discipline.  Clearly,  these  expectations  have 
not been met.  
In the medium term, therefore, what may also need to be relooked into is the interpretation of 
the  term  “regulatory  capital”.  When  there  are  attempts  to  stress  test  the  banks’  balance 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2009
sheets, the focus is on the tangible networth, which is the purest form of capital. The crisis, 
therefore, provides us an impetus to review the permissibility of hybrid/ innovative forms of 
capital instruments and the extent to which these should be allowed as a component of the 
banks’  regulatory  capital  and  greater  emphasis  has  to  be  given  to  maintenance  of  Core 
capital.  
Another important instrument to contain excessive leverage during an upswing is to introduce 
a “leverage ratio”, in addition to the risk weighted capital ratio, covering both, the on-balance 
sheet  assets  and  off  balance  sheet  items.  This  practice  is  already  in  vogue  in  certain 
jurisdictions. 
A more fundamental issue with a capital-centric approach of bank regulation is that even the 
most well capitalised banks have been found to have been caught up in the crisis spiral due 
to  massive  and  immediate  demands  on  liquidity.  The  capital  buffers  are  of  virtually  no 
assistance in such times and what matters is the liquidity of the assets held by the bank and 
the nature of its interconnected dealings with other institutions. One view is that the financial 
regulator  could  give  up  its  strong  focus  on  capital  adequacy  alone  in  favor  of  a  broader 
approach, which should encompass liquidity as a major determinant of the soundness of the 
financial system. It is, however, preferable to consider counter-cyclical liquidity requirements 
along with capital requirements. A proposal is to require banks to hold a varying proportion of 
their  assets  in  a  war-chest  of  government  bonds  and  other  highly  liquid  assets  or  there 
should be certain constraints on the extent to which they are allowed to tap wholesale funds. 
The  overall  framework  should  ensure  availability  of  ample  liquidity  even  in  stressed 
conditions. This must include an assessment of the potential externalities across institutions. 
It is gratifying to note that the significance of the age-old SLR requirement in India and the 
ceiling  prescribed  on  the  inter-bank  liabilities  a  few  years  ago  is  now  getting  recognised 
internationally, in the wake of the crisis. 
It is important to note that while the gains of financial stability are not easily quantifiable nor 
its beneficiaries can be easily identified, the costs of regulation are much more obvious and 
transparent.  Hence,  crises  that  had  been  obviated  are  imperceptible  and  the  demand  for 
prudential regulations declines during prolonged good times, thereby increasing the ultimate 
cost of eventual crises. 
Micro and macro prudential supervision 
The  framework  for  regulating  the  financial  sector  has  traditionally  been  built  on  a 
microprudential foundation, where the primary objective is to limit the risk of financial distress 
of individual financial institutions. This approach is consistent with the objective of protecting 
depositor’s  interest  and  the  integrity  of  the  payments  system.  In  contrast,  the  objective  of 
macroprudential oversight is to limit systemic risk. It is not only important to consider the risk 
of distress of an individual bank but the aggregate risks of all interconnected entities entities 
in the system. Hence, there is a need to evolve an appropriate mix of the micro-prudential 
regulations within an overarching macro-prudential framework.  
One of the lessons of the current crisis is that regulators need to understand the signals and 
identify  appropriate  tools  to  mitigate  the  build-up  of  systemic  financial  vulnerabilities  more 
effectively. While financial stability reports did make such analysis particularly relating to the 
excess leverage and the under pricing of risk, such analysis was not translated into action in 
view  of  the  seemingly  benign  environment  and  confidence  in  risk  management  system, 
market discipline and self regulation.  
A  challenge 
the 
is 
microprudential  and  macroprudential  approaches  to  financial  sector  oversight.  The  micro 
prudential approach is bottom up while the macro approach is top down. In the case of the 
banking sector the macro prudential analysis is based on both back ward looking indicators 
such  as  balance  sheet  profitability  asset  quality  and  capital  adequacy  as  well  as  forward 
the  appropriate  balance  between 
for  policymakers 
to  achieve 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 3
looking  indicators  which  identify  major  risk  facing  the  banking  sector.  Several  MPIs  are 
constructed  to  summarise  the  available  quantitative  information  covering  competitive 
conditions  in  the  banking  sector,  credit  growth,  asset  market  developments  and  the 
concentration of risks in the household and corporate sector.  
Unregulated nodes in the financial architecture 
The global financial system over the years has evolved into a huge behemoth with strikingly 
monolithic characteristics and close inter-linkages. The innovations in financial products and 
technology  have  also  enabled  the  market  players  to  acquire  a  variety  of  risk  exposures, 
transcending  their  customary  role  definitions.  Furthermore,  the  regulation  of  investment 
banks  did  not  cover  prudential  oversight  and  they  were  allowed  to  build  up  excessive 
leverage.  There  was  clear  dichotomy  here  between  the  homogeneous  financial  profiles  of 
various entities and the regulatory prescriptions they were subjected to. Besides, there were 
also  economic  agents  in  the  system  which  did  not  attract  any  regulations  or  were  only 
nominally  regulated  but  were  active  players  in  the  system.  These  dimensions  was  sharply 
brought  to  the  fore  by  the  inability  of  international  regulators  to  even  assess  the  extent  of 
exposure of major entities and distribution of risk in the system through the chain of inter-
linkages, during the initial period of the crisis. 
It is therefore not surprising that regulation of hitherto unregulated entities has been one of 
the  key  recommendations  of  many  committees.  The  G-20  has  called  for  a  review  of  the 
scope of financial regulation. The November 15th communiqué referred to special emphasis 
on  institutions  instruments  and  markets  that  are  currently  unregulated  along  with  ensuring 
that  all  systemically  important  institutions  are  appropriately  regulated.  In  regard  to 
sponsorship and management of comingled private pools of capital, the Group of Thirty has 
suggested that they should ordinarily be prohibited and large proprietary trading should be 
limited by strict capital and liquidity requirements. The Group has noted that “…the increased 
emphasis  on  financial  stability  in  the  mandates  of  prudential  regulators  and  central  banks 
points to the need for greater, more systemic access to information crucial to understanding 
the potential for growing risk imbalances in the system.” The High Level Group on Financial 
Supervision in the EU has suggested application of appropriate regulation in a proportionate 
manner  to  all  firms  or  entities  conducting  financial  activities  which  may  have  a  systemic 
impact. These include hedge funds investment banks, various off balance sheet items etc. 
Also that increased capital should be required for proprietary trading activities. 
Dealing with cross-border issues 
This  leads  us  to  the  more  complex  issue  of  regulation  and  supervision  of  large  complex 
financial  conglomerates.  It  is  even  more  challenging  in  the  event  of  crisis  resolution, 
especially for cross-border institutions. Experience has shown that the resolution of a crisis of 
a  cross  border  nature  is  further  complicated  by  a  mismatch  between  the  global  nature  of 
some  financial  institutions  that  operate  in  several  jurisdictions  and  the  national  nature  of 
solvency. 
While  developing  harmonised  insolvency  regimes  governing  the  resolution  of  large  cross-
border financial firms and remedial action frameworks would be desirable, the challenge is 
the responsibility of the national regulator to protect depositors and other creditors within its 
jurisdiction. While the crisis has seen a high degree of international cooperation, increasingly 
national regulators may look to ensuring that foreign entities maintain adequate liquidity and 
capital within their jurisdiction to protect domestic investors.  
4 
 BIS Review 24/2009
Does a central clearing counterparty reduce counterparty risk? 
Counterparty  risk  became  one  of  the  key  factors  contributing  to  the  clogging  of  financial 
markets as risk aversion increased globally. This was particularly evident in case of longer 
maturity derivative contracts in the OTC market. Coupled with the non-transparent nature of 
the OTC markets which made the exact assessment of positions and exposures of various 
parties  through  maze  of  interconnected  chains  impossible,  this  shifted  the  preference  for 
more  standardized  simple  products  to  be  traded  on  exchanges.  Even  where  products  are 
traded in OTC markets such as the CDS, there is a move already in US and Europe to move 
the  CDS  markets  to  the  clearing  houses  –  various  models  are  being  debated  including 
central  clearing  vis-à-vis  mere  centralized  settlement.  Since  the  central  counterparty,  by 
definition,  interposes  itself  in  any  transaction  settled  through  it,  the  counterparty  in  any 
transaction cleared by a CCP would not be another market participant but the CCP itself. The 
key advantage of the CCP mechanism is the possibility of multilateral netting, which reduces 
counterparty risk for each member of the CCP, by reducing the net credit exposure.  
However, the creation of a CCP means that the counterparty risk is now concentrated in a 
single agent, the clearing house. A universal acceptance of CCP  model for everything will 
result in the concentration of risks at one point, which will become the single point of failure 
for  market  stability.  In  case  of  exchange  traded  products,  there  is  also  the  issue  of  legal 
separation between the exchange and the CCP. Obviously then, the CCP has to be a highly 
regulated entity. The regulatory focus would be on the overall risk management systems in 
place,  including  the  margining  system  and  the  nature  and  quality  of  collateral  held  by  the 
CCP as part of the settlement guarantee fund. From a systemic perspective also, this will be 
a critical issue since in crisis times, these will need to be invoked/liquidated. The implications 
of unwinding such collaterals on the market will be critical.  
Even in term of effectiveness of the CCP in reducing exposures, a recent paper concludes 
that  introducing  a  CCP  for  a  particular  asset  class  is  helpful  if  the  number  of  dealers  is 
sufficiently  large  relative  to  the  exposure-weighted  number  of  other  asset  classes  that 
continue  to  be  bilaterally  netted;  for  plausible  cases,  adding  a  CCP  for  one  class  of 
derivatives  such  as  credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  can  actually  reduce  netting  efficiency  and 
thereby  lead  to  an  increase  in  collateral  demands  and  average  exposure  to  counterparty 
default.1
As the participants are aware, the Reserve Bank has favored a CCP model for settlement of 
forex and government securities trade and intend to extend this to OTC interest rate swaps 
and forwards.  
Systemic risk measurement 
Like any other risk category, the first step towards regulating systemic risk is to identify its 
source and measure it. The most popular measure of risk for individual institutions, the VaR 
has  been  severely  tested.  Like  many  other  financial  models,  the  VaR  model  essentially 
hinges on the estimation of correlations between different assets and risk factors, which have 
to  put  it,  simply  have  just  broken  down.  There  are  already  problems  with  this  institution 
specific framework. How do we go to the next level of “systemic risk”? How do we define how 
much a particular firm contributes to systemic risk?  
Some recent proposals attempt to incorporate systemic risk into the standard VaR measures. 
For  instance,  the  Geneva  report  argues  for  CoVaR,  based  on  the  work  of  Adrian  and 
Brunnermeier (2008), where CoVaR is the VaR of financial institutions conditional on other 
                                                 
1  
“Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty Risk?” Darrell Duffy and Haoxiang Zhu, Stanford 
University. 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 5
institutions  being  in  distress.  Another  report  by  the  New  York  University  (Stern  School  of 
Business) proposes a systemic capital requirement based on the individual firm’s contribution 
to  aggregate  tail  risk. The  problem  with  such  solutions  is  that  they  attempt  to  give  clean 
solutions to complex problems – their simplicity becomes their undoing.  
Besides VaR, stress testing was another pillar on which the risk management framework at 
the banks rested. The stress tests were specifically intended to capture the tail risks, which 
were not captured by the VaR models. Here also, as with other models, the undoing was in 
the inputting the stress parameters which were conditioned by the prevailing perceptions of 
future risks and price movements. The more fundamental issue here, I feel, was the absence 
of a robust correspondence between the results of these stress tests and the response of the 
institutions  thereto.  The  incentive  structures  and  competitive  forces  prevented  concrete 
action  on  adverse  findings  from  the  stress  tests.  Therefore  such  adverse  scenarios  would 
need  to  be  captured  again  under  the  Pillar  2  process,  in  the  capital  requirements  or  the 
liquidity requirements, which carry huge costs. Ideally, the response has to come from within 
the institutions in the form of realignment of business focus, which I realize is not a feasible 
model  to  bank  upon  given  the  breakdown  of  self  regulation.  The  supervisory  review 
processes are meant to address such institution specific issues and still seem to be the best 
bet going forward. 
Centrality of market prices 
“Market prices cannot save us from market failures.” I have borrowed that phrase from one of 
the commentaries of Avinash Persaud, who has been one of the most vocal critics of reliance 
on “market prices” for regulatory and accounting frameworks. The inherent paradox is quite 
appealing and intuitive. The response of the regulated entity and the regulatory prescriptions 
to price movements in prices is standard and symmetric. The issues of reliability of “market 
prices” apart, where does the cycle get broken?  
The  well  functioning  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets  were  supposed  to  reflect  the  “true” 
price of a financial instrument, close to the theoretical, model dictated values. However, in 
reality, the market prices were determined as much by the funding positions of the market 
makers. This in turn, as it turned out, was critically driven by (i) the availability of systemic 
liquidity  and  well  oiled  money  markets  globally  and  (ii)  the  till  then  taken  for  granted, 
readiness  of  counterparties  to  extend  funding  –  the  counterparty  credit  risk.  If  it  is  these 
externalities  which  determine  the  “market  prices”,  the  issue  is  how  to  filter  out  these 
components?  
It will be a real challenge for the regulators to find ways to address these issues, given that 
market prices will continue to be at the heart of the regulatory framework.  
Accounting framework 
The dilemma for the accounting policymakers is to push for a harmonised set of guidelines 
for all economic entities vis-à-vis the differential approach demanded in certain cases by the 
prudential requirements.  
The  present  accounting  approach  is  indifferent  to  the  inter-temporal  financial  impacts  of 
individual  transactions  as  long  as  the  net  impact  is  accounted  for  over  a  period.  From  an 
accounting  perspective,  this  may  make  sense  but  it  does  not  recognise  the  incentive 
structure it induces in the conduct of business operations, which may not be healthy for the 
system as a whole. Ideally, accounting conventions need to be neutral with respect to the 
behaviour  of  financial  players  and  market  dynamics.  While  it  is  true  that  accounting  can’t 
capture future risks, the treatment of gains attributable to the future risks needs to address 
this aspect. 
6 
 BIS Review 24/2009
A  related  issue,  from  the  financial  stability  perspective,  is  the  extent  of  discretion  the 
principles-based accounting framework provides the business entities in deciding the nature 
of each financial instrument. This could result in furthering a certain kind of herd behaviour 
among all the businesses depending on the phase of business cycle. 
Reliance on ratings 
The  rating  agencies  have  already  received  their  share  of  blame  for  the  crisis.  That’s  the 
easier part; the difficult part is to find viable alternatives – the rating agencies were part of a 
big machine that was working well as long as the going was good. Obviously, any alternative 
framework has to be in sync with the changed realities of the market. Its will not be possible 
to  think  of  any  changes  in  this  regard  in  isolation.  At  a  fundamental  level,  what  needs  to 
change, and hopefully will change, is an understanding about what the ratings convey. What 
needs to change is an understanding of the difference between a AAA bond and a AAA CDO 
tranche. Here, more than the rating agencies, the responsibility will lie on the regulators to 
capture  the  differential  risk  characteristics  of  various  instruments,  even  though  identically 
rated,  in  a  very  specific  manner  in  their  prescriptions.  Uniform  capital  requirements  just 
based on credit ratings will need to be replaced by a more granular and nuanced regulatory 
approach. 
Financial innovation 
Much  of  the  development  in  the  financial  sector  internationally  over  the  past  couple  of 
decades or so owes much to the open spirit of financial innovation. The recent turn of events, 
I  would  say,  can  be  attributed  more  to  the  way  the  financial  industry  functions,  given  the 
underlying regulatory and the incentive structures, rather than on financial innovation, per se. 
The risk-return payoff in the financial sector is quite different than any other sector. The only 
blame I would put on the model-centric financial innovations was the false sense of certainty 
and comfort they provided to not merely those who did not understand the black boxes but 
even the institutional investors and rating agencies. The critical element of judgement while 
interpreting and applying the models was found wanting. I am sure lessons would be learnt in 
this regard. 
Conclusion 
The financial system in India has been resilient in these trying times. Whatever fault points 
have  been  felt  in  the  recent  months  do  not  owe  their  origin  within  the  financial  sector.  As 
Governor Dr. Subbarao has aptly remarked in one of his speeches, Indian experience has 
been different in the sense that the strain in the real sector got transmitted to the financial 
sector  unlike  the  other  countries  where  it  was  the  other  way  round.  It  is  only  thorough  a 
constant process of mutual consultation between the market participants and the RBI that we 
will  ride  the  difficult  period.  Going  forward,  the  test  for  further  market  development  will  be 
based  on  an  assessment  of  not  only  implications  for  an  individual  institution  –  micro 
prudential but also implications for systemic risks. 
References 
1. 
2. 
Report of The High Level Group on Financial Supervision in the EU, February 
25, 2009. 
Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability, Group of Thirty, January 
15, 2009. 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 7
3. 
4. 
Declaration:  Summit  on  Financial  Markets  and  the  World  Economy,  G-20, 
November 15, 2008. 
Asset  price  bubbles:  implications  for  monetary,  regulatory  and  international 
policies, Speech by the Governor Bank of Spain, February 24, 2002. 
8 
 BIS Review 24/2009
