Anselmo L S Teng: The economic and financial development of Macao in 
the context of growth of China 
Keynote speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the 19th “Meeting in Lisbon” of Delegations to the IMF/World Bank Annual Meetings 2009 
from African Portuguese Speaking Countries and East Timor, Lisbon, 29 September 2009.  
 Governor of the Bank of Portugal, Dr. Vitor Constâncio,  
Governors of the Central Banks of African Portuguese Speaking Countries and East Timor  
Dear delegates,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Introduction  
I  am  honoured  to  have  been  invited  by  Governor  Dr.  Vitor  Constâncio  to  talk  about  the 
economic and financial development of Macao against a backdrop of the growth of China. I 
am very pleased to be in Lisbon again and meet my friends. I met with some of them just 2 
weeks ago in Macao in the 12th Conference of Central Banks of Lusophone Jurisdictions on 
Human Resources. It is great to see you in Lisbon again.  
In this 19th meeting in Lisbon, the topic picked by the convener is a very timely one. When 
the world is talking about the emerging markets to be the first batch of economies to stand up 
after the devastating financial crisis, I feel good to tell everybody here how Macao is doing 
and the way forward.  
The economy of China  
Despite  interruptions,  sometimes  inflicted  by  mother  nature,  the  rise  of  China  in  the  21st 
century does not appear to be impeded. It is the general consensus that China may be the 
first economy where we find “green shoots” after the financial tsunami which devastated the 
world in late 2008 and early 2009. China was able to score double digit growth in the wake of 
the  new  millennium  until  last  year.  The  rapid  growth  took  a  pause  after  the  outbreak. 
However,  China  was  one  of  the  first  economies  to  announce  a  huge  stimulus  package 
valued at RMB 4 trillion late last year. The stimulus started to take effect when we witnessed 
a growth of 6.1% in the first quarter of 2009 followed by 7.9% in the second quarter, making 
a growth rate of 7.1% for the first half year.  
We  have  witnessed  appreciable  increases  in  manufacturing  output,  investment  in  fixed 
assets  and  private  sector  consumption.  It  has  been  made  clear  that  the  RMB  4  trillion 
stimulus package would be utilised to boost public investment which covers enhancement of 
social  security,  improvement  in  health  care  system  and  rural  development.  It  is  worth 
mentioning that the financial institutions of China have not been appreciably affected by toxic 
assets and hence suffered less from the financial tsunami. As a result, they are in a better 
position  to  extend  more  liberal  credits  to  enterprises  operating  in  China  and  finance 
construction  of  substantive  infrastructures.  In  the  first  six  months  of  2009,  new  credits 
extended  by  financial  institutions  of  China  exceeded  7  trillion  RMB.  In  international  trade, 
China has also applied strenuous efforts in the hope that increased international trade can 
pull  the  overall  economy  out  of  its  doldrums.  One  of  the  practical  measures  adopted  by 
China in this respect is the currency swap agreements valued at 650 billion RMB concluded 
with trading partners like Korea, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Belarus, Indonesia and Argentina. In 
fact,  China  has  been  making  all  efforts  to  alleviate  the  world  economy  from  the  trough. 
Judging from 2008 performance, the China economy ranked third in the world.  
BIS Review 127/2009 
 1
Despite  a  drop  in  exports,  other  sectors  are  faring  well.  In  fact  power  consumption  has 
started  to  pick  up  recently.  China  has  been  stockpiling  commodities  for  its  recovery.  As  a 
result,  world  commodity  prices  have  been  buoyant  which  is  reflected  in  the  firming  of 
currencies of commodities producing countries like Australian Dollar, Canadian Dollar, New 
Zealand Dollar, Brazilian Real and Russian Rouble. To the envy of car manufactures in the 
US, new cars are selling at a rate of more than one million monthly, making the China outlet 
the most profitable arm of the GM group. Share prices in China once advanced by 100% in 
2009 from its trough in 2008. Many other economies suffering from housing property slump 
will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  China  is  trying  to  prevent  a  bubble  which  can  possibly  be 
formed in the buoyant property market. Ladies and gentlemen, it is highly likely that China 
will  be  the  first  one  to  stand  up  after  the  financial  crisis  which  has  been  hurting  the  world 
since late 2008.  
The economy of Macao  
As  we  all  know,  Macao  reverted  to  its  Motherland  in  1999  when  the  Macao  Special 
Administrative  Region  (MSAR)  was  established.  Under  the  principle  of  “one  country  two 
systems”,  “Macao  people  governing  Macao”  and  “high  degree  of  autonomy”,  Macao 
continues to have a free hand in managing its well beings. The tourism services industry is 
the biggest pillar of the Macao economy. The MSAR Government collects about 70% of its 
revenues from this industry. The opening-up of the industry in 2002 gave a forceful impetus 
to the Macao economy. Since then, the Macao economy has taken leaps and bounds. We 
have witnessed double digit growth for a number of years which culminated in 2008 when we 
achieved a per capita GDP of close to USD40,000. At one point, our unemployment rate was 
below  3%.  Despite  the  financial  tsunami,  Macao  still  achieved  an  annual  growth  rate  of 
13.2%.  However,  we  are  not  immune  to  the  crisis,  negative  growth  for  2009  appears 
inevitable.  Nevertheless,  we  are  still  able  to  keep  unemployment  rate  at  bay.  It  is  still  an 
enviable figure of about 3.7%.  
The economy of Macao is expected to remain stable and sturdy in the next few years. Macao 
has  a  tiny  and  open  economy  which  is  affected  by  international  economic  fluctuations.  In 
view  of  its  structure  and  its  proximity  to  China,  the  economy  is  more  geared  to  the  well 
beings of the China economy. As a matter of fact, Macao has benefited from a number of 
policies  from  the  Central  Government  of  China.  Policies  such  as  “individual  traveller 
scheme”, “closer economic partnership arrangement (CEPA)” have rendered an effective lift 
to  our  economy.  Amid  the  tremendous  growth  achieved  in  the  past,  Macao  has  taken  the 
liberty to think about its future positioning and sustainable development. Macao has realized 
long time ago that it should diversify from an over reliance on gaming. The concept of MICE 
has been adopted. MICE stands for meeting, incentive, conference and exhibition. Parcels of 
land have been deployed in constructing hardwares for the MICE concept instead of devoting 
to pure gaming. There has been tremendous progress in this respect. It goes without saying 
that there is still plenty of room for improvement and hence expansion as our softwares in 
this respect are gradually building up. Another area for diversification is the financial sector 
which I am going to mention in the latter part of my speech.  
Macao  came  21st  worldwide  and  6th  in  Asia  Pacific  in  the  rank  of  global  free  economies, 
according to the Index of Economic Freedom by Heritage Foundation of the United States.  
The outline of the plan for the reform and development of the Pearl River Delta 
The  National  Development  and  Reform  Commission  of  the  State  Council  of  the  People’s 
Republic of China released “The Outline of the Plan for the Reform and Development of the 
Pearl  River  Delta  (2008-2020)  (the  “Outline”)”  in  December  2008.  The  Outline,  which  also 
covers Macao, will be brought to broader national strategy and long-term development level 
of the nation. The gist of the Outline is to turn the Pearl River Delta into one of the world’s 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2009
most competitive conurbations with a high quality of life. The Outline defines Macao as an 
international leisure and tourism destination committed to further diversify its tourism sector. 
Based  on  Macao’s  UNESCO  world-heritage  status,  the  MSAR  Government  will  further 
develop  “culture  tourism”  and  reinforce  tourism-related  cooperation  with  Guangdong 
Province of China. Ultimately, Macao will become part of the Pearl River Delta conurbation 
which will be a green area providing a high quality of life.  
To  achieve  all  these,  the  Central  Government  has  approved  and  got  going  with  the 
construction  of  the  Hong  Kong-Zhuhai-Macao  Bridge.  Once  completed,  together  with  the 
comprehensive  highway  network,  one  can  go  from  any  one  township  in  the  conurbation, 
which accommodates a population of 50 million, to another in a matter of a couple of hours 
by land transport. The Central Government has also noted the constraint on land resource of 
Macao which has a total land area of about 30 sq. km. As a start, Macao is authorized to 
relocate  the  University  of  Macao  to  an  area  of  about  1  sq.  km  on  the  Hengqin  Island  of 
neighbouring Zhuhai city. Ultimately, Macao will extend its area to cover 5 sq. km. of Hengqin 
Island. Meanwhile, internal reconstructions keep on going. One of the notable issues is that 
all essential spots of Macao will be connected by light rail in a few years. The positioning of 
Macao has become clear. By 2020, Macao will be part of a conurbation with an area of about 
30,000 sq. km. and a GDP equivalent to that of a medium sized sovereign country.  
The financial sector of Macao  
In the process of diversification, we have not forgotten the financial sector which accounts for 
10% of our GDP. As per the end of June 2009, banks operating in Macao numbered 27 with 
aggregate assets of MOP402.8 billion and total deposits of MOP283.1 billion. At the same 
time, there were 24 insurance companies earning annual gross premiums of MOP3.46 billion 
in 2008. There was a mild downward adjustment in the first half of 2009, in the aftermath of 
financial meltdown. In addition, there were 23 financial institutions of other nature. In the past 
few years, the financial sector has burgeoned in an unprecedented manner in tandem with 
the rapid growth of the Macao economy. All business indicators of the financial institutions 
continue  to  improve;  raised  profitability,  enhanced  asset  quality,  ample  liquidity,  adequate 
capital  and  highly  strengthened  resistance  to  risks.  In  the  process  of  globalization  and  its 
integration into the Pearl River Delta economy, apart from meeting the demand locally, the 
Macao financial sector follows the trend, upgrades itself by servicing the regional economy. 
One of the more significant achievements is that there has been a marked increase in RMB 
business in Macao while the Macao legal tender, the Pataca, has gained wider circulation 
and recognition in the Pearl River Delta. To put it in a nutshell, the Outline has defined that, 
under the framework of environmental friendly economic development, each major city in the 
region  should  make  full  use  of  its  own  competitive  edge  to  construct  a  new  economic 
development scenario for the region via complementary cooperation and positive interaction. 
In  this  connection,  Macao  has  identified  its  own  positioning  in  the  big  picture.  The  Macao 
economy,  particularly  its  financial  sector,  will  certainly  emerge  with  flying  colours  in  the 
course  and  after  the  implementation  of  the  Outline  which  is  scheduled  to  be  finalized  by 
2020.  
On the other hand, the financial system of Macao is timely and appropriately regulated. The 
IMF conducted an assessment of the financial sector supervision and regulation in 2008 of 
the Macao SAR. The result was positive and one of the conclusions of the assessment team 
was that there is a high level of compliance with Basel core principles. The detailed report is 
expected to be published in due course.  
Macao as the service platform between China and Portuguese speaking countries 
Last,  but  not  the  least,  I  would  like  to  mention  how  Macao  can  make  the  best  use  of  the 
legacy  arising  from  its  historical  connections  with  Portuguese  speaking  countries  in  its 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 3
economic and financial development. Macao started to become acquainted with Portuguese 
speaking countries more than 400 years ago. Since its return to China in 1999, its tie with 
Portuguese speaking countries has further been strengthened. China is the world’s factory 
and  has  a  population  of  1.3  billion.  To  maintain  its  functioning,  it  requires  and  consumes 
huge amount of natural resources. After an endeavour of 30 years, it has built up colossal 
foreign exchange reserves of more than USD2.1 trillion. On the other side, the Portuguese 
speaking countries are a market of more than 200 million consumers and are endowed with 
abundant natural resources. They are in need of consumer products of reasonable price and 
capital for further development. All the aforementioned criteria make economic cooperation 
between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries  a  perfect  match.  In  this  connection, 
Macao is both capable and willing to be the middleman. Being a special administrative region 
of  China  and  having  a  close  tie  with  Portugal,  Macao  acts  as  a  platform  for  trade  and 
economic services for China and Portuguese speaking countries. Macao is familiar with the 
legal  system  of  the  Portuguese  world  while  Portuguese  is  one  of  its  official  languages. 
Macao can render excellent services to Portuguese speaking countries which are willing to 
develop more ramified economic and trading relationship with China.  
In 2003, the first Economic and Commercial Cooperation Forum of  China and Portuguese 
Speaking Countries was held in Macao. In 2006, a ministerial meeting of that Forum held in 
Macao delineated fresh plans for new economic and commercial cooperation. The plans take 
into  consideration  the  economic  development  disparities  of  all  participating  countries  and 
emphasize  that  enhanced  cooperation  and  development  should  be  based  on  a  principle 
which will ensure equity and mutual benefit. Macao is endowed with a unique advantage in 
this  respect  arising  from  its  geographical  position  and  historical  heritage.  All  along,  it  has 
always  played  the  leading  role  of  a  liaison  platform  serving  the  economic  and  commercial 
cooperation  between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  In  fact,  the  standing 
secretariat for the Forum is domiciled in Macao, which has always been endeavouring in the 
realization of the various targets set by the Forum.  
The  Macao  financial  sector  has  always  been  a  forerunner  in  facilitating  the  economic  and 
commercial  development  between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  The  Macao 
financial  industry  is  highly  internationalized  and  open;  more  than  80%  of  its  assets  are 
classified  as  international.  The  Macao  financial  sector  is  equipped  with  a  mature  financial 
market  system,  the  stability  and  competitiveness  are  safeguarded  by  timely  and  regulated 
financial supervision. Financial institutions of Macao always consider themselves a business 
partner  of  their  counterparts  in  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  In  fact,  individual  Macao 
banks  have  concluded  cooperation  agreements  with  banks  in  Portuguese  speaking 
countries.  
As the regulator, the Monetary Authority of Macao (AMCM) has been playing a leading role 
in  this  respect.  In  the  past,  the  AMCM  has  concluded  memoranda  of  understanding  with 
central  banks  and  insurance  regulatory  authorities  of  a  number  of  Portuguese  speaking 
countries.  In  2007  and  2008,  the  AMCM  organized  representatives  of  local  financial 
institutions  to  visit  Portuguese  speaking  countries  in  Africa,  Europe  and  South  America  to 
study the financial industry and explore fresh business opportunities. The AMCM has also 
played  host  to  representatives  of  various  financial  conferences.  In  April  this  year,  the 
Conference of Central Banks of Portuguese Speaking Countries was held in Macao with the 
theme “Establishing a Platform for Financial Co-operation and Promotion of Economic and 
Commercial  Interaction”  and,  as  I  mentioned  earlier  on,  the  Conference  on  Human 
Resources was held only two weeks ago.  
Future opportunities 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is highly expected that China will be the first economy to see “green 
shoots” after the devastating financial tsunami. As a special administrative region of China, 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2009
Macao will much benefit. I do hope entrepreneurs around the world will grasp the opportunity 
to create a situation whereby mutual benefit can be achieved.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 5
