Donald L Kohn: International perspective on the crisis and response 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  54th  Economic  Conference, 
Chatham, Massachusetts, 23 October 2009. 
 I am pleased to participate in the conference discussion of the international dimensions of 
the  recent  financial  crisis.1  A  striking  feature  of  the  crisis  was  its  global  character.  With 
markets for financial assets increasingly integrated, often by the activities of globally active 
banks, no country escaped completely unaffected.  
The  way  the  problems  in  the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  market  spread  illustrated  the 
interconnections. Underwriting standards for U.S. subprime mortgages had weakened at the 
same  time  that  non-U.S.  investors,  including  many  non-U.S.  financial  institutions,  had 
eagerly  invested  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  by  purchasing  subprime-backed 
securities.  When  house  prices  leveled  out  and  then  began  to  decline,  default  rates  on 
subprime  mortgages  started  to  rise  rapidly.  Both  U.S.  and  foreign  banks  suffered  losses, 
along with other investors.  
Many of those losses affected asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits and similar 
structures  that  had  invested  in  subprime-backed  securities.  Many  of  these  conduits  were 
sponsored by non-U.S. entities. The conduits had funded illiquid long-term assets with short-
term liabilities, creating a substantial maturity mismatch. When a few of these conduits began 
to report subprime-related losses, investors ran from many conduits. The flight was broadly 
based  because  investors  were  uncertain  about  the  incidence  of  losses  and  liquidity 
pressures arising from nontransparent and poorly understood exposures.  
Integrated bank funding markets were an important source of contagion. Short-term funding 
markets in both the United States and Europe were disrupted when conduits drew on bank 
lines  of  credit  to  replace  maturing  ABCP,  and  banks  turned  to  dollar-denominated  money 
markets to raise the needed funds. As the financial crisis deepened, banks hoarded liquidity 
and became concerned about the exposure of their counterparties in the interbank market to 
losses from subprime mortgages. Spreads between the London interbank offered rate and 
the  overnight  index  swap  rate,  a  measure  of  interbank  market  stress,  widened  in  dollars, 
euro, sterling, and other currencies.  
To  be  sure,  the  mispricing  of  assets  and  risks  was  not  confined  to  the  U.S.  subprime 
mortgage  market.  Many  credit  risk  spreads  across  the  globe  were  at  historic  lows  in  the 
period  before  the  crisis,  after  several  decades  of  mostly  mild,  infrequent  recessions  in  the 
industrial economies. The broad incidence of narrow spreads in part reflected the activities of 
investors  and  intermediaries  who  were  facing  the  same  perceived  incentives  in  many 
different markets. And asset prices – especially real estate prices – were unsustainably high 
in a number of countries.  
Liquidity risk had also been mispriced. Investors had paid insufficient attention to the maturity 
mismatch present in a number of investment vehicles, including ABCP conduits and money 
funds.  And  both  investors  and  intermediaries  had  assumed  that  the  exceptionally  liquid 
conditions  in  many  markets  of  the pre-crisis  period  were  a  permanent  part  of  the  financial 
landscape.  Again,  with  hindsight,  we  can  see  that  these  vehicles  were  vulnerable  to  runs 
once the crisis hit, and these runs did not stop at national borders.  
                                                 
1   Michael Gibson of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks. The views expressed are my own and not 
necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors. 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 1
Moreover,  even  countries  where  assets  weren't  obviously  mispriced  felt  the  effects  of  the 
growing  dislocations  when  global  banks  were  forced  to  deleverage  and  conserve  liquidity. 
Their pullback from lending was broad-based and eventually affected many emerging market 
economies.  And  the  adverse  feedback  loop  between  world  financial  markets  and  the  real 
economy  was  exacerbated  by  the  greater  global  integration  of  markets  for  goods  and 
services.  Trade  and  industrial  output  plunged  everywhere  as  consumers  and  businesses 
pulled back from spending.  
Notably, although financial institutions in some countries seemed to be more resilient to the 
growing turmoil than in other countries, all were affected to a degree, and no particular type 
of regulatory or supervisory system proved itself clearly superior to other designs – either in 
the buildup or the crisis-response phase. Problems afflicted both the fragmented system of 
the  United  States  and  the  unified  systems  of  other  countries.  They  cropped  up  where  the 
central bank was deeply involved in regulation and where it played only a consultative role. 
And  it  occurred  both  in  systems  that  were  principles-based  and  those  that  had  thick  rule 
books.  Clearly,  the  deficiencies  in  both  private  behavior  and  public  oversight  were 
widespread, and both needed to be addressed.  
The response to the crisis was global 
Given the global factors that helped spread the crisis, the response to the crisis needed to be 
global as well. And many of the responses were indeed global – or at least were quite similar 
across various jurisdictions. Everyone was reacting to the same types of problems, but the 
similarities also reflected a high degree of global consultation and collaboration.  
We can see this in the actions of many central banks. Beginning in late 2007, central banks 
generally  reacted  to  funding  problems  and  incipient  runs  with  similar  expansions  of  their 
liquidity facilities. They lengthened lending maturities, in many cases broadened acceptable 
collateral, and in several instances initiated new auction techniques for distributing liquidity to 
overcome the inertia from stigma. Central banks were in constant contact through this period, 
although they arrived at many of these actions separately.  
However,  we  did  explicitly  coordinate  to  address  problems  in  dollar  funding  markets.  The 
Federal Reserve entered into foreign exchange swaps with a number of other central banks 
to  make  dollar  funding  available  to  foreign  banks  in  their  own  countries.  By  doing  so,  we 
reduced the pressure on dollar funding markets here at home.  
Governments  also  reacted  similarly  when  in  late  2008  the  turmoil  deepened  and  many 
countries saw a need to provide broad support to their banking systems. The rescue plans in 
different  countries  contain  similar  elements:  expanded  deposit  insurance,  guarantees  on 
nondeposit liabilities, and capital injections. Although most countries wound up in a similar 
place, the process was not well coordinated, with action by one country sometimes forcing 
responses by others.  
Many countries also took measures to deal with financial distress at systemically important 
firms. Efforts in this area were much messier. The failure of Lehman Brothers highlighted the 
lack  of  a  framework  that  would  allow  for  the  orderly  resolution  of  a  systemically  important 
nonbank  financial  institution  in  the  United  States.  Even  where  formal  crisis-management 
frameworks existed, such as within the European Union, they were not always used in the 
heat  of  the  crisis.  The  reality  is  that  the  resolution  of  failing  firms  is  still  a  national 
responsibility, even for institutions that operate globally. 
Early on in the crisis, authorities recognized that addressing the deficiencies made apparent 
by  the  crisis  required  an  international  effort.  Many  of  those  deficiencies  –  for  example,  in 
bank  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  and  in  accounting  systems  –  were  embodied  in 
internationally agreed regulations, standards, and codes of conduct. Addressing them would 
require working through global bodies of national and international standard setters and they 
would  require  broad  agreement  among  national  authorities.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2009
(now renamed the Financial Stability Board) brought central banks, regulators, and finance 
ministries together to identify the problems, suggest avenues for addressing those problems, 
and push for timely solutions.  
What remains to be done? 
The process of addressing the problems is still at an early stage. Now that the crisis seems 
to be abating, we can better identify the causes of the crisis and work on finding the best 
solutions.  Deficiencies  must  be  fixed  on  a  global  basis  to  forestall  gaps  and  regulatory 
arbitrage that could undermine the effectiveness of regulation. And countries need to have 
confidence  that  others  are  implementing  tighter  standards  in  a  consistent  way.  But  at  the 
same time, regulations must be passed and implemented nationally. On one level, this type 
of  action  is  simply  what  is  required  under  existing  legal  structures.  On  another  level,  it 
reflects  the  reality  that  taxpayers  in  individual  countries  end  up  bearing  much  of  the  cost 
when home-country institutions need to be stabilized. I'll highlight four of the many areas that 
require international coordination.  
First, we need to identify the global risks that can affect local banks. One obvious issue is 
cross-border exposures, especially when banks in many countries have similar exposures. 
On a global level, international groups like the Financial Stability Board have an important 
role  to  play  in  looking  for  these  kinds  of  vulnerabilities.  For  individual  banks  that  operate 
across borders, supervisory colleges bring the key supervisors together and can improve the 
flow of information. These groups can also help raise supervisors' awareness of the risks that 
occur  when  the  business  plans  of  local  banks  evolve  and  shift  to  take  on  more  global 
exposures.  
Of  course,  we  shouldn't  expect  too  much  from  these  exercises.  In  identifying  risks,  false 
positives will be common, and some mispricing of assets is inevitable as people attempt to 
evaluate the implications of broad economic trends and innovations. But looking in a focused 
way  across  markets  and  institutions  may  help  to  identify  areas  where  greater  supervisory 
attention could result in a more resilient system.  
A  second  area  that  is  likely  to  involve  international  collaboration  is  the  development  of  a 
more  macroprudential  approach  to  supervision  and  regulation.  One  aspect  of  such  an 
approach  is  higher  standards  for  systemically  important  institutions;  another  is  supervisory 
and regulatory measures to offset procyclical tendencies of the financial sector. Formulating 
higher  standards 
institutions  will  require 
international  coordination  to  avoid  uneven  playing  fields.  And,  offsetting  procyclical 
tendencies presents a difficult question: Should authorities aim at damping such tendencies 
at a global level or at the level of an individual country? If only global risks are addressed, 
vulnerabilities will persist at the local level; however efforts to address local problems could 
disadvantage domestic banks relative to those headquartered abroad.  
Third,  we  need  to  improve  our  ability  to  resolve  systemically  important  institutions  without 
generating spillovers that spread systemic risk across firms or across borders. Clearly, each 
country should have the legal authority to wind down a systemically important institution in an 
orderly way, taking account of the international dimensions. Beyond this, there is not yet a 
consensus on exactly what to do, but a range of promising proposals have been suggested 
to facilitate orderly resolutions. One is for supervisors to press firms to strengthen their ability 
to quickly provide the information on exposures, funding, and counterparties that would be 
needed  for  crisis  management.  Another  would  have  supervisors  recommend  changes  to 
simplify the organizational structures of systemically important firms to make it easier to deal 
with their failure. A related proposal would require firms to maintain a so-called living will, a 
written  contingency  plan  that  provides  for  an  orderly  wind-down  should  severe  financial 
distress lead to failure.  
important,  globally  active 
for  systemically 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 3
Fourth, we need to address home-host issues that arise in the supervision of cross-border 
firms. For example, some global banks can expose a host country to a withdrawal of risk-
taking  caused  by  problems  outside  its  own  borders.  This  exposure  understandably  makes 
host countries uncomfortable with the traditional division of responsibility that restricts a host-
country to supervising only the activity of a global bank within its own country. One possible 
response here would be more information sharing from home to host, to better enable host 
countries to protect themselves. Another response would be restrictions by host countries on 
cross-border operations of global banks, perhaps going so far as requiring global banks to 
operate through separately capitalized subsidiaries. However, this requirement, in addition to 
imposing costs on the banks, might also impede the ability of the global financial system to 
channel capital to where it is most likely to enhance productivity and growth. 
Conclusion 
I've touched on only a few of the international aspects of the crisis. We face a difficult set of 
decisions regarding how best to reform our national regulatory and supervisory frameworks 
in response to the lessons we have learned. But perhaps chief among the lessons learned 
from the past two years is that in an integrated global financial system we cannot make those 
decisions in isolation; we must collaborate internationally if we are to build a more resilient 
financial system for the future.  
4 
 BIS Review 133/2009
