Lucas Papademos: Opening remarks at the press briefing on the 
occasion of the publication of the December 2009 ECB Financial Stability 
Review 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at 
the press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the December 2009 ECB Financial 
Stability Review, Frankfurt am Main, 18 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
I. 
My colleagues and I would like to welcome you to today’s press briefing on the occasion of 
the  publication  of  the  December  2009  edition  of  the  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review.1  The 
primary objective of the Review is to consider the main sources of risk to the stability of the 
euro area financial system and provide a comprehensive assessment of the capacity of the 
financial  system  to  absorb  adverse  disturbances.  As  usual,  the  Review  has  integrated  the 
interdepartmental work of the ECB with that of the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) of 
the ESCB. It contains 14 boxes and five special feature articles that address topical financial 
stability issues in a more focused and analytical manner. As in the past, we have prepared a 
summary note that highlights some key messages of our analysis and assessment. 
Over  the  past  12  months,  the  extraordinary  policy  measures  taken  by  central  banks  and 
governments have succeeded in restoring confidence in, and strengthening the resilience of, 
financial  systems  around  the  world.  In  particular,  financial  system  support  measures  have 
been addressing the funding problems of key financial institutions and have bolstered their 
capital  positions.  These  measures,  in  combination  with  sizeable  macroeconomic  policy 
stimuli,  have  set  in  motion  a  mutually-reinforcing  process  between  financial  system 
conditions  and  real  economic  performance,  fostering  improving  economic  prospects  and  a 
fading of systemic risk. 
One important reason for the lowered systemic risk has been an abatement of tail risk, which 
has been primarily due to the downside-protection by governments of financial institutions’ 
balance sheets. A recovery of risk appetite, underpinned by the reduced systemic risk, has 
contributed  to  the  remarkable  turnaround  in  the  financial  markets  since  March  2009.  The 
improved financial conditions and the steeper yield curves have sufficiently strengthened the 
profitability  of  many  financial  institutions,  especially  the  large  ones,  to  such  an  extent  that 
they have been able to absorb considerable write-downs on securities and loans, while still, 
on average, reporting material improvements in profitability over three consecutive quarters.  
In my presentation, I will highlight the main risks identified and assessed in the Review and 
the associated financial stability challenges. I will start with certain sources of risk stemming 
from the global macro-financial environment. 
Risks in the global macro-financial environment  
II. 
Over  the  past  six  months,  the  adjustment  of  global  current  account  imbalances  has 
continued, driven by the global economic slowdown and the overall fall in commodity prices, 
especially energy, from the peaks of mid-2008. The current account deficit of the US is now 
projected to fall to 2.6% of GDP in 2009, which is almost 2.3 percentage points lower than in 
the  previous  year.  The  major  counterparts  to  the  adjustment  of  the  US  current  account 
balance have continued to be the surplus economies of eastern Asia and the oil-exporting 
                                                 
1  The cut-off date for data included in the December 2009 FSR was 27 November 2009. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
countries. The current account surplus of Japan is projected to narrow to 1.9%  of GDP in 
2009, while China’s current account surplus is forecast to decline by 2 percentage points to 
7.8% GDP in 2009, as robust domestic demand has underpinned imports growth which has 
exceeded that of exports. However, this ongoing adjustment of global imbalances is rather 
fragile, as it remains largely driven by cyclical factors related to the financial crisis rather than 
by  structural  factors.  Looking  ahead,  there  is  a  risk  of  re-emergence  of  sizeable  global 
imbalances stemming from various sources, including a possible widening of the US current 
account deficit as the economy recovers and if the substantial fiscal stimulus persists.  
Turning  to  external  risks  stemming  more  directly  from  the  US  economy,  there  were  some 
positive  developments,  but  vulnerabilities  also remain.  The  US  housing  market  has  shown 
some signs of stabilisation over recent months. Both home sales and housing construction 
appear to have bottomed out since earlier this year, while the decline in house prices ceased 
in July 2009. The Case-Shiller futures price index for ten major US cities now indicates that 
house  prices  are  expected  to  remain  broadly  flat  over  the  next  three  years  (see  Chart  1). 
Nevertheless, the risk of a renewed deterioration in the US housing market and, therefore, 
possible further losses for households’ net worth in the US and the financial sector has not 
disappeared. While the pace of increase in delinquencies on mortgages and in foreclosures 
has been slowing down, the excess stock of vacant homes remains considerable and might 
continue to exert downward pressure on house prices. In addition, the demand for housing 
has been spurred by tax credits for first-time home buyers, but this incentive has a limited 
time horizon.  
In  the  US  commercial  property  sector,  developments  have  lagged  those  in  the  residential 
property market, both with regard to prices and activity. The recent steep fall in prices raises 
risks  both  for  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  that  are  directly  exposed  to  the 
commercial property market and for investors in US commercial mortgage-backed securities.  
The  outlook  for  US  corporate  sector  has  stabilised  since  May  2009,  as  quarter-on-quarter 
profit  growth  has  turned  positive  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  This  has  mainly  been  due  to  a 
turnaround  in  the  profitability  of  domestic  financial  industries  (See  Chart  2).  As  a 
consequence,  corporate  sector  default  rates  are  expected  to  peak.  Notwithstanding  the 
improvement  in  total  corporate  profitability,  there  are  risks:  the  increase  in  non-financial 
corporate  profitability  has  been  largely  due  to  cost-cutting  measures,  which  could  not 
continue  indefinitely,  while  weak  demand  prospects  are  expected  to  constrain  revenue 
growth.  
The macroeconomic outlook in the non-euro area EU countries has improved, although there 
is still an unusually high degree of uncertainty. In many of the Central and Eastern European 
(CEE) countries of the EU, vulnerabilities have been reduced since May, but the economic 
and financial situation remains fragile. In particular, further economic contraction is forecast 
for  a  number  of  these  countries  next  year.  In  this  environment,  a  combination  of  rising 
unemployment and falling household incomes could be expected to raise the credit risks on 
consumer loans and residential mortgages. Corporate default rates are likely to be high in 
such a context as well. Given these fragilities, the possibility of a resurfacing of risk aversion 
towards the region can not be excluded.  
In  several  CEE  economies,  vulnerabilities  stem  from  the  fact  that  a  sizeable  proportion  of 
outstanding bank loans are denominated in currencies other than the currency in which the 
borrower’s  income  is  denominated.  Such  mismatched  foreign  exchange  currency positions 
mostly affect households. In countries with flexible exchange rates, currency depreciations 
earlier this year have meant that households would have to repay larger amounts than they 
expected. Recent developments serve to underline the risks that exist when large stocks of 
foreign  currency  credit  are  outstanding.  The  share  of  foreign  currency  lending  in  many  of 
these countries has been rising, owing to wide interest rate differentials. This has left them 
increasingly  vulnerable  to  a  renewed  weakening  of  their  currencies,  which  could  trigger  a 
significant further deterioration in banks’ asset quality. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
The  general  recovery  of  risk  appetite  has  benefited  the  hedge  fund  sector.  By  the  end  of 
October 2009, most hedge fund investment strategies have already recouped a substantial 
part,  or  even  all,  of  the  losses  they  suffered  in  2008.  Cumulative  average  year-to-date 
investment returns at the end of October 2009 of all hedge fund investment strategies had 
almost all signs opposite to those reported for the whole of 2008 (See Chart 3). At the same 
time, after significant investor outflows in earlier quarters, preliminary estimates for the third 
quarter of 2009 suggest that the second quarter of 2009 may have marked the end of sector-
wide investor outflows.  
Risks in the euro area non-financial sectors  
III. 
Let  me  now  focus  on  risks  and  vulnerabilities  that  we  have  identified  in  the  non-financial 
sectors  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Despite  the  considerable  heterogeneity  at  the  country 
level, the overall macroeconomic environment in the euro area has improved over the past 
six  months.  The  decline  in  euro  area  economic  activity  has  been  sharp  by  historical 
standards  since  the  third  quarter  of  last  year,  but  quarterly  real  GDP  growth  has  recently 
turned  positive  (see  Chart  4).  In  addition,  the  latest  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections show a gradual recovery in 2010, although the road ahead is likely to be uneven. 
Among the risks stemming from the euro area non-financial sectors, I will highlight the main 
vulnerabilities in the corporate sector, specific fragilities in the commercial property market, 
and certain risks associated with the household sector. 
Over the past six months, corporate profitability has remained very low and leverage ratios 
have generally increased, intensifying the balance sheet vulnerabilities of the non-financial 
corporate sector. In addition, banks have continued to apply conservative lending standards, 
albeit  at  a  moderating  degree.  Improvements  in  financial  market  conditions  have  allowed 
larger firms to partly substitute bank loans with market-based debt or equity. Looking forward 
over  the  next  few  months,  the  overall  balance  sheet  conditions  are  expected  to  remain 
challenging, as firms’ access to external finance is not likely to improve significantly in the 
coming months, while profitability is likely to remain low. Low profitability and high leverage 
are  putting  a  severe  strain  on  firms,  making  them  less  resilient  to  adverse  shocks.  As  a 
consequence,  some  measures  of  corporate  credit  risk,  such  as  unconditional  expected 
default frequencies, remain high for most industries although they had declined recently for 
most sectors. (See Chart 5). 
Conditions in the euro area commercial property markets have deteriorated further during the 
past six months and continue to be a potential source of risk to many financial institutions. 
Capital  values  – 
for  capital  expenditure, 
maintenance  and  depreciation  –  for  prime  property  had  declined  by  an  average  of  12% 
(year-on-year)  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009.  All  euro  area  countries  had  recorded  declining 
capital values compared with the third quarter of 2008. The outlook for commercial property 
prices  and  rents  is  uncertain  because  it  largely  depends  on  the  future  path  of  economic 
activity  as  developments  in  commercial  property  markets  follow  the  business  cycle  rather 
closely (See Chart 6). Some forecasters expect continued decreases in capital values and 
rents throughout 2009 and 2010. 
Turning next to the household sector, although household indebtedness has stabilised over 
the  past six  months,  the  balance sheets  of  this  sector  remain  a  potential  source  of  risk  to 
financial stability. A relatively negative outlook for the labour market and household income is 
expected to offset, at least partly, the ongoing positive effect of the past declines in interest 
rates on the ability of households to service their debts. 
The annual rate of growth in loans to the household sector, especially for house purchase, 
has further moderated, in line with the weakness of economic activity, the uncertain income 
prospects  and  the  marked  slowdown  in  house  prices  (See  Chart  7).  Indeed,  several  euro 
area countries have recorded declines in house prices in the first half of 2009.  
i.e.  commercial  property  prices  adjusted 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 3
Risks in the euro area financial system  
IV. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  main  sources  of  risk  in  the  euro  area  financial  system.  Investor 
appetite  for  risk  has  begun  to  return  after  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  bringing  with  it  an 
improvement  in  market  liquidity  and  a  decline  in  asset  price  volatility.  The  turnaround  has 
been  underpinned  by  government-provided  downside  protection  of  financial  institutions’ 
balance sheets, which has reduced tail risk, improving macroeconomic news and better than 
expected  earnings,  especially  by  financial  institutions.  Against  this  background,  the  equity 
markets have rebounded, led by financial stocks. At the same time, historically low levels of 
money  market  interest  rates  have  induced  a  hunt  for  yield  among  investors,  triggering 
outflows from bank deposits and money market funds into riskier assets, including corporate 
bonds issued by lower-rated borrowers. 
Euro area bond and equity markets 
Over the past six months, euro area long-term bond yields have declined. However, in late 
November 2009, the slope of the euro area yield curve remained steeper than at any point in 
time since the launch of the euro, due to the past declines in short-term market rates (See 
Chart 8). Intra-euro area sovereign spreads, as well as euro area sovereign CDS spreads, 
have narrowed further, in some cases to pre-Lehman levels, until very recently, when a few 
have widened again. 
Looking ahead, the prospects for euro area government bonds continue to be surrounded by 
persistent  uncertainty  about  future  macro-financial  developments.  Upward  risks  to  yields 
could stem from a further unwinding of flight-to-safety and flight-to-liquidity flows. In addition, 
slower than expected growth might increase the financing needs of euro area governments 
and bond markets might face difficulties in absorbing higher government bond issuance.  
Euro area equity markets continue to recover from the severe decline experienced during the 
financial crisis, supported by market optimism about the economic recovery and diminishing 
risk  aversion.  Valuation  measures  based  on  price/earnings  ratios  using  long-term  trailing 
earnings  figures  suggest  that  the  markets  are  not  particularly  overvalued  (see  Chart  9). 
Alternative valuation measures, based on expectations of future earnings, provide different 
signals. Moreover, risks for stock market prices remain, in particular those associated with an 
economic recovery that could turn out to be weaker than expected by markets.  
The euro area banking sector 
Let  me  now  turn  to  euro  area  financial  institutions,  starting  with  the  large  and  complex 
banking groups. Conditions in the euro area banking sector have improved markedly in the 
first  three  quarters  of  2009,  on  account  of  better-than-expected  macroeconomic  news  and 
the  concomitant  rebound  in  the  financial  markets.  The  euro  area  banking  sector  has  also 
benefited from the various financial system support measures and the macroeconomic policy 
stimulus.  
The  earnings  and  profitability  of  euro  area  major  banks  have  recovered  significantly,  and 
across the board, in the first three quarters of 2009, after a dismal performance in the second 
half of 2008. Nevertheless, the dispersion of profitability across LCBGs continues to be wide 
(see the left side of Chart 10). 
The examination of individual revenue categories sheds more light on the factors explaining 
euro  area  LCBGs’  recent  favourable  performance  (see  the  right  side  of  Chart  10).  Net 
interest income has been an important driver of the improved bank performance, on account 
of the steeper yield curve and wider operating margins. The tightening of credit standards, 
the  gradual  pass-through  of  lower  policy  rates  to  lending  rates  and  declining  competitive 
pressures  in  the  credit  market  have  all  contributed  to  higher  revenues  from  core  banking 
business.  Trading  income  has  increased  even  more  strongly  as  the  financial  markets 
4 
 BIS Review 168/2009
recovered after the first quarter of 2009 and has been the main contributor, on average, to 
the increase in revenues as a percentage of assets.  
With regard to bank capital positions and loan-loss provisions, I would like to highlight the 
following points. The recovery in major banks’ earnings, the slowdown in the growth rate of 
both  risk-weighted  and  total  assets  and  increases  in  capital  have  contributed  to  a  slight 
increase in the regulatory capital ratios of the median institutions. Even those institutions with 
the lowest regulatory capital ratios comfortably exceed at present the minimum requirements 
(see the left side of Chart 11).  
Provisions  on  impaired  assets  had  been  a  serious  drag  on  euro  area  LCBGs’  incomes  in 
2007 and 2008. To a large extent these provisions still related to securitised loans, although 
the share of loan impairments had started to grow. Most institutions have reported sharply 
higher provisions for loan losses (see the right side of Chart 11). Moreover, expressed as a 
percentage of total loans, loan-loss provisions were the highest in the third quarter compared 
to the five preceding years. 
Funding liquidity problems continue to bring pressure on the major banks’ operations. While 
the  conditions  have  improved  substantially  in  most  funding  segments  throughout  2009, 
including the money markets, some of these institutions and parts of the broader euro area 
banking system, remain reliant on temporary support measures extended by the Eurosystem 
and governments.  
Box 11 summarises the government measures to support the banking sector and discusses 
their implications for fiscal balances. Regarding the implementation of the measures, several 
conclusions  can  be  drawn:  First,  the  take-up  rate  has  been  generally  low  across  all 
measures, but there are substantial variations: the use of recapitalisation measures has been 
relatively widespread, while the take-up rate for the issuance of bank bonds with government 
guarantees  has  been  considerably  lower  than  expected.  Second,  the  largest  part  of  the 
financial  support  has  been  provided  to  a  relatively  small  number  of  institutions  (See 
Chart 12). Indeed, about half of the extended support has been absorbed by the largest three 
recipient institutions in each category of support. 
The  various  measures  to  support  the  financial  sector  amount  to  considerable  actual  and 
contingent liabilities for euro area governments. Although they are expected to have only a 
small direct impact on government deficits in the short to medium term, potential fiscal risks 
in  the  form  of  higher  refinancing  costs  are  sizeable  for  all  countries  that  have  provided 
significant financial system support, as these measures seem to have had a negative effect 
on market perceptions of the creditworthiness of the respective governments.  
A closer look at LCBGs’ financial results in the first three quarters of 2009 shows that risks of 
future  substantial  write-downs,  and  related  liquidity  and  solvency  concerns,  remained  and 
might  have  increased  somewhat.  While  the  LCBGs  seem  to  be  gradually  getting  over  the 
valuation losses they have suffered on their securities holdings, the sizeable provisions for 
loan  losses  seen  lately  underscore  the  significant  challenges  for  banks  in  managing  their 
distressed loan portfolios.  
Using the same methodology as in the June 2009 Review, and benefiting from more detailed 
data on loan and securities exposures of euro area banks, Box 10 presents an update of the 
estimate  and  assesses  the  magnitude  of  potential  write-downs  that  might  be  suffered  by 
banks by the end of 2010. The results show that euro area banks could face cumulative total 
losses of EUR 198 billion on their exposures to securities and losses of EUR 355 billion on 
their  loan  book  exposures  over  the  period  2007–2010.  The  total  potential  write-downs  on 
securities and loans is thus currently estimated at EUR 553 billion over the same period. This 
figure  is  EUR  65  billion  higher  than  the  June  2009  estimate.  The  increase  is  mainly  be 
explained by a further deterioration in the commercial property market, which contributed to a 
higher  estimate  of  potential  write-downs  on  banks’  commercial  property  mortgages  and 
commercial  mortgage-backed  securities,  and  also  by  the  inclusion  of  an  estimate  of  write-
downs on securities originated in Central and Eastern Europe. Taking into account the write-
BIS Review 168/2009 
 5
downs on loans and securities recorded until end-October 2009 and the loan loss provisions 
until  end-June  2009,  the  potential  further  write-downs  of  euro  area  banks  until  end-2010 
could reach EUR 187 billion.  
 The euro area insurance sector 
Turning  to  the  euro  area  insurance  sector,  it  continues  to  be  confronted  with  challenging 
conditions.  The  results  for  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  the  year  remained  rather 
subdued,  as  premiums  written  declined  on  average.  Reduced  demand  for  life  insurance 
products,  in  particular  unit-linked  products  –  where  the  investment  risk  was  borne  by  the 
policyholder – have contributed to lower premiums written. Premiums written growth in the 
non-life  segments  has  been  hampered  by  the  weak  economic  environment,  which  kept 
demand  from  households  and  firms  muted.  However,  investment  income,  which  has 
benefited  from  the  improvements  in  the  capital  markets  after  mid-March  2009,  was  on 
average  higher  than  in  previous  periods.  The  improvement  in  investment  income  has, 
however, not been enough to avoid a broad-based decline in profitability. 
Large  euro  area  insurers  have  continued  to  increase  their  investment  exposure  to 
government and corporate bonds during the first half of 2009, as they have continued to shift 
their  investment  strategies  away  from  equities  in  an  attempt  to  de-risk  their  investment 
exposures At the end of the first half of 2009, a sample of large euro area insurers had about 
70% of their investments in bonds, up from about 50% at the end of 2007 (See Chart 13).  
Overall,  looking  forward,  euro  area insurers  continue  to  face  challenges  mainly  due  to  the 
subdued economic activity, which is reflected in the uncertainty of their earnings prospects 
(see  Chart  14).  At  the  same  time,  the  disclosed  solvency  positions  of  euro  area  insurers 
indicate  a  reasonable  amount  of  remaining  shock-absorption  capacity  to  weather  the 
materialisation of the risks they currently face.  
6 
 BIS Review 168/2009
V.  Overall assessment  
Let me now conclude by providing an overall assessment of the identified risks to euro area 
financial system stability.  
As mentioned at the beginning of my presentation, the extraordinary policy measures taken 
by  central  banks  and  governments  since  late  last  year  have  been  successful  in  restoring 
confidence  in,  and  improving  the  resilience  of,  financial  systems  around  the  world.  A 
recovery  of  risk  appetite,  underpinned  by  lowered  systemic  risk,  has  contributed  to  the 
turnaround in financial markets since March 2009 and supported the trading income of large 
and complex banking groups. Many of these institutions also benefited from a considerable 
boost  to  net  interest  income  on  account  of  very  steep  yield  curves.  The  significant 
strengthening of the profitability of many LCBGs enabled them to absorb considerable write-
downs on securities and loans while still, on average, reporting profits. Some were even able 
to return the capital they had received from governments, thus exiting from financial support.  
Despite the recovery in financial markets and improved financial performance of euro area 
LCBGs, there are several grounds for caution in assessing the outlook for financial stability in 
the euro area.  
Let me be elaborate on these key risks and vulnerabilities: The main risks identified outside 
the euro area financial system include the possibility of:  
• 
vulnerabilities being revealed in non-financial corporations’ balance sheets, because 
of high leverage, low profitability and tight financing conditions;  
greater-than-expected  household  sector  credit  losses  if  unemployment  rises  by 
more than expected;  
the surge of government indebtedness raising concerns about the sustainability of 
the public finances, as well as the crowding out of private investment; and  
an adverse feed-back between the financial sector and public finances as a result of 
government  financial  system  support  measures,  fiscal  stimuli  and  weak  economic 
activity. 
   Within the euro area financial system, important risks include the possibility of:  
• 
renewed  financial  strains  and  that  the  recent  recovery  of  bank  profitability  will  not 
prove durable;  
vulnerabilities  of  financial  institutions  associated  with  concentrations  of  lending 
exposures  to  commercial  property  markets  and  to  central  and  eastern  European 
countries being unearthed; and  
a setback for the recent recovery of financial markets, if macroeconomic outcomes 
fail to live up to optimistic expectations. 
  All  in  all,  the  challenges  facing  the  euro  area  banking  sector  in  the  period  ahead  call  for 
caution  in  avoiding  timing  errors  in  disengaging  from  public  support.  In  particular,  exit 
decisions by governments will need to carefully balance the risks of exiting too early against 
those of exiting too late. Exiting before the underlying strength of key financial institutions is 
sufficiently  well  established  runs  the  risk  of  leaving  some  of  them  vulnerable  to  adverse 
disturbances, possibly even triggering renewed financial system stresses. Late exits, on the 
other hand, can entail the risk of distorting competition, creating moral hazard risks that come 
with  downside  protection  –  including  the  possibility  of  excessive  risk-taking  –  as  well  as 
exacerbating risks for public finances. 
To cushion the risks that lie ahead, banks will need to be especially mindful in ensuring that 
they have adequate capital and liquidity buffers in place. If the circumstances require it, some 
banks may need to raise new and high-quality capital. In addition, some banks, especially 
those  which  have  received  state  support,  may  need  fundamental  restructuring  in  order  to 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 7
confirm their long-term viability when such support is no longer available. This could involve 
the shrinking of balance sheets through the shedding of unviable businesses with a view to 
enhancing  their  profit-generating  capacities.  At  the  same  time,  banks  should  take  full 
advantage of the recent recovery in their profitability to strengthen their capital positions, so 
that  the  necessary  restructuring  of  businesses  and  the  enhancement  of  shock-absorbing 
capacities do not impinge materially on the provision of credit to the economy.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
 
  8 
 BIS Review 168/2009
  BIS Review 168/2009 
 9
  10 
 BIS Review 168/2009
  BIS Review 168/2009 
 11
  12 
 BIS Review 168/2009
 BIS Review 168/2009 
  13
 14 
   BIS Review 168/2009
 BIS Review 168/2009 
 15
