Giovanni Carosio: Payment cards between the Payment Services 
Directive (PSD) and the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) 
Address  by  Mr  Giovanni  Carosio,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
conference “Carte 2009 – Cards Revolution”, organized by the Italian Banking Association, 
Rome, 12 November 2009. 
 Preamble  
The  integration  of  the  European  retail  payments  industry  has  entered  a  phase  of  rapid 
progress,  spurred  by  the  regulatory  changes  contained  in  the  Payment  Services  Directive 
(PSD), the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project for cooperation between public and 
private sectors, and the introduction of new electronic instruments for payment services.  
The implementation of the Directive will have a strong impact on competition in the payments 
industry, stimulating the creation of new instruments and the access of new operators to the 
market;  the  migration  from  national  to  harmonized  SEPA  products  will  give  fresh 
opportunities  to  service  users  for  comparing  instruments  and  making  better  informed 
decisions.  Both  these  developments  necessitate  an  in-depth  review  of  the  current  product 
supply mechanisms and are therefore a driver of the operational and technological change 
already in incubation.  
These dynamics are reflected, and in many ways magnified, in the payment cards market; 
cards are seen as the natural substitute for cash and thus the instrument that more than any 
other can shift consumers’ habits towards efficient and secure payment services.  
Card  circuits  describe  a  skein  of  relationships  between  a  multiplicity  of  actors  whose 
interests, while not diametrically opposed, do not immediately coincide; ensuring efficiency is 
therefore a complex objective. A balance must be struck between the needs of the various 
stakeholders,  involving  the  safeguarding  of  competition,  the  profitability  of  the  services 
offered and the security of the instruments used.  
Payment  security  is  the  defining  element  in  dealings  with  customers;  traditionally,  it  is  the 
cornerstone of the fiduciary relationship between savers and financial intermediaries. It must 
also be guaranteed in the new “virtual” realities; the dangers inherent in the new technologies 
require  harmonized  technical  and  legislative  measures  that  the  European  standards  can 
provide.  
As  the  market  continues  to  suffer  from  the  financial  crisis,  the  growth  potential  of  the 
payment card sector remains enormous in countries such as Italy, where cash transactions 
are still predominant.  
Economic conditions  
Developments  in  the  retail  payment  services  market  have  been  affected  by  the  financial 
crisis and unfavourable cyclical conditions.  
Since the second half of 2008 global growth in the payment instruments market has declined, 
a trend apparent in Italy too; cards, however, and in particular pre-paid cards, appear to have 
weathered the storm best. The annual growth of card transactions at Italian POS terminals 
(5% in 2008; 7% in 2007) was higher than that for other instruments (1 % in 2008; 3% in 
2007) and broadly in line with the European trend. Pre-paid cards continue to be the best 
performing  instrument,  with  an  annual  average  growth  rate  of  50  per  cent,  five  times  the 
European rate.  
BIS Review 155/2009 
 1
In 2009, while the volume of other payment instruments (credit transfers, direct debits and 
cheques) declined by around 2%, the payment cards market continued to grow at broadly the 
same pace as in 2008. The growth rate for pre-paid cards also declined, from 50 to 25 per 
cent.  
These  are  the  conditions  in  which  the  payments  industry  is  opening  up  to  new  actors 
equipped  to  offer  innovative  products  –  such  as  mobile  payments  –  capable  of  rapidly 
gaining  market  share,  especially  in  micro-payments  where  cash  is  so  common.  Some 
evidence of this can be seen in the case of pre-paid cards (also thanks to their use in Internet 
transactions)  and  other  new  instruments  (for  example,  motorway  toll  payment  devices). 
Indeed,  several  studies  show  that  even  in  countries  with  advanced  credit  and  debit  card 
systems, cash payments still predominate for transactions below a certain amount, estimated 
at around €15; in Italy, however, this threshold continues to be considerably higher (around 
€40), confirming the traditional preference for cash. In view of the many applications that can 
be combined with the pre-paid function for recurring expenses (rather than with the traditional 
current account), the micro-payments area appears particularly suited to policies for greater 
mobile  payments  coverage  –  the  natural  next  step  of  the  most  advanced  products  in  the 
world of cards such as “contactless” cards.  
The nexus between the cyclical situation and the creation of new market segments lies in the 
delicate  nature  of  the  strategic  choices  that  banks  must  make.  More  investment  in  new 
sectors, more risks relative to the speed at which such investment can be amortized when 
profits are lean, but at the same time the need to address the contraction underway in many 
areas of the financial industry.  
The payment services directive and other community regulations  
On 28 October the Council of Ministers approved the draft legislative decree transposing the 
PSD  into  Italian  law.  The  text  is  now  before  Parliament.  Within  45  days  the  competent 
committees will issue their non-binding opinions, before definitive approval by the Council of 
Ministers and publication in the Gazzetta Ufficiale.  
The  first  set  of  rules  laid  down  in  the  Directive  concerns  the  rights  and  obligations  of  the 
parties to payment transactions (Title II). By harmonizing the rules, these provisions remove 
the obstacles to uniform use of SEPA schemes everywhere in the European Union. These 
are rules that affect the ways in which payment services are actually provided, the structure 
of  transactions,  and  the  responsibilities  of  the  various  parties.  They  are  designed  to 
guarantee the highest possible level of security and protection for users of payment services 
and to foster efficiency and innovation.  
The PSD will have a powerful impact on payment cards, owing in part to specific provisions 
of  Italy’s  transposition  decree,  which  characterize  its  content  with  respect  to  the  general 
provisions of the Directive. Some of these national “qualifications” are distinguished by the 
objective of enhancing guarantees for users, in order to strengthen confidence in advanced, 
non-cash instruments. For instance, the decree recognizes the need to adapt some of the 
PSD’s general clauses (as in the case of compatibility of cost-sharing with interchange fees) 
and offers incentives for the use of the most secure, technologically advanced instruments. 
From  this  standpoint,  one  noteworthy  feature  is  the  possibility  for  the  merchant  to  offer 
discounts  to  customers  who  use  only  the  electronic  payment  instruments  covered  by  the 
decree. Further, in order to promote the use of more efficient and reliable instruments, the 
Bank of Italy can authorize merchants to make it more costly for customers to use the less 
efficient instruments, in derogation to the general “no surcharge rule” that the circuits impose 
on merchants to prevent discrimination against their cards.  
In any case, the aim of promoting the most advanced forms of payment is not exclusive to 
the PSD but runs throughout recent Community regulations. The Electronic Money Directive, 
whose transposition is scheduled for the end of April 2011, represents in some respects an 
2 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
extension  of  the  PSD.  It  modifies  the  concept  of  e-money  to  embrace  all  the  different 
possible forms (card-based and server-based) and allows future electronic money institutions 
to  do  business  under  a  regime  analogous  to  that  covering  payment  institutions  under  the 
PSD,  as  regards  both  the  types  of  activities  they  can  engage  in  and  the  possibility  of 
combining payment and commercial services. This could produce a fully competitive market 
situation, propitious to the rapid technological advance of the competitive frontier, with direct 
benefits for the quality of services.  
Another feature of the overall reform of European payment regulations is the aim of ensuring 
effective  protection  for  payment  service  users  by  designating  an  authority  with  specific 
powers of control, complaints handling, and sanctions; for our country, the authority will be 
the Bank of Italy. These new responsibilities are grafted onto the payment system oversight 
powers of the Bank under Article 146 of the Consolidated Law on Banking, which the PSD 
transposition  decree  amends  to  make  user  protection  an  express  objective  along  with  the 
traditional ones of efficiency and reliability; the regulatory and control powers that the Bank 
needs to perform this function effectively are specified.  
SEPA and payment cards  
The  authorities  (the  Eurosystem,  the  Commission)  and  the  market  organizations  (e.g.  the 
European Payments Council) have long since agreed that the basic approach to SEPA as 
regards  payment  cards  must  rest  on  varied,  ramified  models  of  integration:  adequate 
governance  of  pan-European  schemes;  transparent,  non-restrictive  business  models  (and 
fee mechanisms); and higher operational standards for security and processing. The greatest 
progress  has  come  in  raising  standards,  as  is  shown  by  the  migration  to  smart  cards  – 
microchip  technology  is  now  installed  on  some  80  per  cent  of  card  acceptance  devices  – 
which has produced encouraging data on payment card frauds, as well as further advancing 
the  relatively  high  degree  of  technological  integration  that  has  historically  marked  the 
payment card industry internationally.  
There should soon also be an acceleration of convergence of fee mechanisms thanks in part 
to the progress being made in the debate on the multilateral interchange fee (MIF).  
The  measures  affecting  governance  and  the  creation  of  pan-European  alternatives  to  the 
Visa and Mastercard circuits have been less significant. Although some interesting initiatives 
have been taken under the logic of “federating” the national debit card circuits (e.g. EAPS, 
Payfair,  Monnet),  by  far  the  most  prevalent  approach  still  remains  co-branding  with  the 
international circuits. In this context, further gains in efficiency can be sought by separating 
the  governance  of  the schemes  (domestic  or  international) from  payment  processing,  thus 
increasing the transparent supply of unbundled services that are not binding upon users and 
should therefore foster the ability to select the most efficient structure.  
The integration process is being closely followed by the Eurosystem as payment instrument 
overseer.  The  approach  is  designed  to  verify  the  circuits’  level  of  efficiency  and  technical-
operational security.  
Efficiency  
To  achieve  real  advances  in  card  scheme  efficiency  and  fee  profiles,  the  debate  on  the 
Multilateral  Interchange  Fee  and  its  relationship  with  the  effective  costs  of  instrument 
acceptance (also from the standpoint of the “war on cash”) remains crucial.  
The  MIF,  preset  for  each  circuit,  is  relevant  both  to  interbank  and  to  bank-customer 
transactions  as  a  component  of  the  final  price.  According  to  the  European  competition 
authority, the MIF constitutes a de facto lower limit to the service fees charged to merchants 
on debit, credit and prepaid card transactions. However, the theoretical literature is not at all 
unanimous on the effects of multilateral interchange fees, and empirical studies are of little 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 3
help. This suggests the need for a prudent approach, with case-by-case evaluation before 
any decision for substantial intervention on payment network mechanisms is made.  
This is the necessity that has shaped the Commission’s recent initiatives to find a practical 
method  for  setting  the  interchange  fee  at  an  efficient  level  that  truly  takes  account  of  the 
costs (and the benefits) of accepting a card in lieu of other instruments (especially cash) at 
points of sale – the so-called “tourist test”. The aim is twofold: to help guide the European 
competition authority in assessing compliance of cross-border MIFs with the EU Treaty and 
to stimulate convergence of fees for SEPA card use by applying the new method to national 
circuits.  
The  Eurosystem  too  has  undertaken  a  study  on  the  costs  of  using  various  payment 
instruments and cash, in order to measure the potential savings to the economy of replacing 
the  more  costly  instruments  with  those  considered  more  efficient.  The  survey  will  permit 
comparisons  between  countries  and  instruments  (for  instance,  calculating  threshold  levels 
that  make  it  economic  to  choose  any  given  instrument)  and  to  highlight  the  effects  of 
technological innovation.  
The debate on the MIF and, more in general, on the fee structure of payment networks must 
not obscure the objective of expanding electronic payments and reducing the use of cash in 
retail payments. The MIF covers a significant part of the costs sustained by the issuer (brand 
management,  technological  innovation,  clearing,  authorizations,  revocations)  and  can 
therefore  serve  to  avoid  levying  a  charge  directly  on  the  cardholder.  Indeed,  in  order  to 
encourage the use of cards, the MIF structure posits that the holder is to be exempt from 
charges upon making purchases; this argument is completed on the normative plane with the 
PSD’s surcharge rule, also incorporated into the Italian government’s draft legislative decree.  
Although it goes beyond the debate on the MIF, another important explicit recommendation 
of the Eurosystem and the European competition authority that can enhance the efficiency 
and  competitiveness  of  the  system  in  the  SEPA  process  is  the  adoption  of  “open”  fee 
structures. The aim is to give merchants ample room for choice in negotiating acceptance 
fees  differentiated  by  instrument  (for  example,  prepaid  card  or  credit  card)  and  circuit  (for 
instance,  PagoBANCOMAT  and  Maestro),  thereby  undoing  the  widespread  practice  of 
blending the rates on transactions with different cards even under competing schemes.  
This is an approach that has found a counterpart at national level in the action of the Bank of 
Italy and the Antitrust Authority to open up the market to the new “multi-bank” technologies 
that allow transactions carried out at a POS to be transmitted for settlement to a selection of 
banks rather than to a single reference bank, in order to enable merchants to negotiate fees 
on a competitive basis.  
Security  
The other key feature for the adequacy of card circuits within the SEPA context is security, 
i.e. a scheme’s capacity to reduce the risks of fraudulent or illicit use of payment instruments. 
As I noted earlier, the overall incidence of fraud is declining thanks to the changes connected 
with the migration to SEPA. The ratio of fraudulent to total transactions carried out with debit, 
credit  or  prepaid  cards  now  stands  at  0.05  per  cent  in  Italy,  in  line  with  the  international 
standards and down from the peak of 0.07 per cent in 2006. The improvement is surely due 
to faster replacement of cards that only have a magnetic stripe with cards equipped with an 
EMV chip, in compliance with the common standard for SEPA and for the international card 
circuits.  
A  factor  contributing  to  this  result  has  been  the  action  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  in  its  oversight 
function  to  encourage  circuit  operators  to  adopt  technologically  more  secure  devices  as 
swiftly  as  possible,  consistent  with  the  expectations  of  SEPA,  accompanied  by  the 
application of mechanisms aimed at shifting the pecuniary liability for losses caused by fraud 
to  the  operators  that  are  non-compliant  with  the  new  security  standards.  Among  payment 
4 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
cards, prepaid cards have lower rates of fraud (0.02 per cent), which has evidently favoured 
their popularity.  
Renewed threats are being posed especially for online transactions: cases of phishing and 
hacking to acquire sensitive personal data for the illegal use of payment instruments are on 
the  rise.  Strengthening  users’  confidence  requires  preventive  action,  with  recourse  to  new 
technologies  and  to  incentive  mechanisms  (such  as  “liability  shift”  clauses)  that  have 
produced  good  results  in  the  world  of  “physical”  payments  and  can  be  enhanced  and 
extended  to  the  virtual  world.  The  PSD’s  provisions  on  issuer  liability  also  move  in  that 
direction  and  should  spur  the  banking  system  to  invest  new  resources  in  preventive 
technologies.  For  Internet  payments  in  particular,  the  risk  of  fraud  should  be  reduced  by 
widespread adoption of central authentication systems, with the use of two or more access 
keys,  security  tokens  and  one-time  passwords,  as  well  as  specific  site  data  protection 
programs.  
The bodies promoting the SEPA project can intervene more effectively in these respects with 
shared rules of conduct.  
The theme of security includes measures to prevent use of payment instruments for illegal 
purposes such as money laundering. The objective of the various authorities is to combine 
operational  flexibility  and  technological  development  in  the  field  of  payment  services  with 
adequate  integrity  of  circuits  and  traceability  of  transactions.  In  this  sense,  the  scope  for 
marketing anonymous products, both single-load and reloadable, under the new legislative 
context  is  limited  both  in  the  maximum  amount  that  they  can  handle  and  in  their  function 
capabilities, especially for so-called card-to-card transfers. In a globalized market, fraudulent 
activities can rapidly reposition themselves and concentrate on the weak links of the chain. 
For this as well as for other reasons, it is important that intermediaries (banks, issuers and all 
operators  in  the  sector)  not  merely  comply  formally  with  the  rules  but  take  a  risk-based 
approach  in  setting  corporate  policies  to  prevent  improper  use  of  instruments  and  circuits, 
with the associated risk of severe reputational repercussions, which can undermine customer 
confidence  not  only  in  the  entities  involved  but  in  the  payment  instruments  and  circuits 
themselves.  
Conclusion  
Considering the still very high level of use to cash, Italy is among the countries that stand to 
benefit most from the integration under way in the European market in payment cards. The 
completion  of  the  new  legislative  framework  creates  the  conditions  for  the  market  to  offer 
highly standardized , technologically advanced products that can capture a mass customer 
base, such as persons making micro-payments.  
For  their  extensive  distribution  and  user  friendliness,  payment  cards  are  able  to  make  the 
most  of  technological  innovation,  including  through  both  cooperative  and  competitive 
interaction with the new service providers coming into the market, such as mobile telephone 
service operators; this can make it possible to attack the threshold of micro-payments with 
services that are really alternative to cash.  
The payment system oversight function intends to accompany this development, by involving 
all  the  stakeholders  in  defining  instruments,  services  and  solutions  that  can  enhance  the 
reliability and efficiency of the payment system. 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 5
