Már Guðmundsson: Monetary policy objectives and developments in the 
Icelandic economy 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a breakfast 
meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavik, 6 November 2009. 
 In  general,  monetary  policy  is  conducted  under  conditions  of  uncertainty.  The  future  is 
always uncertain, of course, but so are the present and the recent past – at least, when one 
is assessing the state of the economy. This is axiomatic to anyone who has had to wait for 
national  accounts  figures  in  order  to  estimate  current  GDP  growth  and  has  then  seen 
statistics revised repeatedly over a period of several years. Another source of uncertainty is 
the  effect  of  monetary  policy  instruments  on  other  interest  rates,  exchange  rates,  asset 
prices, demand, and inflation. Naturally, we know a great deal about the relationships in the 
economy, but we don’t know what the correct model of it is, and we probably never will, as 
economic  structures  change  over  time.  Furthermore,  expectations  play  a  key  role  in  the 
entire process, and while they may remain reasonably stable for a time, other periods of time 
will come, and expectations will become unhinged. The relationship between interest rates 
and exchange rates under conditions of free cross-border movement of capital is different to 
the relationship that exists under capital account restrictions. In general, the monetary policy 
transmission  mechanism  depends  on  the  maturity  of  the  financial  markets.  These 
uncertainties and complexities, of course, are the reason for monetary policy committees and 
heavily staffed central banks.  
If monetary policy is complex under normal circumstances, the complexity is multiplied in a 
financial crisis, especially a crisis as deep as the one that Iceland has been going through. 
Some of the markets that are important for monetary policy transmission stopped functioning 
to  a  substantial  degree.  Financial  institutions  became  impaired,  and  they  responded 
differently to the Central Bank’s monetary policy instruments than they did before the crisis. 
The relationship with the rest of the world changed. The link between exchange rates and 
interest rates weakened. And expectations became seriously unstuck. Matters were further 
complicated because we had to change the rules of the game in response to the crisis; for 
example, by imposing capital controls.  
It is important to remember this when evaluating monetary policy in Iceland under the current 
circumstances.  At  present,  the  monetary  policy  framework  is  defined  by  the  economic 
programme agreed between the Icelandic Government and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF). The other key elements of the programme are the medium-term fiscal sustainability 
plan and the financial market restructuring plan.  
According  to  the  programme,  the  most  important  task  of  monetary  policy  is  to  promote 
exchange  rate  stability.  One  reason  for  this  is  the  currency  crisis  that  accompanied  the 
financial crisis, pushing the exchange rate far below levels previously thought possible, let 
alone  desirable.  This  currency  collapse  fuelled  inflation,  of  course,  and  amplified  the  debt 
crisis  faced  by  households  and  businesses.  Two  factors  played  leading  roles  in  that 
development.  The  first  is  the  relatively  large  share  of  foreign-denominated  loans  –  an 
average  of  20%  for  households  and  70%  for  businesses.  The  latter  factor  is  an  unusually 
strong exchange rate pass-through effect, which stems from the magnitude of the exchange 
rate drop and the lack of confidence that the króna would recover in the near future. As a 
result, the principal of indexed loans – which constitute about 70% of household debt and 
10% of business debt – was written up. As is often the case in severe financial crises that are 
at the same time country crises, there was a genuine risk of a multi-faceted spiral of currency 
collapse,  inflation,  debt crisis,  and economic  contraction.  It  was  critical  to stave  off  such a 
vicious cycle, and therefore of vital importance to stabilise the exchange rate.  
BIS Review 146/2009 
 1
to  escape 
through  a  collapsed 
But  this  was  problematic  because  of  the  large  amount  of  capital  that  had  accumulated  in 
Iceland through carry trading during the economic upswing. Current estimates indicate that 
some 500 b.kr. remain in the Icelandic economy. There was the risk that this money would 
try 
foreign  exchange  market,  with  unimaginable 
consequences for the exchange rate. Thus it was quite possible that astronomical interest 
rates  would  have  been  required  if  exchange  rate  stability  were  to  be  achieved  through 
interest  rate  policy  alone.  In  view  of  this,  it  was  decided  to  impose  broad-based  capital 
account  restrictions  and  thereby  create  the  scope  for  less  restrictive  monetary  policy  than 
would otherwise have been feasible.  
As is usually the case, there were probably other options available at the time. But because I 
prefer to focus on the current situation and the road ahead, I would prefer not to spend time 
rehashing  the  past  and  ruminating  about  hypothetical  options.  Such  speculation  cannot 
change the past. Generally speaking, however, it seems to me that other options would have 
entailed significantly higher interest rates – initially, at least – and more risk to the exchange 
rate. But that doesn’t change the fact that, although the capital controls provided a certain 
temporary shelter, they also entail significant cost and inconvenience, which probably vary 
directly with the length of time the controls are in place. That cost will ultimately cut into GDP 
growth for the short term and reduce the level of GDP in the longer term. Understandably, 
then, we do not wish to maintain the capital controls a minute longer than necessary.  
Strictly speaking, monetary policy is not based on an inflation target at present – at least, not 
for the short term – as the interim goal of arresting the fall of the króna and then stabilising it 
has taken priority. Ultimately, of course, this policy is consistent with the attainment of the 
inflation target. It would have been tempting to take somewhat greater short-term risk with 
the  exchange  rate  and  direct  monetary  policy  more  toward  domestic  economic  conditions 
and  the  inflation  outlook,  but  the  enormous  damage  that  even  a  short-lived  additional 
depreciation would have done to private sector balance sheets precluded such an approach.  
Under  conventional  circumstances,  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  can  be  described, 
albeit in an oversimplified way, as entailing a policy interest rate that takes into account three 
factors: 
1) the desired policy rate when inflation is at target and GDP is at potential; 2) the output 
gap; and 3) the deviation of inflation from target. In the case of Iceland, the exchange rate 
must be added to this list, and with a heavy weight. But the weight of the other items is not 
zero,  and  the  importance  of  the  exchange  rate  should  diminish  as  the  financial  crisis 
relinquishes  its  grip  and  we  reduce  the  weight  of  foreign  debt  in  private  sector  balance 
sheets, thereby reducing the impact of the exchange rate on domestic liabilities. One of the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s many tasks at present is to assess how these various weights 
should evolve as circumstances change.  
Indicators  presented  at  the  most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting  suggest  that 
foreign-denominated  debt  may  weigh  less  heavily  in  corporate  sector  debt  than  was 
previously believed, and that it is currently diminishing in importance for both households and 
businesses.  Before  the  banks  collapsed,  an  average  of  70%  of  corporate  sector  debt  was 
denominated  in  foreign  currency.  But  the  distribution  is  quite  skewed.  Holding  companies 
had a large share, and large and medium-sized firms were more likely to have foreign debt 
than were small firms. Over half of businesses had domestic-currency debt only. In addition 
to  this,  the  weight  of  households’  and  businesses’  foreign-denominated  debt  will  probably 
decline in the near future, both due to debt restructuring and because the vast majority of 
new bank loans are in domestic currency. The banks have limited capacity to lend in foreign 
currency, both because of a shortage of foreign exchange and because they are operating 
under  temporary  exemptions  from  Central  Bank  rules  on  maximum  foreign  exchange 
imbalances.  Of  course,  this  is  good  news,  in  a  sense,  because  the  sooner  the  weight  of 
foreign debt diminishes, the sooner monetary policy will be released from the straitjacket of 
restraint far greater than is desirable in light of current domestic economic conditions. Other 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2009
factors that could help in this context are new foreign exchange inflows and lower risk premia 
on domestic króna-denominated assets, which would obviate the need to maintain exorbitant 
interest rates in order to keep ISK assets in the country or attract new capital.  
I have expanded at some length on current monetary policy objectives because I consider it 
important  that  these  objectives  be  understood.  But  what  are  the  instruments  of  monetary 
policy? It can be said that, apart from reserve requirements and other similar tools, which are 
seldom  changed,  the  Bank’s  interest  rate  decisions,  foreign  exchange  market  intervention, 
and  capital  controls  are  its  chief  monetary  policy  instruments.  These  instruments  must  be 
properly aligned, and consequently, interest rate decisions take account of capital controls. 
The controls provided some shelter for interest rate decisions for a while; however, as soon 
as they are relaxed, interest rates must be high enough to give investors an incentive to hold 
ISK  assets.  Just  how  high  they  must  be  is  determined  in  part  by  the  risk  premium  on  the 
Republic  of  Iceland,  which  fortunately  has  declined  significantly  in  the  recent  term.  For 
example,  the  Republic’s  CDS  spread  has  fallen  from  around  1000  basis  points  at  the 
beginning of the year to about 350 points.  
But  what  about  foreign  exchange  market  intervention?  It  is  a  tricky  instrument  and,  if 
misapplied, yields nothing at best and generates enormous losses at worst. Refusing to use 
it at all, however, would be unnecessarily extreme. One of the lessons of the financial crisis 
is  that  the  proper  deployment  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  can  be  of  key  importance  in 
preserving monetary and financial stability under difficult circumstances. This is supported by 
innumerable examples from countries from Brazil to Korea. There is no benefit in amassing 
foreign exchange reserves during an economic upswing if one is chary of using them in times 
of need. The public sector can take a broader view than the private sector because it is able 
to take a longer-term position with or against its own currency, thereby smoothing out cycles, 
and profit on the whole arrangement. Australia and other countries have at times used this 
strategy  successfully,  in  spite  of  an  inflation  target.  But  there  is  no  sense  in  protecting  an 
unrealistic exchange rate through thick and thin, nor does it make sense to draw a line in the 
sand  vis-à-vis  the  market.  Under  those  circumstances,  it  is  better  to  adopt  the  military 
strategy  of  Genghis  Khan,  who  often  began  by  retreating,  luring  his  opponents  from  their 
fortresses and then annihilating them out on the steps.  
At present, foreign exchange market intervention in Iceland aims at mitigating exchange rate 
volatility  and  preventing  a  spiral  of  currency  depreciation  and  expectations  of  further 
depreciation.  Since  the  banks  collapsed,  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  exchange  market 
intervention  has  all  been  in  one  direction:  It  has  sold  foreign  currency.  In  the  past  few 
months,  however,  intervention  has  been  reduced  significantly  in  comparison  with,  for 
example, January and February, and then May and June. Nonetheless, 2009 figures year-to-
date are quite high, at over 80 million euros.  
Is too much risk being taken? As long as intervention remains modest, I think not. There is 
no  doubt  that  the  equilibrium  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  has  fallen  sharply  after  the  past 
years’ accumulation of debt and the ensuing collapse of the banking system. I think there is 
little doubt that the current exchange rate is below this new, lower equilibrium rate, as is often 
the  case  in  a  financial  crisis.  However,  there  is  great  uncertainty  about  how  far  below 
equilibrium  it  is.  There  is  also  considerable  uncertainty  about  how  much  the  equilibrium 
exchange rate will rise in coming years and how much the exchange rate will correct itself. 
The Central Bank’s newly published forecast assumes that the exchange rate of the króna 
against  the  euro  will  remain  close  to  current  levels  until  well  into  2010,  whereupon  it  will 
gradually rise to about 170 in 2011 and 2012. We hope, of course, that this forecast is unduly 
pessimistic,  and  experience  tells  us  that  the  currency  can  appreciate  swiftly  once  it  gains 
upward momentum. But it would be imprudent to base plans and policy actions on such a 
hope.  On  the  contrary:  I  believe  we  should  prepare  ourselves  for  a  protracted  episode  of 
weakness.  And,  like  so  many  other  things,  there  are  both  pros  and  cons  associated  with 
such a development.  
BIS Review 146/2009 
 3
That  doesn’t  change  the  fact  that  we  would  all  have  to  make  a  concerted  effort  to  botch 
things in order to prevent the exchange rate from being considerably higher in a few years’ 
time than it is today. But then we will have to remember to buy back the foreign exchange 
that we have used to support the króna in 2008 and 2009. If we do that, then we might profit 
on the whole arrangement. 
I expect this spurs questions about whether we need all of the loans that we have negotiated 
as a part of the IMF programme. In my opinion, this is an eminently justifiable question. First 
of all, we need the loans in order to ensure that we have sufficient foreign exchange at all 
times to enable us to pay amortisation and interest on the foreign debt of the Treasury and 
Treasury-guaranteed entities. As far as the Treasury is concerned, there will be little activity 
until  late  in  2011,  when  a  loan  of  one  billion  euros,  taken  in  2006  to  reinforce  the  foreign 
exchange reserves, will mature. But we can also use the loans to buy the bonds from this 
series  and  others  offered  in  the  secondary  market  at  low  prices,  thereby  easing  the  debt 
service burden and profiting on the whole arrangement. Furthermore, we will need reserves 
in  order  to  engage  in  moderate  foreign  exchange  market  intervention,  with  the  aim  of 
supporting  the  króna  and  reducing  volatility.  And  last  –  but  certainly  not  least  –  we  need 
reserves in order to create confidence in the króna and fend off those who would attack it. 
But  such  an  arsenal,  which  is  only  to  be  used  in  an  emergency,  is  extremely  expensive 
because  it  is  impossible  to  invest  the  reserves  at  rates  comparable  to  those  on  the  loans 
themselves  without  taking  an  unacceptable  amount  of  risk.  Thus  it  is  important  to  avoid 
borrowing more than necessary and to emerge as soon as possible from our current state of 
imbalance.  
Before  I  turn  to  the  economic  outlook  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  most  recent 
interest  rate  decision,  I  consider  it  necessary  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  nature  of  the 
adjustment the Icelandic economy is currently undergoing. First of all, it should be borne in 
mind that the year 2009 would have been extremely difficult in any case, no matter whether 
the banks had collapsed or not. This is because of the huge macroeconomic imbalances that 
developed in the Icelandic economy in 2005-2007 and had to subside in one way or another. 
Second, the collapse of the banking system called unavoidably for an additional adjustment 
in the structure of the economy. We can summarise this as follows: The enormous current 
account  deficit  had  to  go,  and  the  financial  system  and  various  other  bubble-related 
operations had become far too large and had to be downsized. This involves considerable 
unemployment, partly because of layoffs in the sectors that have contracted and the lag time 
before new commercial activities can be established. Tradable sectors must be reinforced. 
The key to hastening that process is re-establishing an effective financial system. Although 
the currency may have played a role in creating the problem, the depreciation is also part of 
the adjustment, and it is accompanied by transitory inflation. However, when the adjustment 
is over, we should not be faced with persistent inflation, and it is the chief role of monetary 
policy to try to ensure that inflation does not become entrenched.  
The  Central  Bank  published  a  new  macroeconomic  forecast  yesterday,  as  well  as 
announcing  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  interest  rate  decision.  The  highlights  are  as 
follows:  
• 
• 
• 
GDP will contract by about 8½% in 2009 and by almost 2½% in 2010.  
The contraction for 2009 is rather smaller than previously forecast.  
Private  consumption  has  declined  less  sharply  so  far  in  2009,  probably  because 
disposable  income  rose  more  in  2008  than  previously  forecast,  and  because  of 
pension fund payouts amounting to some 1½%of GDP in 2009. 
In addition, unemployment has risen less than previously projected.  
Recovery  will  begin  in  early  2010,  in  the  sense  that  quarter-on-quarter  GDP  will 
begin to grow.  
BIS Review 146/2009
 4 
     At that point, however, Icelanders will still consider the situation unfavourable, and it 
will  keep  deteriorating  for  a  while,  as  unemployment  and  the  output  slack  will 
continue growing well into the year, as will the contraction in private consumption.  
As the second half of the year progresses, these factors, too, will begin to improve.  
As always, these projections are uncertain, and the economic recovery could prove 
stronger  or  weaker.  For  example,  one  of  the  alternative  scenarios  in  the  new 
Monetary Bulletin assumes a considerable delay in the construction of the Helguvík 
aluminium  smelter  and  related  power  facilities,  with  the  bulk  of  the  development 
taking place in 2012. Economic recovery is delayed, and the contraction in GDP will 
be 4% in 2010, instead of just under 2½%.  
Inflation has been higher than forecast in the recent term, as a result of a weaker 
króna and a slightly smaller output slack than previously projected.  
Inflation will subside quickly in 2010, however, and underlying inflation will be at or 
near target in the latter half of the year.  
As regards the current economic situation, the outlook I have described here, and indicators 
that  private  sector  balance  sheets  are  somewhat  less  exposed  to  exchange  rate  risk  than 
previously  thought,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  decided  to  make  changes  in  Central 
Bank interest rates that entail an unchanged or slightly more relaxed monetary policy stance. 
The  main  change,  however,  involves  adapting  the  Central  Bank  interest  corridor  to  the 
effective level of monetary restraint, which is currently determined primarily by interest on the 
Bank’s  current  accounts  and  certificates  of  deposit.  If  the  króna  remains  stable  or 
appreciates,  and  if  inflation  falls  as  forecast,  then  the  preconditions  for  further  monetary 
easing should soon be in place.  
Available forecasts assume that the Icelandic economy will recover in the next few years. We 
also hope we will be quick to escape the fetters of the capital controls and the predicament 
faced by monetary policy as a result of the debt crisis and the large proportion of foreign-
denominated  debt.  It  will  then  be  time  to  determine  a  new  monetary  policy  framework. 
Joining the European Monetary Union could be an option in due time, but it is not a certainty, 
and in any event, it will take some time to materialise. The most obvious choice is therefore 
to adopt some sort of inflation target and floating exchange rate. That is a topic for another 
speech, but for the moment, suffice it to say that the experience of the past several years, 
both in Iceland and elsewhere, indicates that such an inflation-targeting regime would have 
to  be  somewhat  different  than  the  pre-crisis  regime.  It  must  be  much  better  supported  by 
fiscal policy, macroprudential financial market regulation, and effective financial supervision. 
It  would  have  to  be  an  “inflation  target-plus”  framework,  which  would  specifically  include 
accumulating  foreign  exchange  reserves  during  upswings  in  the  exchange  rate  cycle  and 
using them in times of need.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 5
