Daniel K Tarullo: Incentive compensation, risk management, and safety 
and soundness 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  University  of  Maryland's  Robert  H.  Smith  School  of  Business 
Roundtable 
“Executive  Compensation:  Practices  and  Reforms”,  Washington  DC, 
2 November 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  this  afternoon  to  give  the  closing  address  at  this  very  timely 
conference on executive compensation. Executive compensation has for some time been an 
important  part  of  academic  and  policy  discussions  of  corporate  law  and  governance.  The 
public's attention to the subject has periodically increased. Such heightened interest is not 
often  part  of  corporate  governance  debates,  but  rather  in  response  to  high  compensation 
levels  for  certain  executives,  or  the  contrast  between  rising  executive  compensation  and 
sluggish overall wage growth. I think it fair to say, however, that public scrutiny has never 
been  more  intense  than  in  the  past  year.  And  never  has  it  been  more  concentrated  on  a 
particular industry than in the current focus on large financial services firms.  
The  interest  and  role  of  the  Federal  Reserve  is  both  broader  and  more  targeted  than  the 
issue  of  executive  compensation  as  such.  It  is  more  targeted  in  that  our  concern  with 
compensation matters rests squarely on our statutory responsibility to ensure the safety and 
soundness of the banking organizations we regulate. It is broader in that we are concerned 
not only with the compensation of executives, but also with compensation arrangements of 
employees other than executives where those arrangements may adversely affect the safety 
and soundness of their firms. In the remainder of my remarks, I will first elaborate a bit on 
how our safety and soundness mandate both defines and limits the scope of our activities on 
compensation. Then I will turn to the supervisory approach we have taken in the proposed 
guidance  we  issued  10  days  ago,  before  closing  with  an  explanation  of  the  specific 
supervisory processes we intend to follow in putting this guidance into practice.1
Compensation as a safety and soundness issue 
Previous speakers have touched on some of the reasons why compensation arrangements 
of  corporate  employees  can  be  a  public  policy  matter.  As  I  have  already  suggested,  the 
compensation  packages  of  employees  –  particularly  senior  executives  –  implicate  the 
principal-agent  concerns  that  inform  much  of  corporate  law.  Shareholders  have  interests 
both in providing employees with incentives to maximize shareholder value and in restraining 
employees  from  using  their  direct  control  over  the  firm's  resources  to  take  more  than  is 
necessary to attract and motivate quality employees. Additionally, as evidenced by the very 
fact  of  Ken  Feinberg’s  job  as  special  master,  the  public  has  an  interest  in  appropriate 
compensation  arrangements  at  firms  in  which  the  government  has  made  significant 
investments. 
Broader  issues  of  fairness  may  also  be  raised  by  high  compensation  levels  for  some 
employees. Of course, these issues can quickly involve rather fundamental considerations of 
political philosophy and political economy. At present, the public debate over the fairness of 
                                                 
1   The views expressed here are my own, and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 1
compensation levels in financial firms has a more specific focus. Many would argue that the 
bonuses that may be collected this year by employees of some financial firms and, for that 
matter,  the  profits  accruing  to  the  firms  themselves,  are  possible  only  because  the 
government  rescued  the  entire  financial  system  through  a  series  of  actions  beginning  last 
year.  Seen  in  this  light,  the  bonuses  and  profits  appear  to  some  observers  as  an  unfair 
channeling of gains to private actors, after potentially devastating losses to those same firms 
and employees were avoided by placing taxpayer funds at risk. 
Each of the foregoing perspectives on compensation raises important policy issues. But the 
regulatory  framework  established  by  statute  makes  them  relevant  to  the  supervisory 
functions of the Federal Reserve only to the extent they affect the safety and soundness of 
financial institutions. An evaluation of some compensation practices at banking organizations 
preceding the financial crisis reveals that they did, in fact, contribute to safety and soundness 
problems.  Indeed,  financial  firms  have  themselves  identified  compensation  practices  as  a 
factor. In this regard, I was struck by the results of a survey conducted earlier this year on 
behalf  of  the  Institute  of  International  Finance.2  Of  the  37  large  banking  organizations 
engaged  in  wholesale  banking  activities  that  responded,  36  agreed  that  compensation 
practices were a factor underlying the crisis.  
Of particular note are incentive compensation arrangements for employees in a position to 
expose the firm to substantial risk that failed to align the employees' interests with those of 
the  firm.  For  example,  some  firms  gave  loan  officers  incentives  to  write  a  lot  of  loans,  or 
traders  incentives  to  generate  high  levels  of  trading  revenues,  without  sufficient  regard  for 
the  risks  associated  with  those  activities.  The  revenues  that  served  as  the  basis  for 
calculating  bonuses  were  generated  immediately,  while  the  risks  might  not  have  been 
realized for months or years after the transactions were completed. When these or similarly 
misaligned  incentive  compensation  arrangements  were  common  in  a  firm,  the  very 
foundation  of  sound  risk  management  could  be  undermined  by  the  actions  of  employees 
seeking to maximize their own pay. 
There is thus significant overlap between the interests of shareholders and of supervisors in 
the area of employee compensation. That is why, as I will explain in a moment, we include 
an emphasis on sound corporate governance measures in our proposed guidance. Indeed, 
supervisory 
from 
shareholders  and  other  market  participants.  By  requiring  banking  organizations 
to 
incorporate a thorough, risk-appropriate approach to incentive compensation arrangements, 
supervisors  can  help  address  concerns  that  these  firms  face  a  kind  of  collective  action 
problem,  which  may  make  a  firm  reluctant  to  rectify  misaligned  arrangements  for  fear  that 
other firms will poach the best employees with promises of substantial near-term bonuses. 
This concern exists at the international, as well as national, level, which is one of the reasons 
why the Financial Stability Board has devoted so much attention to the issue in the past year. 
However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  interests  of  shareholders  and  supervisors, 
representing  the  public,  are  not  wholly  congruent.  Because  of  the  federal  safety  net  –  as 
manifested in the deposit insurance system, the availability of discount window lending, and 
too-big-to-fail perceptions – shareholders may at times be willing to tolerate a degree of risk 
in  a  firm’s  activities  that  does  not  fully  reflect  the  costs  of  that  risk  to  society  as  a  whole. 
Thus, even if banking organizations were able to achieve full harmonization of employee and 
shareholder  interests  in  their  incentive  compensation  arrangements,  supervisory  oversight 
would still be warranted. 
for  change  already  coming 
initiatives  can  reinforce 
impetus 
the 
                                                 
2   The  Institute  of  International  Finance,  Inc.  (2009),  Compensation  in  Financial  Services:  Industry  Progress  and  the 
Agenda for Change (Washington: IIF, March). 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2009
Proposed supervisory guidance 
The  proposed  guidance  recently  issued  by  the  Federal  Reserve  is  informed  by  the 
considerations I have just set forth.3 Our rationale for the guidance is grounded in safety and 
soundness  concerns.  Our  supervisory  approach  emphasizes  the  need  to  integrate 
compensation policy into the overall risk-management framework of financial firms. This dual 
focus on safety and soundness aims and risk-management capacities has been a recurring 
theme of supervisory efforts in the wake of the crisis. Our compensation guidance is just one 
piece of a broad program of regulatory and supervisory reforms, which include strengthened 
capital and liquidity requirements and a more coordinated, "horizontal" approach to large-firm 
supervision. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  guidance  is  based  on  three  fundamental  principles.  First,  incentive 
compensation  arrangements  at  a  banking  organization  should  not  provide  employees  with 
incentives  to  take  risks  that  are  beyond  the  organization’s  ability  to  effectively  identify  and 
manage.  The  amounts  of  incentive  pay  flowing  to  employees  should  reflect  the  risks  and 
potential losses – as well as gains – associated with their activities. Employees are less likely 
to take imprudent risks if their incentive payments are reduced or eliminated for activities that 
end up imposing significant losses on the firm.  
The  guidance  identifies  four  methods  that  have  been  most  often  identified  by  firms, 
consultants, and others as useful in aligning incentive compensation with risk. These include 
adjusting performance awards to reflect the risks of employee activities, deferring payments 
of awards and adjusting actual payments to reflect risk outcomes, using longer periods for 
measuring  the  performance  on  which  awards  are  based,  and  reducing  the  sensitivity  of 
performance  measures  to  short-term  revenues  or  profits.  Our  expectation  is  that  each 
banking  organization  will  use  these  and  possibly  other  methods,  either  individually  or  in 
combination,  to  achieve  risk-appropriate  incentive  compensation  practices  throughout  the 
firm.  
To be fully effective, risk adjustments to compensation should take account of the full range 
of  risks  that  the  activities  of  employees  may  pose  for  the  firm,  including  credit,  market, 
compliance,  reputational,  and  liquidity  risks.  Moreover,  these  adjustments  need  to  be 
implemented  in  practice  so  that  actual  payments  vary  based  on  risks  or  risk  outcomes.  If 
employees  are  paid  substantially  all  of  their  potential  incentive  compensation  when  risk  or 
risk outcomes are materially worse than expected, employees may have an incentive to take 
large  risks  in  hopes  of  substantially  increasing  their  personal  compensation,  knowing  that 
their  downside  risks  are  limited.  Simply  put,  incentive  compensation  arrangements  should 
not create "heads I win, tails the firm loses" expectations.  
The  second  core  principle  is  that  incentive  compensation  arrangements  should  be 
compatible  with  effective  risk  management  and  controls.  Banking  organizations  should 
ensure  that  risk-management  personnel  have  an  appropriate  role  in  designing  incentive 
compensation arrangements and assessing their effectiveness in restraining excessive risk-
taking. Risk-management breakdowns often occurred in firms not because risk-management 
officers were unaware of problems, but because they were not adequately integrated into the 
firm’s  strategic  and  operational  decisionmaking  processes  related  to  compensation.  In 
addition,  a  banking  organization  should  have  strong  controls  governing  its  process  for 
designing,  implementing,  and  monitoring  incentive  compensation  arrangements  to  help 
prevent employees from circumventing or weakening these processes in ways designed to 
increase their personal compensation. 
                                                 
3   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Issues Proposed Guidance 
on Incentive Compensation," press release, October 22. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 3
is 
that 
third  core  principle 
incentive  compensation  arrangements  at  banking 
The 
organizations should be supported by strong corporate governance practice, including active 
and  effective  oversight  by  boards  of  directors.  This  oversight  should  go  beyond  reviewing 
and approving the compensation arrangements for senior executives. Boards of directors, or 
their  compensation  committees,  should  regularly  review  the  design  and  functioning  of  the 
firm’s  incentive  compensation  practices  to  ensure  their  consistency  with  safety  and 
soundness.  
In  developing  these  principles,  we  were  guided  by  two  key  considerations.  The  first,  as  I 
noted earlier, is that problematic compensation practices were not limited to the most senior 
executives  at  financial  firms.  Traders  with  large  position  limits  and  loan  officers  who,  as  a 
group, originate loans accounting for a material amount of an organization’s credit risk, are 
two  examples  of  non-executive  personnel  who  have  the  ability  to  expose  a  banking 
organization to material amounts of risk. For this reason, our guidance extends beyond the 
senior executives at banking organizations to include all other employees who, individually or 
as a group, may expose the firm to material amounts of risk.  
Second,  in  drafting  this  guidance  we  opted  for  principles,  rather  than  generally  applicable 
rules.  The  complex  and  varying  nature  of  financial  activities,  particularly  those  of  large 
banking organizations, suggested that uniform requirements for compensation arrangements 
were not well-advised, at least not on the basis of our present knowledge and experience. 
Activities and risks, as well as the reliability of related risk measures, may differ significantly 
across banking organizations and across employee groups within one banking organization. 
In  these  circumstances,  we  concluded  that  use  of  a  single,  formulaic  approach  to  making 
incentive  compensation  arrangements  risk-sensitive  would  likely  not  be  effective  in 
adequately containing risky behavior.  
As discussed in the guidance, incentive compensation arrangements for senior executives at 
a  large,  complex  organization  are  likely  to  be  better  balanced  if  they  involve  deferral  of  a 
substantial  portion  of  the  executives’  incentive  compensation  over  a  multiyear  period,  with 
payment  made  in  some  form  of  equity  that  is  ultimately  calculated  with  reference  to  the 
performance  of  the  firm  during  the  deferral  period.  However,  the  use  of  equity-based 
incentive compensation may not be effective in aligning the incentives of mid- and lower-level 
employees with the interests of the firm, because these employees may view the outcomes 
of  their  decisions  as  unlikely  to  have  much  effect  on  the  firm  or  its  stock  price.  Moreover, 
deferral may not be effective in constraining the incentives of employees who have the ability 
to expose the firm to long-term or "bad tail" risks, as these risks are unlikely to be realized 
during  a  reasonable  deferral  period.  Consider,  for  example,  how  different  the  incentive 
compensation packages might need to be for a trader who deals in only one kind of highly 
structured,  long-term  instrument,  as  compared  to  the  arrangements  for  the  firm’s  chief 
executive officers.  
Supervisory initiatives 
In  issuing  the  proposed  guidance,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  announced  two  separate 
supervisory initiatives to ensure that the principles are incorporated by banking organizations 
in their compensation arrangements. These initiatives are also intended to help identify and 
promote emerging best practices in the industry. Like the principles themselves, the separate 
supervisory programs recognize the differences among the many banking organizations we 
supervise.  
The first initiative applies to the institutions we classify for general supervisory purposes as 
large, complex banking organizations (LCBOs). LCBOs warrant special supervisory attention 
because  they  are  significant  users  of  incentive  compensation  arrangements  and  because 
flawed practices at these institutions are more likely to have adverse effects on the broader 
financial system. The challenge with respect to these institutions was that while we did not 
want  to  impose  inflexible,  and  possibly  ineffective,  practices  across  the  wide  range  of 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2009
the 
into 
identified 
implement 
the  principles  we  have 
compensation arrangements, we also did not want there to be insufficient attention paid to 
the  very  particulars  that  led  us  to  adopt  this  approach  in  the  first  place.  Accordingly,  we 
decided  to  place  the  burden  on  each  of  these  LCBOs  to  develop  a  plan  that  would,  with 
appropriate  specificity, 
firm’s 
compensation  policies  and  practices.  A  rigorous  process  of  planning  and  implementation, 
with accompanying supervisory oversight, makes it possible for these firms to customize their 
compensation arrangements. 
Our  supervisory  approach  to  compensation  practices  at  LCBOs  will  include  an  extensive 
horizontal review process, in keeping with our increased emphasis on this approach for the 
supervision of the largest institutions. This horizontal review, which we expect to commence 
shortly,  will  be  led  by  a  multidisciplinary  coordinating  group  of  Federal  Reserve  staff.  We 
anticipate that it will include staff from the Board, from Reserve Banks that supervise LCBOs, 
and from other financial regulators. This group also will serve as a resource for supervisory 
staff across the Federal Reserve System on incentive compensation matters.  
This  review  process  will  enhance  our  understanding  of  existing  incentive  compensation 
practices, identify existing or emerging best practices across the organizations, and provide 
an informed framework for evaluating firms’ plans for improving their practices. In this regard, 
each  LCBO  will  be  expected  to  develop  and  present  to  the  Federal  Reserve  a  plan  that 
identifies where improvements to the organization’s compensation arrangements and related 
practices  are  needed  to  bring  them  in  line  with  the  principles  embodied  in  the  guidance. 
These submissions must include the firm’s plans, including relevant timetables, for achieving 
meaningful  and  effective  improvements  to  the  risk-sensitivity  of  its  incentive  compensation 
arrangements and the firm’s related risk management, controls, and corporate governance 
processes.  We  expect  to  work  with  each  organization  through  the  supervisory  process  in 
refining  its  plan.  Once  finalized,  implementation  of  the  plan  will  become  part  of  the 
supervisory  expectations 
the  banking  organization.  As  with  other  supervisory 
expectations,  failure  to  submit  or  implement  a  satisfactory  plan  could  be  the  basis  for 
enforcement action. 
We issued the compensation guidance in proposed form and will be accepting comments on 
the guidance through November 27. While we may well make changes in some aspects of 
the  guidance  based  on  comments  we  receive,  it  is  critical  that  the  incentives  created  by 
compensation  arrangements  be  reviewed  and  adjusted  to  ensure  the  safe  and  sound 
operation of financial firms. Indeed, in light of the experience of recent years, the safety and 
soundness  implications  of  incentive  compensation  arrangements  would  be  an  appropriate 
matter  for  supervisory  oversight  even  in  the  absence  of  any  specific  guidance.  For  these 
reasons,  we  are  not  waiting  to  begin  the  process  of  gathering  information  about 
compensation  practices  from  LCBOs.  Today,  in  discussions  across  the  country,  we  are 
communicating  our  plans  and  expectations  to  these  firms,  with  particular  attention  to 
beginning this information gathering.  
A  separate  program  will  apply  to  the  thousands  of  other  organizations  supervised  by  the 
Federal Reserve, including community and regional banking organizations. Supervisory staff 
will  review  incentive  compensation  arrangements  at  these  organizations  as  part  of  the 
regular  risk-focused  examination  process,  in  connection  with  reviews  of  the  organizations’ 
risk management, internal controls, and corporate governance. These reviews, as well as our 
supervisory expectations for these organizations, will be tailored to reflect the more limited 
scope  and  complexity  of  these  organizations’  activities  –  a  fact  also  recognized  in  various 
aspects  of  our  guidance.  For  example,  we  certainly  do  not  expect  smaller  banking 
organizations that use incentive compensation arrangements on a limited basis to have the 
same type of formalized and detailed program for managing the risks of such arrangements 
as  we  expect  to  see  at  LCBOs.  We  will  also  have  an  ongoing  coordination  process  for 
developing and clarifying guidance for the non-LCBO institutions. 
for 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 5
Conclusion 
We expect that our supervisory practice in this area will evolve. We will have to build on the 
principles  we  have  set  forth  and  we  may,  over  time,  identify  standards  that  should  be 
universally applied to certain classes of employees. We will surely face questions from firms 
that we have not anticipated. But even as we can expect a rapid accretion of knowledge and 
significant elaboration of desirable policies and practices, the constant in our compensation 
oversight  will  be  the  emphasis  on  safety  and  soundness  and  supporting  risk-management 
practices, which have been the foundation for our supervisory approach. 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2009
