Rasheed Mohammed Al-Maraj: Inaugural Plenary Session – “Regulatory 
perspectives” 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al-Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at  the  16th World  Islamic  Banking  Conference  –  Session  1:  Inaugural  Plenary 
Session: “Regulatory perspectives”, Manama, 7 December 2009. 
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: “Salaam Alaikum” 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  welcome  you  once  more  to  the  World  Islamic 
Banking Conference. The 2009 Conference is the sixteenth to be held in Bahrain, and the 
WIBC  has  firmly  established  itself  as  a  landmark  event  in  the  calendar.  I  would  like  to 
congratulate the organisers on having assembled such a strong list of speakers at this year’s 
event, which I am sure will be the best yet. 
Let me begin by thanking the many distinguished speakers who will be appearing during the 
Conference, as well as the event organisers and sponsors. Collectively, your contributions 
are the reason for the success of this event. It also gives me great pleasure to welcome back 
His Excellency Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore. 
Your presence at the World Islamic Banking Conference for the second year in succession is 
an  indication  of  the  increasingly  strong  ties  between  Bahrain  and  Singapore,  and  of  the 
important role that Singapore can play in helping to develop the international presence of the 
Islamic financial industry. I should also like to welcome the other speakers in this Session, 
His  Excellency  Aset  Issekeshev,  the  Minister  of  Trade  &  Industry  from  the  Republic  of 
Kazakhstan,  and  His  Excellency  Khalid  M.  Al-Aboodi,  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  and 
General Manager of the Islamic Corporation for the Development of the Private Sector, part 
of the Islamic Development Bank Group. We are greatly pleased to have you with us today 
as well. 
When the World Islamic Banking Conference took place a year ago, it was overshadowed by 
the  events  that  followed  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  For  a  time  it  seemed  that  no 
financial institution  was so  large  or so  strong  that  the  threat  of  its  failure  was  unthinkable. 
There was wide-spread risk aversion in the financial markets. Interbank markets froze and 
many  banks  found  it  difficult  to  fund  their  positions.  For  a  time  it  seemed  that  the  world 
financial system was teetering on the brink of total collapse. 
The  nightmare  scenario  that  seemed  to  be  unfolding  before  our  eyes  was  averted  by  the 
timely and effective intervention of governments around the world. Banks were recapitalized, 
blanket guarantees of deposits were issued, and central banks provided liquidity in unlimited 
amounts. These measures were sufficient to stave off catastrophe. Although in Bahrain we 
did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  resort  to  some  of  the  extraordinary  measures  adopted 
elsewhere, the central bank took a number of policy actions to ensure the continued smooth 
functioning of our financial markets. 
Although  Bahrain  has  not  been  as  badly  affected  by  the  crisis  as  some  other  financial 
centres, there is no room for complacency. As 2009 has unfolded, the impact of the crisis on 
the level of real economic activity has become more apparent. This has fed through to rising 
credit losses and reduced profitability at many banks. Reduced investor appetite for risk has 
also had an impact on those banks that follow an “originate to distribute” model, especially 
those that have funded real estate developments through distributing shares to investors in 
Special Purpose Vehicles. 
More challenging economic conditions affect the Islamic financial industry just as much as 
the conventional one. As a result, it is essential that the Islamic financial industry recognizes 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
that  the  crisis  has  lessons  which  apply  to  them  as  well  as  to  conventional  financial 
institutions. 
The first lesson that the industry might usefully learn is the importance of avoiding what might 
be  termed  “straight  line  thinking”.  This  is  the  tendency  to  assume  that  what  held  true  of 
recent  years  will  hold  true  in  future  as  well.  For  example,  the  fact  that  the  economy  has 
grown for the last five years at the rate of six or seven percent, leads to the conclusion that it 
will continue to grow at the same rate indefinitely in the future. As a result, banks and other 
financial  institutions  build  their  business  plans  and  expansion  strategies  around  the 
assumption  of  an  indefinite  period  of  strong  economic  growth.  These  business  plans  or 
strategies then tend to come unstuck when growth falls short of expectations as in the past 
year. 
“Straight line thinking” has resulted in poor decision-making throughout the financial industry. 
Later in this Conference we will hear from Professor Nassim Nicholas Taleb whose book, the 
Black  Swan,  has  deservedly  attracted  wide  attention  for  showing  the  fallacies  behind  this 
kind of reasoning. Nonetheless, because the Islamic financial industry is a relatively young 
one, with many institutions that have not yet experienced a full business cycle, “straight line 
thinking”  seems  to  have  been  particularly  prevalent  in  this  sector  of  the  industry.  In  future 
Islamic  financial  institutions  will  need  to  adopt  more  conservative  assumptions  in  their 
business plans and strategies and to stress test them against outcomes which may not be as 
optimistic as those they originally assumed. 
Closely  related  to  “straight  line  thinking”  is  the  tendency  to  be  carried  away  on  a  wave  of 
euphoria. When markets are booming, when every day there seems to be an announcement 
of a major new project or deal, it is tempting to be carried along by this psychology. Bankers 
begin to fear that they are losing out on profit opportunities that are being exploited by their 
competitors. They see their rivals’ ambitious expansion plans and feel that they must jump on 
board the bandwagon. As a result the industry moves as a herd, all galloping in the same 
direction at once. Few bother to stop and to consider whether the direction in which they are 
heading is one that is leading to a cliff. 
While an important function of regulation is to work against the herding mentality which has 
been a feature of financial markets from their very beginning, the primary responsibility for 
questioning  the  direction  of  travel  must  be  with  the  industry  itself.  It  is  the  job  of  prudent 
bankers to raise awkward questions about the sustainability of their bank’s business model 
and their ability to generate profits in the long-run and not  just in the short-term. It is also 
worth remembering the words of Warren Buffet that he is fearful when others are greedy, and 
greedy only when other are fearful. 
Thirdly, the crisis has also illustrated the importance of good liquidity risk management. Prior 
to the crisis, bank management paid too little attention to liquidity risks. They were reluctant 
to invest in safe, but low yielding liquid assets at a time when much better investment returns 
could  be  earned  from  other  financial  instruments.  They  also  assumed  that  it  would  be 
possible for them to exit their positions at any time, without considering the possibility that all 
other financial institutions would be trying to do the same thing at the same time.  
The  regulators  of  conventional  banks  have  now  recognised  the  importance  of  liquidity 
adequacy in parallel to capital adequacy. New international standards are being developed 
on liquidity and several regulators, such as the UK’s FSA, have already put forward their own 
proposals for enhancing liquidity standards. As you are no  doubt aware, the CBB  recently 
published a draft Consultation Paper on liquidity standards for conventional banks and were 
are currently considering similar proposals for Islamic financial institutions. 
Liquidity  management  has,  of  course,  been  a  long-standing  issue  for  Islamic  financial 
institutions. We recognise that there is a relative lack of Sharia-compliant high quality liquid 
instruments that could be used to meet a stock of liquid assets test. As you know, the CBB 
has undertaken a number of initiatives in recent years to assist the Islamic financial sector to 
overcome this difficulty. Nonetheless, although recognizing that the problem is a difficult one, 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2009
the management of Islamic financial institutions have a responsibility to ensure that they take 
appropriate steps to limit the risk of illiquidity to their institutions.  
Prudent  banking  requires  management  to  consider  risk  adjusted  profitability.  For  example, 
putting  a  large  proportion  of  the  bank’s  assets  into  potentially  profitable,  but  also  highly 
illiquid, real estate development projects may fail to achieve an appropriate risk reward trade-
off. If a bank has put all of its assets into long-term illiquid assets, it may show high levels of 
profitability for a few quarters, but it is unlikely to remain in business for very long. 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  the  role  of  the  Boards  of  Directors  and  of  senior  management.  The 
financial crisis involved failures of corporate governance at many different levels. There is a 
common  pattern  behind  many  of  the  failed  financial  institutions  of  the  last  18  months.  In 
many cases, the Chief Executive was a dominant figure who made sure that he alone took all 
important  decisions.  There  was  no  culture  of  open  debate  and  discussion  within  the 
institutions,  with  the  result  that  members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  did  not  feel  able  to 
challenge  the  Chief  Executive’s  decisions.  Many  bank  Boards  lacked  banking  experts. 
Individuals  were  recruited  to  the  Board  of  banks  for  their  connections  rather  than  for  their 
knowledge of the banking industry and the ability to ask the right kind of questions. 
Boards  of  Directors  also  failed  in  their  fiduciary  duty  to  consider  the  interests  not  just  of 
shareholders,  but  also  of  creditors  and  depositors.  Banks  are  not  like  other  corporations 
where directors need to consider only the interests of shareholders. Banks have a special 
position of trust in that they are charged with looking after other people’s money. This means 
the  interests  of  creditors  and  depositors  need  to  have  equal  weight  with  those  of 
shareholders in the decisions taken by the board of directors. Recognition of the directors’ 
fiduciary  responsibilities  is,  therefore,  an  essential  element  of  corporate  governance  for 
banks.  
This observation applies with special force to the Islamic financial industry. The fiduciary duty 
of the Board of Directors of an Islamic financial institution does not only relate to the interests 
of shareholders, depositors, and other creditors, but also to investment account holders who 
bear many of the same risks as shareholders, but who lack the same control rights. Boards 
of Directors and management therefore have a fiduciary duty to consider the interests of a 
wide  range  of  stakeholders.  It  is  essential  that  Sharia-compliant  institutions  reflect  this 
requirement in their corporate governance arrangements. 
The  four  issues  that  I  have  mentioned  today  –  avoiding  “straight  line  thinking”,  avoiding 
herding behaviour, managing liquidity risks, and high standards of corporate governance – 
are not the only lessons that can be learned from the financial crisis. However, I believe that 
these lessons are the ones of greatest relevance to the Islamic financial industry, and ones 
that it needs to give especially careful attention to in reforming its own practices. 
While the financial crisis will result in regulatory changes which will apply to conventional and 
Islamic  banks  alike,  the  primary  responsibility  for  ensuring  sound  and  prudent  banking 
practices  must  reside  with  the  owners  and  managers  of  the  banks  themselves.  Post-crisis 
reform needs to begin with the industry examining carefully its own practices and considering 
whether they meet the standards that its various stakeholders have a right to expect. Only by 
doing  so  will  it  be  able  to  sustain  the  public  trust  which  is  an  essential  component  of  a 
successful financial industry. As the financial crisis has shown, there is little point in pursuing 
short-term profitability if the long-run result is a loss of public trust in the industry itself. 
On that note I should like to thank you for your attention and to wish this Conference every 
success. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 3
