George Provopoulos: The state of the Greek economy in light of the 
financial crisis 
Speech by Mr George Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Annual Meeting 
of the International Monetary Fund, Istanbul, 6 October 2009. 
 The global economy is now emerging from its most severe crisis since the Great Depression 
of  the  1930s.  Why  was  this  crisis  so  severe?  Because  the  financial  system  was  at  its 
epicenter, the ramifications of the crisis were quickly transmitted to all sectors and countries. 
The effects of the crisis were magnified by a collapse in business and consumer confidence. 
History  shows  that  financial  crises  are  more  likely  to  be  followed  by  severe  economic 
downturns when they are centered in the banking system and occur in the context of rapid 
build-ups of credit and fast-rising asset prices. This has also been the case with the present 
crisis.  
The  policy  responses  to  the  crisis  have  been  rapid,  bold,  and  unprecedented.  These 
responses reduced uncertainty and improved economic sentiment.  
With  the  global  recovery  in  its  initial  stages,  and  economic  activity  still  far  below  pre-crisis 
levels, it is too soon to begin withdrawing the stimulus measures. However, the formulation of 
a  medium-term  macroeconomic  framework  for  the  post-crisis  period  will  be  crucial.  It  will 
facilitate the achievement and maintenance of a sound fiscal position and enhance the ability 
of the monetary authorities to deliver price stability. It will also help foster financial stability. 
The challenge will be to choose the correct timing for the withdrawal so as to avoid: first, a 
premature unwinding of public interventions; second, jeopardizing what has been achieved in 
stabilizing economic and financial conditions; third, letting these measures continue for too 
long, at the risk of distorting incentives and damaging public balance sheets. Safeguarding 
the sustainability of public finances will be a key objective in many advanced economies, the 
deficit and debt ratios of which have reached levels unseen in peacetime. 
The IMF has played a key role in helping the global economy weather the storm. The tripling 
of IMF resources has significantly increased the Fund’s lending capacity, and the new SDR 
allocation  has  provided  additional  liquidity  to  the  global  economy.  At  the  same  time,  the 
launch of the Flexible Credit Line will add flexibility to the Fund’s lending framework.  
The best way to manage a crisis is to prevent it. The present crisis has revealed that macro-
prudential factors play an important role in determining the size, nature, and propagation of 
systemic  risk.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  establish  an  effective  framework  for  macro-
prudential  supervision  that  will  ensure  both  the  systematic  analysis  of  risks  and  the 
formulation of policies to address such risks. 
The state of the Greek economy 
The  economic  slowdown  has  been  less  severe  in  Greece  than  in  many  other  European 
countries.  However,  this  outcome  reflects  factors  that,  if  left  untreated,  will  reduce  growth 
potential in the medium term. Specifically, the performance of the Greek economy during the 
crisis  reflects  the  relatively-low  level  of  openness  and  the  deterioration  of  public-sector 
balance sheets from a position that was already worrisome prior to the onset of the crisis.  
A  factor  that  has,  however,  supported  the  Greek  economy  has  been  the  soundness  of  its 
banking  system.  Greek  banks  have  been  free  of  toxic  assets  and  their  exposure  to  the 
emerging  economies  of  South-Eastern  Europe  has  remained  within  manageable  limits.  A 
recent stress test conducted in close cooperation with the IMF has reaffirmed the soundness 
of the Greek banking system. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 1
The relatively-high growth rates experienced by the Greek economy since its entry into the 
euro area reflect a catching-up process. To sustain a robust growth rate in the future, Greece 
will  need  to  address  several  key  challenges,  reflected  in  persistently  very  large  current-
account imbalances, high fiscal deficits, and worrisome debt levels. These imbalances are 
the  result  of  structural  rigidities,  which  have  undermined  competitiveness  over  time.  To 
restore  competitiveness  and  remove  the  imbalances,  a  dual  agenda  needs  to  be 
concurrently  implemented:  first,  a  multi-year  program  of  fiscal  consolidation,  which  can 
reduce  risk  premia  and  crowd-in  private  investment,  raising  the  growth  potential  of  the 
economy;  second,  bold  and  wide-ranging  institutional  reforms  in  the  public  sector  and 
structural  reforms  in  product  and  labor  markets,  which  can  enhance  productivity  and  raise 
the employment rate. Only by undertaking these reforms will the Greek economy be able to 
become more competitive and increase its growth potential and the prosperity of its citizens. 
The  broad  support  received  by  the  newly-elected  government  will  greatly  facilitate  the 
implementation of the reform agenda. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2009
