Nout Wellink: Towards a new framework for monetary policy? Lessons 
from the crisis 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  workshop  “Towards  a  new  framework  for 
monetary policy? Lessons from the crisis”, Amsterdam, 21 September 2009. 
 Over the past two years, we have all been surprised by the fast pace at which events have 
unravelled. But ideas have also evolved rapidly. Only one year ago, at our monetary policy 
workshop  we  were  discussing  whether  financial  imbalances  ought  to  be  incorporated  in 
monetary policy making. Since then, there has been an increasing consensus that monetary 
policy should lean against the wind. At today’s workshop, we will not focus on whether but on 
how monetary policy can be used to lean against the wind. 
In my remarks, I want to address three questions. First, what have we learned about the run-
up  to  the  crisis?  Second,  why  did monetary  authorities  not  lean  against  the  emergence  of 
massive financial imbalances, which turned out to have disruptive macro effects? And third, 
how can we use the answers to the first two questions to think about the next approach to 
monetary policy? 
What have we learned about the causes of the crisis? 
Let me start with what we have learned about the run-up to the crisis. Looking back at the 
years  before  this  crisis  –  and  more  in  general  at  all  major  crisis  episodes  in  industrial 
countries – five main, interrelated ingredients of an accumulating imbalance stand out. 
1. 
The  first  –  and  in  my  opinion  root  –  ingredient  of  the  crisis  lies  in  the  large  US 
external imbalance and the high levels of US international debt. I consider these to 
be a reflection of a country having lived beyond its means and, in particular, an over-
leveraged private sector.  
Second,  low  interest  rates  relative  to  a  natural  rate  of  interest  –  especially  in  a 
context  of  a  buoyant  economy  and  low  inflation  –  suggested  that  monetary  policy 
had been too easy in the years before the crisis. Fiscal policy was probably also too 
easy.  
Third,  global  imbalances  and  too  low  interest  rates  supported  very  strong  credit 
growth and excessive risk taking.  
Fourth, asset prices rose sharply, particularly in equity and housing markets.  
Fifth, a high level of private debt resulted from a prolonged period of strong credit 
growth. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
What we have learned is that it is necessary to recognize that the combination of these five 
elements can have catastrophic consequences and to act upon this recognition. 
Why did monetary policy not lean against the wind? 
In the past, I have stated that “many of the risks that crystallised in the past year were on our 
radar  screen  long  before  the  crisis  started”.1  At  the  same  time,  I  argued  that  these  risk 
                                                 
1   Nout  Wellink  (2008)  “It’s  the  incentive,  stupid!”  Speech  at  the  conference  on  “Integrating  micro  and 
macroeconomic perspectives on financial stability”, University of Groningen, 26 May 2008. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 1
assessments  were  not  translated  into  an  efficacious  preventive  action  –  at  least  not  by 
monetary authorities. But why did we not lean against the wind? I believe that this happened 
for five main reasons. 
1. 
First,  there  was  an  inability  –  by  both  academic  researchers  and  analysts  in  the 
policymaking world – to pay sufficient attention to the role of stocks. In 2007, high 
levels  of  debt  had  resulted  from  a  prolonged  period  of  strong  credit  growth  and 
excessive  risk-taking.  These  made  the  economy  vulnerable  to  negative  shocks, 
such as the collapse of the US subprime mortgage market. The importance of the 
stock  of  debt  in  the  lead-up  to  the  crisis  is  a  manifestation  of  a  more  general 
phenomenon, whereby in a context of disequilibrium – such as the accumulation of 
financial  imbalances  –  stocks  dominate  flows  as  determinants  of  macroeconomic 
dynamics.  This  phenomenon  cannot  be  captured  in  standard  macroeconomic 
models based on linear relationships. 
In tranquil times, the relevance of stocks is modest, and flows as well as prices of 
flows  matter.  Under  these  circumstances,  policy  is  about  fine  tuning  –  mostly 
through the anchoring of expectations. However, “ordinary” monetary policy that is 
based  on  flows  (monetary  flows)  and  prices  (inflation)  cannot  deal  with  the 
implications  of  stocks  that  are  typical  of  periods  in  which  massive  financial 
imbalances  can  accumulate.  We  now  know  that  looking  after  stocks  is  necessary 
during good times as a means to prevent financial crises. 
Second,  macroeconomics  and  policymaking  have  focused  on  decision-making  in 
conditions of measurable risk, rather than immeasurable risk or what is known as 
Knightian  uncertainty.  The  concept  of  measurable  risk  may  be  appropriate  during 
“normal” times. But when we face a build-up of massive financial imbalances, it is 
impossible to measure risks correctly because, like Keynes said, “we simply do not 
know” the future. 
The crisis has taught us that there are always events that – although possible – are 
not accounted for in policy analysis. In the years before the crisis, the historically low 
volatility  observed  in  financial  markets  was  seen  as  equivalent  to  no  uncertainty. 
And successful monetary policy – in the sense of low and stable inflation – was seen 
as a guarantee of stability. In such a context, a global recessionary trend, such as 
the one we have experienced this year, was unthinkable. 
Accounting  for  such  immeasurable  risk  would  require  a  marked  change  to 
macroeconomics. It implies moving away from the principle of optimizing agents, to 
one of agents that would aim to insure against uncertain events. Rather than aiming 
at  identifying  the  best  solution  to  a  given  problem,  the  aim  would  be  to  do  “well 
enough”  –  across  a  series  of  different  problems  irrespective  of  how  likely  they 
maybe.  This  would  not  be  without  costs:  it  would  insure  against  the  effects  of 
undesirable events at the expense of a better performance in normal times. 
Third,  the  existing  monetary  policy  framework  focuses  on  medium-term  price 
stability – defined over a horizon of two years. In the run-up to the crisis, this meant 
that  financial  imbalances  were  left  to  be  handled  by  micro  prudential  policy.  But 
financial  imbalances  are  procyclical,  and  also  have  strong  macro-dynamics  and 
implications  for  the  macroeconomy.  This  calls  for  a  macro  prudential  policy  in 
addition to a micro prudential response – a theme that will be picked up by some of 
today’s policy panellists – and, in addition, a role for monetary policy. 
Fourth, it is important to acknowledge that policy makers are part of the environment 
in  which  they  operate.  We  now  know  that  the  prevalent  behaviour  in  the  years 
before the crisis embodied an important element of irrationality. Like all members of 
society,  policymakers  are  partial  to  the  prevalent  consensus,  and  share  its  key 
values and behavioural characteristics. 
BIS Review 154/2009
 2. 
  3. 
4. 
2 
 5. 
Finally, from a political economy point of view, it was hard for policymakers to sell an 
unconventional  line  of  action  in  a  situation  where  inflation  was  well-behaved  and 
there  was  no  firm  proof  that  something  was  actually  going  severely  wrong  in  the 
financial sector. 
How can we draw lessons for monetary policy? 
I  believe  that  monetary  policy  requires  two  fundamental  changes.  First,  we  need  a  new 
culture that puts more emphasis on the role of stocks in creating potential macro-risks – in 
particular for monetary authorities, risks for price stability in the medium-run. The new culture 
would also focus on decision-making under uncertainty. 
Second, central banks either need a shift in their monetary policy framework to deal explicitly 
with financial imbalances, or interpret their current framework in a way that gives them more 
freedom  in  pro-actively  trying  to  avoid  that  financial  imbalances  burst,  with  major 
macroeconomic consequences. 
One approach would be to keep a mandate of price stability – that is not introduce financial 
stability  or  asset  prices  as  a  second  goal  for  monetary  policy  –  but  follow  a  two-track 
approach to monetary policy. The first track would be a sufficient guide of action when no 
imbalances  accumulate.  Under  these  conditions,  the  “traditional”  monetary  policy  could  be 
followed. The second track would focus on monitoring the build-up of stocks (for example the 
debt to GDP ratio) and associated potential macro-risks (in particular risks for price stability) 
in the medium-run. 
This  approach  would  require  greater  flexibility,  since  at  times  the  policy  rate  could  be 
changed even if inflation looks perfectly anchored. It would also require a horizon longer than 
two years, since the cycle of accumulation and unwinding of imbalances typically draws out 
further than two years. Greater flexibility and a longer horizon imply a more challenging role 
for  communication.  How  should  we  communicate  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  when 
inflation  is  low  but  there  are  some  concerns  that  financial  imbalances  are  accumulating, 
which  have  a  very  small  chance  of  unwinding  in  a  very  disruptive  way  five  years  ahead? 
Another important ingredient of this approach is the close coordination, both with supervisory 
authorities and, once a crisis erupts, with fiscal authorities. 
Do central banks need to abandon their current monetary framework to follow the approach I 
have  outlined?  I  believe  not.  In  practice,  both  the  ECB’s  second  pillar  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s long-term perspective can lend themselves to – and in fact already capture elements 
of – this new approach. The same might be true for a flexible inflation targeting framework as 
it is currently followed by the Reserve Bank of Australia. 
I hope that the academic scholars, policymakers and market participants that are joining us 
today for this workshop, will help us gain further insights into these important issues. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 3
