Budi Mulya: Exit strategy in advanced countries and their implications 
for the EMEAP region 
Remarks  by  Mr  Budi  Mulya,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  in  the  6th  Executives’ 
Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks  (EMEAP)  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability 
Committee (MFSC) Meeting, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 14 November 2009. 
 Let me start by commending Dr. Krishna Srinivasan and Dr. Eli Remolona for the excellent 
presentations on this very timely and important issue. A vast discussion on exit strategy has 
been  hovering  around  us  recently,  which  involve  so  many  ways  and  aspects.  However, 
today, I will focus on three main aspects; first, the strategy itself; second, the implications 
it will bring; and third, the challenges it will leaves us with.  
The strategy for exit  
Let me begin with the first part: the strategy for exit. The biggest challenge is determining the 
timing to exit. On this issue, I believe we share the same understanding that it will depend on 
the state of the economy and the financial system of a country. Nonetheless, given the still 
uncertain and fragile global economic recovery, especially those of the advanced economies, 
I have a conviction that we should err on the side of further supporting demand and financial 
repairs. Accordingly, the exact answer would be don’t rush. In relation to this, it is always 
relevant to ask about the authorities’ commitment, especially the Fed, to err on the side of 
being too late, rather than too early, in starting their tightening cycle.  
The  next  issue  is  the  sequence  of  exit.  In  this  respect,  the  complexities  lie  on  the 
interaction between fiscal vs. monetary, and conventional vs. unconventional policy. It 
is relevant for us to ask which one will come first. Should credible commitments to medium-
term  fiscal  consolidation  precede  monetary  tightening?  Would  withdrawal  of  current 
extraordinary  liquidity  support  and  deposit  guarantee  accelerate  or  offset  monetary 
tightening?  Similarly,  should  central  banks  raise  interest  rates  before  they  unwind 
unconventional monetary policies, or the other way around? In this respect, let me recall that 
the G20 recommends that central banks can raise interest rates before they dry up liquidity. 
However, let me also balance this view with the fact that abundant liquidity inside the system 
tends  to  impede  any  central  banks  attempt  to  raise  short  term  interest  rate,  like  the  one 
occuring in the US. Thus, credibility would be the issue.  
How  to  exit  is  another  issue.  In  this  respect,  unwinding  the  central  bank’s  elevated 
balance  sheet  amidst  slowly  adjusted  potential  output,  will  always  be  economically 
difficult  and  politically  complicated.  Of  course,  there  are  several  options  to  take,  e.g. 
whether  utilize  either  reverse  repo,  issuing  central  bank  bill,  or  start  to  explicitly  declare 
medium to longer term inflation target. But different consequences may arise from the way 
those  factors  are  decided  and  implemented.  To  begin  with,  it  is  important  to  distinguish 
between the long term risk and the short term consequences. As I pointed out earlier, the 
extent to which exit strategies take place is not an easy issue and involving vast complexities 
as these strategies will always be contradicted with the pace of the recovery itself. Problems 
exist when the perceptions about the exit builds up and feeds up the tail risk where market 
players  are  irrationally  exuberant  in  responding  the  way  the  recovery  runs.  First,  the 
perception  that  the  authorities  in  advanced  economies,  mainly  the  Fed,  will  maintain  their 
loosening stance in an extended period has become a sort of long-run certainty. Second, the 
perception  that  market  mechanism  will  efficiently  make  automatic  correction  against  short-
run  dynamics.  As  a  result,  risky  asset  prices  have  risen  too  much,  too  soon,  and  too  fast 
compared with macroeconomic fundamental. Simply to say, asset price bubbles fueled by 
this too enthusiastic retort is and will always be our main short-run implication of the 
speculation builds up around the exit strategy issues. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 1
The implications and policy dilemma 
The impact of major economies’ exit policy to EMEAP countries will depend on the degree 
of openness of a country from the point of view of both trade and financial account. In 
Indonesia, for instance, this financial account channel has become substantial as short term 
cross  border  flows  has  been  sizable  in  domestic  financial  market.  In  addition  to  economic 
openness of a country, two other aspects that should be taken into account are economic 
characteristic  and  policy  regime  being  implemented.  In  terms  of  the  latent  economic 
characteristics, the nature of the role of each economic sector to GDP, the level of exchange 
rate pass-through, the role of expectation in inflation formation which would provide unique 
level of shock absorber specific for each country from global shock.  
Nonetheless, I do believe that the EMEAP economies are facing similar immediate problem, 
i.e.  how  best  manage  the  increasing  volatile  short-term  capital  flows  stemming  from 
asymmetry in economic recovery between advanced vis-à-vis emerging economies and the 
policy  responses  that  go  with  it.  Thus,  our  policy  effectiveness  will  be  confined  by  the 
pace of recovery and the exit strategy in advance economies, mainly in the US. In the 
wake of US dollar weakening, letting the domestic currency to appreciate implies inflating the 
bubbles. On the other side, sterilizing the appreciation to offset the spillovers will also mean 
putting  additional  liquidity  flush  to  the  financial  market,  and  thus  keeping  short-term  rates 
lower than is desirable. Yet, tightening monetary policy will also be a hard choice since it will 
elevate the appreciation trend as well as complicate central bank communication on the back 
of recovery. Directly limit capital inflows through regulatory approach is also a hard option. A 
consensus view on this is that it will only be effective as long as there is a policy uniformity 
across countries, which is in my view far from doable, since countries with closely aligned 
agendas – i.e. supporting the recovery – are unable or unwilling to take bold steps in terms of 
coordinating  exchange  rate  policies.  That  is  primarily  because  the  overriding  objective  of 
nearly all parties involved is to maintain some level of exchange rate competitiveness, and 
that is simply not possible. The same concern was also brought forward in the recent G20 
meeting.  
The challenges for EMEAP  
Amidst of all of the complexities around the exit strategy issue we face, we still have to end 
up with best options. Simply to say, in the current state of the global financial landscape, it is 
a big challenge for central banks, mainly in emerging economies, to shape their policies. We 
cannot put the exit policy merely as a long run issue. Rather, current development on this 
leads  me  to  believe  that  we  have  already  dealt  with  its  implication  since  it  shapes  market 
perception. Therefore, on the absence of ideal policy, it is always relevant for us to find a 
better escape clause. And on this respect, the way we communicate to the market plays a 
big  role  in  shaping  the  right  incentives  to  them  while  maintaining  the  pace  of  the 
recovery.  As  a  good  measure  to  risk  awareness,  it  is  also  beneficial  for  us  to  always 
consider  the  probability  of  odds  scenario  to  happen.  In  this  respect,  let  me  suggest  that 
regional coordination and cooperation is a key word.  
While there is much rhetoric on the need for a coordinated exit strategy, such an outcome 
will be challenging to be delivered given the different recovery rates both in Asia particularly 
EMEAP countries, and the rest of the world. In the mean time, EMEAP countries should 
get ready to receive the impact of exit policies in advance economy which will differ in 
term  of  speed  and  magnitude,  depending  on  each  country’s  specific  economic 
character. Given this, a faulty exit strategy of the advanced economies could easily spill over 
into smaller economies, swamping our efforts to deal with the slowdown.  
Managing an exit from the current policy settings as growth recovers poses another 
test for EMEAP central banks to that hard-won credibility. With inflation in the process of 
bottoming out and the recent data flow in EMEAP countries suggesting a clear recovery in 
economic  activity,  we  all  find  ourselves  pondering  the  risk  that  the  economic  stimulus 
provided  by  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  makers  might  be  withdrawn  earlier  compared  to 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2009
advance  economy.  In  this  regard,  I  believe  that  monetary  policy  credibility  is  particularly 
crucial to the countries’ growth risk premium, which is judged by historical inflation volatilities. 
For  some  countries,  given  the  inflation  volatilities  are  historically  high,  a  more  pre-emptive 
monetary  policy  response  is  warranted  in  order  to  anchor  inflation  expectations.  Provided 
that  improving  balance  of  payment  positions,  for  countries  which  historically  have  strong 
pass-through  from  exchange  rate  changes  to  inflation  expectations  such  as  in  Indonesia, 
stronger exchange rates will also be important to keep inflation expectations well-anchored 
without necessitating to aggressively increase interest rates and hurting the growth recovery. 
In  other  words,  a  strong  exchange  rate  can  serve  as  an  effective  anchor  to  inflation 
expectations. This will be important throughout as higher global commodity prices in 2010 
could begin to translate into higher inflation expectations.  
Finally, every country has a stake in the sequencing and magnitude of the strategies of the 
large economies. The impact of global exit on smaller economies could manifest in a return 
of  recessionary  tendencies  as  well  as  balance  of  payments  (BoP)  problems,  which  have 
generally  not  been  a  significant  feature  so  far.  IMF  programs  have  conventionally  been 
oriented to dealing with BoP crises. In the current scenario, the larger resource base may 
have to be deployed with much more flexibility to help particularly smaller economies to deal 
with the potentially recessionary impact of exit — a kind of global macroeconomic safety net. 
Some operating guidelines for such a program need to be quickly developed.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 150/2009 
 3
