Jean Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament  
Introductory speech by Mr Jean Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
a hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 7 December 2009. 
 Dear Madam Chair,  
Dear Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
This is our first meeting since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty. The new Treaty is a 
reason to celebrate: in Europe generally, here at the European Parliament, but also at the 
ECB. It will make the Union stronger, more effective and more efficient.  
The  powers  and  responsibilities  of  the  European  Parliament  increase.  The  ECB  formally 
becomes  an  institution  of  the  European  Union,  and  all  its  essential  features,  above  all  its 
independence, are confirmed.  
Dans le cadre du nouveau traité, nous nous réjouissons de notre collaboration à venir avec 
le Parlement. La qualité de cette coopération a été exemplaire à mes yeux au cours de ces 
dernières années.  
Unsere  heutige  Anhörung 
ist  drei  wichtigen  Themen  gewidmet:  erstens,  unserer 
Einschätzung  der  aktuellen  wirtschaftlichen  Lage;  zweitens,  unserer  Exit-Strategie  zum 
Auslaufen  der  außergewöhnlichen  geldpolitischen  Maßnahmen,  die  wir  in  dem  Höhepunkt 
der  Krise  eingeführt  hatten;  und  drittens,  dem  Thema  der  systemischen  Risiken  im 
Finanzsystem.  
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
The economic situation and outlook have continued to improve since my previous hearing 
before  this  Committee  ten  weeks  ago.  The  euro  area  economy  shows  increasing  signs  of 
recovery.  Economic  activity  in  the  third  quarter  is  estimated  to  have  increased  by  0.4% 
compared with the previous quarter. In 2010 we expect to see a moderate recovery. This is 
in  line  with  the  latest  Eurosystem  staff  projections,  which  were  published  last  Thursday. 
However, this expectation remains surrounded by a high level of uncertainty. In the view of 
the Governing Council, the risks to the outlook remain broadly balanced. 
As regards price developments, inflation and inflationary pressures have remained low over 
recent  months.  In  line  with  our  expectations,  inflation  rates  turned  positive  again  in 
November,  reaching  an  estimated  0.6%.  Looking  ahead,  we  expect  inflation  to  remain 
moderate over the policy-relevant horizon, in line with a relatively slow recovery in demand. 
Indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored, in 
line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the medium term.  
Our  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressures  over  the 
medium term. In particular, we see that money and credit expansion continues to decelerate. 
In the case of loans to households, the latest data provide further confirmation of a levelling-
off  at  low  rates  of  growth.  The  growth  of  loans  to  enterprises  follows  turning-points  in  the 
business cycle with some lag. The still subdued levels of production and trade, coupled with 
broader  uncertainty  regarding  the  business  outlook,  will  dampen  firms’  demand  for  bank 
financing  also  in  the  coming  months,  especially  for  short-term  loans.  At  the  same  time, 
overall financing conditions continue to improve, which should support the demand for loans 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 1
in the period ahead. Thus, at present we see no signs of a credit crunch for the euro area as 
a whole. We are monitoring developments very closely. 
It is against this background that the Governing Council continues to view the current level of 
key ECB interest rates as appropriate. 
Phasing-out of non-standard measures 
2. 
In response to the financial crisis, the Eurosystem has introduced a number of non-standard 
measures since October 2008. 
As  I  explained  to  you  before,  the  five  key  elements  of  our  enhanced  credit  support  have 
been:  fixed  rate  full  allotment;  an  expansion  of  the  list  of  collateral;  longer  maturities  for 
refinancing operations; liquidity provision in foreign currencies; and financial market support 
through a measured but significant covered bond purchase programme.  
These measures have served the economy well in critical times. They have supported the 
ability of banks to provide credit to the euro area economy, ensuring that money and credit 
market  conditions  properly  reflect  the  monetary  policy  stance  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council.  
As you know, all our exceptional measures were designed with the phasing-out in mind. In 
most cases, the phasing-out occurs naturally, and our operational framework is sufficiently 
flexible  for  us  to  be  able  to  adjust  liquidity  conditions  when  warranted.  Our  institutional 
independence  means  that  we  are  unrestricted  in  our  ability  to  implement  the  appropriate 
decisions.  
I have always stressed that the phasing-out would be timely and gradual. It must be timely, 
because one should exit neither too early, nor too late – any ex ante bias is not justified. The 
phasing-out must be gradual, because the situation is improving only gradually and downside 
risks remain.  
Last  Thursday  we  took  a  decision  to  initiate  the  gradual  phasing-out  of  some  of  the 
extraordinary  liquidity  measures,  as  they  will  not  be  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the 
past. This will avoid distortions associated with maintaining non-standard measures for too 
long. It is important to avoid a situation in which banks are heavily dependent on exceptional 
central bank financing. In the context of a stabilisation in the money markets, incentives have 
to be strengthened for banks to restructure their balance sheets through recapitalisation. In 
addition,  a  timely  and  gradual  phasing-out  should  help  activity  in  the  money  market  and 
strengthen peer monitoring among banks. 
It was against this background that the Governing Council decided to adjust the design of 
some of our refinancing operations. We will continue to fully accommodate banks’ liquidity 
needs at fixed interest rates in all our main refinancing operations for as long as is needed – 
and at least until mid-April next year. We thereby continue to provide liquidity support to the 
euro area banking system so as to facilitate credit provision to the euro area economy. But 
as regards our one-year operations, we decided to not engage in further one-year operations 
beyond  the  December  operation  that  was  already  announced.  The  improved  conditions  in 
financial markets have indicated that not all our liquidity measures are needed to the same 
extent  as  in  the  past.  Similarly,  it  is  our  intention  to  discontinue  the  6-months  refinancing 
operations after the last operation at the end of March next year.  
Liquidity developments in non-euro area EU countries  
Allow me to say a few words on the broader implications of our decisions on non-standard 
measures,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  EU  Member  States  outside  the  euro  area. 
Macroeconomic and financial conditions in these countries seem to have stabilised, although 
there are significant differences across the region. A general “sudden stop” in capital flows to 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2009
central and eastern Europe has not materialised. The significant presence of foreign banks 
seems to have had a stabilising effect in this regard, as parent banks have to a large degree 
been able to maintain their exposures to the region. The ECB’s extensive liquidity provision 
to parent banks established in the euro area has contributed to this. In addition, the ECB has 
provided  liquidity  support  to  some  non-euro  area  central  banks  in  cases  of  market 
malfunctioning or to facilitate the functioning of the international financial system.  
Fiscal policies in the euro area 
Finally,  I  should  like  to  add  a  few  comments  on  fiscal  exit  strategies.  Many  euro  area 
governments  are  faced  with  high  and  sharply  rising  fiscal  imbalances,  which  are  not 
sustainable over the longer term. This could weaken public confidence in the sustainability of 
public finances, with adverse effects on market sentiment, leading to less favourable medium 
and long-term interest rates. Unsustainable fiscal positions may also complicate the task of 
our monetary policy to maintain price stability. 
Communicating  credible  fiscal  exit  strategies  is  therefore  crucial  in  order  to  anchor 
expectations.  Such  strategies  need  include  credible  measures,  notably  on  the  expenditure 
side. As agreed by the Ecofin Council last week, governments need to set out concrete and 
quantifiable  adjustment  measures  that  will  lead  to  a  sustainable  correction  of  fiscal 
imbalances. Several countries will have to start consolidation in 2010, and all others in 2011 
at the latest. 
Systemic risk 
3. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  last  topic  we  selected,  namely  the  issue  of  systemic  risk  in  highly 
interconnected financial systems and ways to address it. 
Systemic risk is the risk of a broad-based break-down of the financial system. It results from 
an impairment of the financial system, generally resulting from the high degree of interplay 
and  interconnectedness  within  the  system.  Systemic  risk  is  distinct  from  the  risk  that  can 
affect  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  financial  institutions.  Furthermore,  systemic 
risk, when it erupts, is to be certain to seriously affect the financial intermediation process to 
such a degree that there are negative spill-overs to the real economy.  
The crisis has illustrated that systemic risk may be triggered by the collective behaviour of 
institutions and the manner in which they interact in financial markets. It has highlighted the 
importance  of  improving  our  knowledge  and  assessment  of  interconnectedness  in  the 
financial system, both via the direct links between financial institutions and the indirect ones 
created in financial markets.  
Micro-supervisory assessment, institution by institution, typically investigates the vulnerability 
of  each  entity,  under  various  assumptions  of  stress.  In  contrast,  systemic  risk assessment 
investigates  the  possibility  of  the  whole  system,  or  significant  parts  of  it,  being  vulnerable, 
and considers that major risks may emerge from the financial system itself. Such risks may 
arise, for example, because large parts of the system might have similar exposures, may rely 
on  the  same  funding  sources,  can  be  exposed  to  rising  financial  imbalances,  may 
comprehend large similar currency or maturity mismatches inducing liquidity vulnerabilities, 
and  can  be  exposed  to  large  scale  underassessment  and  mis-pricing  of  risks.  In  the 
assessment  of  the  systemic  risk  of  the  financial  system  itself,  the  judgement  on  the 
robustness of financial infrastructures is particularly important.  
One important issue in assessing systemic risks is to measure the degree of procyclicality 
which is embedded in the financial system itself, namely the capacity of the system to amplify 
fluctuations and to produce after a certain period of time, excessive booms and busts starting 
from relatively modest initial shocks, up or down. This “procyclical systemic instability” of the 
system is itself a complex concept which calls for analysis of the interplay between diverse 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 3
phenomena  such  as:  herd  behaviour,  contagion  from  common  or  correlated  exposures, 
counterparty  relationships,  and  undesired  procyclical  effects  of  prudential  rules,  of 
accounting rules, of behaviour of credit rating agencies, etc.  
Another  important  domain  in  assessing  systemic  risk  is  the  analysis  of  the  inter-linkages 
between  the  financial  sector  itself,  taken  as  a  whole,  and  the  real  economy.  Financial 
imbalances  often  mirror  real-economy  imbalances.  The  adverse  feedback  loop  between  a 
fragile system, prone to procyclicality, and the real economy  might be devastating, as has 
been demonstrated by the recent crisis experience. This means that unsound macro-policies 
over time, including macro imbalances, can themselves trigger financial imbalances, which in 
turn would aggravate instability and fragility in the real economy.  
Sources of systemic risk are particularly difficult to assess. By definition, they stem from the 
interrelations between the various elements in the system and are hence inherently complex. 
We  know  that  the  evolution  of  systems  under  stress  is  particularly  difficult  to  capture. 
Furthermore, the materialisation of a risk is very often a sharp, abrupt and rapid non-linear 
phenomenon which calls for non-standard analysis. For example, in a very large and highly 
complex financial system, the channels through which risks are propagated are very difficult 
to  capture  comprehensively.  A  deep  understanding  of 
leverage,  correlations  and 
concentrations  of  exposures  is  key  in  this  respect.  But  the  identification  of  the  different 
channels of propagation does not suffice. The robust modelling of the system is, in itself, a 
formidable challenge.  
In  practice,  analysts  can  rely  on  early  warning  indicators  and  models,  indicating  when 
clusters  of  financial  institutions  or  markets  of  systemic  relevance  are  approaching  “danger 
zones”.  In  assessing  the  resilience  of  the  system,  macro  stress  tests  have  become  an 
important  part  of  the  risk  assessment  tool-kit.  They  can  also  help  in  prioritising  the  risks 
identified and are a pertinent tool to support the formulation of policy recommendations. 
Central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world  are  working  to  enhance  and 
develop  these  tools.  In  my  view,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  can  make  a 
significant contribution in fostering systemic risk analysis, coordinating analytical efforts and 
concentrating  central  banking  and  supervisory  expertise  from  all  EU  countries.  I  am  also 
confident  that  the  role  of  the  ESRB  in  translating  risk  assessments  into  appropriate  risk-
prioritisation, early warnings and concrete policy recommendations to mitigate systemic risks 
will contribute to the much more resilient EU financial system we are all looking forward to. 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2009
