Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The road less travelled – exploring the nexus 
of macro-prudential and monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  “Learning  from  the  financial  crisis:  financial  stability, 
macroeconomic policy and international institutions”, Rome, 12 November 2009. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
I am delighted to be here today in this beautiful venue of the Einaudi Institute for Economics 
and Finance participating in an outstanding conference aimed at drawing lessons from the 
financial  crisis.  Being  in  Rome,  one  can  witness  numerous  signs  of  the  ability  of  ancient 
Romans  to  be  skilled  architects  and  builders.  The  Romans  were  particularly  adept  in 
constructing and maintaining roads – the viae romanae. The Roman roads played a pivotal 
role  in  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  empire,  ensuring  communication  and  fostering  its 
expansion. However, the other side of the coin was that their effectiveness was such that in 
the last period of the empire, they made it easier for their enemies to move quickly to the 
Roman territory. Similarly, the linkages among intermediaries in our financial system foster 
the efficiency and the stability of the system in normal times. However, in times of tensions, 
they  can  also  contribute  to  the  fast  spreading of  problems.  In  my  remarks  today  I  will  talk 
about  roads  or  linkages  in  the  financial  system,  but  also  about  the  new  roads  of  policy-
making on which we are embarking and the challenges lying ahead on these less explored 
paths. 
It has now been more than two years since the financial crisis started in August 2007. During 
this  period,  the  actions  taken  by  policy-makers  have  been  mainly  aimed  at  preventing  a 
meltdown in the financial sector and at containing pernicious spillovers to the real economy. 
Recent  indicators  point  to  a  stabilisation  or  a  slight  pick-up  of  economic  activity  in  several 
major  economies,  suggesting  that  the  most  acute  phase  of  the  crisis  might  be  behind  us. 
Thus, it seems to be the right time to review what went wrong, to take stock of the lessons 
learned and to propose ways to reduce the likelihood of similar events occurring in the future.  
In my remarks today, I will argue that the crisis has shown us that policy-making is faced with 
new challenges and needs to take some new, less explored paths. We need to develop and 
put to work new tools aimed at mitigating the threats to the safety and stability of the financial 
system, while preserving the efficiency arising from technological advances. In this context, 
the knowledge of the linkages between monetary policy and financial stability is of particular 
importance.  At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  understand  thoroughly  how  macro-prudential 
regulation and supervision interact with monetary policy. In particular, we need to understand 
how  systemic  risk  and  policies  put  in  place  to  mitigate  it  may  affect  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy. 
I will first recall the market and policy failures brought to the surface by the crisis and argue 
that we need to address the fundamental causes of these failures. I will then describe what 
we know about the interaction between prudential regulation and supervision and monetary 
policy. At the same time, I will emphasise those mechanisms that are still less known. Finally, 
I will suggest a way to proceed and to explore the new road lying ahead. 
Lessons we have learned from the crisis 
Before taking a new path, it is good to know exactly where we are and how we got there. So 
in order to define more clearly our possible upcoming tasks and challenges, let me first start 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 1
by  recalling  briefly  the  sources  and  the  amplification  mechanisms  of  the  recent  financial 
crisis.  
Ultimately the crisis was a combination of the accumulation of major imbalances in the years 
running  up  to  the  crisis  with  the  incentives  provided  by  the  existing  regulatory  framework. 
Low inflation, low interest rates and abundant liquidity prior to the crisis were conducive to an 
excessive accumulation of risk. Banks and other investors had increased their appetite for 
risk and engaged in a “search for yield” supported by the exponential growth of complex and 
opaque financial products. The excessive risk-taking was also encouraged by the inadequate 
corporate governance of financial intermediaries and by regulations that did not keep up with 
the technological advances, also due to the emergence of a shadow banking system which 
was largely unregulated. When the crisis was triggered by the drop in the value of certain 
structured  products,  it  quickly  spread  through  interbank  linkages,  transforming  it  into  a 
system-wide financial and economic crisis.  
In my view, the general lessons learnt from this experience are the following: 
First,  the  financial  crisis  has  reminded  us  how  important  it  is  to  look  at  the  links  and 
connections  of  the  financial  system.  We  saw  that  major  disruptions  such  as  the  failure  or 
near-failure  of  certain  institutions  rapidly  spilled  over  to  the  whole  financial  system. 
Therefore,  the  systemic  nature  of  individual  institution’s  risk-taking  has  been  largely 
underestimated.  The  consequences  of  this  must  be  that  macro-prudential  regulation  and 
supervision  are  improved  and  extended.  Systemic  risk  is,  generally,  outside  the  control  of 
each individual institution. But, with a macro-prudential framework subjecting all systemically 
important institutions to a stricter prudential framework, which may include capital or liquidity 
surcharges, these institutions can contribute to an increase in the resilience of the system as 
a whole. 
Second,  the  impact  of  systemic  risk  depends  very  much  on  the  collective  behaviour  of 
financial  institutions  and  their  interconnectedness,  as  well  as  on  the  interaction  between 
financial markets and the macroeconomy. Systemic stability is a public good. The recognition 
of this public good property underpins the recent emphasis on a macro-prudential approach 
to  regulation  and  supervision.  For  this,  we  need  to  establish  an  effective  framework  for 
macro-prudential analysis aimed at containing systemic risk.  
And  third,  monetary  policy  concerns  and  macro-prudential  concerns  are  interconnected. 
During  the  recent  crisis,  financial  instabilities  spilled  over  into  the  real  economy  with 
substantial  consequences  for  the  risks  to  price  stability.  Central  banks  around  the  world, 
including the ECB, have reacted to these diminishing risks to price stability by significantly 
lowering  their  key  policy  interest  rates.  Therefore,  it  appears  that  in  a  post-crisis  world, 
financial stability considerations will have to be taken into account to a greater extent in the 
conduct of monetary policy. New tools may be needed, as well as an organisation of policy-
making such that the interactions between macro-prudential regulation and supervision and 
monetary policy are brought together. 
Allow me to elaborate on this last point. 
Exploring the nexus between macro-prudential regulation/supervision and monetary policy 
As just mentioned, price stability and financial stability are interconnected. While it is certainly 
true that financial stability does not necessarily imply price stability and vice versa, the recent 
crisis  has  made  it  clear  that  large-scale  financial  instabilities  can  significantly  affect  the 
development of prices in the economy.  
Therefore,  a  natural  question  arises  as  to  whether  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential 
supervision and regulation are related and interlinked with each other.  
I see monetary policy and macro-prudential supervision and regulation as being linked in two 
ways. First, monetary policy can have an impact on financial market developments and thus 
can  affect  the  stability  of  financial  markets.  And  second,  the  regulatory  framework  that 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2009
governs financial markets can have clear macroeconomic implications – as witnessed in the 
recent crisis – which may trigger a response with respect to monetary policy.  
Let me elaborate on these two points in more detail. The objective of monetary policy is to 
maintain price stability. Generally, an environment of stable prices reinforces the stability of 
the financial system as well. This, however, is not always the case. An environment of low 
interest  rates  coupled  with  low  inflation  may  be  conducive  to  asset  price  bubbles  and  the 
build-up of excessive leverage. In particular, recent research has emphasised the impact that 
monetary policy, and especially low short-term interest rates, may have on the risk appetite 
of  financial  intermediaries  and  investors  at  large.  This  in  turn  may  favour  the  build-up  of 
imbalances threatening financial stability, even when price stability is preserved. Therefore, 
the question arises whether monetary policy may have to take this effect into account, and 
consequently  should  possibly  “lean  against  the  wind”  of  unsustainable  asset  price  and 
excessive credit bubbles.  
Let me clearly say that the interest rate instrument of monetary policy is a rather blunt tool in 
preventing such bubbles from appearing. Let me add in this context that in my view the credit 
boom prior to the recent crisis was more triggered by a lack of adequate risk controls, low 
credit standards and reduced collateral requirements than by the environment of low interest 
rates.  In  this  sense,  macro-prudential  supervision  and  regulation  are  certainly  the  best 
policies to keep asset price developments in line with financial stability objectives.  
However,  central  banks  should  certainly  become  more  wary  of  systemic  financial  risks 
affecting the macroeconomic environment. For this, the strengthening of the analysis of asset 
prices and credit developments is essential. The monetary policy strategy of the ECB is well 
founded to take these considerations into account. On the one hand, the analysis of asset 
prices is part of our economic analysis. While asset prices are only one of many indicators 
considered  in  this  analysis,  the  recent  crisis  has  taught  us  that  we  need  to  pay  closer 
attention  to  potential  misalignments  and  the  potential  formation  of  asset  bubbles.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  our  monetary  analysis  we  analyse  the  developments  in  money  and  credit 
indicators. In particular, our analysis of loan developments, and particularly developments in 
loans to the private sector, looks at the impact of our monetary policy on the financial sector, 
as  well  as  the  role  of  these  developments  in  our  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability. 
However,  the  lesson  we  can  take  away  from  the  crisis  is  that  this  analysis  of  monetary 
counterparts, i.e. the developments in private sector borrowing, must become more thorough 
and systematic in the future.  
Let  me  turn  to  my  second  point,  namely  how  macro-prudential  regulation  and  supervision 
may affect the macroeconomic environment and hence monetary policy-making.  
It has been widely acknowledged that the regulatory framework has been contributing to the 
amplification of the natural fluctuations of the economic cycle. This phenomenon – known as 
pro-cyclicality  –  can  for  example  be  linked  to  the  time-varying  risk  parameters  for  the 
calculation of capital requirements or the accounting framework.  
The need to address this excessive pro-cyclicality is a concern now shared by policy-makers 
globally. After their meeting in Pittsburgh last month, the G20 leaders stated “we want growth 
without cycles of boom and bust and markets that foster responsibility not recklessness.” In 
other  words,  we  need  to  preserve  the  efficiency  gains  arising  from  advances  in  financial 
development, but we also need to find ways to reduce threats to financial system safety and 
stability  which  seem  to  be  inherent  to  the  new  developments  and  avoid,  or  at  least  limit, 
“roller-coaster” paths.  
Moreover,  there  may  be  mechanisms  through  which  macro-regulation  may  affect  the 
provision  of  credit  and  ultimately  output  and  inflation.  For  example,  by  requiring  financial 
institutions  to  hold  large  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  or  by  limiting  leverage,  their  cost  of 
capital and lending may be impacted, which in turn may affect, at least in part, the provision 
of bank credit. These are only a couple of examples of how the regulatory framework may 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 3
affect  the  provision  of  credit.  There  are  many  more  rules  and  regulations  that  affect  the 
supply of and demand for credit, thereby impacting broader macroeconomic outcomes.  
Overall, the above examples clearly show that the regulatory framework can have important 
implications  for  macroeconomic  outcomes  and  thereby  can  have  direct  consequences  for 
monetary policy-making. At the same time, the regulatory framework may equally affect the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  through  its  impact  on  the  aggregate  behaviour  of  the 
banking sector and, hence, also affect the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Looking forward, the question arises how  the  currently envisaged global reform  agenda of 
the G20 will affect the macroeconomic environment. For example, will the general increase in 
capital and liquidity requirements or the introduction of a leverage ratio reduce the available 
resources for credit creation? How will the introduction of counter-cyclical capital buffers and 
more emphasis overall on risk management frameworks affect the behaviour of banks and 
the  real  economy?  And  more  generally,  are  additional  measures  needed  to  make  the 
regulatory framework more flexible and dynamic depending on the state of the economy? 
These  questions  and  many  more  on  the  potential  impact  of  the  regulatory  framework  on 
macro  outcomes  seem  to  me  of  high  interest  for  the  research  community  for  the  years  to 
come and I encourage everyone in the room to develop new analytical tools and models that 
help to understand this interaction better. 
The way forward 
Given  the  interactions  and  linkages  between  macro-prudential  supervision  and  regulation 
and monetary policy, having the task of the former close to or within a central bank is in my 
view a sensible way forward, not least because central banks have the necessary analytical 
capabilities to analyse the broad perspective that I outlined earlier. For us, such analysis will 
be  of  crucial  importance.  As  you  know,  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  will  be 
established  with  the  mandate  to  map  financial  risks  and  their  concentration  at  the  system 
level  for  the  macro-prudential  supervision  of  systemic  stability.  The  ECB  will  provide  the 
necessary  input  for  the  ESRB  to  carry  out  the  work  under  its  mandate.  In  particular,  the 
ESRB will be instrumental in the analysis of systemic risks and will issue risk warnings and 
policy recommendations to address financial stability concerns.  
The primary objective of the ECB’s monetary policy is to achieve and maintain price stability. 
This  will  remain  our  primary  objective  and  the  forthcoming  tasks  in  macro-prudential 
supervision will not conflict with this objective. In my view, the new macro-prudential task and 
the existing monetary policy responsibilities can be mutually supportive.  
In order to achieve this objective and to avoid any potential conflict of interest, it is crucial 
that  the  instruments  of  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  supervision  be  clearly 
separated. Our policy rate will be set according to our assessment of risks to price stability 
and  the  ESRB  will  issue  macro-prudential  policy  recommendations  with  regard  to financial 
stability  risks.  In  practice,  each  of  these  mandates  may  involve  taking  a  different  path. 
However, as I mentioned earlier, the roads may cross from time to time. Therefore, policy-
makers need to be aware of the possibility of these paths crossing, i.e. of the linkages and 
interactions that I have mentioned. Let me stress once more that from this point of view, the 
ECB is in a good position to evaluate the interactions between the two paths. Our two-pillar 
strategy  involves  the  analysis  of  asset  prices  as  well  as  the  analysis  of  money  and  credit 
aggregates. This may provide useful indications on the nature of the interactions. However, 
more work is needed to better understand the interactions and to make our analysis more 
thorough and systematic on this point.  
The policies supporting monetary and financial stability should remain two distinct areas of 
action,  but  there  are  synergies  to  be  gained  from  the  analysis supporting  both.  All  in  all,  I 
believe that the objectives of price and financial stability are complementary, at least in the 
long run, and that the policies supporting both should be seen as mutually supportive. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2009
Conclusions 
The recent financial crisis has strikingly illustrated the interconnectedness that characterises 
the  global  financial  system.  In  providing  a  framework  for  strengthening  financial  stability, 
policy-makers are currently not only refining the regulatory and institutional set-up, but also 
looking for new analytical tools that help to better identify, monitor and address sources of 
systemic risk.  
I have described how the crisis has reaffirmed the need for an enhanced macro-prudential 
approach to regulation and supervision. It also emphasised how important it is to improve our 
knowledge of the interactions between financial and monetary stability policies.  
Faced  with  these  challenges,  policy-makers  are  taking  less  travelled,  less  explored  roads. 
Additional work is needed to pave these new paths so that they can stand the test of time, 
like the Roman roads have done. But the past has shown that a return to the roads taken 
before the crisis is not an option. Pursuing in isolation policies aimed at financial and price 
stability  may  lead  to  conflicting  paths.  Taking  different  roads,  but  being  wary  of  their 
junctions, is the way forward, which eventually will lead to the achievement of the same aim: 
an efficient financial system promoting economic growth and less prone to pro-cyclicality. 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 5
