Ewart S Williams: Lessons from the financial crisis 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the launch of the Ansa Euro Income Fund, Port-of-Spain, 17 November 2009. 
 I am pleased to participate in this ceremony this evening, not to endorse the merits of any 
particular product, since obviously; it is not something that the Central Bank as Regulator 
could  do.  Instead,  I  want  to  commend  this  initiative  which,  to  me,  in  this  challenging 
economic  environment,  represents  a  vote  of  confidence  in  the  economy  and  another  step 
towards the development of the capital market.  
It  is  certainly  a  positive  note  against  the  background  of  the  negative  hum  that  has 
overwhelmed us for the past several months. 
Globally,  the  negative  news  has  been  around  for  much  longer  –  for  more  than  eighteen 
months or so, following the financial meltdown that has been attributed to a variety of factors, 
and the sharp global recession that ensued.  
Even now when there are signs of recovery, we have become so jaded that most projections 
are now accompanied by a series of caveats in which the downside risks are given equal 
prominence.  
Now in the US, UK and Eurozone there are signs of recovery – green shoots, we are told – 
but we are advised not to rule out the possibility of a double-dip recession, meaning another 
likely  downturn  in  2010,  or  an  L-shaped  recession,  meaning  that  we  may  just  face  a 
prolonged period of slow, tepid growth or virtual stagnation.  
I guess the cautiousness that now engulfs policy makers in the advanced economies is, in 
part, a reflection of how far they have come: how close we have been to a collapse of the 
global  financial  system  and  how  deep  the  recession  has  been  in  several  of  the  advanced 
countries.  
I guess that the concerns that now pervade the developed countries also have to do with the 
recognition of the colossal re-balancing that is taking place in the world – a re-balancing that 
has  meant  a  shift  in  the  poles  of  global  growth  from  the  US  and  Europe  and  for  a  while 
Japan, to the new powers – China and India and the smaller economies in Asia along with 
one or two emerging market countries in Latin America, like Brazil and Chile. 
The Caribbean, including us here in Trinidad and Tobago, has also had more than its share 
of  bad  news.  Up  the  islands,  tourism  is  sharply  down  and  with  unemployment  in  the  US 
topping  10 per  cent,  workers’  remittances,  which  are  an  important  source  of  foreign 
exchange receipts, for much of the region have plunged. With many regional governments 
over-burdened  with  debt,  there  has  been  renewed  recourse  to  the  IMF  and  the  other 
multilateral institutions for financial assistance.  
Here at home, we have not been spared. After GDP growth averaging 7 percent since 2001, 
the economy saw a reversal, starting in the fourth quarter of 2008. This has continued into 
2009, when we are likely to register negative growth, on an annual basis, for the first time 
since 1993.  
Reading  about  the  recession  abroad  and  seeing  it  translated  into  a  sharp  fall  in  energy 
prices,  a  negative  psychology  has  overtaken  consumers  who  have  become  cautious  and 
have  started  to  spend  less.  At  the  same  time,  businessmen  have  postponed  investment 
projects.  
I continue to believe that we are fortunate because we still have the fiscal space to maintain 
demand. There is still sufficient activity going on and enough hope for an early resurgence, to 
forestall an even more precipitous reduction in employment.  
BIS Review 160/2009 
 1
Five  years  ago,  we  would  have  considered  an  unemployment  rate  of  5.1  per  cent  and  an 
inflation rate at a similar level (5 per cent) as the reward for good economic management. 
But times have changed.  
The harsh reality is that our economy was developing at a pace and in a manner that was 
clearly  unsustainable.  Bottlenecks  had  already  begun  to  emerge  in  several  places  –  in 
transportation,  in  the  public  utilities  (electricity  and  water),  in  skilled  labour  and  in 
management. The international recession advanced the inevitable and in my view has given 
us the opportunity to stop, re-think, re-prioritise and, to learn from our mis-steps. 
Take the financial sector; we were able to ride out the international financial crisis virtually 
unscathed, and to contain contagion from our own domestic financial debacle. To me, this 
testifies  to  the  underlying  strength  of  our  financial  system  and  in  particular,  its  robust 
capitalization (in the case of the banks), and the system’s generally conservative orientation.  
That said, our local financial crisis carries clear lessons, some of which are: 
• 
First, that to effectively manage a modern financial system, you need state-of-the-
art legislation, with penalties and a regime to ensure compliance. 
Second, that good governance structures are an indispensable part of the efficient 
management  of  financial  institutions.  Boards  of  Directors  must  understand  their 
fiduciary responsibilities and must see protecting depositors or policy-holders as a 
major part of their responsibility. 
Third, external auditors must also be held to account and they must recognize that 
depositors,  creditors  and  shareholders  are  looking  to  them  for  an  independent 
opinion; and 
Fourth, that investors also have a responsibility to understand the trade-off between 
risk  and  reward  and  to  remember  the  old  maxim  –  if  it  is  too  good  to  be  true,  it 
probably is. 
   The present economic downturn also carries powerful lessons that we could refuse to learn, 
to our peril.  
One compelling lesson is that oil and gas brought us to where we are but that our reserves 
are  by  no  means  limitless  and  indeed  they  may  be  even  smaller  than  we  would  like  to 
believe. On this basis, we need to move quickly to establish a sustainable fiscal position and 
accelerate  efforts  at  meaningful  diversification.  This  is  indeed  a  daunting  task  and  would 
require close collaboration between Government and private sector.  
If  the  non-energy  export  sector  is  our  hope  to  medium-term  economic  viability,  the 
inescapable  consequence  is  that  we  would  need  to  significantly  increase  our  productivity 
levels.  Our  recent  intensified  emphasis  on  education  and  training  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction but these needs to be complemented by a much great focus on ICT.  
Finally, we need to fully exploit the opportunities offered by small business activity in niche 
industries.  
In case you have any doubts, I have tremendous confidence in this economy, in its resilience 
to overcome the current difficulties and its ability to meet the medium-term challenges that 
confront us. We like to boast about our native creativity, our enterprising spirit and our ability 
to  overcome  hurdles.  I  happen  to  believe  that  all  this  is  true  and  that  when  the  chips  are 
down we will make the right decisions.  
However, we have a knack for putting off the difficult decisions for too long. Let’s hope we 
don’t, this time around.  
Let me again congratulate Ansa Merchant Bank for showing continued faith in the economy 
of Trinidad and Tobago.  
Thanks for inviting me. 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2009
