Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Islamic finance and the financial crisis 
Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank  of  Bahrain,  at  the  AAOIFI-World  Bank  Annual  Conference  on  Islamic  Banking  and 
Finance, Manama, 14 December 2009. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  the  11th  Annual 
AAOIFI-World Bank Conference on Islamic Banking and Finance. I should especially like to 
thank the many distinguished speakers who will participate in this Conference, as well as the 
event  organisers  and  sponsors.  Particular  thanks  are  due  to  Mr. James  Adams,  Vice 
President, East Asia and Pacific Region, World Bank who has travelled to Bahrain to be with 
us  today.  We  are  grateful  to  the  World  Bank  for  their  continued  support  of  this  important 
event. 
Looking  back  on  the  12  months  that  have  passed  since  the  last  AAOIFI-World  Bank 
Conference,  it  is  striking  how  profound  have  been  the  changes  in  the  financial  landscape 
since then. 
The  last  time  this  Conference  took  place  it  was  under  the  shadow  of  the  bankruptcy  of 
Lehman Brothers. This had cast a dark cloud over the world financial system and the global 
economy. For a period of several weeks it had appeared that no institution was so strong, or 
so large, that the prospect of its failure was unthinkable. There was widespread risk aversion 
in  financial  markets  and  the  reluctance  of  banks  to  lend  to  each  other  risked  creating  a 
vicious  downwards  spiral.  The  interbank  markets  were  frozen.  Banks  that  were  unable  to 
raise wholesale funding were forced to cut back on their lending. This reduced the availability 
of credit to otherwise sound borrowers. Rising default rates then in turn fed the perception 
that lending banks were at risk. And so the cycle took another downward turn. 
In  response  to  this  downward  spiral  many  governments  –  especially  in  the  advanced 
economies – took a series of extraordinary measures, including the provision of liquidity in 
unprecedented  amounts, 
the  provision  of  recapitalization  support,  and  Government 
guarantees of deposits. These measures have been successful in breaking the psychology 
that  led  to  the  vicious  downward  spiral.  Although  the  global  economy  has  not  yet  fully 
recovered,  the  signs  of  recovery  are  there  and  the  situation  is  immeasurably  better  than 
12 months ago. 
There  are  many  who  might  say  that  the  events  in  the  global  financial  system  have  little 
relevance to Islamic finance. Many in the Islamic finance industry point out that it has been 
sheltered  from  the  impact  of  the  crisis  in  part  because  the  Shari’a  prohibits  the  excess 
leverage and speculative financial activities that were at its root. They also take comfort from 
the  fact  that  many  participants  in  conventional  finance,  as  well  as  regulators,  and  policy-
makers  have  begun  to  ask  whether  there  are  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  principles  of 
Islamic finance which might help avoid future crises.  
Recent events have certainly created a great opportunity for the Islamic financial industry. At 
the same time, however, there is no room for complacency and if the industry is to make the 
most of the opportunity that has now arisen it will need to ensure that the lessons of the crisis 
are fully learned. 
Some of these lessons are quite general and apply equally to conventional and to Islamic 
finance. Central bankers and regulators have learned that they must pay more attention to 
risks that are common throughout an entire sector of the industry. These risks might not be 
immediately  apparent  from  reviewing  the  balance  sheet  or  financial  statements  of  an 
individual institution.  
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
An  example  of  such  a  risk  is  when  all  banks  assume  that  they  can  exit  their  speculative 
positions at the same time. This requires them to assume that financial markets will always 
remain as liquid as they are in normal times. But if every financial institution is operating on 
the same assumption, then the point at which everyone tries to rush to the exit will be the 
point at which financial markets cease to function. There will be only sellers and no buyers. 
This is what happened in conventional finance when banks invested in structured financial 
instruments like CDOs and CLOs which they then found they couldn’t sell at any price. 
Now some people might believe that because Islamic financial institutions cannot invest in 
CDOs  and  CLOs,  they  must  be  immune  to  this  problem.  But  think  about  the  exposure  of 
many Islamic banks to the real estate market. It might be a reasonable assumption for an 
individual institution that it could exit profitably a property development that it is funding. But 
when  many  other  institutions  are  making  similar  assumptions  about  the  projects  they  are 
funding, the industry as a whole may find it difficult to exit its investments without substantial 
losses or within a reasonable time-frame. 
A further lesson of the crisis is specific to the work of the accounting standard setters and 
thus to AAOIFI. This lesson relates to the importance of disclosure and transparency. Good 
disclosures ensure that risks can be clearly identified and that market counterparties are able 
to form a considered view of the value of financial instruments and investments. 
The  financial  crisis  involved  multiple  failures  of  disclosure  and  transparency.  For  example, 
conventional  banks  moved  assets  to  Structured  Investment  Vehicles  (SIVs)  or  “conduits” 
which  did  not  form  part  of  their  normal  financial  reporting  or  disclosures.  Because  these 
entities were regarded as off-balance sheet they were opaque both to regulators and to the 
counterparties of the banks that sponsored them.  
Similarly,  as  we  now  know,  the  risk  disclosures  of  various  structured  financial  instruments 
were inadequate to permit purchasers of those instruments to perform a proper assessment 
of the risk/reward trade-off. Many investors purchased assets which they believed to have a 
very different risk profile than turned out to be the case. 
Again, there are parallels with Islamic finance. The use of off-balance sheet special purpose 
vehicles  has  been  a  feature  of  the  financing  model  of  many  Islamic  banks.  We  need  to 
consider whether this gives rise to the same problem of a lack of transparency that arose 
with off-balance sheet SIVs. Similarly, accounting standards for Islamic finance need to keep 
pace  with  financial  innovation.  There  is  a  lesson  in  the  failure  of  the  accounting  of 
conventional instruments to keep pace with industry developments. 
As  the  G20  leaders  recognised  in  their  recent  summit  meeting,  enhanced  accounting  and 
disclosure standards must be a key component of the response to the financial crisis. They 
have  commissioned  the  international  standard  setting  bodies,  such  as  the  International 
Financial Standards Board (IFSB) and from the US Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB),  to  review  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  and  to  amend  their  accounting  and  disclosure 
frameworks  accordingly.  AAOIFI  will  have  important  work  to  do  in  ensuring  that  the 
framework  of  transparency  and  disclosure  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  will  match  the 
enhanced standards that are likely to be forthcoming for conventional finance. I encourage 
AAOIFI  to  follow  these  developments  closely  and  to  work  on  producing  revised  and  new 
accounting standards to match changes in the field of conventional finance. 
The  changes  that  are  likely  to  result  from  the  global  financial  crisis,  including  in  the 
accounting and auditing profession, will provide the background to the professional careers 
of the students whose success we have gathered to recognise today. 
I would like to offer my congratulations to these students who have successfully completed 
the  “Certified  Shari’a  Adviser  and  Auditor”,  and  “Certified  Islamic  Professional  Accountant” 
programmes.  Both  are  challenging  courses  of  study.  To  complete  them  successfully  has 
required hard work and commitment. It is an achievement to be proud of, and one that I am 
sure will serve you in good stead as you further develop your professional careers. 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
Let me conclude by wishing the graduating students all the best in their future careers, and to 
wish all the participants in this Conference a very rewarding and stimulating two days. 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
