Paul Jenkins: Central banking in Canada – meeting today's and 
tomorrow's challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Jenkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Vancouver Board of Trade, Vancouver, British Columbia, 8 October 2009.  
 Good afternoon, it's a pleasure to be with you again. When I last spoke to the Board of Trade 
three years ago, my topic, "Weathering Economic Shocks," was not dissimilar to today's – 
although our perspective in 2006 was certainly different. Indeed, the global financial crisis of 
the  past  two  years  has  presented  unique,  stressful  challenges  that  have  forced  us  all  to 
assess what has worked well and what needs to change. Today, I would like to review some 
of the critical thinking around these issues, primarily from the perspective of our work at the 
Bank of Canada. I will also offer some thoughts on Canadian public policy more broadly, as 
well as on the economies of Canada and British Columbia. 
A look back 
All of us, collectively and as individuals, have been immersed in the fallout from the global 
financial  crisis  that  began  to  unfold  in  August  2007.  Its  impact  has  been  profound  and 
widespread,  across  national  economies  and  financial  markets.  Heightened  uncertainty  in 
global financial markets associated with the collapse of the subprime-mortgage market in the 
United States, the opaqueness of structured securitized financial products, an overreliance 
by banks on wholesale funding, and generally lax regulation resulted in key markets seizing 
up.  Credit  spreads  widened  dramatically,  and  a  forced  deleveraging  process  made  credit 
expensive and unavailable to many households and businesses.  
As the process unfolded, it was evident that many financial institutions were insolvent. Firms 
such as Bear Stearns, AIG, and Lehman Brothers suddenly became household names. The 
intensity  of  the  stress  in  financial  markets  quickly  led  to  a  deep,  synchronous  global 
economic recession, which some have dubbed the "Great Recession."  
Policy-makers  reacted  swiftly  to  the  onset  of  the  recession.  Last  autumn,  on  our 
Thanksgiving weekend, G-7 finance ministers and central bank governors put in place a plan 
of action acknowledging the need for a global solution. This was followed by a series of G-20 
summits – starting last November in Washington, D.C., and most recently, in Pittsburgh two 
weeks ago – which quickly broadened the reach of countries involved in turning the situation 
around and preventing a recurrence. While the resulting coordinated set of plans to stabilize 
global financial markets and provide macroeconomic stimulus is beginning to bear fruit, the 
recovery is going to be protracted, given the extent of repair required in financial markets and 
system infrastructures around the world.  
The  gravity  and  global  reach  of  what  we  endured  during  the  past  two  years  have  been 
unprecedented in the past half-century. While acknowledging this, we should not forget the 
valuable lessons learned from other serious economic and financial challenges of previous 
decades. Let me mention a few.  
A major challenge was the struggle to reduce the high, variable inflation rates of the 1970s 
and 1980s and to establish a low, stable, and predictable inflation environment. Another was 
the effort made in the mid-1990s to put Canada's fiscal house in order, with a medium-term 
focus on reducing public debt levels relative to the size of our economy.  
We have had to respond to major external shocks: the Asian, Russian, and Latin American 
financial crises of the late 1990s and start of this decade; the worldwide collapse of the high-
tech bubble in 2000-01; and the 9/11 terrorist attacks. And, familiar to this audience, we have 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 1
witnessed  the  emergence  of  China  and  India,  along  with  technological  advances  and  the 
increasing globalization of trade and finances. 
As diverse as these challenges were, two themes are common to them all. The first is the 
importance of sound policy frameworks to guide our thinking and our actions. The second is 
the  importance  of  economic  flexibility,  by  which  I  mean  our  ability  to  adjust  to  changing 
circumstances  and  return  to  full  production  potential  as  quickly  as  possible.  Most  of  my 
remarks today relate to the first of these two themes; I will pick up on the second towards the 
end.  
Canada's response to the global financial crisis 
As you know, the Bank's monetary policy objective is to achieve its 2 per cent inflation target 
for the consumer price index (CPI). It is through inflation control, by providing Canadians with 
confidence  in  the  future  value  of  their  money,  that  we  contribute  to  good  economic 
performance  in  Canada&  –  a  means  to  an  end.  Throughout  the  global  financial  crisis  and 
recession,  our  monetary  policy  decisions  have  been  anchored  by  our  inflation-targeting 
framework, and we have calibrated our actions to achieve the 2 per cent target.  
In  a  series  of  rate  cuts  between  December  2007  and  April  2009,  we  reduced  our  target 
overnight  rate  of  interest  by  a  total  of  425  basis  points.  This  includes  an  exceptional, 
coordinated cut of 50 basis points, taken by the G-10 countries one year ago today. Since 
April,  the  target  rate  in  Canada  has  remained  at  0.25  per  cent,  which  we  regard  as  the 
effective lower bound. Also in April, we stated that, conditional on the projection for inflation, 
we will keep the policy rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010. These 
actions  have  resulted  in  interest  rates  dropping,  for  many  borrowers,  to  record  post-World 
War  II  lows.  In  addition,  inflation  expectations  –  given  the  credibility  of  policy  –  have 
remained firmly anchored to the 2 per cent target.  
Clearly,  these  have  been  unusual  times  –  so  much  so  that  they  have  demanded 
consideration of unconventional instruments in our conduct of monetary policy. In an Annex 
to our April Monetary Policy Report (MPR), we set out a framework for conducting monetary 
policy at low interest rates.  
This  framework  includes  three  instruments.  The  first  is  a  conditional  statement  about  our 
target policy rate, which is the one unconventional instrument we have employed thus far. 
The  second  is  quantitative  easing,  which  refers  to  outright  purchases  of  financial  assets 
through the creation of excess settlement balances on the books of the Bank; and the third, 
credit easing, refers to purchases of private sector assets in key, temporarily impaired credit 
markets.  The  use  of  any  of  these  instruments  would  clearly  be  cast  in  terms  of  what  is 
needed to achieve our inflation target.  
Canadians  have  also  benefited  through  the  crisis  from  other  policies.  A  sound  fiscal 
framework,  aimed  at  reducing  the  national  debt-to-GDP  ratio  over  the  medium  term,  has 
provided  an  important  degree  of  flexibility  in  this  time  of  need.  A  system-wide  focus  on 
financial stability, including the provision of liquidity to key markets by the Bank of Canada 
and  risk  assessments  in  our  Financial  System  Review,  has  provided  further  support. 
Canadians have also benefited from a risk-based approach to financial system regulation. 
The combined effect of the decisions and actions taken in each of these policy areas is a 
primary reason why Canada has avoided the worst of the global financial crisis. Although our 
economy  has  suffered  a  deep  recession,  due  to  the  impact  of  the  U.S.  recession  and  the 
collapse of commodity prices, Canada has avoided a boom-bust cycle in housing, and our 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2009
financial  system,  especially  our  banking  system,  has  continued  to  function  relatively  well.1 
Indeed,  some  attributes  of  Canada's  regulatory  system  for  financial  institutions  are  being 
advanced globally through the G-20 process.2  
Overall, the Canadian experience shows that sound policy frameworks, working in tandem, 
help address difficult circumstances – even situations as extreme as those we have recently 
faced. 
Looking ahead 
Still,  our  experience  of  the  past  two  years  makes  it  clear  that  the  status  quo  is  no  longer 
sufficient.  At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  must  strengthen  our  frameworks,  in  terms  of  both 
monetary policy and financial stability, to increase the country's capacity to avoid crises to 
the extent possible and to address shocks when they do occur. 
In terms of monetary policy, there are two critical streams to our work plan. The first relates 
to our inflation-targeting regime. In November 2006, when we renewed the current five-year 
inflation-target  agreement  with  the  federal  government,  we  also  launched  a  research 
program  to  examine  ways  to  strengthen  our  monetary  policy  framework.3  Two  questions 
were posed: What are the costs and benefits of a lower inflation target? What are the costs 
and benefits of a price-level target?4
Considerable study on these two questions has already been undertaken, involving not only 
researchers at the Bank, but also academics and colleagues at other central banks. I won't 
review this work today. However, more information can be found on our research website, 
http://www.inflationtargeting.ca/,  and  in  summary  articles  in  the  Bank  of  Canada  Review.5 
We will take a hard, objective look at what the research finds, and you can expect to hear 
more from us on this subject in the coming year.  
The second stream relates to the transmission mechanism – that is, how our monetary policy 
actions work their way through financial markets and the economy. The crisis has made it 
abundantly clear that central banks must have a better understanding of the links between 
the  real  economy  (that  is,  output,  inflation,  and  employment)  and  the  financial  sector.  For 
example,  time-varying  term,  liquidity,  and  risk  spreads  have  been  shown  to  be  empirically 
relevant  for  explaining  real  activity,  as  have  non-price  terms  for  credit.  Another  important 
insight  from  the  financial  crisis  is  that  broader  procyclical  dynamics  –  that  is,  forces  that 
amplify cyclical fluctuations – in money, asset, and credit markets also have implications for 
the real economy and hence, monetary policy. A critical part of the Bank's research agenda 
is on these real-financial linkages, to better understand them and incorporate them into our 
models and policy analysis. 
                                                 
1   One exception was in a very specific segment of the Canadian market for non-bank-sponsored, asset-backed 
commercial  paper  (ABCP),  which  had  transparency  problems  and  which  led  to  the  standstill  under  the 
Montreal Accord. 
2   For a more detailed review of these attributes, see P. Jenkins, "Canada's Financial Sector: Responses to the 
Global Crisis" (presentation to the Colombian Banking Association, Cartagena, Colombia, 10 July 2009). 
4  
3   See "Renewal of the Inflation Control Target, Background Information" (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, November 
2006). 
In  the  price-level-target  approach  to  inflation  control,  bygones  are  not  bygones,  unlike  the  current  policy. 
Under  price-level  targeting,  if  inflation  has  been  below  trend,  causing  the  price  level  to  fall  below  target, 
monetary policy would need to generate above-trend inflation for a while to return the price level to target. Or, 
if  inflation  has  been  above  trend,  lifting  the  price  level  above  its  target,  the  central  bank  would  need  to 
temporarily induce below-trend inflation to return the price level to its target path over time. 
5   See various articles, Bank of Canada Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, Spring 2009). 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 3
In terms of financial stability, what we have witnessed over the past two years has been an 
increasingly complex set of interrelationships among credit, market, and funding risks. These 
interrelationships, involving key segments of the global financial system, have had significant 
consequences for economies worldwide – consequences that have brought to the fore the 
critical importance of effectively managing liquidity, credit, and market risks, as well as the 
importance of ensuring adequate levels of capital.  
In  several  of  these  areas,  Canada  –  as  I  noted  earlier  –  has  stood  out  for  the  sound 
management, regulation, and supervision of its financial institutions. However, the focus at 
this micro level is not enough. Indeed, another key lesson of the global financial crisis has 
been  a  recognition  of  the  need  for  oversight  of  the  system  as  a  whole,  including  both 
systemically  important  institutions  and  markets.  Such  an  approach  is  critical,  because 
systemic  risks  can  arise  from  the  collective  actions  of  institutions  and  market  participants 
that,  at  the  individual  level,  may  appear  to  mitigate  risk,  but  that  collectively  –  because  of 
interconnectness and common exposure – contribute to the instability of the system overall. 
The off-loading of assets in illiquid markets is just one example. 
A system-wide, or macroprudential, approach is the shared responsibility of the Department 
of Finance and all of the federal financial regulatory authorities, including of course the Bank 
of Canada, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, and the Canada Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation.  Ultimately,  it  is  the  Minister  of  Finance  who  is  responsible  for  the 
sound stewardship of the financial system. 
A  macroprudential  approach  involves  two  main  elements.  The  first  is  macroprudential 
surveillance to identify the buildup of risks to the financial system. The Bank is well placed to 
contribute  to  macroprudential  surveillance,  given  our  mandate  to  take  an  economy-wide 
perspective,  our  research  on,  and  knowledge  of,  the  economy  and  financial  system 
(including  the  clearing  and  payments  system),  and  our  connections  with  key  international 
organizations.  
The second element is macroprudential regulation, or regulation designed to strengthen the 
resilience of the financial system as a whole, which is the responsibility of the Minister, with 
advice from the Bank, OSFI, CDIC, and others. Progress here will need to take into account 
those  interdependencies  among  institutions  and  markets  that  have  implications  for  the 
overall  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Issues  to  be  addressed  include  sound  market 
infrastructure,  product  standardization  and  transparency,  counterparty  relationships,  and 
countercyclical macroprudential tools such as countercyclical capital buffers. Work on these 
issues  represents  a  multi-year  investment  at  home  and  abroad.  The  Bank  is  undertaking 
research and analysis in a number of areas, including how to mitigate procyclical behaviour 
in the financial system, what is required to keep core funding markets continuously open, and 
models to stress test the Canadian financial system and gain insights into its functioning.  
Advancement of this work will be aided by research and analysis in international committees 
and working groups, as well as in academia and at central banks. A particularly challenging 
aspect  of  this  work  will  be  the  development  of  macroprudential  tools  and  their  use  in 
promoting financial stability.6  
But  what  do  the  lessons  of  the  past  two  years  tell  us  about  the  interactions  and  overlap 
between monetary policy and financial stability? It's clear that monetary authorities need to 
be  concerned  about  financial  instability  which,  as  the  past  two  years  have  taught  us,  can 
threaten price stability due to the recessionary consequences for the real economy. It was in 
response to such disinflationary forces – even a concern about deflation on the part of some 
                                                 
6   These tools could include minimum risk-weighted capital ratios; minimum capital held against a bank's trading 
book;  maximum  leverage  ratios;  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  for  mortgages;  and  minimum  margin 
requirements and haircuts. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2009
– that we aggressively cut interest rates to support the economy and thus, achieve our 2 per 
cent inflation target.  
Financial instability can also affect the monetary policy transmission mechanism. As I noted 
earlier,  heightened  uncertainty  and  instability  in  financial  markets  raise  spreads  and  non-
price terms in credit markets in ways that are unpredictable, and with consequences that are 
uncertain.  This  puts  weight  on  monetary  policy  to  take  aggressive  actions  –  including  the 
potential use of unconventional instruments – to offset these consequences. 
Financial  instability  is  primarily  about  market  failures  and  distortions  that  need  to  be 
addressed directly. The experiences of the past two years demonstrate that the best way to 
do this is through effective financial regulation, which includes macroprudential regulation to 
address systemic risks.7 Interest rates are a blunt policy tool. Their use to address financial 
instability could create uncertainty for pricing financial assets and result in a misallocation of 
capital, with consequences for the whole economy. There could also be a risk of a loss of 
credibility for the monetary authorities, as they pursue their mandate of price stability. 
This all adds up to the fact that there are important issues to be addressed and considerable 
work  to  be  done  in  updating  and  designing  new  tools  to  meet  the  challenges  of  central 
banking going forward. In using our conventional monetary policy tool, the target overnight 
rate, we need to better understand real-financial linkages, and how changes in the target rate 
are transmitted to the economy. We need to further develop our thinking about, and assess 
the effectiveness of, unconventional monetary policy tools when the target policy rate is at 
the effective lower bound. And, in order to promote financial stability, we need to contribute 
to  the  development  and  use  of  macroprudential  tools,  especially  countercyclical  tools,  to 
address periods of both financial exuberance and pessimism. 
There  remains,  however,  the  issue  of  how  central  banks  should  react  to  developments  in 
asset  prices  because  of  their  consequences  for  both  inflation  and  financial  stability. 
Experience  shows  that  increases  and  collapses  in  house  prices  affect  aggregate  demand, 
and  have  played  a  particularly  important  role  as  a  driving  force  behind  bouts  of  financial 
instability. In Canada, house prices enter directly into the calculation of the CPI. The Bank of 
Canada  follows  developments  in  house  prices  closely  and  factors  them  into  our  decision-
making process regarding the level for the target overnight rate, consistent with achieving our 
inflation target.  
In our 2006 background document, we indicated that the central bank should focus on the 
inflation  and  output  consequences  of  any  economic  disturbance,  including  asset-price 
shocks,  and  should  continue  to  respond  in  a  manner  consistent  with  meeting  our  inflation 
objective. We also said, "some flexibility might be required, however, with regard to the time 
horizon  over  which  this  is  realized."8  That  might  involve  extending  the  usual  horizon  for 
achieving  the  inflation  target  in  response  to  an  asset-price  shock,  in  return  for  greater 
financial,  economic,  and  inflation  stability  over  a  somewhat  longer  horizon.  The  challenge 
would lie in making such judgment calls, calls that become even more difficult for an open 
economy  such  as  ours  when  the  asset-price  shock  comes  from  abroad.  Here,  our  flexible 
exchange rate would be helpful, by performing its usual role as an important shock absorber. 
                                                 
7   M. Carney, "Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic Activity" (presentation to a 
symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  22  August 
2009): p. 3. 
8   See "Renewal of the Inflation Control Target, Background Information," op. cit., p. 9. 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 5
How central banks should respond to asset prices is receiving considerable attention in light 
of the experience of the past two years.9 More discussion and debate are called for, drawing 
on those experiences and on what research can tell us.10
Issues of broader public policy and the economy  
Let me now turn to public policy more broadly, and to the economy. There are two elements 
relating to public policy that I wish to touch on briefly, since both have taken on heightened 
importance as a result of the global financial crisis. The first is the importance of policies that 
promote  flexibility  and  an  innovative  business  environment.  As  we  have  often  seen,  most 
recently  during  the  global  financial crisis,  many  adverse  shocks  to  the  Canadian  economy 
come from abroad. We must be able to adapt and adjust in response to these developments. 
Sound macroeconomic and financial policies are very important, but we also need policies 
that  enable  the  efficient  shifting  of  resources  from  one  sector  to  another  and  that  provide 
incentives  for  businesses  to  be  nimble  in  developing  new  products  and  markets  as  trends 
change in global demand.  
The  second  element  relates  to  the  importance  of  a  rotation  of  global  demand  to  address 
global current account imbalances. Fundamentally, this means that, over the coming years, 
more  U.S.  economic  growth  must  come  from  net  exports,  and  more  Chinese  growth  must 
come  from  domestic  demand  within  China.  The  United  States  will  remain  Canada's  major 
trading partner, but we increasingly need to consider other markets outside North America as 
destinations  for  Canadian  products.  Here,  I'm  referring  not  only  to  China,  and  not  only  to 
commodities.  Canada  has  a  comparative  advantage  in  many  other  areas  –  for  example, 
communications, transportation (ground and air), education, and financial services, to name 
only a few – and we must exploit these. 
In  terms  of  the  economy,  there  are  increasing  signs  that  activity  has  begun  to  expand  in 
many countries in response to the substantial stimulus that has been provided. However, as I 
noted  earlier  in  my  remarks,  we  should  expect  a  protracted  recovery,  given  the  financial 
repair that needs to take place. 
In  Canada,  growth  has  resumed,  supported  by  stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  a 
well-functioning  financial  system,  the  relative  health  of  Canadian  balance  sheets,  firmer 
commodity prices, and a rebound in business and consumer confidence. As we signalled in 
our September interest rate decision, GDP growth in the second half of 2009 will likely be 
stronger than projected in our July Monetary Policy Report. It would appear, however, that 
some of this stronger growth reflects the effects of temporary factors, such as the impact of 
the U.S. "cash-for-clunkers" program on Canadian automotive production. In our September 
press  release,  we  also  reiterated  that,  conditional  on  the  outlook  for  inflation,  the  target 
overnight  rate  can  be  expected  to  remain  at  its  current  level  until  the  end  of  the  second 
quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.  
Broadly, the factors at play nationally are also evident in the recent developments of the B.C. 
economy.  As  elsewhere,  activity  in  British  Columbia  appears  to  be  picking  up  after  a  very 
difficult year for virtually all areas of the B.C. economy. Residential construction and demand 
for  existing  housing  are  improving,  with  a  dramatic  upswing  in  the  resale  market  that  is 
attributed  to  the  stimulative  effects  of  lower  mortgage  rates,  lower  selling  prices,  and 
improving  consumer  confidence.  Despite  the  completion  of  projects  related  to  the  2010 
                                                 
9   W.  R.  White,  "Should  Monetary  Policy  'Lean  or  Clean'?"  (Working  Paper  No.  34,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, August 2009). 
10   For  example,  under  certain  conditions,  price-level  targeting  could  possibly  provide  a  better  framework  for 
addressing  financial  stability  issues  without  jeopardizing  the  price  stability  credibility  of  the  monetary 
authorities. See Carney, op. cit., pp. 5-6. 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2009
Winter Olympics, it's expected that major public sector spending on transportation and other 
infrastructure  projects  will  contribute  to  growth  this  year  and  in  2010.  Firmer  commodity 
prices are also a positive. However, export markets remain weak, especially the U.S. market, 
and are only expected to strengthen gradually.  
Overall, in line with our July projection, we see positive economic growth in British Columbia 
next  year.  There  will  be  the  boost  from  the  Olympic  and  Paralympic  Winter  Games;  the 
results  of  the  Bank's  Business  Outlook  Survey  are  also  consistent  with  this  view.  More 
generally,  in  looking ahead,  further  progress  in  raising  business  and  consumer  confidence 
levels, and growth that is private-sector driven will be increasingly important in spurring full 
recovery here in British Columbia. 
Turning to the outlook for inflation, we see inflation returning to our 2 per cent target in the 
second quarter of 2011, with both upside and downside risks around this projection. Upside 
risks  include  a  faster-than-expected  recovery  in  consumer  and  business  confidence,  and 
further improvements in Canada's terms of trade. Downside risks are largely external, such 
as a risk of setbacks in the ongoing repair of the global financial system, and more persistent 
weakness  in  foreign  private  demand.  All  else  being  equal,  a  persistently  strong  Canadian 
dollar would also reduce real growth and delay the return of inflation to target.  
The  Bank  will  assess  the  balance  of  risks  to  inflation  in  its  upcoming  MPR,  which  we  will 
release two weeks from today. Even though we are at the effective lower bound for our policy 
rate, the Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.  
Conclusion 
The  Great  Recession  has  taught  us  many  lessons,  and  has  re-affirmed  the  importance  of 
international  co-operation,  where  Canada  has  much  to  contribute.  We  have  also  seen, 
through the turmoil of the past two years, that our policy frameworks have served us well. 
However,  we  must  improve  our  capacity  to  address  future  challenges.  This  includes 
strengthening  the  Bank's  policy  frameworks  for  promoting  both  price  stability  and  financial 
stability. This work is well under way at the Bank and internationally. 
The  Great  Recession  has  also  drawn  attention  to  the  importance  of  policies  that  promote 
economic flexibility and an innovative business environment. It has shown us, once again, 
how adverse shocks to the Canadian economy often come from outside and thus, why it is 
essential to continue to develop policies that encourage ready adaptation and adjustment to 
external  developments.  As  a  nation,  we  have  taken  major  steps  in  this  direction.  This  is 
particularly  true  for  the  economy  of  British  Columbia,  which  has  seen  considerable 
restructuring in recent years. We cannot now lag in these efforts.  
Finally, the experiences of the past two years have brought into sharp focus the reshaping of 
the  global  landscape  that  began  more  than  a  decade  ago.  Given  our  comparative 
advantages, this phenomenon offers us many opportunities, ones we cannot afford to waste. 
Thank you for your attention and I would be pleased to answer any questions.  
BIS Review 124/2009 
 7
