Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Development of the insurance business in 
Bahrain  
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at  the  Sixth  Annual  Gulf  Insurance  Forum  Developing  GCC  Insurance Markets  & 
Products, Manama, 4 November 2009. 
 Distinguished Guest, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good morning.  
It is a pleasure for me to be here today to address the Annual Gulf Insurance Forum. Now in 
its  6th  year,  the  forum  is  clearly  establishing  itself  as  an  important  event  in  the  Insurance 
market calendar. 
I would like to commend the organizers, the Co-Ordination Commission for Gulf Insurance 
and  Re-insurance  Companies  and  the  Bahrain  Insurance  Association  (BIA),  for  putting 
together a stimulating program, which will no doubt enrich the ongoing dialogue and debate 
on addressing key areas in the development of insurance markets and products in the GCC. 
I  would  also  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  the  delegates  and  the  many  distinguished 
speakers for taking the time to contribute to this forum. 
I  will  keep  my  remarks  brief  and  outline  some  of  the  highlights  in  the  development  of  the 
insurance business in Bahrain. 
Despite the recent financial turmoil in the financial sector, the insurance market in Bahrain 
has continued its double digit growth in both the conventional and Takaful markets. Following 
an  annual  increase  of  gross  premiums  of  34%  for  the  2008  year  end,  we  have  seen  a 
continuing growth trend for 2009 with a 9% growth as of the end of June 2009 compared to 
the same period in the previous year. Gross premiums for the Takaful sector have increased 
37% to BD 18 million as of the end of June 2009. Currently, takaful gross premiums account 
for almost 18% of total premiums, up from 14% a year ago. 
Medical insurance as well as life insurance have also contributed significantly to this growth 
in overall premiums. 
However, while underwriting results have continued their positive trends, the insurance firms 
needs to closely monitor their returns on investment, in order to ensure that they will continue 
to meet their liquidity and financial obligations towards their policyholders. 
We at the CBB believes that sound insurance markets need to have appropriate regulatory 
framework,  adequate  accounting  standards  and  a  strong  supervisory  infrastructure,  and 
proper  corporate  governance  that  should  be  long-term  oriented  focusing  not  only  on 
shareholders returns, but also on protecting policyholders. There is also a clear and urgent 
need  for  better  cooperation  among  supervisors  on  both  a  regional  and  global  basis  and  a 
coordinated approach in several of supervisory issues. 
I  hope  that  the  presentations  that  will  take  place  today  and  tomorrow  will  stimulate  and 
provide  further  ideas  for  the  insurance  community  in  further  developing  insurance  markets 
and products in the GCC Countries. All that remains is for me to wish you an interesting and 
productive  forum,  and  to  thank  the  organizers,  once  again,  for  putting  on  a  stimulating 
program. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 1
