Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Insurance and reinsurance in the aftermath of the global 
crisis 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
21st  Federation  of  Afro-Asian  Insurance  and  Reinsurance  Conference,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
20 October 2009. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here today at the 21st Federation of Afro-Asian Insurance and 
Reinsurance  Conference  in  Kuala  Lumpur.  This  Conference  reinforces  the  cooperation 
between  the  African  and  Asian  region  in  the  development  of  the  insurance  industry.  The 
theme of this year's conference, "the insurance and reinsurance environment in the aftermath 
of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis",  is  indeed  highly  relevant  as  stabilization  and 
signs of recovery are emerging in the world economy. The crisis has tested the robustness 
and  resilience  of  financial  systems  around  the  world.  The  far  reaching  implications  of  the 
financial crisis have shaken the foundations of the international financial system. The effects 
of the crisis on the financial systems and the re-thinking by the international community on 
the issues that have surfaced during the crisis will fundamentally change the future financial 
landscape. This Conference provides an important platform to discuss the key issues faced 
by the insurance and reinsurance industry, in particular, in the context of our two regions and 
to discuss the potential to leverage on our respective relative strengths and the opportunities 
that the new environment presents. 
While several of the advanced economies will continue to be weighed down by weak growth 
as the slow process of financial resolution continues and the high unemployment delays the 
recovery process, emerging economies, in general, and Asia in particular, have shown a high 
degree  of  resilience.  The  financial  intermediation  in  most  emerging  economies  have 
remained undisrupted and have continued to support the domestic economic activity. While 
the  emerging  economies  are  expected  to  lead  the  recovery  process,  there  needs  to  be  a 
reassessment of the strategies for future growth. Over reliance on export orientation to the 
traditional markets would increase the vulnerability to external developments. 
Going  forward,  emerging  economies  now  need  to  achieve  a  greater  balance  between 
external-oriented development strategies and the strengthening of our domestic demand. In 
Asia,  domestic  demand  in  most  emerging  economies  are  well  supported  by  the  positive 
demographic  structure,  the  rising  income  levels,  and  the  broadening  of  affluence.  This  is 
reinforced  by  the  low  levels  of  unemployment  and  inflation,  and  the  continued  access  to 
financing. This changing spending patterns in Asia have already led to the rise of a modern 
retail  sector  across  our  region.  In  addition,  high  savings  rates  exceeding  30%  of  Gross 
National Product for most countries in Asia, raises the potential for long-term sustainability of 
domestic  consumption  spending.  This  trend  has  also  supported  increased  intra-regional 
trade, investment and tourism that is reinforcing the growth prospects in the region. 
The  evolving  trends  and  encouraging  growth  prospects  in  our  respective  regions  present 
tremendous opportunities for the insurance and reinsurance industry. Of significance is that 
the  global  insurance  industry  on  the  whole  has  remained  resilient  throughout  the  current 
financial  crisis.  The  overall  aggregate  financial  position  of  insurers  in  the  crisis  affected 
countries  have  continued  to  be  strong,  and  generally  not  severely  affected  by  liquidity 
pressures  or  exposures  in  the  credit  derivatives  markets.  Earlier  losses  by  insurers  in 
financial market activities had resulted in a shift to "back-to-basics" models, focusing on core 
underwriting  business  instead  of  heavily  relying  on  investments  as  the  main  source  of 
earnings.  The  industry  had  also  benefited  from  the  subsequent  upturn  in  the  pricing  cycle 
which  has  fortified  the  capital  position  of  insurers  and  provided  the  support  to  maintaining 
sound  underwriting  standards.  These  conditions  have  placed  the  industry  on  a  much 
stronger position to withstand the challenges emanating from this global financial turmoil.  
BIS Review 131/2009 
 1
Domestic  and  external  conditions  are  however  expected  to  remain  volatile  for  some  time. 
Significant  uncertainties  will  persist  in  the  international  financial  markets  and  the  broader 
global economic conditions. These conditions will continue to pose significant challenges to 
the insurance industry. In this environment, maintaining strong capital buffers and sound risk 
management is even more imperative to ensuring the continued resilience of the insurance 
industry. With the adoption of Solvency II in Europe and its influence on solvency regimes in 
other jurisdictions, more countries, including Malaysia, have now moved to adopt more risk-
aligned  capital  regimes.  This  needs  to  be  reinforced  by  substantive  improvements  in  risk 
management practices, greater alignment between business strategy and risk, and greater 
appreciation by boards and senior management of insurers on risk issues given the growing 
complexity  and  increasing  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets  and  financial  sector 
players. 
The insurance industry has progressed significantly over the years and is well-positioned to 
supporting  both  the  recovery  process  and  future  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  As 
emerging  economies  rebalance  with  greater  emphasis  on  private  consumption,  the  social 
safety net will need to be strengthened, with insurance and pensions now having a greater 
role. An ageing population will also become an issue in the future. Globally, the number of 
the  aged  population  that  is  aged  65  and  above  is  expected  to  grow  dramatically  by  2050. 
Such  rapid  growth  will  have  major  economic  and  social  consequences  in  many  countries. 
Many nations are finding it increasingly difficult to provide adequately for this segment of the 
population  through  state-provided  social  security.  Planning  for  retirement  has  therefore 
become essential both for individuals as well as public policy to ensure sustainable financing 
to  meet  retirement  and  healthcare  needs  in  the  long  term.  An  enhanced  social  safety  net 
would  foster  greater  security  in  addition  to  reducing  the  need  for  significant  precautionary 
savings. This would in turn promote increased consumption spending. 
Prospects for higher insurance penetration rate in the region continue to remain positive. In 
2008, insurance premiums accounted for 5.95% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in Asia 
and  3.57%  of  GDP  in  Africa  compared  to  7.29%  in  America  and  7.46%  in  Europe.  The 
changing  priorities  of  the  growing  population  in  the  region,  largely  comprising  of  a  young 
workforce in the middle income group, have also enhanced the demand for investment-linked 
and  wealth  management  products.  These  opportunities  require  strategies  to  increase  the 
accessibility  of  insurance  products.  Worldwide,  insurers  have  successfully  leveraged  on 
bancassurance  and  internet  channels  to  enhance  insurance  penetration.  In  Malaysia, 
insurers can now freely enter into bancassurance arrangements with banking institutions and 
extend  their  branch  network  based  on  the  liberalisation  measures  announced  in  April  this 
year. 
In the more recent period, the role of insurance becomes increasingly more important, with 
the  increasing  frequency  of  catastrophies  that  have  been  associated  with  global  climate 
change and pandemics. According to a recent study, economic losses caused by natural and 
man-made  catastrophes  around  the  world  in  2008  amounted  to  USD269  billion.  Asia 
accounted for the top five worst catastrophes in terms of fatalities in 2008. The recent natural 
disasters in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands have also resulted in major destructions. 
Public-private  partnership  between  Government  and  the  insurance  industry  in  providing 
appropriate  insurance  schemes  and  developing  risk  mitigating  mechanisms  are  needed  to 
cope with these losses. Greater collaborative efforts among industry players in the region in 
the form of technical assistance and pooling of resources will increase capacity and expertise 
to underwrite such risks. Through such collaboration, the ability for the insurance industry to 
underwrite and reinsure risks based on the requirements of the region can be significantly 
enhanced.  
The growth of the takaful sector has also been commendable over these recent few years. 
Between  2004  and  2007,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of  the  global  takaful  industry  is 
estimated at 25%, compared to 10.3% for conventional insurance. With the proliferation of 
players  and  products,  and  the  rapid  pace  of  development  of  the  sukuk  market,  Malaysia's 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2009
takaful sector experienced an average annual growth of 20% from 2003 to 2008. Today, the 
takaful industry accounts for 11.5% of the overall insurance premiums. Takaful companies in 
Malaysia  have  also  ventured  into  international  markets  to  expand  their  business.  This 
positive outlook is expected to continue with the impending entry of new takaful players as 
well as from the increased participation of international industry players in the takaful market. 
Of  importance  is  that  the  industry  is  well  supported  by  a  robust  legal  and  regulatory 
framework that upholds Shariah principles. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis  there  has  also  been  a  rethinking  of  the 
regulatory structure of the financial system. The crisis has exposed serious shortcomings in 
the  supervisory  architecture.  Increased  consideration  is  being  given  to  a  more  integrated 
approach  to  the  prudential  regulation  of  the  insurance  industry  together  with  the  other 
segments of the financial sector. With the growing significance of the insurance industry, this 
would  result  in  more  consistent  prudential  standards  for  regulation.  In  addition,  there  has 
been an ongoing convergence in the financial sector as traditional boundaries continue to be 
eroded by changes in institutional structures, shifting legal barriers and product innovations. 
The  proliferation  of  conglomerate  arrangements  have  also  increased  the  need  for  more 
consistent  regulatory  approaches  across  industry  boundaries  to  reduce  the  prospect  of 
regulatory arbitrage and inefficiencies. 
France and Germany have recently made announcements on the consideration to place the 
supervisory responsibility of the insurance sector with the Central Bank. This has however, 
drawn some resistance from insurers on grounds that" the concentration of responsibilities 
would  create  new  conflicts  of  interest  for  the  financial  sector".  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has 
been the supervisory authority of the banking industry since its establishment in 1959 and for 
the  insurance  industry  since  1988.  This  integrated  approach  within  the  Central  Bank  has 
enabled  us  to  form  a  more  complete  assessment  of  the  risks  to  financial  stability  while 
ensuring consistency in the treatment of risks across the different industries to avert risks to 
the overall financial stability. 
The  rapid  pace  of  changes  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  environment  requires 
industry  players  to  continually  upgrade  their  expertise.  Cooperation  in  this  area  between 
industry players can contribute towards bringing the insurance industry to the next frontier. 
Since its establishment in 1964, the Federation of Afro-Asian Insurers and Reinsurers has 
fostered  a  strong  cooperation  among  insurance  industry  players  in  Africa  and  Asia.  Such 
expertise  may  indeed  be  tapped  through  such  regional  platforms,  bringing  with  it  mutual 
benefit to the insurance industry in both markets. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 3
