Andrew Bailey: Banknotes in circulation – still rising. What does this 
mean for the future of cash? 
Keynote address by  Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director  for Banking Services and Chief 
Cashier  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Banknote  2009  conference,  Washington  DC, 
6 December 2009. 
 I am grateful to Helen Allen, Nikki Brownlie, Victoria Cleland, Nick Davey, Andrew Dent, Iain de Weymarn, Lee 
Dobney,  Andrew  Hauser,  Matthew  Hunt,  Orla  May,  Sally  Reid  and  Andrew  Wardlow  for  their  comments  and 
assistance.  
It is a great pleasure to be the keynote speaker at Banknote 2009. I want to use my time 
today to consider the implications of developments in banknote circulation for the future of 
cash.  In  particular,  I  am  going  to  examine  what  I  regard  as  the  apparent  paradox  of 
banknotes, namely that the value of notes in circulation continues to rise, while the evidence 
we have suggests that the use of banknotes as a payment mechanism is declining gently, 
not I should say dramatically. I am going to illustrate this using our experience of Bank of 
England banknotes. There are three parts to my remarks. I am going to begin by describing 
trends  in  banknote  circulation  and  use.  Then  I  will  consider  the  paradox  in  these  trends. 
Finally, I will draw out some key challenges that we face in managing the circulation of Bank 
of England notes. Let me say at the outset that my very clear objective in terms of Bank of 
England notes is to maintain the integrity of our banknotes, and an important part of that is 
meeting the public demand. I am not trying to promote or kill our notes.  
The trends in banknote circulation and use  
I am going to talk about trends in banknote circulation in the context of the roles of money, as 
a medium of exchange (payments) and a store of value. Chart 1 illustrates the pattern of the 
total value of Bank of England notes in circulation over the last forty years. The striking thing 
is the acceleration of growth over the last fifteen years. This may come as something of a 
surprise to the “cash is dead” lobby. This chart suggests that nothing could be further from 
the truth. The total value of our circulation was around £15bn in the mid 1990s, while today it 
is around £45bn. As the chart also shows, this increase can for the most part be attributed to 
one denomination, the £20 note.  
BIS Review 162/2009 
  1
But it is important to put this increase in notes in circulation into context. Chart 2 does this by 
plotting the value of notes in circulation as a share of the nominal GDP of the UK, again over 
the last forty years. What we now see is a decline in the value of notes from 6% of nominal 
GDP  in  1970  to  a  low  point  of  2.4%  in  the  mid-1990s.  Since  then,  there  has  been  a 
stabilisation and small increase, followed by a noticeable increase over the last two years, to 
3.2% of nominal GDP. We can tell a story about inflation in the UK economy to explain the 
long-run trend. The decline in the stock of notes in circulation relative to nominal GDP came 
in the high inflation period of the 1970s, running on into the early 80s. As inflation erodes the 
value of the currency, the incentive to hold banknotes declined markedly in a period of high 
inflation. Likewise, this was a period that saw a marked decline in the use of cash for wage 
payments.  The  move  to  an  environment  of  low  inflation  has  subsequently  stabilised  that 
situation.  
 This pattern of the note issue as a percentage of nominal GDP reveals that something quite 
noticeable has happened over the last two years. Chart 3 focuses on this development by 
plotting  the  course  of  the  note  issue  to  GDP  percentage  over  the  recessions  of  the  early 
1980s and early 1990s and the current experience. The contrast of the current experience is 
striking.  Two  features  of  the  current  situation  strike  me  as  most  relevant  in  explaining  this 
development: first, lower levels of public confidence in the banking system; and second, very 
low interest rates which thereby reduce the opportunity cost of holding banknotes (as a non-
interest bearing asset).  
 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2009
  
I should add two important points at this stage. First, my understanding is that this pattern 
over the last two years is reflected in other major currencies. Second, as I will come back to 
later, banknotes are central-bank money in a form that can be held by the public, in other 
words the retail equivalent of reserve accounts at the central bank, the latter being wholesale 
central-bank  money.  Banknotes  are  therefore  a  non-interest  bearing  store  of  value.  In  the 
current  recession,  the  demand  for  banknotes  has  risen,  and  it  is  likely  that  this  reflects 
demand for central-bank money as a store of value. We can add some further evidence to 
support this story by looking at the pattern of behaviour of the various denominations of Bank 
of England notes. We issue four denominations – £5, £10, £20 and £50. Chart 4 shows the 
growth rate of each denomination over the last nearly four years. The striking feature of this 
chart is the growth rate of the highest denomination note, the £50, which had picked up from 
the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the  summer  of  2007,  and  then  rose  further  from  last 
autumn, in the wake of the failure of Lehman. Since the summer of 2007, the total value of 
our £50 notes in circulation has risen from £7bn to £9bn. Again, I believe this is a pattern 
seen in the high denomination notes of other currencies. Chart 5 shows the same story, but 
this time expressing it in terms of the contribution of each denomination to overall growth. 
The yellow contribution shows the role of the £50. This strikes me as pretty good prima facie 
evidence that there has been an increase in demand for banknotes as a store of value.  
BIS Review 162/2009 
 3
    
So far, I have told the story of trends in demand for banknotes over the last forty years in 
terms more of the macroeconomics of demand for notes as central bank money. Now I want 
to turn to the more micro elements of banknote use. The first thing to say here, as Chart 6 
illustrates, is that over the last twenty years there has been a major change in the method of 
distributing banknotes to the public. At the start of the 1990s there were under 20,000 ATMs 
in  the  UK,  whereas  now  the  number  is  over  60,000.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  current 
decade, the major growth has been among the independent ATM deployers, as opposed to 
financial institution operated machines.  
 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2009
  
And  as  Chart  7  shows,  ATM  withdrawals  now  account  for  around  70%  of  all  cash 
acquisitions  by  individuals  in  the  UK,  compared  with  25%  in  the  early  1990s.  We  can  all 
observe around us the growth of the ATM industry, but it is worth considering how influential 
it  has  been  on  the  circulation  of  banknotes.  First,  the  rise  of  the  ATM  has  fundamentally 
changed and modernised the distribution of what is sometimes regarded as an old-fashioned 
means of payment. Second, it is likely that the growth of ATMs may have led to an increase 
in notes in circulation for another reason.  
 
 BIS Review 162/2009 
  5
When  we  talk  to  ATM  operators  about  their  business  model  they  stress  that  the  least 
acceptable outcome is for their ATMs to run out of notes. As a consequence, ATMs are re-
stocked  well  before  they  run  out.  This  means  that  the  overall  ATM  estate  is  holding  what 
could be described as idle inventory stock, but these are defined as notes in circulation. But I 
should be clear that I don’t have enough evidence to prove to you that the stock:output ratio 
for  banknotes  has  gone  up,  which  would  run  counter  to  the  story  in  almost  all  other 
industries.  
I want to move on now to trends in cash usage (I am using “cash” here to mean banknotes 
and coin). Chart 8 shows survey evidence for the use of cash in retail transactions in the UK 
over the last 25 years. In terms of the share of the total volume of transactions, cash has 
fallen from over 80% in the mid 1980s to 60% currently. In value terms, cash accounted for 
around  9%  of  all  retail  transactions  in  the  early  1990s,  whereas  it  is  around  4%  currently. 
Cash is generally used for small-value transactions. The latest evidence suggests that the 
average  value  of  a  cash  transaction  is  around  £9,  with  93%  of  payments  under  £5  being 
made  in  cash.  One  in  five  adults  in  the  UK  report  that  they  use  only  cash  for  day-to-day 
transactions, with this group heavily focused on teenagers/young adults and the elderly. The 
survey evidence also indicates that more credit-constrained individuals prefer to use cash, as 
a budgeting tool based, I think, on the principle that with cash you can only spend what you 
have.  
 
 The paradox of banknotes  
This quick survey of trends in banknote demand and use leaves us with what I regard as the 
paradox of banknotes. The total value of Bank of England banknotes in circulation continues 
to rise, but their use in transactions is falling gradually. To recap, I have put forward some 
arguments that seek to explain this paradox. From a macroeconomic perspective, sustained 
low inflation has increased confidence in the real value of the currency, while more recently 
demand for banknotes has risen during this recession, and particularly for high denomination 
notes,  reflecting  loss  of  confidence  in  banks,  and  very  low  interest  rates.  ATMs  have 
changed banknote issuance. And, banknote use is more concentrated among the young, the 
6 
 BIS Review 162/2009
elderly,  and  those  on  low  incomes.  I  would  add  one  other  thought  on  the  demand  for 
banknotes,  which  is  more  to  do  with  human  psychology.  I  suspect  most  people,  however 
much they use cards, feel a degree of comfort from knowing that they also have cash in their 
wallet or purse, even if it is as a back-up.  
What does this analysis tell us about future demand for cash? As a central bank responsible 
for  the  issuance  of  banknotes,  two  principles  are  at  the  front  of  our  thinking:  first,  that  we 
issue central bank money, in the form of claims on the Bank of England; and second, that in 
doing so we must meet the public’s demand for our notes. By issuing central-bank money, 
we are providing both a means of payment and a store of value.  
But I think we should recognise that the paradox of banknotes that I have described indicates 
that there may well be a limit to the growth of the value of notes in circulation insofar as the 
use  of  banknotes  as  a  means  of  payment  is  not  increasing.  This  is,  though,  a  broad 
assessment, and I would not wish to offer a judgment on the level at which the demand of 
the public to hold more banknotes will peak. An important reason for this uncertainty is that, 
as recent experience indicates, the demand for banknotes as a store of value is dependent 
on the state of the economy and the financial system. This is a challenge for central banks 
because we have to manage our own contingency stocks based on a view of likely future 
demand. This is something to which central banks have had to devote more attention over 
the last two years.  
What does it mean to meet the public’s demand for banknotes  
I  want  to  turn  now  to  considering  what  it  means  to  meet  the  public’s  demand  for  our 
banknotes.  I  take  this  very  seriously,  with  the  principle  that  the  public  knows  best  what  it 
wants in terms of what it requires from its banknotes.  
I think it is reasonable to say that, in the past, meeting the public’s demand for notes was for 
most part focused on ensuring that the value of notes demanded was available. At the Bank 
of England we have outsourced much of our role in note distribution for 27 years and our 
note  distribution  schemes  have  been  designed  around  the  objective  of  meeting  public 
demand for a value of notes. There is nothing at all wrong with this objective; indeed, it is the 
heart of what we do on note distribution. But increasingly, we are trying to meet two other 
objectives as well: maintaining a satisfactory physical quality of our notes in circulation, and 
meeting the public’s demand for different denominations, ie the denominational mix.  
There are two developments which stand out for me in terms of the physical quality of notes. 
First, modern ATMs can more safely dispense notes of a physical quality that as the issuing 
authority I would not wish to see in circulation (for example, heavily soiled notes). This is a 
mundane  point,  but  the  latest  ATMs  are  harder  to  jam,  unlike  their  predecessors.  On  the 
whole, financial institutions do not dispense what we regard as unfit notes, even though their 
ATMs might be able to do so, but as the issuing authority we now have to pay more attention 
to ensuring that this does not happen. The second development represents the connection 
between  the  physical  quality  of  notes  and  denominational  mix.  We  have  most  difficulty 
getting our low denomination note, the £5, into circulation. The main reason for this problem 
is that few ATMs dispense £5s. The link to quality comes about because once our £5s enter 
circulation, they stay in circulation and exchange hands more times before they return into 
the  wholesale  cash  distribution  system  for  fitness  sorting,  and  thus  can  be  taken  out  of 
circulation as unfit or re-circulated as a fit note. Put simply, since there are relatively few £5 
notes entering circulation they stay in circulation and are not banked and fitness sorted as 
regularly  as  they  should  be.  Chart  9  illustrates  this  problem.  It  shows  over  the  last  nearly 
fifteen  years  the  trend  in  how  many  times  per  year  on  average  banknotes  of  each 
denomination are processed through the wholesale cash centre fitness sorting process. The 
intuition we think is that the lowest value note should be sorted most often, and the highest 
value note least often. The reason for this order is that the lowest value note will be nearest 
to  a  pure  transactional  instrument,  and  the  highest  value  note  nearest  to  a  pure  store  of 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 7
value instrument. As the chart indicates, the intuition holds for all denominations except the 
£5. On average, at £10 note passes through a cash centre for sorting nine times a year, a 
£20 four and a half times, and a £50 just under once a year. But the £5 has seen a decline 
from five times a year in the mid-1990s to one and a half times a year now. This goes a long 
way to explain the problem we have with the £5. We need to see more dispensed so that 
they are less scarce and therefore they return to cash centres for sorting more often.  
 
  
In  the  last  few  years  we  have  had  some  success  in  increasing  the  total  number  of  £5s  in 
circulation. The overall value of £5s in circulation had been stuck at around £1bn since the 
early  1990s.  In  the  last  two  years  it  has  risen  to  £1.3bn.  But  the  evidence  from  turnover 
indicates that we have a lot more to do. Recently, we have therefore run two pilot schemes. 
One is with a major bank, which has agreed to stock a proportion of its ATMs with £5s and 
examine  what  affect  this  change  would  have  on  its  cash  business.  The  results  to  date 
suggest that the business case for stocking some ATMs with £5s is stronger than previously 
thought.  
At the same time, we have carried out a second pilot study. This has been focused on the 
business case for major retailers ordering more £5s to use as change. A major supermarket 
chain has conducted a trial which involves supplying more £5s to many of its stores. Again, 
the  results  appear  to  have  been  a  success.  Using  more  £5s  as  change  has  appeared  to 
slightly speed up the overall processing of payments at the checkout and appears to be well 
received by customers.  
I am very grateful to HSBC and Sainsbury’s for their help with these two pilots. In the New 
Year I hope and expect that we will take these examples to other financial institutions and 
major retailers to make the case for a change of policy towards issuing £5s. This is important 
because  my  assessment  is  that  there  is  a  good  deal  of  aversion  among  the  commercial 
sector to change in this area. Yet our evidence suggests that the public wants more of them 
and of a better quality. To achieve that objective we need to see more £5s dispensed from 
ATMs  and  by  retailers  in  change.  With  the  results  of  these  two  pilot  exercises,  I  think  we 
have  the  evidence  to  press  the  case  for  raising  the  dispense  of  £5s,  and  we  will  do  this 
alongside reviewing our distribution scheme to ensure that the incentives for note distribution 
are properly aligned across the denominations.  
8 
 BIS Review 162/2009
The  story  of  the  £5  illustrates  the  growing  importance  of  denominational  mix  in  our  note 
distribution policy. We want to work with the commercial sector to ensure that the public’s 
demand for a balanced denominational mix of notes is met.  
In conclusion, notes are a big business for central banks. They are high profile in the eye of 
the public. There is an apparent paradox in that the value of notes in circulation has been 
rising year after year at the same time that evidence suggests that the use of notes to pay for 
transactions is declining. I have offered some explanations for this paradox which highlight 
that banknotes are also a store of value since they are central bank money. But at the same 
time the objectives of our central bank distribution scheme have grown in number to embrace 
the physical quality of notes in circulation and the denominational mix. The last of these – 
denominational  mix  –  poses  the  biggest  challenge,  but  in  the  UK  I  believe  we  now  have 
evidence to support the business case for ATM and retailer dispense of £5s.  
And, finally, I am sometimes asked why this matters to the Bank of England? After all, I can 
assure you that in the current financial conditions we are not short of difficult challenges. The 
answer  is  simple.  We  should  not  forget  that  our  job  is  to  ensure  that  confidence  in  our 
currency is maintained – and crucial to that is satisfying the public’s demand for our notes. 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 9
