Heng Swee Keat: New strategies for new economic realities 
Remarks by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the 16th Annual World Islamic Banking Conference, Bahrain, 7 December 2009. 
 H.E. Governor Rasheed M. Al Maraj, Central Bank of Bahrain, 
H.E. Aset O. Issekeshev, Minister of Industry and Trade, Republic of Kazakhstan, 
Your Excellencies 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
1. 
Islamic Banking Conference. 
Good  morning.  I  am  honoured  to  speak  at  this  plenary  session  of  the  16th  World 
Global crisis and recovery 
2. 
The theme of “New Strategies for New Economic Realities” is timely. Last year, the 
financial crisis that enveloped the world was unprecedented in scale, complexity and speed 
of transmission. Major financial institutions have failed and others continue to face significant 
challenges ahead. 
3. 
The  outlook  seems  better  now  than  a  year  ago.  Equity  markets  have  rallied  and 
credit spreads narrowed. Many Asian and GCC economies have recovered more quickly and 
strongly than expected with China and India leading the way. ASEAN-5 and GCC countries 
are expected to post small positive growth in 2009. Going into 2010, growth in ASEAN-5 and 
GCC is estimated to rebound sharply to 4% and 5.2% respectively. 
4. 
However,  sentiments  remain  volatile  and  investors  react  sharply  to  bad  news,  as 
recent events have shown. The global de-leveraging of financial institutions is still on-going. 
The  IMF  has  highlighted  that  global  banks  and  financial  institutions  have  yet  to  recognize 
more than half of their total estimated write-downs of US$3.4 trillion. So far, growth has been 
supported  by  the  massive  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus.  Indeed,  studies  of  past  crises 
suggest that economic recoveries in the aftermath of financial crises tended to be protracted. 
Many analysts therefore expect global growth to be slower in the coming years. 
5. 
and what is the role of financial institutions, especially Islamic financial institutions? 
6. 
Even with slower global growth, emerging Asian and Middle Eastern economies are 
expected  to  grow  at  higher  rates  than  advanced  economies.  There  are  many  positives 
working  in  their  favour  –  abundant  natural  resources  and  monetary  reserves;  young  and 
dynamic  populations,  growing  consumer  demand, 
infrastructural  programmes 
underway in some areas like water, energy, transport, education and healthcare. Generally, 
balance sheets of corporates and households are in better shape than it was in earlier years. 
7. 
With  the  growing  importance  of  emerging  economies,  we  will  see  changes  in  the 
patterns  of  trade  and  development.  There  will  be  stronger  “south-south”  trade.  The  old 
pattern  of  “flying  geese”  development  in  Asian  newly-industrialised  economies,  where 
developed  economies  bring  in  investment  and  technologies,  will  give  way  to  a  more 
variegated pattern, where companies in the emerging markets will invest in other markets. 
We already see many corporates from emerging markets developing disruptive technologies 
and business models that address market needs in very competitive ways. It will be a more 
diverse and vibrant landscape in the future. 
Against this backdrop, what should be the growth strategies of emerging economies, 
large 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 1
However,  growth  is  not  to  be  taken  for  granted.  Many  challenges  remain.  Let  me 
8. 
suggest three areas where policy makers and financial practitioners in the Middle East and 
Asia can work together to contribute to growth and development. 
9. 
First, at the recently-concluded APEC meetings in Singapore, it was recognised that 
sustainable global growth will require structural reforms and a new growth paradigm. We can 
no  longer  rely  on  export-led  growth  in  developing  countries  and  high  consumption  in  the 
developed  world  driven  by  excessive  leverage  and  asset  appreciation.  Big  economies  like 
China  and  India  have  greater  scope  to  restructure  their  economies  and  raise  domestic 
demand. Smaller economies such as Singapore and Bahrain have to re-orientate themselves 
and respond nimbly to new opportunities in global markets. 
10. 
In  both  the  GCC  and  Asian  regions,  the  funding  needs  to  support  growth  and 
development are large. For instance, the Asian Development Bank has projected that Asia 
requires  US$8  trillion  of  new  infrastructure  over  the  next  decade.  Such  investments  are 
important  for  economic  growth,  as  well  as  for  raising  the  quality  of  life  by  providing  better 
access  to  education,  health  care  and  sanitation.  Hence,  as  part  of  the  structural  reforms, 
governments need to put in place investment frameworks that promote and mitigate the risk 
of such long term investments. 
11. 
Second,  proper  financing  structure  for  such  investment  is  crucial.  Today,  there  is 
strong risk appetite for emerging market assets. National authorities are concerned with the 
risks  of  asset  inflation  and  volatility  of  capital  flows.  But  properly  structured,  these  provide 
unique opportunities to channel the much-needed capital for growth and development. In this 
regard, Islamic finance which has its central emphasis on supporting real economic activities 
in trade, investment and the growth of productive capacities is especially relevant. 
12. 
However,  effective  intermediation  of  capital  requires  focused  attention  on  the 
management  of  risks.  As  I  mentioned  in  my  speech  at  the  previous  WIBC,  many  risks  – 
including  credit,  market,  liquidity,  operational  and  reputational  risks  are  common  to  both 
conventional  and 
finance.  Overly-optimistic  projections  of  growth,  or  over-
concentration  in  particular  sectors,  or  mismatches  in  assets  and  liabilities  can  give  rise  to 
risks that can damage financial institutions. The crisis serves as a valuable pause from the 
frenzy  of  financial  activities.  This  allows  us  to  re-evaluate  risk  management  practices  in 
individual  financial  institutions,  as  well  as  the  systemic  linkages  across  institutions, 
instruments and markets. 
13. 
Central  banks  and  regulators  need  to  cooperate  closely  so  that  risk  assessments 
can  be  shared  and  common  action  taken  where  necessary.  The  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain 
(CBB)  and  MAS  have  enjoyed  very  good  relations,  and  have  worked  to  promote  Islamic 
Finance. The CBB is a highly-regarded central bank and integrated financial regulator. I am 
pleased that the MAS and CBB will be signing a Memorandum of Understanding later today 
to  build  on  our  existing  strong  relationship  to  enhance  supervisory  cooperation  and 
information-sharing. 
14. 
The  third  area  relates  to  close  interactions  among  industry  practitioners  and  the 
development  of  ground  knowledge.  While  there  are  many  opportunities  for  trade  and 
investment among emerging economies, the business linkages are only beginning to grow. 
Forums  such  as  the  WIBC  provide  a  valuable  platform  for  practitioners  to  build  their 
knowledge of each region and the business leaders. At the same time, for large-scale and 
long-term investments such as in infrastructure, effective knowledge of partners and on-the-
ground presence are important ways of mitigating risks. 
Islamic 
Recent developments in Singapore 
15. 
Let  me  therefore  take  this  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  about  developments  in 
Singapore. As an international financial centre in Asia, Singapore seeks to develop Islamic 
finance  by  leveraging  on  our  existing  strengths  in  banking,  insurance,  asset  management 
2 
 163/2009
and capital markets. Although relatively new, we have seen steady progress. MAS launched 
its  Sukuk  early  this  year.  The  Islamic  Development  Bank  also  issued  a  $200m  Singapore 
dollar-denominated trust certificate. In May, Olam International, a local trading firm tied up 
with the Islamic Bank of Asia to launch a Commodity Murabaha based on agricultural trade 
flows. Just last month, Singapore’s Keppel T&T and Saudi Arabia’s Al Rajhi Holding Group 
announced  an  agreement  to  establish  a  joint  venture  asset  management  company  to 
manage  the  world’s  first  Shariah-compliant  data  centre  fund.  Other  Singapore  companies 
and Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) are also using Shariah-compliant structures for 
their financing needs. 
16. 
We were honoured to host the 5th Islamic Financial Services Board Annual Summit 
in May. At this Summit, MAS issued a consolidated set of guidelines to provide greater clarity 
and certainty on how our banking regulations apply to Islamic banking. Islamic finance was 
also  featured  when  the  Paris  EUROPLACE  International  Financial  Forum  was  held  in 
Singapore in October. We will continue to work with fellow regulators and the private sector 
to fine-tune our regulatory approach and to develop the infrastructure and talent to facilitate 
the growth of Islamic Finance in Singapore. 
17. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  bringing  leaders  in  finance  and  business  together  to 
understand the developments in each region provides a valuable platform for collaboration. I 
am therefore pleased that MEGA Events has decided to bring the first Annual WIBC Asian 
Summit  (Asia  WIBC  2010)  to  Singapore.  Islamic  finance  will  provide  an  increasingly 
important bridge in the growing connectivity between the Middle East and Asia. Singapore is 
pleased  to  help  catalyse  deeper  relations  between  these  two  high-growth  regions.  Asia 
WIBC  will  provide  a  unique  platform  for  industry  players  from  more  established  centres  of 
Islamic  finance  to  share  their  experiences.  I  look  forward  to  welcoming  all  of  you  to  the 
inaugural Asia WIBC in Singapore next June. 
Conclusion 
18. 
In  conclusion,  the  global  economy  is  recovering  gradually,  though  there  remain 
many risks ahead. Emerging economies are expected to grow well, but we need to tackle the 
many structural challenges. Governments need to undertake structural reforms. The financial 
sector needs to facilitate the flow of funds into growth areas, and Islamic Finance will play an 
important role. By working closely to deepen risk management, and to enhance the ground 
knowledge in each region, we can contribute to sustainable growth. On this note, I wish you 
another very successful conference in Bahrain. 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 3
