Ardian Fullani: Developments in the Albanian banking system 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Third Open Forum with 
the banking system in Albania, Tirana, 13 October 2009. 
 Dear participants,  
It’s  a  special  pleasure  for  me  to  open  the  proceedings  of  the  3rd  forum  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania’s dialogue with the banking system. Our communication with the market and its top 
administrators has now turned into a tradition, to share ideas and present attitudes related to 
developments affecting the banking and financial activity in general. 
Such meetings are an important instrument that carry out an inter-institutional communication 
and simultaneously create a window of communication with the public at large. They serve 
for identifying issues posing a challenge to the overall financial market operation and are a 
precaution for finding solutions, aiming at coordinating the interests of parties operating in the 
financial market, with the financial stability strengthening as the final goal.  
The 3rd forum we are holding today is the continuation forum. Allow me to remind you of the 
first forum, which, I would label, without any hesitation, as the forum that consolidated the 
financial  stability  foundations  in  Albania.  Its  conclusions  highlighted  many  pre-emptive 
measures,  which  in  the  course  of  time,  upon  global  crisis  precipitation,  resulted  of  an 
extremely immune importance.  
The 2nd forum recorded another salient achievement, having the confirmation of scrupulous 
implementation  by  the  banking  system  of  all  previous  tasks  and  recommendations  as  the 
main motif. This forum, which was held on the eve of global turmoil outburst, indicated that 
the Albanian banking system had significantly increased its resilience.  
It addressed important matters related to:  
• 
• 
• 
Today’s forum takes place in an important moment of the banking and financial system. After 
a  hard  year,  it  seems  that  the  situation  is  becoming  eventually  normal.  Therefore,  I  am 
confident that, figuratively, the third forum will have the consolidation of public confidence in 
the Albanian banking system as the main motif. Achievements in this regard are not lacking. 
Statistics  show  that  deposit  level  is  approaching  steadily  to  its  prior-crisis  level,  while  ALL 
credit livening-up is continuing.  
Dear participants, 
Today’s meeting is held after some important financial and economic events dictated by the 
global  crisis.  Now  that  the  situation  has  cleared  up  and  has  entered  into  an  improvement 
stage, a thorough analysis is being made about its causes, about public authorities’ reaction 
and about actions to be taken, in order to raise the global financial system’s resilience.  
Now,  allow  me  to  deal  briefly  with  the  main  features  of  this  unmatched  crisis,  and  then 
continue with some arguments on the functioning of the Albanian financial system and some 
necessary regulations for its further perfection. 
The  crisis  originated  in  the  USA  through  the  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble,  bringing  a 
number of existing problems to the fore. Now, it has become clear that global imbalances of 
currency  flows,  affected  by  irresistible  behaviour  of  expenditures  or  savings  between 
developed and developing ones, have led in the course of time to extremely easing monetary 
Transparency and customer services,  
Risks related to foreign currency credit and consumer credit, as well as  
Interbank market functions and monetary policy transmission in the economy.  
BIS Review 129/2009 
 1
policies  in  advanced  economies,  which  have  further  deepened  these  imbalances,  thus 
leading  to  rise  in  the  financial  activity  risk,  while  searching  for  a  higher  return  from 
investment.  
Innovations  in  financial  products  reflected  inside  or  outside  financial  institutions’  balance 
sheets,  found  the  necessary  mechanism  to  conceal  the  real  risk  size  in  the  extreme 
stratification.  
Management structures’ remuneration policies of financial institutions that were at the heart 
of the crisis supported the aggressiveness for short-term and unsteady profits on the back of 
the need for a better understanding of risk, intending a positive performance and long-term 
investments  stability.  Several  market  mechanisms  resulted  non-efficient 
to  precede 
developments in some global-wide institutions. Pronounced weaknesses were reflected even 
in financial market regulatory authorities, who believed that difficulties would be sorted out by 
a  market  discipline  mechanism  or  by  a  greater  reliance  on  internal  models  of  financial 
industry  assessment.  Also,  it  has  become  clear  that  the  supervisory  regulatory  authorities 
have not paid due attention to developments that affect the overall financial system, focusing 
more  on  certain  institutions’  behaviour.  From  this  viewpoint,  it  is  deemed  that  actions  to 
monitor the overall price performance of non-financial assets, the way of estimating them and 
recording  them  to  bank  balance  sheets  have  been  insufficient  to  pre-empt  unjustified 
increases and to avert their procyclic moves.  
All  these  elements  are  regarded  as  conclusions  that  go  beyond  certain  jurisdictions  and 
require  a  global  response  in  the  context  of  increased  financial  integration  and  ongoing 
economic globalization.  
Emerging market economies are affected differently from this turmoil. The crisis shudder hit 
harder the countries with an economy damaged from macroeconomic and financial policies, 
with decreased competitiveness, reduced space for financial stimulation, with an unbalanced 
economic growth or an underlined dependence on foreign financing resources to stimulate 
an unrestrained economic and financial expansion.  
In the face of an extremely difficult financial situation, spread swiftly on the entire real sector 
of the global economy, public authorities of advanced economies took extraordinary actions 
to ensure financial market functioning and attenuate the financial distress.  
Through  central  bank  actions,  low-cost  liquidity  was  injected  into  the  markets,  while 
governments took extraordinary actions to provide backup capital to financial institutions and 
to support domestic aggregate demand. Moreover, some emerging market economies, with 
robust  economies  and  with  an  upward  share  to  the  global  economy,  have  supported  the 
domestic  demand  through  their  stimulating  policies  and  have  preserved  their  economic 
growth,  playing  an  important  role  in  mitigating  the  global  crisis  consequences.  Along  with 
extraordinary  measures taken to withstand the crisis effects in the short run, authorities of 
advanced economies and international financial institutions have been strongly committed to 
change the way of global financial system functioning and its regulating superstructure. Many 
financial  market  regulation  and  supervision  standards  are  expected  to  change,  aiming  at 
putting  necessary  boundaries  to  financial  market  dynamism  and  innovations,  in  order  to 
ensure system’s stability and its resilience to various risks.  
In  more  details,  the  goals  of  these  changes  will  be:  strengthen  the  mechanisms  that  raise 
financial  system  stability;  duly  orient  the  stimuli  that  determine  decision-making  in  the 
financial activity and decrease procyclicality in it. Changes to the regulatory and supervisory 
superstructure  are  aimed  at  strengthening  the  institutional  mechanism,  paying  greater 
attention to systemic risks and global-wide financial institutions. Better conditions will be set 
for  supervisory  standards  convergence  and  the  cooperation  among  regulatory  authorities 
operating  in  different  jurisdictions  will  be  strengthened.  At  the  same  time,  the  role  of 
international  financial  institutions  will  be  oriented  towards  financial  crisis  management  and 
their resources will be adapted to this end.  
2 
 BIS Review 129/2009
For  many  reasons,  which  converge  in  ongoing  processes  of  financial  integration  and 
economic globalization, no country can pretend to stand beyond these developments.  
In such a case, what at the very beginning could be perceived as a more relaxing financial 
environment  that  would  provide  a  competitive  priority,  would  soon  leave  the  place  to 
recycling of problems that were at the root of this crisis, decreased investors’ confidence and 
increased  financial  and  social  costs  for  recovery.  Naturally,  each  country  will  adapt  these 
standards to the degree of current financial system development, its composition and depth, 
as  well  as  to  its  outlook.  It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  these  measures  would  be 
insufficient, if not accompanied by more general policies, aiming at diversifying sources that 
contribute  to  economic  equilibrium  growth,  financing  the  economic  agents,  improving  the 
legal framework of business development and following sound macroeconomic policies. 
Allow  me  now  to  deal  with  the  situation  of  our  financial  system  and  share  with  you  some 
stances, which we have generally discussed even previously. The stagnant situation of the 
financial  system  during  the  last  year  was  dictated  by  the  banking  system  performance, 
because of its weight. The rest of the financial system, represented by insurance companies 
and other non-bank financial institutions, underwent a good growth. Regardless of this, their 
share to the financial system remains low.  
The banking sector was faced with liquidity constraints in the last quarter of 2008 and in the 
first quarter of 2009. Deposit withdrawal from the banking system was withstood, thanks to 
liquid assets adequacy, capital availability and Bank of Albania’s intervention to supply the 
market  with  liquidity,  aiming  at  maintaining  its  stability  and  mitigating  any  expected 
contraction of the banking system’s intermediary role. To this end, the Bank of Albania has 
supported the demand of the banking system for liquidity through open market operations. 
After cutting interest rate by 0.5 percentage point in January 2009 and mitigating inflationary 
pressures at home, the monetary policy paid special attention to financial stability, keeping 
base interest rate unchanged for the whole period. Thus, it was aimed to support the demand 
for financial assets denominated in the national currency in the short run. At the same time, 
the  Bank  of  Albania  carried  out  with  a  strong  supervisory  regime  on  banking  sector 
developments.  
Such a stance supported the efficient management of liquidity situation of the banking sector, 
oriented credit towards national currency and influenced the maintaining of financial stability 
parameters and capitalization of activity. The situation entered into a qualitative improvement 
stage, following the re-starting of the process of public deposit growth in the banking sector. 
This  process,  which  took  place  gradually  and  steadily  in  the  second  quarter  of  2009, 
continued  at  satisfactory  paces.  During  this  period,  banks  acted  with  due  prudence  and 
accountability.  
Therefore, I would like to avail myself of the opportunity to thank you, the staff you manage, 
as well as the shareholders of your institutions, for their commitment and cooperation during 
this period.  
However, the liquidity situation and the global crisis effects on the real sector of the economy 
have  brought  about  underlined  decline  in  lending  paces  and  have  reversely  impacted  the 
credit  portfolio  quality  of  the  banking  sector.  Therefore,  the  financial  result  of  the  banking 
sector, though lower than that of 2008, continues to be positive.  
It is clear to all of us that the banking sector would face a difficult business climate and needs 
to  adapt  in  the  mid-term.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  complex  interdependence  between  the 
economic  growth  and  banks’  financial  soundness  is  noted.  Decline  of  investments  and 
partially of consumption in the economy has been reflected in decreased credit demand. On 
the  other  hand,  increased  premium  risk  has  made  banks  more  tightening  in  lending 
standards, showing greater attention to liquidity indicators. The Bank of Albania deems that 
we  may  enter  into  a  vicious  circle,  where  non-lending  to  the  economy  would  result  to  a 
prolonged economic slowdown, due to damages in related interests of all stakeholders in the 
economy, including banks. We think that this situation requires countercyclic operations in a 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 3
general  level.  In  practice,  the  banking  sector  should  exercise  its  role  in  promoting  the 
development of the economic activity, naturally showing proper prudence. This system is the 
generator and controller of market economy.  
Provision  of  development  impulses  by  acting  jointly  should  be  its  primary  task,  while  the 
positive synergies will bring mutual benefits to economic growth and financial stability.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  banking  industry  should  review  the  banking  activity 
growth strategies, aiming at their better harmonization with the necessary human, financial 
and  technological  resources.  Operational  risk  identification  and  management  remain  a 
priority. In practical terms, this process should aim at placing internal mechanisms to prevent 
creation  of  excesses  in  certain  directions  of  the  banking  activity,  aiming  at  a  better 
diversification of investments and supporting steadier forms of financing resources. All these 
require  strengthening  of  internal  audit  systems,  stimulation  of  structures  that  assess  and 
manage  operational  risks  in  general,  bank  staff  expertise,  and  establishment  of  stable 
relations  with  depositors  and  other  beneficiaries  of  banking  services  through  transparency 
enhancement.  
In this framework some issues that deserve special attention will be:  
a) 
Setting  parameters  that  ensure  a  better  equilibrium  between  performance  of  risky 
assets of the banking sector and financing resources, as concerns type of currency, 
maturity term, interest rate;  
Setting  volumes  and  certain  features  of  banks’  operational  assets  that  enable 
maintaining of satisfactory liquidity levels;  
Identifying  certain  mechanisms  that  will  mitigate  the  cyclicality  in  banking  activity, 
particularly  in  the  context  of  rapid  growth  of  banking  activity  or  in  cases  of  its 
significant contraction;  
Strengthening  requirements  for  managing  extraordinary  situations  and  business 
continuation;  
Improving structures of management, accountability and performance appraisal and 
increasing  expenditure  effectiveness  for  training,  financial  stimulation  and  human 
resources strengthening;  
Further  strengthening  of  the  requirements  for  transparency  to  clients,  and  the 
regulatory  framework  for  customer  protection  from  likely  abusive  practices  in  the 
financial system. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
The Bank of Albania will be committed to this process, making use of all necessary human 
and financial resources, aiming at further improvement of legal, regulatory and operational 
procedures,  so  as  to  create  steadier  conditions  for  a  balanced  banking  activity,  which 
remains profitable and carries out the intermediation process in a competitive way over the 
long run. We are convinced that this reassessment process is necessary, not only to operate 
in the framework of convergence to international standards, which are changing, but also to 
act  pre-emptively  to  financial  and  banking  activity  risks,  which  arise  from  its  rapid 
development.  In  this  process,  we  will  make  use  of  the  experience  gained  during  the  last 
months and the directions in which the international standards are changing in this area. We 
are aware that this process requires constant communication with the banking industry. Also, 
the identified measures will be taken by allowing the proper time necessary for the banking 
industry to recover and prepare.  
As a matter of fact, the Bank of Albania has initiated this negotiating process first of all within 
itself.  Some  regulatory  acts  of  supervisory  framework,  which  are  being  discussed  lately, 
mentioning the draft-regulation “On liquidity risk management”, are prepared by taking into 
account the above goals. Also, procedures for systemic risk identification and assessment, 
as well as response to them, are being completed.  
4 
 BIS Review 129/2009
In this framework and beyond it, the Bank of Albania believes that all the public authorities 
that  play  a  role  in  financial  market  regulation,  supervision  and  development,  should  be 
committed to a similar process, having the strengthening of the regulatory and operational 
framework as the final goal, in order to firm up the long-term financial system stability. To this 
end, we think that it is necessary to pursue such policies that enable re-establishment and 
maintenance  of  balances  in  fiscal,  banking  and  monetary  activity,  supportive  to  a  stable 
economic growth over the medium and long run. To provide a longer-term response to stable 
economic development, public authorities should speed up to design and implement stronger 
development policies, which in the medium run enable establishment of a better equilibrium 
in the contribution of various sectors to economic growth, which raise competitiveness of our 
economy  and  make  it  more  formal.  To  find  better  development  equilibriums  even  in  the 
financial  system,  it  would  be  necessary  to  draft  policies  that  would  promote  a  faster 
development of the non-bank financial sector and would support creation of capital and debt 
markets for private entities.  
Accomplishment  of  these  objectives  would  preliminarily  require  strengthening  of  financial 
reporting standards; completion, accuracy and improvement of law-enforcement in terms of 
business relations development; as well as a better protection of creditors’ and consumers’ 
rights of financial institutions and products. In practical terms, these measures would expand 
financing resources for economic development, thus relatively decreasing its dependence on 
the banking sector. Also, public authorities should, through a close cooperation among them, 
review and improve the framework of measures for efficiently withstanding the extraordinary 
financial situations, being ready to engage the necessary financial, human and technological 
resources and carry out necessary legal and regulatory changes.  
Dear heads of the Albanian banking system, 
The  events  we  have  experienced  in  these  12  months  make  us  believe  that  prior-to-crisis 
economic and financial balances are likely to shift to a new equilibrium. I think that what I just 
said constitutes the essence of our contribution to the future: Let us do our best to make the 
economy  move  naturally  towards  a  new  equilibrium.  All  the  institutions,  policy-makers, 
administrators should be committed seriously to setting-up this new hotbed for our economy, 
so  that  as  the  years  go  by,  it  becomes  attractive,  competitive  and  profitable  for  every 
economic agent, either domestic or foreign. 
Getting  away  from  the  pressure  exercised  by  the  crisis  whirlpool  requires  much  optimism, 
energy and financial resources. At national level, ensuring steady foreign currency inflows, 
particularly in the form of foreign direct investments, remains a major priority. I think that the 
banking  system  has  a  prior  role  to  play  in  this  regard.  It  should  be  active  in  identification, 
promotion and financial backup.  
Thus the multiplier effect of foreign investments would gain a new dimension.  
Bailing the country out of the crisis spillovers requires not only energies, but also joint efforts. 
The  irreversible  path  towards  a  democratic  system  of  market  economy  requires  financial 
architecture perfection and the country’s steady economic development in the long run. To 
this end, the drafting and implementation of wise development policies should be a constant, 
real  and  forward-looking  priority,  in  full  accordance  with  the  European  convergence 
framework. Only in this way we will harvest all comparative advantages that our country and 
the region and beyond provide to foreign investors.  
Let me finally emphasise once more that a well-capitalised banking system is a long-awaited 
development. However, considering only the regulatory capital is insufficient, I think. What I 
really think poses an ongoing challenge is the capital of public trust. The latter one is not an 
output of regulations or banking supervisory practices. It is an output of all actors’ sacrifices. 
Enhancement of public confidence would lead to more effective mobilization of all financial 
resources in the economy, addressing them according to free market principles to the benefit 
of individuals, businesses, decision-makers and banking industry itself. Ultimately, this would 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 5
be  translated  into  the  benefit  of  the  country,  giving  an  additional,  real  and  tangible 
opportunity to the country’s rapid convergence to the European Union.  
Thanking you for your attention, I invite you to discuss on these issues. 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2009
