Heng Swee Keat: Advances in risk management – theory and practice 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Symposium  to  mark  the  opening  of  RMI’s  new  facilities,  Singapore, 
2 October 2009. 
 Prof Tan Chorh Chuan 
Prof Tan Eng Chye 
Prof Duan Jin-Chuan 
Distinguished speakers, guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Good morning 
Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to join you today at the symposium which marks the opening of 
Risk Management Institute’s (RMI) new facilities.  
RMI is Singapore’s first full-fledged research centre dedicated to risk management. RMI was 
set up three years ago. The timing could not have been more appropriate. Given the spotlight 
in the current financial crisis on risk management, the shift of economic weight to Asia, and 
NUS’ standing as a global university in the heart of Asia, RMI has a major opportunity to play 
a prominent role in research and education on this critical topic. 
Emerging from the current crisis 
In  recent  weeks,  confidence  has  returned  to  financial  markets.  More  recent  forecasts  for 
global economic growth have been revised upwards, including that for Asia.  
There is palpable relief that the global economy has avoided the abyss. But some players 
seem to have forgotten that we have just gone through the worst financial crisis since the 
post-war period. The clean-up of the wreckages will take time. For example, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) recently revised its estimate of the write-downs on expected losses by 
financial  institutions  on  bad  assets  to  $3.4  trillion.1  The  scale  of  these  losses  remains 
significant. Further, several weakness in the global economy continue to present risks to the 
sustainability  of  the  recovery.  These  include  the  continued  deleveraging  by  banks  and 
households, rising unemployment, weak fiscal positions in certain economies, and a reduced 
buffer for further decisive intervention. 
In  addition,  with  the  revival  in  investor  confidence  and  generally  conducive  global  liquidity 
conditions, authorities have been keeping a close watch on the asset markets. In Singapore, 
MAS recently decided to disallow the Interest Absorption Scheme and Interest-Only Housing 
Loans for private residential property lending.  We will closely  monitor  developments in the 
property market and the broader economy. Our upcoming Monetary Policy review in October 
will continue to focus on MAS’ objective of maintaining overall price stability for the medium-
term. 
In this climate of relief and confidence, it is also easy to lose the sense of urgency to address 
lessons  that  can  be  learnt  from  the  crisis.  Much  remains  to  be  done,  especially  in 
                                                 
1  
IMF  Global  Financial  Stability  Report  (GFSR)  -  Navigating  the  financial  Challenges  Ahead  dated  October 
2009. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 1
strengthening  risk  management.  Each  of  us,  as  regulators,  as  industry  participants,  as 
research institutes, academics and researchers, has an important part to play. 
Role of regulators 
First,  there  is  need  for  global  regulatory  reforms.  MAS  is  involved  in  discussions  at  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  other  fora  to 
consider proposals to strengthen the regulatory framework. Let me highlight two key areas of 
focus: regulatory capital framework and liquidity risk management standards. 
The  crisis  occurred  on  the  back  of  aggressive  risk  taking  and  leveraging.  Risks  had  been 
under-estimated and in many cases, financial institutions were over-reliant on external credit 
ratings and on quantitative models. Risks were built up both on and off the balance sheets of 
banks.  When  these  started  to  materialise,  the  de-leveraging  effects  and  the  steep  fall  in 
asset prices resulted in liquidity seizures in asset and funding markets. This caused major 
losses and writedowns of bank capital. In many cases, costly government intervention was 
needed to keep the financial institutions from failing. 
To  improve  the  resilience  of  banks,  global  regulators  have  agreed  to  raise  the  levels  and 
quality of bank capital. Additional capital for trading book and for securitisation risks will be 
needed.  There  are  on-going  discussions  on  establishing  a  framework  for  countercyclical 
capital  buffers  and  raising  the  quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  the  Tier  1  Capital 
base. Other supplementary tools to contain the riskiness of banks, such as a leverage ratio 
are also being developed. 
To  address  liquidity  concerns,  regulators  are  considering  the  introduction  of  a  minimum 
global liquidity standard that includes a stressed liquidity coverage requirement underpinned 
by a longer term structural liquidity ratio.  
MAS is involved in the discussions on both the capital and liquidity proposals and supports 
the  broad  thrust  of  these  initiatives.  As  MAS’  regulatory  framework  has  generally  been 
regarded  as  conservative,  we  are  in  a  good  position  to  comfortably  adopt  these  more 
stringent standards.  
However,  we  are  aware  that  more  regulation  on  its  own  is  not  a  panacea.  It  would  be 
undesirable  for  the  regulatory  pendulum  to  swing  towards  extreme  conservatism  and  for 
over-prescriptive  rules  to  severely  restrict  financial  innovation.  MAS  will  adopt  a  balanced 
approach  and  will  work  closely  with  and  consult  all  stakeholders  in  implementing  the  new 
regulatory standards.  
Role of industry participants 
Supervision has to work in concert with effective risk governance in the financial institutions. 
The  Boards  and  senior  management  of  financial  institutions  must  take  ownership  and 
responsibility to manage risks. A report issued by the Senior Supervisors Group2 in March 
2008,  on  observations  on  risk  management  practices  highlighted  many  risk  management 
practices that improved the resilience of financial institutions during a crisis. Let me highlight 
three areas. 
First,  effective  capital  planning.  Banks  need  to  conduct  a  thorough  and  comprehensive 
assessment of their levels of capital. These have to be “forward-looking”, taking into account 
the nature and level of the bank’s risk, not only under “normal” business conditions, but also 
                                                 
2   The  Senior  Supervisors  Group  comprises  senior  financial  supervisors  from  seven  countries  (United  States, 
Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom). It is chaired by William L. Rutledge from the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2009
under conditions of stress. The level of capital has an important “signalling” effect in a crisis. 
Hence, banks need to develop funding strategies and contingency plans, ahead of crisis, to 
ensure there is adequate capital to maintain market confidence. 
A  second  related  area  is  stress  testing.  Globally,  the  financial  industry  has  acknowledged 
that  stress  testing  practices  were  insufficiently  comprehensive  or  rigorous.  Robust  stress 
testing  helps  the  financial  institution  to  identify  the  impact  of  adverse  events  and  shocks, 
outside  of  the  normal  environment.  However,  let  me  caution  that  the  techniques  for 
integrated firm-wide stress testing remain in the early stages of development and need to be 
further  refined.  Tipping  points,  correlations  between  risks,  feedback  loops,  behaviours  and 
interactions of market participants are difficult to anticipate and quantify. New approaches to 
stress tests are being considered, such as reverse stress testing, which requires a financial 
institution to identify scenarios of which the impact could threaten its survival. If done well, 
such  an  approach  can  help  question  assumptions,  and  uncover  hidden  risks  and  inter-
linkages between risk factors.  
Capital planning and stress testing rely heavily on quantitative techniques to measure risks. 
The  crisis  shows  the  limitations  of  Value-at-Risk  (VAR)  models  and  other  quantitative 
techniques.  Going  forward,  financial  practitioners  will  have  to  be  more  critical  of  the 
assumptions behind the models, and be more prepared to apply sound judgment and reality 
checks. MAS will, as part of its supervisory review process, continue to engage the banks on 
their capital planning processes, and to evaluate whether the framework is sufficiently robust 
and comprehensive. 
The third area that financial institutions need to do is to establish firm-wide risk management 
and  foster  an  appropriate  risk  management  culture.  In  this  crisis,  several  institutions  that 
failed were managing risks within “silos”, by organisational structure or by risk types. In terms 
of culture, the focus on expanding earnings needs to be matched with an equal focus on risk 
and control. Senior management and staff at the business lines need to comprehend, and be 
accountable,  for  the  risks  which  emanate  from  their  activities.  Risk  managers  have  to  be 
empowered to call a stop to the dance even while the music is still playing. It is in this context 
that the recent Financial Stability Board principles on compensation have been formulated, to 
align compensation to prudent risk taking.  
So far, I have highlighted some of the challenges facing regulators and industry participants. 
Academics, researchers and institutes such as RMI, play important roles in supporting the 
financial industry in its journey to improve risk management practices. Let me now touch on 
the role that RMI can play. 
RMI’s role in the aftermath of the crisis 
As a knowledge centre in financial risk management, RMI acts as the link between theory 
and  application,  bringing  together  researchers,  risk  managers  and  regulators  to  share 
experiences and views on risk management. I believe RMI can do more to facilitate this. Let 
me suggest three broad areas. 
First, as researchers are removed from the fray of day-to-day action, you can step back and 
ask  fundamental  questions  about  risk  management  practices,  identify  gaps,  and  facilitate 
innovation  in  risk  management  techniques.  I  am  pleased  to  learn  about  your  credit  rating 
project,  which  aims  to  provide  rigour  and  transparency  to  the  financial  assessment  of 
regional corporates. The value of such work is that it is grounded on sound empirical and 
theoretical work, with a clear focus on solving practical, impactful problems. In the same vein, 
RMI’s regular workshops and lecture series serve as useful platforms to present findings to 
the industry, and to encourage two-way discussions. MAS fully supports RMI’s initiatives to 
deepen its collaboration with the industry. 
Second, as a repository of knowledge on risk management, RMI plays an important role in 
education.  RMI  has  been  appointed  as  the  lead  provider  on  risk  management  under  the 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 3
Financial  Industry  Competency  Standards  (FICS).  You  have  launched  50  accredited 
programmes across seven Risk Management job families over the past year. To support the 
role of Boards and senior management in risk management, I hope that RMI would consider 
appropriate executive programmes for Board members and senior management of financial 
institutions. I believe RMI can make an impact in enhancing the knowledge and capability of 
practitioners. 
Finally,  I  hope  RMI  can  provide  a  focal  point  to  bring  in  global  thought  leaders  and 
practitioners  on  risk  management,  through  your  flagship  RMI  Annual  Conference.  This 
conference  has  been  a  success.  This  conference  will  also  allow  RMI  to  showcase  its 
contribution.  This  year’s  Annual  Conference  attracted  over  300  local  and  regional 
participants, registering an increase in the industry’s participation over the previous year.  I 
am optimistic that you can grow this conference into a premier event on risk management in 
the region and globally. 
Conclusion 
RMI’s growth would not be possible without strong support from the university. I appreciate 
the efforts of Prof Tan Chorh Chuan and Prof Tan Eng Chye in championing the growth of 
RMI.  RMI’s  new  facilities  is  a  visible  commitment  of  this  support.  Equally,  if  not  more 
important,  is  your  support  for  cross-disciplinary  research.  Just  as  we  remind  financial 
institutions not to manage risks in silos, research efforts are more productive through inter-
disciplinary  collaboration.  By  encouraging  faculty  members  from  different  parts  of  the 
universities to work together, and with industry professionals, you do much to advance RMI’s 
leadership in financial risk management. 
I  congratulate  RMI  on  the  opening  of  its  new  facilities  and  wish  Prof  Duan  and  your 
colleagues every success. I wish you a fruitful symposium. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2009
