Daniel K Tarullo: Confronting “too big to fail” 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Exchequer Club, Washington DC, 21 October 2009.  
 The far-reaching financial crisis that has afflicted our country in the past two years has drawn 
attention to a raft of problems – from the concentration of commercial real estate exposures 
in  some  regional  and  community  banks,  to  the  risks  associated  with  some  forms  of 
derivatives, to the need for more vigorous financial services consumer protection. Proposals 
for  administrative  and  congressional  responses  are  thus  appropriately  diverse.  I  would 
suggest, however, that the reform process cannot be judged a success unless it substantially 
reduces systemic risk generally and, in particular, the too-big-to-fail problem. This afternoon I 
will  address  my  remarks  specifically  to  the  task  of  forging  an  effective  response  to  this 
problem.1  
The current form of the too-big-to-fail problem  
The concern is hardly a new one. In one manifestation, too big to fail was an extension of the 
classic  problem  of  bank  runs  and  panics.  If  a  large  bank  failed  –  whether  because  it  was 
illiquid after a deposit run or insolvent after severe losses – the entire banking system might 
be  endangered.  In  cases  in  which  other  banks  held  significant  deposits  in  the  distressed 
institution, the failure of a large bank might lead directly to the illiquidity or insolvency of other 
banks. The result could be a domino effect in the interbank lending market, with one bank's 
failure toppling the next. Even where direct losses to other banks were thought manageable, 
the failure of a large bank might strike panic into depositors, especially uninsured depositors, 
of  other  large  institutions.  The  result  might  be  a  far-reaching  run  on  the  entire  banking 
system  that  could,  in  a  worst  case  such  as  occurred  in  early  1933,  freeze  the  financial 
system completely. 
Faced with either variant of such a devastating impact on the system, government authorities 
often believe they have little choice but to intervene. The government may provide funds or 
guarantees  to  the  bank  in  order  to  keep  it  functioning.  Alternatively,  the  government  may 
allow  the  bank  to  fail,  but  shield  some  or  all  of  its  depositors  from  loss,  even  those  not 
covered  by  existing  insurance  programs.  In  1984,  for  example,  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance Corporation protected the uninsured depositors of Continental Illinois Bank, then 
the nation's seventh largest depository institution, after a foreign depositor run that followed 
heavy losses.  
One concern arises from the effects on incentives of bank creditors and, possibly, the banks 
themselves. Creditors who believe that an institution will be regarded by the government as 
too  big  to  fail  may  not  price  into  their  extensions  of  credit  the  full  risk  assumed  by  the 
institution.  That,  of  course,  is  the  very  definition  of  moral  hazard.  Thus  the  institution  has 
funds available to it at a price that does fully internalize the social costs associated with its 
operations. The consequences are a diminution of market discipline, inefficient allocation of 
capital,  the  socialization  of  losses  from  supposedly  market-based  activities,  and  a 
competitive advantage for the large institution compared to smaller banks.  
The  management  and  shareholders  of  the  too-big-to-fail  institution  may,  in  turn,  regard 
themselves as holding a kind of put option and may thus be motivated to take greater risks 
                                                 
1   The views expressed here are my own, and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 1
with the cheaper funds now available to them. If the risky projects pay off, the shareholders 
profit famously. If the results are bad, the government may keep the institution afloat, thereby 
preserving at least some value for shareholders. 
The roots of the present crisis – and thus of the current form of the too-big-to-fail problems – 
reach  much  deeper  than  the  breakdown  of  private  risk  management  and  shortcomings  of 
government regulation during the first part of this decade. Its origins lie in 30 years of change 
in  the  organization  of  financial  firms  and  markets  that  squeezed  the  traditional  business 
model of commercial banking. The regulatory system accommodated the growth of capital 
market  alternatives  to  traditional  financing  by  relaxing  many  restrictions  on  the  type  and 
geographic scope of bank activities, and virtually all restrictions on affiliations between banks 
and non-bank financial firms. The result was a financial services industry dominated by one 
set  of  very  large  financial  holding  companies  centered  on  a  large  commercial  bank  and 
another set of very large financial institutions not subject to prudential regulation.  
Many  firms  of  both  types  relied  for  a  considerable  portion  of  their  financing  on  short-term 
capital market sources that were often poorly matched with the maturity structure of a firm's 
assets.  Securitization  markets  were  a  major  part  of  these  complex,  tightly  wound  financial 
arrangements.  When  questions  arose  about  the  quality  of  assets  held  by  the  borrowing 
institutions, a classic adverse feedback loop ensued. With lenders increasingly unwilling to 
extend credit against these assets, liquidity-strained institutions made increasingly distressed 
asset sales, which placed additional downward pressure on asset prices, leading to margin 
calls for leveraged actors and mark-to-market losses for all holders of the assets.  
As shown by the intervention of the government when Bear Stearns, AIG, Fannie Mae, and 
Freddie Mac were failing and by the repercussions from the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, 
the universe of financial firms that appeared too big to fail by 2008 included more than the 
insured depository institutions subject to prudential regulatory requirements. It is noteworthy 
that, prior to the start of the crisis, relatively few market observers would likely have identified 
Bear  Stearns  as  so  systemically  important  that  it  could  not  be  permitted  to  fail  in  a 
"disorderly" fashion. Indeed, some observers counseled letting the firm enter bankruptcy. The 
extension of funds by the Treasury Department from the Troubled Asset Relief Program and 
guarantees from the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to each of the nation’s largest 
institutions in the fall of 2008 revealed the government’s view that a very real threat to the 
nation’s  entire  financial  system  was  best  addressed  by  shoring  up  the  nation’s  largest 
financial firms.  
The government-arranged and subsidized absorption of Bear Stearns into JPMorgan Chase 
draws attention to two additional features of the too-big-to-fail problem. First, no matter what 
its general economic policy principles, a government faced with the possibility of a cascading 
financial  crisis  that  could  bring  down  its  national  economy  tends  to  err  on  the  side  of 
intervention. Second, once a government has obviously extended the reach of its safety net, 
moral  hazard  problems  are  compounded,  as  market  actors  may  expect  similarly  situated 
firms  to  be  rescued  in  the  future.  Both  these  observations  underscore  the  importance  of 
adopting robust policies in non-crisis times that will diminish the chances that, in some future 
period of financial distress, a government will believe it must intervene to prevent the failure 
of a large financial institution. 
A program to contain the problem 
Moral hazard is, if not quite pervasive, certainly common in modern economic life. The best 
evidence that we are willing to live with some degree of moral hazard may be found in the 
importance of insurance as a social institution. The costs that would be incurred in trying to 
eliminate moral hazard completely from, say, a casualty insurance policy are simply too high 
as a practical matter. Similarly, we should not realistically expect to eliminate moral hazard 
completely in the financial sector. What we can reasonably expect and, indeed, should insist 
upon, is that we take steps to contain the problem such that the social costs associated with 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2009
the consequences of the misaligned incentives do not exceed the benefits associated with 
the operation of the institutions or markets in which the moral hazard exists.  
Parallel reasoning applies with respect to the negative effects that may attend the failure of a 
large financial institution. Efforts should be made to reduce those effects, but in such a way 
that  takes  account  of  the  costs  that  these  efforts  may  themselves  impose  on  productive 
activities.  In  the  financial  arena,  the  trade-off  is  often  characterized  as  one  between  the 
availability and efficient allocation of credit, on the one hand, and the safety and soundness 
of the financial system on the other. 
The  conventional  response  to  moral  hazard  problems  arising  from  anticipated  government 
support for financial actors has been to enact regulation to counteract unwelcome effects on 
the  incentives  of  creditors,  investors,  or  managers.  Thus,  for  example,  the  potential  moral 
hazard  arising  from  the  availability  of  discount  window  lending  or  from  the  presence  of 
federal deposit insurance is offset to some degree through safety and soundness regulation. 
Likewise,  the  potential  for  large  negative  externalities  from  a  firm’s  activities  is  often 
countered with regulation designed to force some measure of social cost internalization by 
the firm.  
A  regulatory  response  for  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  would  enhance  the  safety  and 
soundness of large financial institutions and thereby reduce the likelihood of severe financial 
distress that could raise the prospect of systemic effects. Such a response consists of three 
elements. 
First, the shortcomings of the regulations that failed to protect the stability of the firms and 
the  financial  system  need  to  be  rectified.  Regulatory  capital  requirements  can  balance  the 
incentive  to  excessive  risk-taking  that  may  arise  when  there  is  believed  to  be  government 
support for a firm, or at least some of its liabilities. There is little doubt that capital levels prior 
to the crisis were insufficient to serve their functions as an adequate constraint on leverage 
and  a  buffer  against  loss.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  with  other  U.S.  and  foreign 
supervisors  to  strengthen  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk-management  requirements  for  banking 
organizations. 
trading  activities  and 
securitization exposures have already been agreed. Work continues on improving the quality 
of  capital  and  counteracting  the  procyclical  tendencies  of  important  areas  of  financial 
regulation, such as capital and accounting standards. 
These  regulatory  changes  are  surely  a  necessary  part  of  a  response  to  the  too-big-to-fail 
problem,  but  there  is  good  reason  to  doubt  that  they  are  sufficient.  Generally  applicable 
capital  and  other  regulatory  requirements  do  not  take  account  of  the  specifically  systemic 
consequences  of  the  failure  of  a  large  institution.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  many  have 
proposed a second kind of regulatory response – a special charge, possibly a special capital 
requirement, based on the systemic importance of a firm. Ideally, this requirement would be 
calibrated so as to begin to bite gradually as a firm’s systemic importance increased, so as to 
avoid the need for identifying which firms are considered too-big-to-fail and, thereby, perhaps 
increasing moral hazard. 
While very appealing in concept, developing an appropriate metric for such a requirement is 
not an easy exercise. There is much attention being devoted to this effort – within the U.S. 
banking agencies, in international fora, and among academics – but at this moment there is 
no specific proposal that has gathered a critical mass of support. 
A third regulatory change is in some respects the most obvious and straightforward: Any firm 
whose failure could have serious systemic consequences ought to be subject to regulatory 
requirements such as those I have just described. At present, these apply only to firms that 
own  a  commercial  bank  –  a  regulatory  gap  that  became  painfully  evident  last  year  as 
systemic  problems  arose  from  the  activities  of  other  firms.  Although  the  five  large,  "free-
standing"  investment  banks  of  early  2008  have  subsequently  either  converted  to  bank 
holding company status or ceased operations as independent firms, action by Congress is 
In  particular,  higher  capital 
requirements 
for 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 3
needed to ensure that other firms posing such a risk – now or in the future – can be brought 
within the perimeter of regulation. 
This  regulatory  agenda  has  much  to  be  said  for  it  and  should,  I  believe,  be  vigorously 
pursued. But I doubt that rules directed at the conduct of financial firms will be an adequate 
response to the too-big-to-fail problem. In the first place, there is some danger that simply 
piling on a series of administrative reforms and restrictions intended to constrain the behavior 
of firms would have unnecessarily adverse consequences for the availability of credit on risk-
sensible  terms  for  consumers  and  businesses  alike.  The  interaction  of  regulatory  changes 
needs to be thought through. Also, the financial crisis should itself inject a considerable dose 
of  humility  into  regulators’  assessment  of  the  efficacy  of  even  well-considered  regulations. 
Rules directed at the behavior of large firms must be complemented with reforms directed at 
the behavior of their investors and counterparties.  
An  agenda  to  enhance  market  discipline  can  serve  two  purposes.  First,  establishing  the 
realistic  prospect  of  losses  for  investors  and  counterparties  in  a  large  financial  institution 
should change their calculations in deciding whether to enter a transaction with the firm, and 
thus  lead  to  a  more  complete  incorporation  of  risk  into  the  terms  of  such  a  transaction. 
Second, the assessment of that risk by these financial actors, as reflected in the pricing of 
their  investments  and  contracts  with  a  firm,  can  itself  provide  valuable  information  to 
regulators. 
While  the  role  of  market  discipline  has  been  much  discussed  in  academic  and  policy 
literature  as  a  potentially  central  element  of  a  financial  regulatory  system,  it  had  not  been 
significantly  developed  and  implemented  by  regulators  themselves.  The  crisis  has  pushed 
some  market  discipline  ideas  to  the  fore.  Here  again,  I  think  there  are  three  important 
measures. 
First  would  be  creation  by  Congress  of  a  special  resolution  procedure  for  systemically 
important financial firms. The Federal Deposit Insurance Act establishes such a process for 
banks,  but  not  for  the  holding  companies  of  which  they  are  part,  or  for  important  financial 
firms that do not own commercial banks. A regime that raised the real prospect of losses for 
shareholders and creditors would add a third alternative to the unattractive existing options of 
bailout or disorderly bankruptcy. The consequent increase in market discipline before severe 
financial  distress  arises  could  be  a  key  advance  in  the  containment  of  the  too-big-to-fail 
problem. 
A related innovation would be a requirement that each major financial institution draw up and 
submit  for  approval  to  its  supervisors  a  plan  for  orderly  wind-down  in  the  event  of  serious 
liquidity or solvency difficulties. Although even a good faith effort might not anticipate all the 
circumstances  that  may  raise  such  difficulties,  and  thus  might  not  adequately  prepare  an 
effective wind-down strategy, the development of such a plan would at the least be a useful 
supervisory  exercise.  It  would,  for  example,  provide  an  occasion  for  examining  the 
relationships  among 
financial 
organization.  
A second kind of market discipline initiative is a requirement that large financial firms have 
specified  forms  of  "contingent  capital."  Numerous  variants  on  this  basic  idea  have  been 
proposed  over  the  past  several  years.  While  all  are  intended  to  provide  a  firm  with  an 
increased capital buffer from private sources at the moment when it is most needed, some 
also  hold  significant  promise  of  injecting  market  discipline  into  the  firm.  For  example,  a 
regularly issued special debt instrument that would convert to equity during times of financial 
distress could add market discipline both through the pricing of newly issued instruments and 
through the interests of current shareholders in avoiding dilution. 
A  third  improvement  in  market  discipline  could  come  through  judicious  extension  of 
disclosure requirements for regulated financial institutions. Disclosure requirements have at 
times  served  as  too  easy  an  answer  to  calls  for  market  discipline.  Indeed,  poorly  crafted 
requirements can simultaneously impose significant costs on firms while providing little useful 
the  many  separate  corporate  entities  within  a 
large 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2009
information  to  investors.  However,  an  organized  inquiry  of  actual  and  potential  investors 
might  identify  discrete  categories  of  information  thought  to  have  particular  salience  for 
purchase  and  pricing  decisions.  There  may  be  a  need  to  resolve  issues  of  potential 
competitive harm to firms required to publish certain forms of information. Still, such an effort 
seems worth pursuing, especially in conjunction with specific proposals for contingent capital 
or similar requirements. 
Alternatives 
The  foregoing  set  of  administrative  and  legislative  proposals  constitutes  a  strong  reform 
program to address the too-big-to-fail problem, particularly as supplemented by the greater 
emphasis on horizontal reviews, creation of a quantitative surveillance mechanism, and other 
supervisory changes being implemented at the Federal Reserve.2 Along with our domestic 
and  international  colleagues,  we  are  already  working  on  many  of  these  initiatives.  We  are 
hopeful  that  Congress  will,  in  its  legislative  response  to  the  crisis,  include  a  resolution 
mechanism and an extension of regulation to all systemically important financial institutions. 
Still,  we  cannot  know  for  certain  that  this  program,  even  if  forcefully  implemented,  would 
substantially contain the too-big-to-fail problem. All participants in the reform process must 
continue  to  explore  other  possibilities,  including  some  that  would  work  more  fundamental 
changes in the structure of the financial industry.  
One approach suggested by a number of commentators is to reverse the 30-year trend that 
allowed progressively more financial activities within commercial banks and more affiliations 
with  non-bank  financial  firms.  The  idea  is  presumably  to  insulate  insured  depository 
institutions  from  trading  or  other  capital  market  activities  that  are  thought  riskier  than 
traditional  lending  functions.  There  are,  however,  at  least  two  reasons  why  this  strategy 
seems  unlikely  to  limit  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  to  a  significant  degree.  One  is  that, 
historically at least, some very large institutions got themselves into a good deal of trouble 
through risky lending alone. Moreover, as we have already seen in the experience with Bear 
Stearns and Lehman, firms without commercial banking operations can now also pose a too-
big-to-fail threat.  
Another  approach  would  be  to  attack  the  bigness  problem  head-on  by  limiting  the  size  or 
interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions.  Some  observers  have  even  suggested  that 
existing large firms should be split up into smaller, not-too-big-to-fail entities, in a manner a 
bit reminiscent of the break-up of AT&T in the early 1980s. Of course, the conceptual and 
practical  challenges  in  breaking  up  the  nation’s  largest  financial  institutions  would  be 
considerably  more  daunting  than  those  faced  by  Judge  Greene  in  creating  four  regional 
operating  companies  and  a  long  distance  carrier  out  of  the  old  AT&T.  Indeed,  to  my 
knowledge, no one has offered anything like standards for undertaking this task, much less a 
blueprint for how it would be accomplished. This is, in other words, more a provocative idea 
than a proposal. Like many a provocative idea, though, even in an unelaborated form it can 
focus attention on the relative effectiveness of alternative policy proposals. 
The  fact  that  the  largest  financial  firms  will  account  for  a  significantly  larger  share  of  total 
industry assets after the crisis than they did before can only add to the uneasiness of those 
worried about the too-big-to-fail phenomenon. It is notable that current law provides very little 
in  the  way  of  structural  means  to  limit  systemic  risk  and  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  The 
statutory prohibition on interstate acquisitions that would result in a commercial bank and its 
affiliates holding more than 10 percent of insured deposits nationwide is the closest thing to 
                                                 
2   See Daniel K. Tarullo (2009), "Bank Supervision," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, August 4. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 5
such an instrument.3 Policymakers and policy commentators alike might usefully attempt to 
develop similarly discrete mechanisms that could be beneficial in containing the too-big-to-
fail  problem.  As  must  be  apparent  from  my  remarks  today,  my  strong  suspicion is  that  an 
effective response to the problem will likely require multiple, mutually reinforcing instruments. 
Conclusion 
In  closing,  let  me  reiterate  the  importance  of  moving  ahead  with  the  administrative  and 
legislative reform agenda that I have laid out this afternoon. The components of this agenda 
will each be significant contributions to a more effective regulatory system. They will enhance 
financial stability and increase market discipline in transactions involving large financial firms. 
Of  course,  financial  instability  can  occur  even  in  the  absence  of  serious  too-big-to-fail 
problems.  Other  reform  measures  –  such  as  regulating  derivatives  markets  and  money 
market  funds  –  are  thus  also  important  to  pursue.  In  focusing  today  upon  measures  to 
mitigate too-big-to-fail problems, I mean only to suggest that no reform package should be 
considered  sufficient  if  it  does  not  address  these  problems  in  a  robust  fashion.  And  in 
suggesting  that  policymakers  should  continue  to  examine  possible  measures  beyond  the 
current reform agenda, I certainly do not intend to suggest that the current agenda should be 
delayed.  I  only  urge  that  we  all  keep  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  front  and  center  as  the 
regulatory reform effort moves forward.  
                                                 
3   12 U.S.C. § 1842(d). 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2009
