Stefan Ingves: A cure for crises – confidence, confidence and trust 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Eurofi  Forum, 
Gothenburg, 29 September 2009. 
 It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  hold  this  keynote  address  at  the  EuroFi-conference  here  in 
Gothenburg. We have recently witnessed a financial crisis of historic proportions. We may 
have seen the worst, but the crisis is not over. The development of the last year gives me an 
excuse to address a topic that has followed me for much of my working life: namely financial 
crises and trying to sort them out. I could go on and talk about financial crises for hours, but I 
promise you that I will stay – at least roughly – within my time limit.  
I have been working with the resolution of financial crises for almost two decades. I started 
out, here in Sweden, with the banking crisis of the early 1990s. Later, I toured the world as 
an  IMF  employee,  assisting  in  crisis  resolution  in  many  different  countries,  and  I  came  to 
know many difficult situations from within. In my present role, the last year has, to a large 
extent, been about dealing with the repercussions of the latest financial crisis. One difference 
this time is the magnitude and the global reach of the crisis – it is not really just any other 
domestic  crisis.  However,  I  do  believe  that  financial  crises  are  related  creatures  –  or 
monsters if you prefer. On a fundamental level, all crises share causes and cures but they 
also have many differences. The cure is made up of two ingredients: 1) regain confidence to 
resolve a crisis; and 2) preserve confidence to prevent a crisis from repeating itself. Given 
the  international  dimension  of  this  crisis  and  the  proliferation  of  cross-border  banking,  the 
cure  for  this  crisis  also  involves  a  third  component  –  trust  between  authorities  to  enhance 
cross-border  crisis  management.  So,  the  outline  of  my  speech  can  simply  be  stated  as: 
confidence, confidence and trust!  
Most financial crises will involve banks because banks are special. Banks are both central to 
all economic activity, due to their role in the payment system, and inherently unstable, due to 
the maturity mismatch from borrowing short and lending long. To avoid a run, a bank must 
maintain the confidence of depositors and market participants. If a bank loses the confidence 
of its customers, it faces problems. If confidence for the entire banking sector disappears, a 
financial crisis is a fact.  
The underlying idea of my cure is quite simple. Confidence is essential to operate a bank. 
Consequently, confidence is essential to prevent and resolve financial crises. More precisely, 
to resolve a crisis, the cure should restore the public’s and the market’s confidence in the 
banks. This should be done by acknowledging the losses and dealing with the bad assets. 
To  prevent  this  crisis  from  repeating  itself,  measures  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that 
confidence does not dissipate so rapidly again. To this end, liquidity and capital regulation 
need  to  be  reformed.  The  final  ingredient  in  the  cure  is  trust.  This  ingredient  stresses  the 
importance of trust between national authorities to the efficient management of cross-border 
crises.  
Regaining confidence in the short run: go get the lemons!  
Banks create confidence by telling good and credible stories about the future, stories about 
why  you  will  get  your  money  back.  Money  may  make  the  world  go  around,  but  it  is  good 
confidence-building  storytelling  that  spins  the  money  around.  When  these  stories  fail  to 
create confidence, the markets will dry up. This is basically an example of the well-known 
lemon problem.  
The current problems first surfaced in the US subprime market. The repackaging and sale of 
assets backed by subprime loans meant that the crisis, at its outset, had already started to 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 1
grab  hold  of  banks  internationally.  Bankers  exposed  to  subprime  assets  began  to  find  it 
increasingly difficult to tell convincing stories. Banks and market agents became less willing 
to trade and to lend to each other. In March 2007, Bear Stearns received emergency lending, 
followed by a forced sale. Rating downgrades and more bad news kept arriving and the crisis 
started  to  spread  geographically  and  to  affect  more  markets.  Banks  experienced  serious 
funding problems. The ECB and the Fed responded by injecting liquidity on August 9, 2007. 
On  September  13,  Northern  Rock  received  emergency  liquidity  support  from  the  Bank  of 
England. Concerns for bank-to-bank contagion due to interconnectedness resulted in a loss 
of confidence for the entire banking system. In 2008, bad events continued to unfold. In the 
summer of 2008, the US government was forced to rescue Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 
The relatively slow build-up of the crisis abruptly came to an end when Lehman collapsed on 
September 15. Confidence simply disappeared and liquidity evaporated. Several banks got 
into severe difficulties: Merrill Lynch, Hypo Real Estate, Bradford & Bingley, Fortis, Dexia and 
the Icelandic banks: Landsbanki, Glitnir and Kaupthing, to mention a few. A melt-down of the 
financial system was prevented by a massive intervention by central banks and governments 
worldwide.  
A loss of confidence is the driver of a liquidity crunch, but the lemon problem, as first noted 
by George Akerlof in 1970, explains the mechanics of a market breakdown. A lemon is an 
asset  of  bad  quality,  originally  referring  to  poor  quality  cars.  In  short,  the  lemon  problem 
arises when sellers know whether or not their asset is a lemon, but potential buyers cannot 
tell the difference. The risk of purchasing a lemon will lower the price buyers are willing to 
pay for any asset and, because market prices are depressed, owners of non-lemon assets 
will be unwilling to put them up for sale.  
In normal times, banks can obtain short-term finance by borrowing on the interbank market 
and  by  selling  assets. When  it  became  apparent  that  some  assets  had  turned  sour  –  that 
they  were  lemons  –  confidence  in  the  strength  of  individual  banks’  balance  sheets  was 
eroded. Confidence in the banking sector as a whole was eroded, given the uncertainty over 
the extent of the problem – uncertainty over where the bad assets were located and the fear 
of possible bank-to-bank contagion. Such uncertainty over the extent and location of lemons, 
coupled with a fear of contagion, are normal features of any crisis. However, the opacity of 
some  of  the  new  financial  products  and  the  increased  interconnectedness  of  the  financial 
system inflated the degree of uncertainty and the fear of contagion, compared to past crises. 
The lack of confidence between the banks resulted in the breakdown of interbank markets. 
At  the  same  time,  previously  liquid  asset  markets  completely  dried  up,  due  to  the  lemon 
problem. As a consequence, banks found it costly – or even impossible – to obtain liquidity 
by selling assets.  
Basically,  when  there  are  lemons  out  there,  bankers  cannot  tell  convincing  confidence-
creating stories about the future. A precondition for the return to normal conditions, that is, to 
a  situation where  banks  do  not  depend  on  central  banks for  liquidity,  is  that  confidence  is 
restored.  Central  banks  have  been  injecting  liquidity  for  two  years  now,  but  still  the 
underlying problem – the lack of confidence – has not been fully solved. Normality will not 
return until the impaired assets are dealt with. Consequently, we convincingly need to go and 
get the lemons!  
To  do  that  is  both  messy  and  costly.  A  difference  to  previous  crises  is  the  new  financial 
products that have turned sour. It will be difficult to deal with these opaque and complicated 
new  breeds  of  lemon.  However,  this  does  not  make  it  less  important  to  get  the  lemons  – 
rather the contrary. There are also no shortcuts in dealing with bad assets. The losses must 
be recognised. A loss is a loss. The costs involved may make it tempting to sugar-coat the 
lemons by letting the bad assets be valued above market value, but this will only postpone 
the recovery.  
One  possible  approach  to  dealing  with  bad  assets  is  through  various  forms  of  asset  relief 
measures.  However,  if  asset  relief is  offered,  then  the  pricing  must  be  set  at  conservative 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2009
market values. A transfer value set above the market value is basically a transfer of money 
from taxpayers to bank-owners. This could also be costly over time, in terms of increased 
moral  hazard.  In  addition,  pricing  above  market  prices  may  destroy  the  asset  market  for 
years to come and thus add to the costs of the crisis. To restart a market, it is crucial that 
investors become confident that the bottom has been reached. This confidence can only be 
achieved by the realistic and transparent valuation of assets. Once at the bottom, people will 
start  to  listen  to  good  stories  about  the  future  again.  Risk  appetite  will  return  and  market 
activity  will  pick  up.  In  my  view,  a  key  part  of  the  successful  resolution  of  the  Swedish 
banking  crisis  in  the  1990s  was  that  the  impaired  assets  were  assigned  realistic  and 
conservative  values.  Removing  the  suspicion  that  bad  surprises  may  linger  around  the 
corner is essential to restarting a market. It is a matter of confidence.  
Similarly, the lack of confidence in the banks’ balance sheets cannot be improved by creating 
opaque accounting rules. The book value of a bank will increase if we assign book values 
above market value, but will it restore confidence? Again, to regain confidence, the balance 
sheets of banks should reflect realistic values.  
Accounting rules should force banks to disclose what their assets are worth and not allow 
problems  to  be  hidden.  Lack  of  confidence  arises  over  concerns  about  a  bank’s  actual 
financial  situation.  If  market  participants  have  to  recalculate  reported  valuations,  then  the 
return of confidence will be more difficult to achieve. It is therefore important that accounting 
is transparent and internationally harmonised. We should also keep in mind that accounting 
rules  are  not  only  about  preserving  financial  stability  in  the  short  run.  Changing  the 
accounting rules could make communication more uncertain and less transparent.  
Another tool for telling stories about the future is stress testing. Stress testing can thus be a 
very valuable and effective tool in restoring confidence. However, this requires that the stress 
tests are both credible and adequately disclosed. The Fed’s stress tests of US banks earlier 
this year present a good example of how this tool can be used. We – at the Riksbank – have 
been  publishing  stress  tests  of  individual  banks  since  2006.  With  a  track  record  of 
reasonable stress tests, the credibility of the methodology and the results has continued to 
increase during the crisis.  
Building confidence in the long-run: liquidity and capital regulation  
The  financial  crisis  of  the  past  two  years  has  been  very  costly.  We  must  ensure  that  this 
crisis  does  not  repeat  itself.  Lawmakers,  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  have  a 
daunting  task  ahead  of  them.  Regulatory  and  supervisory  reform  is  needed.  I  have  great 
hope that we will take this opportunity to create a safer and sounder financial system. In this 
respect, I would like to bring up two important issues for a safer financial system: liquidity and 
capital regulation.  
Liquidity  or,  rather,  illiquidity  has  been  in  the  centre  of  this  crisis.  Banks  will  always  be 
exposed to liquidity risk due to the maturity mismatch, as this is a central feature of banking. 
However, in the run up to the crisis, this maturity mismatch increased too much. Banks relied 
on the misguided perception that short-term financing would be available from liquid markets. 
A key lesson from the crisis is that a liquid market can very quickly become illiquid.  
The conclusion is that liquidity must be regulated more firmly. Banks need to hold a buffer of 
liquid assets large enough to allow them to weather a liquidity shock. However, the definition 
of  this  liquidity  buffer,  as  well  as  what  type  of  assets  should  be  viewed  as  liquid,  requires 
careful thought. We should keep in mind the lesson that market liquidity can vanish quickly 
and be extremely cautious about what securities we consider to be liquid. Furthermore, the 
power to dictate the type of assets a bank must hold will have an impact on asset markets. 
We must ensure that this power is not misused.  
From a central banker’s perspective, the content of the liquidity buffer has a bearing on the 
central bank’s policy on what assets to accept as collateral. In a crisis, it is the central bank’s 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 3
decision on which securities to accept that defines liquid and illiquid assets – at least in the 
local currency. Therefore, the interplay of liquidity regulation and the central banks’ collateral 
requirements also warrants considerable reflection.  
Finally,  liquidity  regulation  will  make  maturity  transformation  more  costly.  We  clearly  need 
more  regulation  today  but,  in  casting  additional  regulation,  we  have  to  consider  the  costs. 
Too strict regulation would stifle competition, make financial services more expensive and, in 
the long run, hamper economic growth. On the other hand, too loose regulation would inspire 
speculation  with  taxpayers’  money  and  also  reduce  economic  growth.  Thus,  the  extent  of 
financial regulation is – at least partly – a question of society’s risk tolerance.  
Liquidity  buffers  will  create  a  cushion.  However,  the  root  of  a  liquidity  crunch  is  a  lack  of 
confidence. A major aim of regulatory reform  should thus be to ensure that trust does not 
dissipate so rapidly and completely again. In order to do this, we need to increase capital 
requirements,  both  in  terms  of  the  quality  of  capital  and  the  amount  of  capital.  After  all, 
capital  provides  protection  against  bad  outcomes.  Increasing  the  quality  and  amount  of 
capital will increase the resilience of individual banks. In addition, strengthening the ability of 
banks to absorb losses mitigates the risk of contagion – therefore more and better capital will 
also strengthen the resilience of the system.  
In my view, the important part of capital is loss-absorbing common equity. In addition, other 
forms  of  capital  are  needed  to  protect  the  state.  If  a  bank  defaults,  capital  typically 
evaporates very quickly. I have seen many examples of banks that have defaulted because 
they did not meet the capital adequacy rules. In my experience, when bank managers say 
that  they  have  a  problem,  they  often  claim  to  have  –  say  –  6  per  cent  regulatory  capital, 
rather than the required 8 per cent. When the authorities eventually and realistically assess 
the  assets,  capital  is  often  negative  and  the  state  has  to  bail  out  the  bank.  Thus,  capital 
should be of good quality to protect the bank on a going concern basis, but also to protect 
the state in the event of a default. As some banks may be too big to fail, as regulators we 
should also discuss the possibilities of creating debt instruments which automatically convert 
to equity when losses mount above certain trigger points.  
Building trust to enhance cross-border crisis management  
A  financial  crisis  is  costly  to  resolve.  The  potential  costs  are  so  large  that  only  the  nation 
state, through its power to tax, can shoulder the costs. This makes the state the only ultimate 
and credible guarantor of financial stability.  
Today,  we  have  a  mismatch  between  the  geographical  reach  of  the  only  party  that  can 
guarantee financial stability – the state – and the international financial system. The logical 
solutions  to  this  geographical  mismatch  are  either  to  shrink  the  financial  system  back  to 
within national borders or to create an international institution with a right to tax or a system 
of  burden-sharing,  so  that  confidence  in  an  ultimate  guarantor  can  be  established  on  an 
international level.  
The  first  solution  would  be  too  costly.  Basically,  it  would  imply  rolling  back  decades  of 
globalisation and financial integration. Consider, for example, the costs of dismantling a large 
cross-border bank. It would also mean a serious blow to the European single market. In a 
way, I find it puzzling that we are discussing the possibility of a single market for all kinds of 
goods and services except for the commodity most suited for free trade: money. A concrete 
example of the merits of financial integration is how the arrival of foreign banks resulted in a 
rapid development of the banking systems in the Eastern and Central European countries. 
The citizens and corporations of these countries benefitted substantially from early access to 
advanced financial services.  
The second solution – to create an international institution with taxation rights or a system of 
ex ante burden sharing – is simply not realistic for the foreseeable future.  
4 
 BIS Review 118/2009
Consequently, we are stuck with the geographical mismatch and, as a consequence, cross-
border banks pose a real challenge to crisis management. To accommodate this mismatch, 
national authorities must cooperate more effectively. This is the only feasible option. In order 
to achieve efficient cooperation, it is vital to build trust between authorities, which explains 
my third ingredient.  
In the EU, we have the home country principle as a fix for the geographical mismatch. We 
have  also  signed  a  European  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  aimed  at  improving 
cross-border cooperation.  
However, the home country principle does not solve the dilemma of international banks and 
national  authorities.  Tension  arises  because  the  home  country  is  responsible  for  the 
supervision of branches but the host country is responsible for the financial stability of the 
country. This tension also persists if the foreign bank operates through subsidiaries. Many 
cross-border  banks  centralise  different  parts  of  management.  There  are  good  economic 
reasons for such centralisation. However, the implication is that the home supervisor, as the 
consolidating supervisor, has the overall picture, while the host country has the responsibility.  
In a crisis, decisions must be taken fast and, typically, based on insufficient and uncertain 
information.  Access  to  information  is  thus  crucial  for  effective  crisis  management.  In  the 
present crisis, host countries have had difficulties in obtaining timely information from home 
country  authorities.  Considering  the  importance  of  information,  the  frustration  of  host 
countries  is  understandable.  However,  let  me  emphasise  that  the  problem  of  insufficient 
information flows also goes the other way. Home country authorities have also experienced 
difficulties  in  getting  accurate  information  from  host  authorities.  A  result  of  the  lack  of 
cooperation has been suboptimal solutions, the breaking up of banks and a move towards 
nationalistic objectives.  
Experiences  from  the  crisis  prove  that  it  is  easy  to  sign  an  MoU  in  good  times,  but  much 
more difficult to live up to the spirit of that MoU in bad times.  
Financial  integration  will  continue.  The  question,  then,  is  how  do  we  improve  cross-border 
crisis management? Part of the problem today is a lack of mutual trust. In bad times, trust is 
essential for sharing information. Reaching a joint assessment and making efficient decisions 
often require frank and open-hearted discussions. Such discussions will not take place if the 
parties  do  not  trust  each  other.  I  believe  that  we  must  put  effort  into  building  trust  among 
authorities.  In  this  respect,  the  trust  shared  among  the  Governors  of  the  Nordic  Central 
Banks can provide inspiration.  
The Governors of the Nordic countries have built trust for a long time. This building of trust 
dates  back  to  the  19th  century.  Although  it  is  not  very  widely  known,  in  1873,  Sweden, 
Denmark and Norway formed a monetary union based on the gold standard. This union was 
eventually dissolved in 1924. However, I believe that one legacy of the union has been that 
the Governors of the Nordic Central Banks – adding Iceland and Finland to the group – have 
continued  to  meet  regularly  since then.  This  tradition  of  regular  meetings  has  built  trust.  It 
has taken some time, but today the trust is there.  
The  Nordic  example  shows  that  trust  between  authorities  can  be  achieved,  but  that  trust 
takes time to build – so patience is warranted. At the same time, we need to start getting this 
process going immediately. On a European level, I think that the MoU can enhance cross-
border cooperation by increasing harmonisation, regulatory convergence and, not least, by 
building trust. Consequently, we should continue to fully implement the MoU. We are working 
on  this  in  the  Nordic  and  Baltic  countries  and  are  currently  establishing  a  Nordic-Baltic 
Voluntary Specific Cooperation Agreement. This may serve as an example and, although it 
may take some time, I am confident that we can increase trust in Europe as well.  
BIS Review 118/2009 
 5
Conclusion  
In my speech, I have talked about confidence and trust. Confidence is essential for a well-
functioning financial system. I have touched upon some reforms and actions that I believe 
are important to regain and preserve confidence in the banks. I have also talked about how 
building trust between authorities is essential to enhance cross-border crisis management.  
At  the  very  beginning  of  my  speech,  I  promised  to  stay  within  the  time-frame.  I  should,  of 
course, in the spirit of my speech, repay your trust by living up to my promise. But, before I 
end,  I  would  like  to  take  the  chance  to  stress  the  need  for  immediate  action.  Right  now, 
nobody doubts the need for and the relevance of reforms. But our memories are short. Good 
times also have a tendency to further shorten our memories of financial crises. So we must 
take  this  opportunity  to  make  reforms  while  the  public  awareness  and  the  political  will  are 
present. It will be a lot of work, but it will pay off.  
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2009
