Donald L Kohn: Central bank exit policies 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Cato  Institute's  Shadow  Open  Market  Committee  Meeting, 
Washington DC, 30 September 2009. 
 I am pleased to be on this panel on exiting from the unusual policies the Federal Reserve 
and other central banks have put in place to ameliorate the effects of the financial turmoil of 
the past two years. Chairman Bernanke has made a concerted effort to explain the thinking 
of the Federal Reserve in this regard, because it is so important that the public understand 
we have the means to meet our objectives of fostering stable prices and high employment. I 
will  briefly  underline  some  aspects  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  framework  for  exiting  that  I 
believe to be especially critical to that understanding.1  
Conditions for exit 
In  its  most  important  aspects,  the  decision  about  when  to  begin  exiting  from  the  unusual 
policies is not materially different from any decision to start tightening monetary policy. We 
will  need  to  begin  to  remove  the  extraordinary  degree  of  accommodation  in  its  various 
dimensions when we judge that exiting from the current stance of policy will be necessary to 
preserve  price  stability  as  the  economy  returns  to  higher  levels  of  resource  utilization. 
Because it takes people time to adjust their spending and pricing decisions in response to a 
change in interest rates or other aspects of financial conditions, like other monetary policy 
decisions, that judgment will need to be based on a forecast of economic developments, not 
on current conditions. So we must begin to withdraw accommodation well before aggregate 
spending  threatens  to  press  against  potential  supply,  and  well  before  inflation  as  well  as 
inflation expectations rise above levels consistent with price stability.  
I cannot give you a small list of variables that will trigger an exit; as always, our forecasts will 
use all available sources of information. And I can't predict how rapidly we will have to raise 
short-term interest rates from around zero or remove other forms of accommodation; that too 
depends on how the economy seems to be recovering and the outlook for inflation. Clearly, 
the present degree of accommodation – as gauged by nominal and real short-term interest 
rates and the size of our balance sheet – is extraordinary, and we will have to take account 
of how that is influencing spending and inflation expectations when deciding when and how 
fast to tighten.  
Tools for exit 
We have the framework to exit from these policies when we need to do so. And the tools at 
our disposal will allow us to do so at the pace and in the sequence we judge will best meet 
our objectives.  
Most  importantly,  our  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves  will  enable  us  to  raise  short-term 
interest rates even while the quantity of assets we hold is still quite elevated and while the 
reserve base of the banking system is extraordinarily high. The opportunity for banks to earn 
interest on a highly liquid risk-free deposit at the Federal Reserve should put a reasonably 
firm floor under short-term rates, including the federal funds rate. To date, that floor has been 
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market 
Committee. 
BIS Review 120/2009 
 1
somewhat  soft,  perhaps  because  not  all  participants  in  the  federal  funds  market  can  hold 
deposits  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  because  banks  have  been  reluctant  to  allocate  the 
needed capital to arbitrage a few basis points. But I am confident that when we begin to raise 
our  deposit  rate,  it  will  put  upward  pressure  on  the  rates  on  competing  assets,  increasing 
actual and expected short-term interest rates with the usual types of effects on other interest 
rates and asset prices. As banks become more comfortable with their capital levels, they will 
be more willing to undertake the arbitrage to tighten the link between the rate on deposits 
and short-term market interest rates.  
Still, draining reserves at some point also will be an aspect of exiting. The large volume of 
reserves  is  contributing  to  the  loose  relationship  of  our  deposit  rate  and  market  rates.  In 
addition,  although  to  date  the  high  volume  of  reserves  evidently  has  not  increased  bank 
lending or reduced spreads of rates on bank loans or other assets relative to, say, Treasury 
rates, it could begin to do so if banks start to perceive the risk-adjusted returns on loans as 
superior to our deposit rate. An increase in lending and narrowing of spreads on bank loans 
is  a  necessary  and  desirable  aspect  of  the  return  to  better-functioning  markets  and 
intermediation to promote economic growth. But spreads eventually could become narrower 
than what would be consistent with underlying risk, and lending could grow more quickly than 
appropriate  for  price  stability  if  very  high  levels  of  reserves  remain  in  place.  We  are 
developing new techniques for draining reserves, including reverse repurchase agreements 
against  mortgage-backed  securities  and  time  deposits  for  banks  at  the  Federal  Reserve. 
And, of course, we retain the option to sell securities from our portfolio on an outright basis. 
The range of tools will permit us to drain large volumes of reserves if necessary to achieve 
the policy stance that fosters our macroeconomic objectives.  
Our  lending  programs  were  designed  to  wind  themselves  down  as  market  conditions 
improve, and they are doing so. When conditions are no longer unusual and exigent, those 
programs  not  focused  on  depository  institutions  will  be  terminated,  and,  with  a  few 
exceptions  such  as  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility,  they  will  leave  no 
residual on our balance sheet.2  
The  long-term  securities  we  are  buying  will  not  run  off  so  rapidly.  But  the  effects  of  our 
holdings of mortgage-backed and agency securities on spreads nonetheless should decline 
even if they remain on our balance sheet. For one, some of the spread compression may 
result from the flow of our purchases, as well as our stock of holdings, and as we already 
announced, we will be tapering down our purchases. Moreover, the stock of assets we own 
will become an ever smaller share of a growing market. Finally, as confidence returns, asset 
demands will become less focused on particular classes of highly safe and liquid assets and 
more sensitive to relative interest rates, and private participants will arbitrage away at least 
some  of  any  remaining  spread  distortions.  Nonetheless,  if,  in  the  course  of  removing 
accommodation,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  perceives  spreads  to  be 
distorted or longer-term interest rates to be not responding appropriately, it could consider 
sales of these assets.  
Communication about exit 
The  unusual  nature  of  our  actions  and  the  uncertainty  about  when  and  how  they  will  be 
unwound suggest an even greater payoff than usual from being as clear as possible in our 
communications with the public. I already noted the importance of the public's understanding 
that we can and will exit from these policies when that is necessary to achieve our objectives 
for stable prices and maximum employment. In addition, we will need to explain especially 
                                                 
2   Lending in support of the orderly resolution of individual systemically important institutions will run down more 
slowly. The Administration has agreed to seek to remove the so-called Maiden Lane facilities from the Federal 
Reserve's balance sheet. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2009
carefully  –  in  our  policy  announcements,  the  minutes  of  our  meetings,  and  our  quarterly 
forecasts  –  the  evolution  of  our  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  and  the  risks 
associated  with  achieving  our  goals.  Finally,  we  will  need  to  be  sure  our  rate  guidance 
evolves along with our assessment of the probability that the exit is drawing closer.  
Conclusion 
Although economic conditions have apparently begun to improve – partly in response to the 
extraordinary  steps  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  authorities  have  taken  –  resource 
utilization is quite low, inflation is subdued, and continuing restraints on credit are likely to 
constrain  the  speed  of  recovery.  For  that  reason,  as  the  FOMC  stated  last  week, 
exceptionally low interest rates are likely to be warranted for an extended period. Given the 
highly unusual economic and financial circumstances, judging when the time is appropriate 
to remove policy accommodation, and then calibrating that removal, will be challenging. Still, 
we need to be ready to take the necessary actions when the time comes, and we will be.  
BIS Review 120/2009 
 3
