K C Chakrabarty: Mobile commerce, mobile banking – the emerging 
paradigm 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the India 
Telecom 2009 Conference organised by the Department of Telecom, Government of India, in 
collaboration  with  the  Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  (FICCI), 
New Delhi, 4 December 2009. 
 1. 
Introduction 
1.1  
It is indeed a privilege for me to be here at the "India Telecom 2009" event being 
organised by the Department of Telecom, Government of India, in collaboration with FICCI. I 
thank  Mr.  J.S.  Deepak,  Joint  Secretary,  Department  of  Telecom  for  extending  me  an 
invitation  and  providing  me  an  opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  on  Mobile  Commerce  or  
M-Commerce.  M-Commerce  is  an  area  which  is  rapidly  changing  the  way  people  conduct 
their financial transactions. Besides, this is an area which offers abundant scope for inclusive 
growth, which I believe is the theme of this conference. This is also an area which promises 
business  opportunities  to  service  providers  and  other  players  in  the  field  of  mobile 
communications,  and  last  but  not  the  least,  this  is  also  an  area  which  presents  new 
challenges  to  the  regulators  across  the  globe.  E-Commerce  is  process  of  providing  the 
buyers  of  goods  and  services,  the  option  to  carry  out  such  transactions,  and  pay  for  the 
same,  without  being  physically  present.  E-commerce  platforms  can  bring  in  efficiency  and 
cost benefits to buyers. But the key to such arrangements is the delivery. The internet is only 
one  of  the  mediums  to  reach  to  the  buyer,  the  confidence  of  the  buyer  depends  on  the 
reliability,  safety  and  security  of  the  delivery  system  and  the  trustworthiness  of  the 
merchants. Same would be applicable to m-commerce. Mobiles by the same logic can only 
be a facilitator and the Mobile Service Providers (MSPs) the service provider for this channel. 
Basic characteristics of m-commerce/e-commerce 
When  we  talk  of  e-commerce  or  m-commerce,  we  need  to  understand  the  key 
2. 
2.1  
differentiation between this type of commerce and traditional commerce. 
2.2  
In traditional commerce, delivery is a support function and a routine to be taken care 
by  clerks  or  lower  level  staff.  It  is  taken  for  granted  unless  something  goes  dramatically 
wrong. But in e-commerce or m-commerce, “delivery” becomes Critical Core Competence in 
which  businesses  will  be  evaluated  and  preferred.  Its  speed,  quality  and  responsiveness 
becomes decisive competitive factor which determines the success and sustainability of the 
company.  No  existing  m-commerce  player  is  organized  for  it.  Very  few  yet  are  thinking  in 
these terms. One who desires to enter this field must evaluate its “delivery” capability. 
2.3  
Second important issue in m-commerce or e-commerce is the need for collaboration 
between technology service provider and provider of goods and services. If it is m-medicine, 
we  require  collaboration  between  mobile  service  provider  and  health/medicine  service 
provider.  Similarly,  in  e-broking,  we  require  collaboration  between  technology  partner  and 
broking  service  provider.  Similarly,  in  m-banking  or  m-payment,  we  require  collaboration 
between  mobile  service  provider  and  banking/payment  service  provider.  We  cannot  and 
should not think of, at the initial stage, mobile payments without bank accounts. 
2.4  
It will also be useful before debating on any alternative modes for banking/payment 
delivery or concluding that banks have failed in providing financial inclusion, to consider the 
following three aspects related to the payment delivery and banking technology in India:– 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 1
I. 
II. 
III. 
Banking  technology  is  of  recent  origin  in  the  country.  Scaling  up  may,  therefore, 
require more time. 
Payment  is  only  one  aspect  of  banking.  Financial  inclusion  goes  beyond 
remittances.  Other  products  and  services  are  required  which  banks  are  better 
equipped to provide. 
Given  the  above  aspects  and  that  the  enabling  provisions  like  appointment  of 
business  correspondents  have  been  permitted  only  recently,  it  would  be  early  to 
conclude that banks have not been successful. 
I  hasten  to  add  that  if  the  banks  continue  as  laggards,  the  system  will  have  to  look  for 
alternate non bank model. The important end of inclusive growth cannot suffer on account of 
our insistence on a particular means/model. 
3. 
Evolution of electronic financial services  
(e-banking/e-commerce/m-banking/m-commerce) 
3.1  
Payment  methods  in  the  settlement  of  transactions  for  goods  and  services  have 
evolved  over  the  years  as  a  result  of  innovations  and  developments  in  technology  and 
business practices. From the earliest known barter systems to the cash-based approach and 
later, to other paper-based payment instruments, the progress in the payment methods was 
a relatively gradual one. However, due to rapid strides in technology, more efficient payment 
methods have evolved, mainly in the last few decades. Electronic mode funds transfer has 
afforded an efficient and secure means of transferring funds between bank accounts and is 
fast displacing paper-based payment methods. 
3.2.  
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  keeping  in  pace  with  the  developments  and 
introduced the Electronic Clearing Service (ECS) followed by the Electronic Fund Transfer 
System, later extended as the National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) and the Real Time 
Gross  Settlement  (RTGS).  All  these  systems  offered  a  secure  and  efficient  platform  for 
transfer  of  funds  between  bank  accounts  without  the  need  for  paper-based  payment 
instruments. The growing acceptability of ECS, RTGS and NEFT by banks and consumers of 
banking services of these schemes is evidenced by the following facts:  
• 
The  volume  of  ECS  (Credit)  transactions  handled  increased  from  69,019  in 
2006–07  to  88,394  in  2008–09.  The  volume  of  ECS  (Debit)  transactions 
increased from 75,202 to 1,60,055 during this period. 
The  number  of  CBS  enabled  bank  branches  offering  NEFT  service  has 
increased  from  42,900  to  54,200  in  2008–09  and  to  60,839  as  on 
September 30, 2009. 
The volume of transactions in EFT/NEFT increased from 4,776 in 2006–07 to 
32,161  in  2008–09.  The  aggregate  value  of  transactions  increased  from 
Rs.77,446 crore to Rs.2,51,956 crore during this period.  
The  number  of  bank  branches  offering  RTGS  service  has  increased  from 
43,512 to 55,000 in 2008–09 and to 60,144 as on September 30, 2009. 
The daily average volume of transactions is 90,000 for about Rs.1,200 billion 
of  which  82,000  transactions  for  about  Rs.980  billion  pertained  to  customer 
transactions as at end of August 2009.  
ECS 
– 
NEFT 
– 
  RTGS 
– 
  2 
 BIS Review 161/2009
I  would  like  to  mention  here  that  in  India,  RTGS  facility  is  currently  available  only  for 
transactions of Rs. 1.00 lakh and above. With more bank branches coming under CBS, the 
volume and value of transactions settled under RTGS and NEFT is expected to show further 
increase in the coming years. 
3.3  
The growth of internet and accessibility to the world at large from a PC at home or 
office  not  only  brought  about  a  revolution  in  access  to  information  but  the  related 
developments in technology also heralded the emergence of e-payments/e-commerce. From 
the convenience of the home, one could plan one’s travels and book rail/air tickets instantly 
avoiding the hassles of visits to the travel agent or standing in a long queue at the railway 
booking counters. Most significantly, one could do and all this on a 24/7/365 basis. 
3.4   Even as we were marveling at the way internet changed our life styles, the increasing 
popularity  of  the  Mobile  Phone  (I  believe,  the  number  of  telecom  subscribers  in  India  has 
crossed  the  500  million  mark  as  on  September  30,  2009)  and  developments  in  mobile 
technology brought to fore the potential of this ubiquitous instrument as a tool for conduct of 
business, including electronic money transfers and the terms “Mobile banking” and “Mobile 
commerce”  acquired  popularity.  While  e-commerce  has  skipped  the  majority  of  the 
population due to the cost of setting-up such channels, m-commerce has the capability to be 
inclusive due to the wide spread use of the mobile phones. 
3.5  
Recognising  the  importance  of  this  mode  Reserve  Bank  of  India  issued  the 
guidelines for Mobile Banking Transactions in October 2008. The guidelines permit banks to 
provide  mobile  banking  transactions  and  mandates  that  all  transactions  have  to  originate 
from one bank account and terminate in another bank account. These guidelines have been 
discussed in different fora and the perception in certain quarters has been that the guidelines 
are  restrictive  as  they  do  not  permit  non-bank  entities,  especially  the  Mobile  Service 
Providers to provide such services. The protagonists of this view often refer to the reported 
success of the M-PESA model adopted by Kenya and feel that the same could adopted or 
adapted  in  our  country.  They  generally  argue  that  a  non-bank  led  model  with  appropriate 
regulatory  mechanism  in  place  would  not  only  be  as  safe  as  a  bank-led  model  but  also 
enable greater penetration into under-banked and non-banked areas and thereby contribute 
to the financial inclusion process. 
3.6  
M-PESA is in effect a virtual prepaid payment product, allowing the mobile service 
provider to retain the pre-paid amount and permitting, inter alia, person to person remittance. 
A  paper  “Poor  People  Using  Mobile  Financial  Services:  Observations  on  Customer  Usage 
and  Impact  from  M-PESA”  published  by  CGAP  (Consultative  Group  to  Assist  the  Poor) 
states  that  person-to-person  transfer  for  maintenance  of  family  dominates  the  use  of  
M-PESA  in  Kenya.  In  comparison,  mobile  banking  offers  the  facility  of  accessing  banking 
products, which includes payments/remittances from bank account to bank account – either 
inter-bank or intra-bank. 
3.7  
Before embarking on the question of extending m-commerce facility, it is necessary 
to understand the risks. In this connection, I would like to refer to a paper submitted by the 
World Bank on the “Integrity in Mobile Financial Services” which identified four risk factors 
viz. anonymity, elusiveness, rapidity and poor oversight. Anonymity is the risk of not knowing 
a customer’s actual identity. Elusiveness is the ability to disguise mobile transaction totals, 
origins and destinations. Rapidity is the speed with which illicit transactions can occur. Poor 
oversight identity refers to the level of regulation of service providers. Any model of mobile 
financial services needs to address to these issues 
3.8  
Firstly, let me admit that despite a wide network of bank branches spread across the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  country,  banking  has  still  not  reached  a  large  section  of  the 
population. They are deprived of basic banking services like a savings account or minimal 
credit  facilities.  Banking  penetration  was  not  there  because  earlier  technology  was  not 
available. But now, technology is available.  Reserve Bank has taken measures to achieve 
increased financial inclusion though the “Banking Correspondent BC” model. The RBI also 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 3
formulated a biometric access/smart card based scheme of Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) 
by  banks  to  facilitate  routing  of  social  security  benefits,  National  Rural  Employment 
Guarantee  Act  payments  and  other  government  payments  could  be  routed.  The  scheme, 
which involves subsidizing the cost of issue of the biometric access/smart cards by banks, 
was  initially  implemented  in  Andhra  Pradesh  in  2008  and  has  been  extended  across  the 
country till June 30, 2010. I would also like to mention here that as per the annual report of 
India Post for the year 2008–09, there are over 1.55 lakh post offices in India, of which 89% 
are  in  the  rural  areas.  And  post  offices  offer  money  transfer  services  through  their  Money 
Order  and  Instant  Money  Order  schemes.  One  of  the  important  concerns  in  any  money 
transfer transaction is the bonafide of the underlying. This concern is not restricted to India 
but felt across the globe. 
3.9  
The  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  Guidelines/Anti  Money  Laundering  (AML) 
guidelines have been well established in banks and appropriate mechanism is in place for 
reporting  high  value  transactions  to  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  of  the  Government  of 
India. The MSP led model would have concerns from the point of view of money laundering 
and  the  safety  and  security  of  the  transactions.  The  customer  identification  processes 
followed  in case  of  prepaid  customers  are  lax as  the  MSPs  consider  this  as  low  risk  from 
their  financial  stand  point.  Given  the  large  number  of  such  cards  being  issued  and  the 
number  of  outlets  through  which  they  are  issued,  as  a  Regulator  of  the  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems in the country, it is difficult to contain the risk of anonymity in a MSP led 
model. Let me add here that the M-PESA model has the comfort of a National-ID scheme 
which  is  in  existence  in  Kenya.  Interestingly,  as  per  the  indications  available  on  the  UID 
Project, the team is veering round to the bank led model to further financial inclusion in India. 
Also, apart from KYC norms, MSPs would also have to enhance transparency in pricing and 
improve their infrastructure. 
3.10  
The advocates of a MSP-led mobile commerce list two advantages of the system, 
namely (i) leveraging the spread agent network (ii) transaction cost. The wide spread agent 
network is an attractive proposition for extending financial services. But does this require that 
the service is provided by the MSP only? I have already highlighted the availability of a large 
network  of  banks  in  the  country.  Cannot  this  agent  network  be  utilized  by  banks  in 
partnership with MSPs, for extending financial services? Keeping in view the concerns about 
money  laundering  and  financial  terrorism,  we  would  prefer  a  partnership  where  the  MSPs 
gain from the Over The Air (OTA) transaction volume and banks leveraging the channels for 
wider reach. There needs to be clear distinction of roles. Reserve Bank is exploring a better 
model across the world. 
3.11  
In  this  context  two  successful  models  of  partnership  between  banks  and  MSPs 
observed are Wizzit in South Africa and G-Cash in Philippines. Wizzit Bank is a virtual bank 
which is a subsidiary of Bank of Athens in South Africa. It provides the unbanked population 
in SA with bank accounts on mobile phones which can be used to make person-to-person 
payments, transfers and pre-paid purchases. Besides, account holders are also provided a 
Maestro  card  for  cash  withdrawal.  The  MSPs  supports  this  facility  as  carriers  of  such 
transaction instructions.  
3.12  
Philippines  have  been  the  pioneer  in  enabling  financial  services  through  use  of 
mobile  phones.  The  first  product  introduced  in  the  country  was  SMART  money  –  a 
partnership between, SMART telecom, Banco de Oro. Subsequently, G-cash a telecom led 
model  was  subsequently  introduced  by  Globe  Telecom.  The  country  has  seen  the 
development of partnership between the mobile payment platforms provided and rural banks 
there. 
Ownership of customers 
4. 
4.1  
The  issue  of  partnership  between  banks  and  MSPs  brings  to  fore  the  muted 
discussion  Ownership  of  customers.  The  implementation  of  a  successful  mobile  banking 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2009
product  requires  seamless  flow  of  payment  instructions  across  mobile  operators.  The 
successful partnering of banks and MSPs would also need the resolution of the issue related 
to  customer  ownership.  The  discussion  on  mobile  banking  often  leads  to  the  issues  of 
ownership of customers. The MSP's by virtue of being the owners of the mobile customer 
claim that mobile banking is only an Value added service (VAS) enabled by them. The banks 
claim  ownership  of  the  banking  customer  and  feel  mobile  only  being  an  additional  access 
channel similar to internet. 
Transaction charges 
5. 
5.1  
On the reported second advantage of low transaction charges, let me again quote 
from the CGAP report. A fund transfer of 1,000 Ksh (Kenyan Shilling) would cost the remitter 
30 Ksh and the recipient 25 Ksh if the recipient is a registered customer and upto 75Ksh of 
the  recipient  if  not  a  registered  recipient.  In  comparison  a  bank  to  bank  fund  transfer  of 
Rs 1 lakh  in  India  using  NEFT  would  cost  only  Rs.  5/–  for  the  customers.  The  charges 
mandated by RBI make all account to account fund transfer models as the cheapest mode of 
remittance in India. 
5.2  
Information  and  Communication  Technology  based  solutions  hold  the  key  in 
promoting financial inclusion in the country. Currently, number of projects using smart card 
solutions  with  biometric  authentication  have  been  implemented  in  the  country.  In  such 
arrangements the account details and the transaction data are stored on the smart card held 
by the account holder. Agents of BCs, who are given hand held Point of Sale terminals are 
be approached by the customers for carrying out any transaction. Similar, solutions based on 
high  end  mobile  phones  have  also  been  implemented.  In  this  arrangement,  all  transaction 
data  are  held  on  the  mobile  phone.  The  customers  are  given  only  receipts  of  their 
transactions/account statements. 
Financial inclusion 
6. 
6.1  
In  this  regard  we  recognize  that  mobile  phone  can  be  an  important  mode  for 
propagation of financial inclusion in the country. The coverage of mobile phones and the use 
of such instruments by all section of the population can be exploited for extending financial 
services  to  the  excluded  populations.  A  comparison  of  the  smart  card  based  and  mobile 
solutions would show that both technologies have their advantages. A mobile based product 
for  extending  financial  inclusion  would  permit  the  customer  to  carryout  transactions 
independent  of  agents  of  BCs.  The  agents  would  only  be  required  for  enrollment,  cash 
deposit and cash withdrawal. Whereas, in a smart card based technology, the presence of 
an agent is required for initiation of all transactions. 
6.2  
The advantage of smart card is that, it can provide biometric authentication, which 
would help in reducing frauds and ensure identity of customers. Such cards can also hold all 
transaction details on the card. Further, the failure of transactions at POS would be less in 
comparison with the SMS based transactions. 
Customer service 
7. 
7.1  
Banking  is  an  activity  of  trust.  This  trust  resides  on  the  Capital,  Liquidity 
requirements and the stringent regulatory and supervisory requirements. Therefore, dilution 
of these standards would not be possible. Any arrangement that the banks are permitted to 
enter into would have to address these issues. The customer service aspect also have to be 
given  increased  importance.  This  assumes  importance  as  the  failure  rate  in  mobile 
transactions  can  be  high.  The  report  by  CGAP  states,  failure  to  process  transactions  or 
transactions processed but confirmation not received due to congestion at peak texting times 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 5
as a major source of dissatisfaction of customers of M-PESA. Resolution of such complaints 
takes long time to resolve by the agents due to high volume of such calls. 
(ii)  
Issues faced by banks in providing mobile banking 
8. 
8.1  
One year has lapsed since the issuance of the guidelines by RBI. 32 banks have 
been given approval to provide mobile banking facility in India. Of this 21 banks have started 
providing  these  services.  Yet  we  have  not  seen  much  activity  in  this  area  in  India.  The 
transaction volumes are very low. Let me highlight here some of the issues stated by banks 
for low uptake of mobile banking facilities.  
(i)  
The requirement of end-to-end encryption makes implementation costly. They feel 
low ticket transactions do not require end-to-end encryption. 
The transaction limits of Rs 5000/– and Rs 10,000/– needs to be revised upwards. 
Banks  point  out  that  these  limits  do  not  permit  transactions  like  air  lines  ticket 
purchase etc. 
8.2  
These issues are being examined by RBI. Yet these questions raise the following 
concerns  in  our  minds.  Are  the  banks  targeting  only  the  customers  who  can  book  airline 
tickets or such large ticket transactions only? Mobile being a cheap mode for delivery which 
essentially  facilitates  low  value  transactions  why  are  low  value  transactions  not  being 
facilitated? 
8.3  
Other  issues  stated  by  banks  relate  to  the  difficulties  faced  with  Mobile  Service 
Providers.  Let  me  highlight  some  of  these  issues,  the  mobile  service  providers  and  TRAI 
would like to examine these. 
I.  
Facilitation  of  mobile  banking  requires  tie-ups  with  individual  service  providers  for 
enabling such services. Banks face difficulties in entering into such partnerships. 
MSPs  do  not  open  up  channels  for  facilitating  mobile  banking  services  by  banks. 
Opening up USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Services Data) channel for mobile 
banking and enabling the accessing of mobile banking facilities through all GPRS 
connections. 
II.  
Role of non-banks in Indian payment scenario 
9. 
The  Payment  and  Settlements  System  Act,  2007,  entrusts  upon  RBI,  the 
9.1  
responsibility  for  regulation  and  supervision  of  all  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the 
country.  Subsequent  to  the  notification  of  the  Act,  we  have  permitted  non-bank  entities  to 
issue prepaid payment instruments. The policy guidelines issued in April 2009 in this regard 
provide wide options for issuance of such pre-paid products. The amendment to the policy 
guidelines issued on August 14, 2009, permits all non-bank entities including MSPs to issue 
mobile  based  prepaid  instruments.  This  relaxation  was  carried  out  based  on  the 
representation from MSPs. Yet, as of now only one MSP has applied for approval to provide 
such  services.  We  are  rather  surprised  at  the  lack  of  interest  since  the  change  was 
mandated  based  on  representations  from  COAI.  Are  we  to  conclude  that  any  model  that 
does not provide a financial float does not interest MSPs? It will have to be recognized that 
MSP  led  model  cannot  also  permit  MSPs  to  enjoy  the  float  funds.  These  funds  remaining 
with non-banks are tantamount to deposit taking which needs to be discouraged. 
10. 
Conclusion 
10.1  
The  convenience  of  the  mobile  phone  as  an  instrument  for  conduct  of  financial 
transactions  and  the  immense  potential  it  has  in  the  process  of  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  growth  is  well  recognized.  We  all  agree  that  the  benefits  of  m-commerce  should 
6 
 BIS Review 161/2009
reach the common man at the remotest locations in the country. However, the extent and the 
manner  in  which  m-commerce  should  be  facilitated  needs  a  cautious  and  well  considered 
approach keeping in view the concerns on money laundering and financial terrorism and the 
stability of the payment and settlement systems. Further, any non bank service provider in 
the  e  payment  cycle  has  to  model  his  business  based  on  fees  and  not  on  float.  Funds 
management is best left to banks. While this is the policy has stood the test of time, RBI is 
not  averse  to  any  idea  of  revisiting  this  approach  if  this  arrangement  fails  to  meet  the 
objective of total financial inclusion. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 7
