A D Mminele: South Africa amidst the crisis 
Address by Mr A D Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
“Spire  Awards”  Ceremony,  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange,  Johannesburg,  3  November 
2009.  
 Introduction  
1. 
Good evening distinguished guests, nominees for the 2009 Spire Awards, Sponsors of the 
Awards, ladies and gentlemen  
It is an honour to be invited to speak at this prestigious event, which is held in recognition 
and celebration of excellence in South Africa’s fixed income market. The Spire Awards have 
become a key event in the South African financial markets calendar.  
BESA  has  undergone  numerous  changes  over  the  past  two  years,  having  successfully 
completed its demutualisation and recapitalisation at the time of the 2008 Spire Awards and 
now,  just  more  than  a  year  later,  has  become  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the 
Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE). BESA should be congratulated for the role it played in 
the development of South Africa’s bond market. In the more than 10 years of its existence, 
BESA played a prominent role in advancing South Africa to its position as one of the most 
liquid and developed amongst global bond markets, and a leader in emerging markets. This 
fact is clearly illustrated by the significant rise in turnover in recent years, from R9, 5 trillion in 
1998  to  R19,  1  trillion  in  2008.  The  World  Federation  of  Exchanges  places  BESA  as  the 
fourth largest exchange in terms of turnover recorded for bond trades in 2008.  
We wish BESA well in the new partnership with the JSE, which will benefit the interest rate 
and derivatives market in South Africa and contribute towards the further development of our 
financial markets. Allow me to take this opportunity to convey my appreciation for the manner 
in  which  the  JSE  has  kept  the  markets  and  relevant  stakeholders  informed  about  the 
integration process.  
Importance of a well developed bond market  
2.  
I need not tell you that  the central bank takes a keen interest in the fixed income market, 
having played a key role in the development and expansion thereof prior to 1998. The bond 
market plays a vital role in the achievement of both monetary and financial stability. A well 
functioning  bond  market  should  improve  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy, 
allow the central bank to infer inflation and interest rate expectations of market participants, 
and contribute to the promotion of economic growth, by facilitating more efficient pricing of 
borrowing and lending. Without a well-developed local currency debt market, balance sheet 
vulnerabilities  could  emerge,  the  risk  of  default  would  increase,  there  would  be  a 
concentration  of  credit  and  maturity  risks  in  the  banking  system,  and  vulnerabilities  from 
capital inflows and limited macroeconomic policy instruments would increase. The ability to 
cope  with  financial  distress  would  be  diminished.1  Because  of  our  well-developed  local 
currency  bond  market,  the  Government  has  over  the  years  been  able  to  meet  its  funding 
requirements mainly in the domestic market, and this has indeed been one of the reasons 
why South Africa fared rather well in the global financial crisis. For many emerging markets, 
the further development of local currency debt markets has become a priority.  
                                                 
1   CGFS Papers no.28, Financial stability and local currency bond markets, June 2007. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 1
It is also for these reasons that the Committee of Central Bank Governors in SADC (CCBG) 
approved the creation of a financial markets subcommittee during 2008. This committee was 
established  precisely  because  of  the  recognition  that  robust,  well  diversified  and  liquid 
financial  markets  are  critical  to  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  for  maintenance  of 
financial  stability,  and  that  they  can  contribute  towards  increased  economic  activity 
throughout the region. Under the auspices of this committee, central banks have agreed to 
co-operate in developing and strengthening their national financial markets with the intention 
of creating a regional financial market as part of the initiatives towards the implementation of 
the SADC Finance and Investment Protocol (FIP). I am aware that the JSE, as part of the 
Committee  of  Stock  Exchanges  in  SADC  (CoSSE)  is  already  in  conversation  with  this 
subcommittee to advance the development of bond markets in the region.  
Conundrum or catastrophe?  
3.  
As  we  have  witnessed  in  recent  times,  even  in  well-functioning,  deep  and  liquid  bond 
markets,  inefficiencies and  market  failures  can  still  occur. It  was  not  too  long  ago  that  the 
world was perplexed by the so-called “Greenspan conundrum”, where there appeared to be 
a decoupling of monetary policy from long-term interest rates. The increase in the US policy 
rate from 1 per cent in 2004 to 5, 25 per cent in 2006 had little or no impact on long-term US 
Treasury  yields,  ultimately  resulting  in  low  and  stable  long-term  mortgage  rates.  This 
phenomenon  raised  concerns  that  a  possible  housing  bubble  was  brewing  in  the  US, 
concerns which were not unfounded.  
There were many explanations put forward for this conundrum, from the immense credibility 
the  Fed  had  gained  in  keeping  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  low,  to  Fed  Chairman 
Bernanke’s “global savings glut”. Whatever the reason, it was not long before the Greenspan 
conundrum turned into a disaster. Risks of the housing bubble bursting indeed materialised 
and the rest of the story you all know very well. Needless to say, the conundrum that existed 
is  no  longer.  As  central  bankers  began  to  ease  monetary  policy,  investors  began  to  worry 
about inflation, boosting long-term interest rates and in the process mitigating the action that 
policymakers thought was necessary. Unconventional forms of expansionary monetary policy 
were  instituted,  for  fear  that  long-term  interest  rates  would  not  remain  low  and  therefore 
would  dull  any  possible  improvement  in  economic  activity.  The  combined  impact  of 
quantitative and credit easing on central bank balance sheets has been extremely large.  
The rise of emerging economies  
4.  
It is said that the crisis did not derail but rather accelerated the rise of emerging economies.2 
It is now just more than two years since the onset of the sub-prime crisis and it appears that 
the global economy is finally emerging from recession, even if significant risks remain. The 
IMF’s latest World Economic Outlook shows improved prospects for global growth in 2009 
and 2010 compared to previous forecasts, with a strong performance by Asian economies 
supporting the global recovery.  
Emerging markets, accounting for one third of global output, play an increasingly important 
part, and it is for this reason that the G20 has assumed a leading role as a forum for global 
co-ordination. After losing approximately 60 per cent of value since the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers until the low point reached in March 2009, the Morgan Stanley Capital International 
Index (MSCI) gained more that the 60 per cent until the end of October, led by an almost 90 
per cent improvement in the MSCI for emerging markets. The EMBI plus yield had increased 
                                                 
2   Antoine van Agtmael, FT.com. 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2009
for 
too 
levels 
by almost 600 basis points between January 2007 and October 2008, and has since declined 
by a similar magnitude.  
Emerging market currencies have also appreciated significantly, the rand being no exception. 
A  currency  remaining  at  non-competitive 
long  might  have  adverse 
consequences for the real economy. Some countries opted to deal with currencies perceived 
to  be  too  strong  through  a  combination  of  verbal  and  actual  market  intervention.  Brazil,  in 
addition to previous measures, also recently imposed a 2 per cent tax on capital inflows into 
both equity and bond markets to contain short-term capital flows and to reduce any further 
upward pressure on the currency. The appreciation in emerging market currencies, including 
the rand, has been mostly driven by external factors, such as increased global liquidity, the 
depreciation  of  the  USD  and  renewed  investor-appetite  for  more  risky  assets.  Domestic 
factors,  such  as  relatively  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  wider  interest  rate 
differentials, have also played a role. These gains, unfortunately, increase the likelihood of 
an uneven economic recovery.  
Whilst the monetary and fiscal authorities in South Africa have at times expressed concern 
about the impact of the appreciated currency on the overall macroeconomic balance, SARB 
policy  remains  that of  no  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market with  the  objective  of 
managing the currency. The floating exchange rate regime helped to cushion South Africa 
from  more  severe  effects  of  the  global  crisis.  The  Bank  will,  within  the  broader  context  of 
policy  coordination  with  the  National  Treasury,  continue  with  its  strategy  of  accumulating 
foreign  exchange  reserves  when  market  conditions  are  conducive.  Over  the  past  year, 
reserves accumulation was constrained by the volatility in the foreign-exchange markets, the 
level of global risk aversion and cost considerations. More recently, conditions in the foreign 
exchange markets have been somewhat more favourable, allowing the Bank to increase its 
purchases of foreign exchange in a responsible manner.  
South Africa amidst the crisis  
5.  
As we are all aware, South Africa was not immune to the global crisis, the domestic economy 
contracted  for  three  consecutive  quarters.  The  monetary  policy  tightening  cycle  which 
commenced  in  June  2006  came  to  an  end  in  June  2008.  The  MPC  was  initially  more 
concerned  about  the  impact  of  multiple  supply  shocks  on  inflation.  It  was  only  later  that 
global developments began to have a significant impact on the economy. Keeping in mind 
that  the  MPC’s  focus  is  on  the  medium  to  long-term  expected  inflation  trajectory,  and  that 
there is a lag in the reaction of inflation to interest rate changes, the significant widening in 
the output gap and inflation continuing its downward trend after peaking at 13, 6 per cent in 
August  2008,  allowed  for  the  MPC  to  reduce  the  repurchase  rate  by  500  basis  points 
between December 2008 and August 2009.  
The contraction in economic activity and the change in the monetary policy stance impacted 
the domestic bond market in two ways. Firstly, while monetary policy easing exerted some 
downward  pressure  on  bond  yields,  this  was  counteracted  by  increased  supply  of 
government  bonds.  Given  the  rapidly  slowing  economy,  revenue  intake  was  substantially 
lower than projected, causing an increase in the budget deficit. Increased risk aversion also 
resulted  in  non-residents  reducing  their  exposure  to  the  domestic  bond  market.  Amid  the 
economic conditions described above, the benchmark yield curve inverted. The dynamics in 
the bond market changed significantly over the past year. Whereas in previous years, strong 
economic  growth  and  revenue  collections  resulted  in  government  being  net  redeemers  of 
bonds, since the end of 2008, activity in the primary bond market has been driven primarily 
by the public sector, Government and state owned enterprises. For the first nine months of 
2009,  the  public  sector  issued  a  net  R74,  5  billion,  compared  with  net  issuance  of  R800 
million in the same period last year. The Medium Term Budget Policy Statement indicates 
that for 2009/10, revenue collections will be R82 billion lower than projected in the February 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 3
Budget, resulting in the projected budget deficit for 2009/10 increasing from 3,4 per cent of 
GDP to 7,6 per cent.  
Notwithstanding  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  and  conditions  in  the  domestic 
economy,  bond  listings on  BESA  grew  in  2008,  albeit  at  a slower  pace.  While  on  the  one 
hand, the bulk of growth was attributed to the increased issuance of commercial paper by 
corporates  as  well  as  increased  issuance  by  state  owned  enterprises,  on  the  other  hand, 
growth in listings was dampened by contractions in the securitisation and “other” corporate 
categories.  Similarly,  conduit  sizes  have  almost  halved,  driven  by  negative  perceptions 
towards  asset  back  commercial  paper  following  the  sub-prime  crisis  and  the  slowdown  in 
economic growth. As for corporate listings in general, these were held back by the slowdown 
in domestic economic activity which forced many corporates to scale down activities. There 
are,  however,  indications  that  appetite  for  credit  in  the  South  African  market  is  returning, 
judging  from  the  strong  senior  bank  bond  issuance  in  the  third  quarter.  South  Africa  has 
fared rather well throughout the crisis in comparison to some other emerging and developed 
economies.  
Conclusion  
6.  
In  conclusion:  While  there  continues  to  be  much  uncertainty  regarding  the  strength  and 
sustainability  of  the  recovery,  increasingly  central  banks  are  beginning  to  ponder  exit 
strategies. The quantitative easing employed by central banks, the fiscal stimulus packages 
and record increase in government debt issuance has created concerns about exit strategies 
of central banks and their impact. The question is whether central banks will be able to exit 
from these unconventional policies in such a manner that the nascent economic recovery is 
not jeopardized, while also ensuring that the timing is correct such that inflationary pressures 
do not build. Central banks face important challenges in several areas, such as determining 
the timing and extent of reversing policy easing, coordinating with fiscal authorities and other 
central banks, and communicating their strategies to the public. A disciplined analysis of the 
data will test the science of central banking, whereas a good assessment of the operating 
environment and judgement will put the spotlight on the art of central banking.  
Finally, I would like to congratulate all the nominees for this year’s Spire Awards. Whether 
you or your team walk away with a prize or not, the fact that you were nominated is indeed 
already a great recognition by your clients and your peers for the contribution you have made 
to the South African bond market.  
I thank you all for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 140/2009
