Durmuş Yılmaz: Islamic finance – during and after the global financial 
crisis  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Conference on “Islamic finance – during and after the global financial crisis”, IMF-World 
Bank Annual Meetings 2009, Istanbul, 5 October 2009.  
 Distinguished Guests,  
I want to begin my speech with expressing my heartfelt condolence to the loss of lives by 
earthquake in Indonesia. 
I am honored to address such a distinguished audience in Istanbul. It is a great pleasure for 
us to host this conference. In my presentation today, I will address the growing interest in 
Islamic finance, which has been proven to be relatively immune to financial crisis during the 
current episode, especially compared to the conventional financial institutions. 
Increasing  popularity  of  Islamic  finance  can  be  attributed  first  to  the  enormous  volume  of 
loanable funds that accumulated in geographies that host Islamic practices of living. Islamic 
finance  as  yet  another  alternative  to  mainstream  finance  can  be  mentioned  as  a  second 
reason. 
It is by now a de facto practice and this makes enough motivation to study, talk about and 
assess Islamic finance. 
Dear Guests,  
Islamic  financial  institutions  have  started  to  emerge  in  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth 
century and become one of the fastest growing segments in the global financial system over 
the  past  three  decades.  Although,  Islamic  finance  institutions  are  mainly  founded  in  the 
Middle East and South-east Asia, the interest has extended to Europe and the United States. 
Today, the size of Islamic banks around the world is estimated to be more than USD 250 
billion and expected to grow by about 15 percent annually. 
Due to the growing importance of the Islamic finance, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) 
was  established  in  December  1973.  The  purpose  of  the  Bank  is  to  foster  economic 
development  and  social  progress  of  Muslim  communities  individually  as  well  as  jointly  in 
accordance  with  the  principles  of  Islamic  Law.  The  number  of  members  to  the  Bank  is 
steadily enlarging and currently consists of 56 countries. 
The  primary  functions  of  the  IDB  are  to  participate  in  equity  capital  and  grant  loans  for 
productive  projects  and  enterprises  besides  providing  financial  assistance  to  member 
countries in other form for economic and social development. The Bank is also required to 
establish and operate special funds for specific purposes including a fund for assistance to 
Muslim communities in non-member countries, in addition to setting up trust funds. 
The  Bank  is  authorized  to  accept  deposits  and  to  mobilize  financial  resources  through 
Shari'ah  compatible  modes.  It  is  also  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  assisting  in  the 
promotion of foreign trade especially in capital goods, among member countries; providing 
technical  assistance  to  member  countries;  and  extending  training  facilities  for  personnel 
engaged in development activities in Muslim countries to conform to the Islamic Law. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In  the  Turkish  context,  the  Islamic  finance  practices  are  embodied  in  a  uniquely  defined 
compartment of the banking system. These banks are called as the “participation banks” in 
Turkey  and  they  constitute  an  integral  part  of  the  Turkish  banking  system.  There  are  four 
Islamic banks categorized as participation banks, and 45 conventional banks in Turkey as of 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 1
September 2009. It is crucial to highlight that the participation banks are not considered as 
an alternative to the conventional banks. While they are functioning similar to deposit banks, 
their fund collecting and lending processes differ significantly. 
Participation banks are authorized by the Turkish Banking Act to collect funds from the public 
under  the  “profit  and  loss  participation  accounts”  and  the  “special  current  accounts”.  The 
profit  and  loss  participation  accounts  are  essentially  a  version  of  the  Islamic  financial 
instrument, where the bank utilizes the funds deposited by account holders to fund specific 
business activities. Any profits earned are shared between the account holder and the bank, 
in proportion to an agreed ratio. 
Participation banks in Turkey mainly offer two types of lending. The first type of financing is 
Murabaha, which is a transaction consisting of two sales contracts. The first contract involves 
a bank client requesting the bank to undertake a Murabaha transaction and promising to buy 
the  commodity  specified  by  him  or  her  if  the  bank  acquires  that  commodity.  The  second 
contract  involves  the  client  purchasing  the  commodity  acquired  by  the  bank  on  a deferred 
payment basis and agreeing to a payment schedule. The second type of financing is financial 
leasing or Ijara, with terms similar to those offered by other leasing companies. 
Participation  banks  currently  constitute  only  a  small  part  of  the  Turkish  banking  sector, 
accounting  for  3.7  percent,  4.2  percent,  and  5.2  percent  of  total  banking  sector  assets, 
deposits, and loans, respectively, at the end of 2008. However, they have been expanding 
rapidly in recent years. The share of participation banks’ assets in total banking sector rose 
from  1.9  percent  in  end-2002  to  3.7  percent  in  end-2008.  They  have  provided  finance  to 
mainly small and medium size dynamic firms. At present, participation banks are regulated 
according to the same standards as conventional banks. Accordingly, they are regulated and 
supervised by the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency. 
Distinguished Guests,  
While Islamic finance is well settled as a mode of operation, with already living examples, 
there is no consensus view on the role of Islamic finance on price and financial stability. 
On  the  financial  stability  side,  although  there  has  been  a  wide  consensus  that  the 
establishment  of  a  powerful  regulation  and  supervision  system  is  vital  to  resume  financial 
stability, there are contradictory views on the support of the Islamic financial institutions to 
financial  stability.  On  the  other  hand,  the  role  of  Islamic  finance  on  price  stability  has  not 
been fully covered by the recent empirical studies. 
The views supporting Islamic finance state that Islamic financial institutions are more resilient 
to  external  shocks.  Profit  and  loss  sharing  feature  of  the  transactions  in  Islamic  finance 
provides a protection to these institutions, apart from the capital. This feature of the Islamic 
financial institutions could transfer a negative shock on the asset side to the liability side. 
Furthermore, due to the fact that the investors (depositors) take on some part of the risk and 
do  not  have  deposit  insurance,  they  have  more  incentives  to  exercise  tight  oversight  over 
these  institutions.  In  addition,  as  compared  to  conventional  banks,  they  have  held  a 
comparatively larger share of their assets in reserve accounts for the liquidity management. 
Thus, even if Islamic financial institutions have risky investments, these buffers make them 
more resilient to the negative external shocks. 
On the other hand, the opposing views claim that Islamic finance does not need to 
improve  the  financial  stability.  According  to  this  view,  profit  and  loss  sharing  feature  of 
Islamic  finance  transfers  the  credit  risk  from  Islamic  institutions  to  their  depositors,  and 
therefore, motivates the excessive risk taking incentive of Islamic banks. 
While  capital  value  and  earnings  of  customers  are  not  guaranteed  in  Islamic  finance,  this 
feature may increase moral hazard and motivation for excessive risk taking without adequate 
capital. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2009
During the recent financial crisis, Islamic financial institutions have demonstrated significant 
resilience. They have been less affected compared to the conventional financial institutions 
thanks  to  prohibitions  on  excessive  leverage.  The  transfer  of  risks  related  with  the  debt  is 
prohibited in Islamic finance. Therefore speculative transactions such as derivative are non-
existent. Transferring the risk related with the debt and speculative financial activities could 
cause unnecessary booming of the financial transaction volume well above the size of the 
real economy. 
Moreover, linking credit supply to growth rate of the economic activity, Islamic finance acts as 
a  natural  hedging  scheme.  In  other  words,  financing  extended  by  means  of  Islamic 
institutions  can  be  used  only  with  the  real  economic  activity,  and  thereby,  help  restrict 
excessive credit boom. Credit is mainly extended for the purchasing of the real goods and 
services.  In  Islamic  finance,  Islamic  financial  institutions  should  own  and  possess  the  real 
goods  and  services  and  the  buyers  of  the  real  goods  and  services  should  want  to  take 
delivery. Therefore, stakeholders share profits in good times, and losses in bad times. 
Distinguished Guests,  
There is ample room to improve Islamic financial system, more specifically on regulatory and 
supervisory side. While the high growth rate of the Islamic financial institutions is expected to 
continue  in  the  coming  years,  they  maintain  certain  market  risks  such  as  reputation  and 
liquidity  risk.  Liquidity  management  is  difficult  under  Islamic  finance  rules  as  practical 
instruments  in  accessing  liquidity  are  limited.  However,  Islamic  financial  institutions,  being 
aware  of  the  limits  in  liquidity  management,  sustain  higher  liquidity  ratios  compared  to 
conventional  banks.  Similar  case  is  valid  for  their  capital  ratios.  Moreover,  the  lack  of 
technical and contract standardization seems to weaken the potential of Islamic finance, as 
an alternative financing against the conventional financial institutions. Besides, the customer 
base  needs  enlargement  including  household  services.  The  regulation  and  supervision 
framework of Islamic financial institutions should also be improved. 
In  conclusion,  the  current  crisis  has  given  an  opportunity  to  Islamic  financial  institutions  to 
prove  their  potential.  As  their  products  limit  the  excessive  leverage  and  the  disruptive 
financial 
to  ensure 
macroeconomic stability. 
This may lead the way for Islamic financial institutions to expand and improve. 
Dear Guests  
As  you  may  know,  the  Central  Bank  Governors  of  the  Organization  of  Islamic  Conference 
gathered yesterday in Istanbul upon the invitation of the Central Bank of Turkey on the 40th 
anniversary of the OIC and 25th anniversary of the Standing Committee for Economic and 
Commercial  Cooperation  of  OIC.  The  purpose  of  that  meeting  was  to  make  a  meaningful 
contribution  to  the  ideal  of  reaching  a  sustainable  and  stable  global  order  based  on  the 
principles of justice, equity, participation and freedom fort he humanity to reach peace and 
prosperity that embraces differences between the civilizations as a source of richness and 
not as a reason for clash. Our objective is to make these meetings permanent that convenes 
regularly every year to stipulate our common views and decisions regarding the issues that 
concern the member countries. 
Once  again  I  extend  my  warm  welcome  to  all  participants.  I  also  want  to  thank  the 
distinguished  participants  for  their  valuable  contributions.  I  hope  you  enjoy  both  the 
conference and your stay in Istanbul. 
Thank you. 
their  products’  advantages 
they  have  confirmed 
innovations, 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 3
