Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance – a central bank's perspective 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Seminar on Islamic Finance "Islamic Finance: A Central Bank's Perspective", Bank of Italy, 
Rome, 11 November 2009. 
 While  not  being  here  in  person,  most  certainly  I  am  here  in  the  commitment  to  this 
conference on Islamic finance, organised by Banca d'Italia, to speak on the subject of Islamic 
finance from the perspective of a Central Bank. As the international financial markets and the 
global economy recover from the repercussions of the financial disruptions and dislocations 
that have occurred in the major financial systems, there have been wide ranging proposals to 
strengthen  the  foundations  for  financial  stability,  and  reviews  of  the  existing  institutional 
arrangements in the international financial system.  
Despite this more challenging environment, the expansion of Islamic finance as a viable form 
of financial intermediation has gained momentum demonstrating its viability and resilience. 
The rapid growth and development of Islamic finance essentially reflects its ability to meet 
the  changing  pattern  of  demand  by  consumers  and  businesses,  its  ability  to  remain 
competitive and its ability to withstand a more challenging environment. 
More  recently,  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  has  gained  significance  as  it 
transitions  from  being  domestic  centric  to  becoming  increasingly  more  internationalised. 
There is now increased international participation in Islamic financial markets in the different 
jurisdictions and more Islamic financial institutions are having presence or strategic interests 
in several jurisdictions. This trend has resulted in increased cross border financial flows.  
My remarks this morning will focus on three aspects of Islamic finance that is of interest to 
Central Banks. The first relates to the financial stability of the Islamic financial system and to 
highlight the sources of stability that is derived from the inherent elements of Islamic finance 
and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  has  been  developed  to  deal  with 
emerging risks that are specific to the Islamic financial system. The second relates to the role 
of  the  Central  Bank  in  developing  the  Islamic  financial  infrastructure,  including  the 
international Islamic financial architecture.  
The  third  aspect  concerns  the  implications  of  the  increased  internationalisation  of  Islamic 
finance  and  the  potential  for  greater  interdependence  thus  requiring  more  effective 
surveillance and cross border coordination to ensure financial stability across jurisdictions.  
Intrinsic value propositions of Islamic finance 
The  strengths  in  Islamic  finance  are  derived  from  the  principles  of  Shariah  that  require 
financial  transactions  be  accompanied  by  an  underlying  productive  economic  activity  thus 
resulting in a close link between financial and productive flows. This requirement reduces the 
prospect for over-exposure to risks associated with excessive leverage and imprudent risk 
taking. 
Fundamental  to  Islamic  finance  is  the  profit  and  risk  sharing  which  explicitly  requires  the 
appropriate due diligence and ensures that the profit is commensurate with the risks. The risk 
associated with the real investment activity is therefore explicitly integrated into the financial 
transaction.  There  is  thus  an  explicit  emphasis  on  the  economic  viability  of  the  underlying 
assets  and  on  good  governance,  ethics  and  transparency.  It  is  these  very  elements  of 
Islamic  finance  that  provides  an  in-built  mechanism  that  enhances  the  prospects  for  its 
soundness and stability.  
BIS Review 141/2009 
 1
As  Islamic  finance  evolves  to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  businesses  and 
consumers, innovation is integral to the development of new Islamic financial products and 
services. It is recognised, however, that unfettered financial innovation can become a major 
source of instability. In Islamic finance, innovation must be tested against the objectives of 
the  Shariah,  where  the  primary  objective  is  the  realisation  of  benefit  to  the  people.  This 
demands  the  internalisation  of  Shariah  principles  in  Islamic  financial  transactions,  both  in 
form  and  substance.  Indeed,  Shariah-based  innovation  brings  with  it  a  Shariah-compliant 
culture in the Islamic financial institutions that serves to ensure that the product development 
process incorporates ethical value propositions. 
A central bank's perspective 
From a Central Bank's perspective, ensuring financial stability of the Islamic financial system 
is the paramount objective. Integral to the efforts in the development of Islamic finance, is 
therefore,  the  strengthening  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  The  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  which  was  established  in  2002  has  been  instrumental  in 
developing  and  issuing  global  prudential  standards  and  guiding  principles  for  the  industry. 
This  has  included  capital  adequacy  requirements,  to  governance  and  risk  management 
standards. The IFSB has also contributed to the harmonisation in the development of Islamic 
finance across different jurisdictions.  
While  the  basic  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  takes  into  account  the 
distinctive features of Islamic finance are already in place, efforts are now underway to put in 
place  a  comprehensive  infrastructure  to  deal  with  the  new  challenges  confronting  the 
international  financial  system.  Looking  beyond  the  current  crisis,  an  integrated  crisis 
management  framework  will  be  part  of  this  infrastructure.  It  is  recognised  that  a  more 
facilitative and modernised legal framework is also required and that the boundaries of the 
regulatory  framework  for  Islamic  finance  would  also  have  to  be  regularly  adapted  to  keep 
pace with the evolution and transformation of the financial system. Finally, the supervisory 
framework for Islamic finance is also being reinforced by a financial safety net framework that 
comprises the lender of last resort facility and a deposit insurance system. These financial 
arrangements are now in place in Malaysia. 
Also important are the institutional arrangements for resolution of troubled Islamic financial 
institutions. In Malaysia, we have in place a mandated resolution mechanism to provide for 
expedient, effective and cost efficient resolution of Islamic financial institutions. Yet to be put 
in  place  however,  is  a  mechanism  for  cooperation  between  regulators  within  and  across 
jurisdictions for resolution to contain potential systemic risks beyond the national boundaries. 
In 2008, the Taskforce on “Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability” was formed by the 
Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  and  the  IFSB,  together  with  the  industry  leaders  and 
international  expertise  to  examine  further  the  building  blocks  in  the  Islamic  financial 
infrastructure that need to be put in place to ensure financial stability. 
Among the areas covered by the report are for the effective implementation and enforcement 
of the prudential standards and the supervisory framework, and the recommendation for the 
establishment  of  a  Financial  Stability  Forum  to  address  issues  of  financial  stability  in  the 
Islamic financial system.  
In Malaysia, the Islamic financial system operates in parallel with the conventional financial 
system.  In  such  a  dual  system  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  avoid  the  potential  for 
regulatory arbitrage that may result in distortions that undermines the environment of a level 
playing field between conventional finance and Islamic finance. The development of the legal 
and regulatory framework for Islamic financial services industry is therefore grounded on the 
principle  of  neutrality  in  ensuring  no  worse  off  treatment  when  compared  to  conventional 
finance in terms of the taxation, laws and regulations.  
2 
 BIS Review 141/2009
Equally  important  in  the  building  of  the  financial  infrastructure  is  the  development  of  the 
Islamic  financial  markets.  Malaysia  has  now  developed  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial 
system that includes the banking and takaful industry, other specialised financial institutions 
and the Islamic money and capital markets. The supporting financial infrastructure includes a 
robust regulatory and supervisory framework reinforced by the legal and Shariah framework, 
the payment and settlement systems, the development of the pool of expertise and talent to 
support the industry. 
The sukuk market that is, the Islamic bond market is fast emerging as the most significant 
form of financing that continues to receive strong interest as a means for raising funds and 
for investment. The global sukuk market has been increasing at an average annual rate of 40 
percent, with 90 percent of the issuances by the corporate sector. In Malaysia, the issuance 
of sukuk has now surpassed the issuance of conventional bonds. Strong demand for sukuks 
have also come from the high savings economies including from Asia and the Middle East. 
As a new asset class, it has generated demand from both conventional as well as Islamic 
financial investors. The sukuk is therefore not only an attractive instrument for investment but 
it is also a competitive means for raising long term funding needs. 
Strengthening synergies between financial centres 
Two important trends have increased the integration of Islamic finance into the international 
financial  system  –  the  accelerated  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  markets  and 
increased liberalisation. The development in the Islamic financial markets has contributed to 
the  availability  of  a  wide  spectrum  of  Islamic  financial  instruments  that  has  ranged  from 
instruments to manage liquidity, to structures for financing of mega investments. The higher 
level  of  foreign  participation  in  the  Islamic  financial  markets  which  has  resulted  in  the 
increase  in  cross  border  flows  in  the  international  Islamic  financial  system  thereby, 
enhancing international financial linkages between financial systems. Liberalisation has also 
brought greater foreign institutional presence in Islamic financial systems resulting in greater 
diversity of players and strengthening further the international financial linkages. 
Malaysia has very much been part of this process. In 2003, the Islamic financial system was 
liberalised to allow for increased foreign presence. In 2007, the sukuk market was liberalised 
to allow the raising of funds by eligible corporates from any part of the world in any currency. 
And this year, the first foreign currency sukuk of USD1.5 billion was successfully issued by 
our  petroleum  corporation  with  a  significant  over  subscription  by  investors  from  Europe, 
Middle East and Asia.  
As  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  gains  momentum,  it  is  necessary  to 
facilitate  the  potential  for  liquidity  management  across  borders.  As  part  of  an  international 
collaborative effort, a Task Force on Liquidity Management was set up by the IFSB and the 
IDB  early  this  year  to  develop  solutions  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions in managing liquidity at both the national and international levels.  
A further area of international collaboration is towards promoting value-added investment in 
human capital building as a long term solution to sustainable growth of the Islamic financial 
industry. The establishment of talent development and research institutions in Islamic finance 
are  now  increasingly  wide  spread  in  several  jurisdictions  with  several  strategic  alliances 
across borders being entered into. The International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance 
(INCEIF) in Malaysia was set up by the Central Bank with programmes for practitioners and 
post-graduate  studies  to  ensure  the  continuous  supply  of  talent  in  Islamic  finance.  The 
current enrollment in INCEIF are from more than 60 countries attracting students including 
from the UK, Canada, France and Japan and Korea and the Middle East.  
Equally  important  to  innovative  development  is  a  deeper  understanding  of  Shariah  and 
knowledge of Islamic finance and for a greater convergence in the theoretical understanding 
and practical considerations in resolving the contemporary issues faced by Islamic financial 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 3
industry players. In this regard, a platform has been established for active engagement and 
intellectual  dialogue  among  global  Shariah  scholars,  practitioners, 
regulators  and 
academicians. As the global economy becomes a more interconnected and interdependent, 
the process of greater convergence of financial standards and mutual recognition of products 
is also facilitating the international integration of Islamic finance across different jurisdictions. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  While  the  inherent  strengths  of  Islamic  finance  have 
contributed to its viability and resilience, going forward the foundations for its sustainability as 
a competitive form of financial intermediation continues to be strengthened. Concerted efforts 
are  underway  focusing  on  the  further  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  markets,  the 
financial  infrastructure,  the  investment  in  research  and  development  to  support  innovation, 
and enhancing further the legal, regulatory and supervisory framework. 
An important part of the developments will be to facilitate a more inclusive arrangement that 
would  allow  for  greater  interface  and  inter-linkages  across  jurisdictions,  in  particular  from 
emerging economies. As part of this process, building and strengthening linkages between 
financial  systems  will  contribute  to  this  process.  Indeed,  participation  with  the  European 
financial  systems  will  form  an  important  linkage  between  the  East  and  the  West.  In  our 
pursuit  and  commitment  to  strengthening  the  resilience  of  Islamic  financial  industry  and  to 
enhance  these  linkages  would  not  only  have  the  potential  to  contribute  towards  global 
financial stability but also to the prospects for global growth.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2009
