Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Key issues confronting the financial sector in Malaysia 
Keynote address by Mrs Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Financial Industry Conference 2009, Kuala Lumpur, 17 November 2009. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to our financial industry conference for this year. This 
conference  takes  place  at  a  time  when  the  global  financial  landscape  is  experiencing 
fundamental change. Even as we meet, events continue to unfold in directions that are likely 
to fundamentally alter the way in which financial institutions conduct their business. Reforms 
to  strengthen  the  foundations  of  financial  stability  are  wide-ranging  to  improve  the 
supervision  and  regulation  of  financial  institutions,  and  the  institutional  arrangements  for 
coordination and cooperation in the area of surveillance and crisis management within and 
across  jurisdictions.  This  Conference  is  organised  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  engage  in 
constructive  dialogue  with  the  industry  on  developments  affecting  the  international  and 
domestic financial industry, focusing in particular on implications for financial institutions in 
Malaysia. 
Economic developments and outlook 
After  a  challenging  beginning  to  this  year,  Malaysia  is  now  gradually  moving  on  a  path  of 
recovery  supported  by  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  a  sound  financial  sector. 
Economic  activity  has  continued  to  show  a  marked  improvement  in  the  third  quarter,  with 
positive growth expected in the fourth quarter. This improvement has been underpinned by a 
recovery in domestic demand, particularly in consumption, supported by better employment 
conditions, the accelerated implementation of fiscal measures, the accommodative monetary 
environment  and  the  continued  access  to  financing.  In  2010,  the  Malaysian  economy  is 
expected  to  sustain  the  growth  momentum,  driven  by  domestic  economic  activity  and 
reinforced by improvements of growth of our major trading partners. 
The role of the domestic sector in driving growth is not new. Domestic demand has in fact 
been  the  main  source  of  growth  for  the  overall  economy  since  2003,  complementing  our 
large external sector. This trend highlights the fact that our economy is evolving towards a 
balanced  growth  model,  deriving  advantages  from  our  economic  linkages  with  the  global 
economy while at the same time strengthening the domestic sources of growth.  
While growth in domestic consumption has been encouraging, the next step towards further 
rebalancing  the  sources  of  growth  will  be  to  increase  the  contribution  from  investment.  A 
higher level of private investment would further improve our productive capacity and increase 
the potential for higher growth. In this, many new areas of growth would benefit from higher 
investment,  including  in  the  services  sector,  as  well  as  in  the  development  of  enabling 
infrastructure for modern economies such as in broadband and green technology.  
Rising above the economic challenges 
While economic prospects have improved, the road to economic recovery will not be without 
challenges. Firstly, the better economic prospects for recovery in Asia, and the expectations 
that  Asia  will  lead  in  the  emergence  from  the  global  recession  could  draw  large  capital 
inflows into the region. Such flows would not only lead to more volatile exchange rates, but 
also to increases in asset prices. Increases in commodity prices could also potentially feed 
into inflation and affect the economic recovery process. Most economies in Asia, including 
the policy makers, the financial industry and the private sector, have however, the capacity to 
manage  these  challenges.  Stronger  financial  positions,  low  levels  of  leverage  and  buffers 
built  during  the  good  times  have  rendered  the  potential  to  manage  the  more  challenging 
environment. The role of the financial sector is particularly important in ensuring the flow of 
financing to productive economic activity is not disrupted, while exercising prudential restraint 
in an environment of excess liquidity. 
Towards  the  medium  term,  significant  uncertainties  remain  for  the  outlook  of  the  global 
economy.  Overall  global  growth  is  expected  to  remain  weak  over  the  medium  term  with 
structural  weaknesses  in  the  advanced  economies  weighing  down  the  overall  economic 
growth in these economies. Being highly integrated with the global economy, the continued 
weakness of the advanced economies could present a challenge for overall economic growth 
for  most  emerging  economies  in  the  medium  term.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  for  the  external 
sector of Malaysia to evolve into a more diversified structure to increase resilience and rely 
less  on  the  traditional  markets  for  growth.  It  is  encouraging  to  note  that  this  is  already 
happening.  Since  2000,  our  share  of  exports  to  emerging  economies  has  increased  from 
53%  to  66%  in  2008.  This  represents  an  important  trend  towards  a  more  broad-based 
economic integration with the global economy, through increased trade and investment.  
Going  forward  in  2010,  to  enhance  the  growth  prospects  in  this  more  challenging 
environment  is  through  increasing  productivity  whereby  the  same  levels  of  investment 
generates higher output. Focus also needs to be on high impact investments that will have a 
higher  multiplier  impact  on  the  economy.  Attracting  foreign  direct  investments  through 
liberalisation and strategic alliances would also contribute to this process. To raise the level 
of economic performance, it is not only important to invest right, but equally important is to 
have  the  enabling  environment  to  maximise  the  return  on  investment.  The  efficiency  of 
financial intermediation is a vital part to the success of this strategy.  
International regulatory reforms 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  international  regulatory  reforms.  This  global  financial  crisis  has 
resulted in the world experiencing the worst recession in modern history. This has prompted 
the  world  to  come  together  with  wide  ranging  proposals  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
financial  stability  and  to  address  weaknesses  in  the  international  financial  system.  A 
fundamental  issue  being  deliberated  is  the  determination  of  the  balance  between  private 
decision-making, the market system and Government intervention. While at one end of the 
spectrum, the case is being made that there is no other alternative to the market to generate 
an  efficient  functioning  financial  system,  at  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  the  call  is  for  a 
more interventionist regime. The solution lies in a balance between these, and the avoidance 
of  an  over  reaction  in  addressing  weaknesses  and  excesses  that  have  been  built  over  an 
extended period of time. 
Equally  important  is  to  recognise  that  for  markets  to  function  efficiently,  institutional  and 
market  infrastructure  need  to  be  well  developed.  The  incentive  structure,  the  rules  of  the 
game, the transparency and the levels of financial literacy also needs to be in place. When 
these elements are still yet to be developed, as in many emerging economies, it increases 
the risk to financial stability. For advanced financial systems, however, when the institutional 
structures  and  rules  became  deficient  and  less  relevant,  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  be 
changed.  In  essence,  the  environment  has  become  highly  dynamic  requiring  regular 
regulatory reinvention.  
Let  me  turn  to  the  approach  adopted  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The  recent  global 
developments will not fundamentally alter the main tenets of our approach to the regulation 
and supervision of financial institutions in Malaysia. It will continue to be a balance between 
rules-based and principles-based regulation. The principles-based approach is more likely to 
produce  more  efficient  market  outcomes,  better  risk-alignment  and  socially  responsible 
behaviour.  The  approach  will  also  continue  to  be  risk-based,  in  which  the  expectations  in 
governance  and  risk  management  are  higher  for  the  larger  and  more  complex  financial 
institutions, and when these expectations are not met, the Bank will respond with supervisory 
actions. The Bank will continue to act pre-emptively to deal with the risks, at the institutional 
and  system  levels.  Judgements  will  be  applied  based  on  a  broad  range  of  information 
available on the potential build-up of risks.  
The regulatory framework adopted will continue to be consistent and aligned to international 
standards  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  this  regard,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia will implement the changes by the Basel Committee to improve the risk capture of 
Basel II for trading book, securitisation and counterparty credit risk exposures. We will also 
positively consider developments by the International Association of Insurance Supervisors 
to achieve internationally consistent capital standards for insurance companies. We will be 
introducing changes to improve the liquidity framework and strengthen the quality of capital, 
focusing  in  particular  on  equity  as  the  predominant  form  of  capital.  We  also  support  the 
global  initiatives  that  are  aimed  at  reducing  the  complexity  of  products,  strengthening 
transparency and improving incentive structures.  
An area of current international deliberation which will have a significant implication on the 
domestic regulatory and supervisory environment is the increased emphasis on the macro-
prudential dimension of regulation and supervision. A key lesson drawn from the crisis has 
been  the  inadequacy  of  supervision  that  was  primarily  focused  on  individual  institutions. 
Even  before  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  the  underpricing  of  risk  and  increased 
leverage  in  the  financial  system  had  been  identified  as  sources  of  potential  instability  well 
before  the  eruption  of  the  crisis.  The  warnings  that  were  issued  by  central  banks  and 
international  institutions  were  largely  ignored  and  failed  to  result  in  appropriate  responses 
either by market participants or by the authorities responsible for the oversight of individual 
financial institutions or the specific market segments.  
This  has  led  to  calls  to  regulate  such  market  excesses  through  counter-cyclical  or  macro-
prudential measures such as increasing capital buffers in good times which could be drawn 
upon  under  stress  conditions,  the  implementation  of  a  leverage  ratio  to  supplement  risk-
based capital requirements and through-the-cycle provisioning standards. There is also a call 
for systemically important institutions to be required to meet higher regulatory standards that 
are reflective of the risks that they pose to the system, rather than a consideration only of 
their institutional risk profile. The international reactions to these measures have been mixed, 
mainly because they are extremely difficult to calibrate in a way that will not unduly constrain 
output  potential  in  good  times,  while  avoiding  significant  demands  for  more  capital  and  a 
confidence  crisis  during  bad  times.  The  Bank  will  carefully  assess  the  details  of  these 
measures  as  they  are  released,  and  we  will  do  so  taking  into  account  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory regime in Malaysia.  
Bank Negara Malaysia has already for some time now, put in place a framework in which the 
supervision  of  individual  institutions  is  complemented  with  macro-prudential  assessments. 
Risks  identified  at  the  macro-level  provide  important  inputs  to  supervisory  assessments  of 
individual  institutions,  while  the  collective  behaviours  of  individual  institutions  provide 
information  on  the  build  up  of  risks  in  the  system.  Financial  institutions  would  already  be 
familiar with this through the Financial Stability Report of the Bank and with the stress testing 
parameters.  
The  ability  of  the  Bank  to  undertake  surveillance  and  act  pre-emptively  to  avert  risks  to 
financial stability will also be further enhanced when the new Central Bank of Malaysia Act 
2009  comes  into  force on  25  November  2009.  This  includes  the  expanded  powers  for  the 
Bank  to  undertake  surveillance  and  prompt  resolution  on  financial  institutions  including  on 
non-regulated  institutions  that  are  systemically  important.  As  we  continue  to  refine  our 
approaches, and develop a better understanding of market behaviours, financial institutions 
will  also  need  to  better  integrate  institutional  risk  assessments  with  macro-economic 
developments.  
International  reforms  have  also  focused  on  delivering  fair  outcomes  for  consumers.  In 
relation to this, the Bank will continue to ensure that financial innovations are developed to 
meet  the  real  needs  of  consumers  and  businesses,  and  do  not  expose  the  system  to 
excessive  risks.  Ongoing  efforts  to strengthen avenues  for  consumer  redress  will continue 
through  the  establishment  of  a  financial  ombudsman  and  improved  product  transparency, 
particularly  in  the  area  of  pricing,  commissions,  fees  and  charges  so  as  to  support  more 
informed  consumer  decisions.  Timelines  for  some  of  these  measures  have  already  been 
announced. These reforms will be reinforced by strengthening further the current consumer 
protection  framework  to  address  mis-selling  practices  and  facilitating  a  more  effective 
enforcement of business conduct regulations.  
Strengthening the domestic infrastructure for financial stability  
An important part of the efforts to strengthen the domestic infrastructure for financial stability 
is  legislative  reform.  The  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  drafting  a  new  legislation  that  will 
amalgamate  existing  legislations  governing  financial  institutions  and  intermediaries  in 
Malaysia  that  are  administered  by  the  Central  Bank.  Provisions  in  the  current  banking, 
insurance and takaful laws will be updated to support a more differentiated regulation and 
supervision  according  to  risk.  It  will  also  reinforce  the  emphasis  placed  on  effective  board 
oversight and enable pre-emptive supervisory and enforcement actions by the Bank. This will 
include  the  introduction  of  a  broader  and  more  flexible  enforcement  framework,  with 
consideration  to  civil  and  administrative  penalties  to  deal  with  different  types  of  offences. 
Proposed  legislative  changes  also  include  the  introduction  of  a  more  comprehensive 
insurance  compensation  system  for  the  protection  of  policyholders.  The  draft  legislation  is 
expected to be completed in 2010.  
Progressive liberalisation of the financial sector  
This year marks the ninth year into the implementation of the Financial Sector Masterplan. 
Following  the  release  of  the  Plan  in  2001,  more  than  90%  of  the  recommendations  in  the 
Plan  have  been  implemented.  Collectively,  these  measures  have  contributed  towards 
achieving a more efficient, effective, stable and resilient financial sector as was envisioned in 
the  Masterplan.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  significant  transformation  of  the  financial  system 
that  is  now  more  diversified  with  well  developed  financial  markets  and  broadened  product 
offerings, that is more competitive with home-grown regional players, that is more inclusive 
with higher levels of banking and insurance penetration, and with improved financial strength 
indicators as financial institutions are better supported by strengthened governance and risk 
management standards and practices. 
The development of Islamic finance has also made significant strides both in the domestic 
and  international  front  as  Malaysia  evolves  as  an  international  Islamic  financial  hub. 
Enhancements  to  the  payment  infrastructure  have  also  supported  the  increased  use  of  e-
payment channels. With these building blocks in place, the financial system has also been 
progressively deregulated and liberalised. The more recent liberalisation to allow for greater 
foreign  participation  in  the  domestic  financial  markets  and  increased  foreign  presence  will 
enhance further our financial and economic international linkages.  
As  we  move  into  the  final  phase  of  the  Masterplan,  we  are  confident  of  the  strength  and 
resilience of the domestic financial sector to face greater competition and benefit from the 
liberalisation  measures  recently  announced.  We  have  received  strong  interest  in  the  new 
licences  from  Asia,  the  Middle  East,  Europe  and  the  United  Kingdom  that  bring with  them 
strong value propositions that will add significantly to the depth and breadth of the financial 
sector in Malaysia.  
In the insurance sector, greater competition will emerge from the progressive deregulation of 
product rates. The current reforms in the motor insurance sector will introduce far-reaching 
changes  in  a  key  segment  of  the  industry,  with  significant  implications  for  the  business 
strategies of insurers and their approaches to risk management. With the introduction of a 
new scheme for basic motor insurance cover, pricing for non-statutory motor insurance will 
be  gradually  liberalised,  thus  removing  price  distortions.  This  will  allow  rates  to  adjust  to 
underlying risk factors. This will also be accompanied by a holistic review of motor insurance 
practices  and  the  supporting  infrastructure  to  enable  more  scientific  underwriting  and 
improve claims management. Industry groups have been formed to study these issues and 
make  recommendations  for  the  smooth  transition  to  this  new  and  more  competitive 
environment, while at the same time improving practices across the entire value chain of the 
motor  insurance  sector.  The  groups  have  made  good  progress  and  the  recommendations 
are expected to be finalised for implementation in the second half of 2010. 
A new blueprint for the financial sector  
Beyond this international financial crisis and economic recovery, a global shift is taking place 
that is resulting in an increasingly multi-polar world. In this new phase of globalisation, the 
concentration of economic power in the global economy will become more dispersed. Asia 
will be very much part of this new future that is emerging. As Asia’s importance as a growth 
centre in the world economy increases, three major trends can be expected to intensify going 
forward. First, domestic demand, supported by the large and fast-growing middle income and 
young  population  in  the  region,  will  increasingly  have  a  greater  role  in  driving  economic 
growth  in  Asia.  This  would  contribute  towards  a  greater  balance  between  domestic  and 
external  sources  of  growth.  Second,  the  diversification  of  external  markets  will  accelerate, 
towards greater economic inter-linkages with emerging economies in other parts of the world. 
Part of this trend includes the creation of the ASEAN Economic Community by 2015 in which 
ASEAN will transform into a single market with free movement of goods and services. This 
will include the lifting of restrictions to the flow of capital in the region. And third, is the greater 
financial  integration  within  Asia  that  will  result  in  an  increased  part  of  the  savings  in  Asia 
being reinvested in Asia. 
The new spending patterns as incomes rise in the region will drive the modernisation of the 
retail  sector  across  the  region.  Financial  services  to  the  household  sector  will  become 
increasingly important in this new environment. Reforms to pensions and retirement benefit 
systems will be key to providing a more comprehensive social safety net, thus reducing the 
need  for  high  precautionary  savings  and  encouraging  consumption.  In  addition,  the  large 
trade  sector  in  Asia  and  large  capital  investments  required  to  move  towards  higher  value-
added  activity  will  also  provide  an  expanding  market  for  financial  services.  The  more 
regionally integrated financial system will allow firms and investors increased options in the 
regional  financial  markets  for  financing  and  investment.  These  trends  are  being  further 
supported  by  enhanced  linkages  in  the  payment  systems  to  facilitate the  intermediation  of 
funds in the region.  
The  economic  transformation  of  Malaysia  will  move  us  to  the  next  level  of  development. 
Malaysia  has  been  a  middle  income  country  for  almost  three  decades,  having  benefited 
considerably from rapid industrialisation and integration with the global economy. Moving into 
the next stage of economic development, the domestic economy will change to a productive 
structure  that  is  more  innovation-driven  and  knowledge-intensive,  with  the  services  sector 
assuming  an  increasingly  dominant  role  in  the economy.  In  this  next decade,  the  services 
sector is expected to account for about two thirds of the economy, with growth focused on 
higher value added activities.  
To support and drive this transformation, a new blueprint for the financial services sector is 
being  developed  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The  blueprint  will  chart  the  next  phase  of  the 
evolution  of  the  financial  sector,  with  the  aim  of  positioning  the  financial  sector,  including 
Islamic finance, not only to become a catalyst to the transformation process, but also having 
the flexibility to respond to the key trends that are emerging. In essence, we need to evolve a 
financial system that best serves Malaysians in this new environment.  
As  the  global  financial  services  industry  going  forward  strives  to  regain  thrust  and 
confidence, the starting point in Asia is to build on the solid foundations put in place during 
the decade following the Asian financial crisis. Asia is seeing the payoffs from the financial 
reforms, institutional development and the strengthening of the financial infrastructure. While 
financial  markets  have  become  more  volatile,  financial  intermediation  has  not  been 
interrupted. 
While our starting point is from a position of strength, we must nevertheless draw upon the 
lessons from the current crisis. The lessons from the crisis must not be lost. This crisis offers 
Malaysia and other emerging markets an opportunity to steer the future path of development 
of  the  financial  sector  to  a  stronger  and  more  sustainable  path  one  which  avoids  the 
trappings of greed and reckless behaviour that have significantly set back the financial sector 
in many advanced economies. It would be foolish of us not to take heed of these lessons and 
leverage on the opportunity to leap forward on a more solid foundation.  
Despite  these  developments,  going  forward,  the  trend  for  liberalization  will  continue  as 
financial integration in the region will intensify. This will mean greater foreign participation in 
terms  of  new  institutional  presence,  strategic  alliances  and  greater  participation  in  our 
financial markets. Efforts to develop further our foreign exchange market will be intensified. 
Our financial links will also need to extend beyond the region to facilitate economic links with 
other emerging economies. 
On  the  domestic  front,  financial  services  to  SMEs  need  to  evolve  from  transactional  and 
lending-based business to a full-service, relationship-based business. The household sector, 
already an important segment being served by the industry, will see further transformation 
with  the  continuing  evolution  of  multi-channel  distributions  with  online  channels  becoming 
more popular and increased customer demands for product transparency and overall service 
levels.  We  expect  to  see  a  re-orientation  of  processes  and  incentives  towards  value  over 
volume,  further  differentiation  in  the  management  of  customer-relationships  and  an 
increasing focus on technology-driven transformations that are more aligned with business 
strategies.  The  outgrowth  of  these  strategies  will  include  an  accelerated  shift  in  product 
offerings towards more comprehensive end-to-end financial solutions and further changes in 
the  traditional  roles  of  physical  branches  and  intermediaries,  with  greater  use  of  more 
efficient direct channels and strategic alliances to widen the outreach of financial products 
and services. In the area of e-payments, the creation of a mobile ecosystem is envisaged, to 
provide  an  open  and  inter-operable  platform  for  all  financial  institutions,  mobile  network 
operators  and  services  providers  to  offer  highly  automated  and  cost-effective  mobile 
payment services.  
Going  forward  in  this  new  financial  system,  the  role  of  boards  of  financial  institutions  in 
determining the risk appetite of their institution, in ensuring that strategies are consistent with 
that appetite and in overseeing risk management systems will become increasingly critical. 
Shortcomings  in  how  boards  discharged  their  roles  in  a  number  of  major  international 
financial institutions were a material contributor to the global financial crisis. Boards must be 
relentless in pursuing the effective governance of risk, continuously develop their capacity to 
do  so,  and  insist  on  strengthening  processes,  systems  and  structures  as  appropriate  to 
effectively monitor and control risk.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my remarks. We need to prepare ourselves for a future in which we can 
prosper.  We  have  every  potential  to  do  so.  The  authorities  have  great  determination  to 
provide the enabling environment for this to happen. Financial institutions need to decide on 
their own strategy and the business model to not only perform but also survive in this more 
challenging environment. The demands are for world class service and real value added to 
the economy. For the Central Bank, as the supervisory authority, our role will be to push the 
frontier of the financial infrastructure with its international inter-linkages, while not losing sight 
of ensuring overall financial stability.  
On that note, I look forward to productive discussions during these next two days on the key 
issues confronting the financial sector. 
