Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Recent advances in modelling systemic risk 
using network analysis 
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of 
the European Central Bank, at ECB workshop, Frankfurt am Main, 5 October 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you to the workshop on “Recent advances in modelling systemic risk 
using  network  analysis”  here  at  the  ECB.  A  workshop  on  systemic  risk  that  provides  an 
analytical focus on the financial sector as a network of financial agents could not come at a 
more timely moment.  
In 1896 the German sociologist Georg Simmel stated in his book “The Philosophy of Money”: 
“money is the spider that spins society’s web”. With this, Simmel already at the time pointed 
to  the  network  aspect  of  money,  how  financial  innovation  can  transform  the  economy  and 
society;  and  the  transformation  process  as  changes  in  the  complexity,  size  and  nature  of 
economic and societal networks.  
The recent financial crisis has strikingly illustrated the interconnectedness that characterises 
the  global  financial  system.  In  providing  a  framework  for  strengthening  financial  stability, 
policy-makers are currently not only refining the regulatory and institutional set-up, but also 
looking for new analytical tools that help to better identify, monitor and address sources of 
systemic risk. Therefore, I believe network analysis can make a relevant contribution and I 
am  delighted  that  you  have  come  together  today  to  present  and  discuss  new  work  in  this 
field. 
Let  me  give  you  three  questions  (from  the  perspective  of  a  policy-maker)  which  today’s 
workshop would ideally shed light on: 
• 
What  are  the  key  channels  and  systemically  important  players  that  need  special 
attention? 
How can macro-prudential supervision take the interconnectedness into account?  
And can network methodologies provide us with a useful tool in this respect? 
• 
• 
With these questions in mind, I have structured my introductory remarks into three parts. I 
will  first  give  a  short  assessment of  the  relevance  of  systemic  risk  in  the  modern  financial 
system.  Then  I  will  discuss  the  use  of  network  theories  for  the  analysis  of  systemic  risk. 
Finally, I will briefly refer to network applications to payment and financial systems.  
Systemic risk in the modern financial system 
1.  
Systemic  risk  refers  to  the  possibility  that  a  triggering  event  such  as  a  bank  failure  or  a 
market  disruption  could  cause  widespread  disruption  of  the  financial  system,  including 
significant  difficulties  in  otherwise  viable  institutions  or  markets.  Preventing  these  negative 
externalities from impairing the functioning of the system and from spilling over to the real 
economy is a crucial element of the mission of central banks and of supervisory authorities. 
In the last two years, the functioning of the global financial system has been challenged by 
an extraordinary sequence of such triggering events. This brought to the fore how complex 
and  interconnected  the  financial  system  had  become  and,  consequently,  how  problems  in 
one part of the system could reach other parts, also very distant ones. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 1
In July and August 2007 the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market collapsed when 
investors  realised  that  money  market  mutual  funds  had  invested  in  paper  backed  by  sub-
prime assets. Investors became suddenly distrustful of all forms of private credit, especially 
structured products and other complex and opaque instruments, and this caused the funding 
for structured investment vehicles and special-purpose vehicles to dry up. Difficulties faced 
by  conduits  and  other  asset-backed  programmes  in  rolling  over  their  short-term  funding 
forced them to look to bank sponsors for liquidity (this was the case, for instance, for IKB and 
Sachsen  LB  in  Germany)  or  to  sell  assets.  A  crisis  of  confidence  ensued  which  gripped 
money  market  mutual  funds  and  the  commercial  paper  market,  notwithstanding  their 
distance from the US housing market. 
Such  unstable  dynamics,  set  off  by  increasing  uncertainty  about  the  size  of  losses  in  the 
system and, maybe more importantly, about their exact location, continued in the course of 
2008. Then, the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 transformed a pessimistic 
and disoriented mood into full-blown panic and paralysis.1
The  biggest  negative  surprise  following  Lehman  Brothers’  default  was  its  effect  on  money 
market  funds.  When  one  fund,  Reserve  Primary,  “broke  the  buck”  (that  is,  the  value  of 
investors’ money fell below the notional amount invested), the sector was hit by a wave of 
redemptions that fuelled instability in the credit markets. Again, banks and companies relying 
on short-term funding through commercial paper or ABCP (i.e. debt backed by mortgages, 
credit  cards  and  other  consumer  loans)  could  not  roll  over  their  debt,  except  at  overnight 
maturities. 
The  ensuing  dynamics  in  market  participants’  behaviour  clearly  illustrate  the  presence  of 
knock-on  effects,  negative  externalities,  and  a  coordination  failure  in  the  market  network. 
Each institution responded rationally given individually available information. However, each 
rational response had repercussions for the whole system. 
The  impact  of  systemic  risk  depends  very  much  on  the  collective  behaviour  of  financial 
institutions  and  their  interconnectedness,  as  well  as  on  the  interaction  between  financial 
markets and the macroeconomy. Systemic stability is a public good. The recognition of this 
public  good  property  underpins  the  recent  emphasis  on  a  macro-prudential  approach  to 
regulation and supervision. 
From  a  micro-prudential  perspective,  a  strengthened  supervision  of  individual  institutions’ 
risk-taking incentives is also important. A key element of the risk management framework of 
banks is that they take into account, in terms of credit and liquidity risks, the exposure they 
have  to  particular  (potentially  systemically  relevant)  counterparties.  Systemic  risk  is, 
generally, outside the control of each individual institution. But, by keeping liquidity buffers 
and capital reserves and by limiting large exposures and addressing dependencies, banks 
can contribute to an increase in the resilience of the system as a whole.  
The use of network theories for the analysis of systemic risk 
2.  
The financial crisis has reminded us how important it is to look at the links and connections of 
the financial system. We saw that major disruptions such as failure or a near failure of certain 
institutions rapidly spilled over to the whole financial system.  
Therefore, network theory can help us to analyze the systemic risk of such disruptions (i) by 
looking  at  how  resilient  the  system  is  to  contagion;  and  (ii)  what  the  major  triggers  and 
channels of contagion are. 
                                                 
1   G. Tett (2009), “Markets 12 months after Lehman collapse”, Financial Times, 9 September. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2009
An important aspect of the analysis of systemic risk is that an apparently robust system may 
in fact be very fragile. This comes from the fact that a high number of interconnections within 
the network will serve as shock-amplifiers rather than as absorbers. 
Another key aspect of the analysis is that within the network of the financial system, there are 
players with only a few connections, but also players that are highly connected. Obviously, 
such networks are extremely vulnerable if those highly connected players are disrupted. In 
fact, when a shock hits the system, the number of affected players can be especially low, but 
still  propagate  system-wide.  Payment  systems,  for  instance,  are  networks  with  such  a 
property.2  
Clearly, large and highly connected financial institutions are systemically important. This has 
important  implications  for  macro-prudential  surveillance,  and  hence  for  financial  stability. 
Network  analysis  is  crucial  for  the  identification  of  such  systemically  important  institutions 
and markets which are critical market players in the web of exposures. Monoline insurance 
providers and AIG provided an example of such critical players; key custodian banks or large 
correspondent banks play a similar role.  
Let me add to this, that a particular institution might not only be critical to the functioning of 
financial markets or market infrastructures because other institutions are financially exposed 
to  it,  but  also  because  other  market  participants  rely  on  the  continued  provision  of  its 
services. For us as policymakers this is a crucial point, as the impact of a failure of a given 
market player also hinges on the ability of the financial infrastructure to support its resolution 
and  to  facilitate  the  orderly  unwinding  of  positions.  So  let  me  now  turn  to  the  specific 
application of network theory to payment and financial systems. 
Network analysis applications to payment and financial systems  
3.  
Research in network theory has received relatively little attention in economics until the last 
decade. Therefore, I am delighted to see that this literature is growing and today’s workshop 
clearly illustrates its growing importance.  
The  papers  from  today’s  program  highlight  how  direct  and  indirect  interlinkages  and 
contagion dynamics among financial institutions, as well as among institutions, markets and 
infrastructures,  can  be  significantly  influenced  by  three  important  network  characteristics: 
First, the degree of connectivity, second, the degree of concentration and third, the size of 
exposures. We see from the papers that network analysis can help to better understand the 
interlinkages and systemic connections in many different segments of the financial markets, 
ranging  from  money  markets  to  networks  of  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs),  and  from  large-
value payment systems to cross-sector exposures in the euro area financial system. 
We see that this research gives important insights into the various amplification mechanisms 
in  the  global  web  of  financial  connections.  Such  amplification  very  much  depends  on  a 
number  of  factors,  such  as  the  size  of  aggregate  macroeconomic  shocks,  asset  price 
volatility,  liquidity  risk  and  financial  leverage.  Moreover,  network  analysis  can  be  used  to 
simulate the effect of credit and funding shocks on banking and financial stability by taking 
into account – beyond the direct balance sheet exposures – also the impact of contingent 
claims and credit risk transfer techniques. 
                                                 
2   See  M.  Pröpper  et  al.  (2008),  “Towards  a  network  description  of  interbank  payment  flows”,  DNB  Working 
Paper No. 177, for an analysis of Dutch payment flows; C. Puhr and S. W. Schmitz (2009), “Structure and 
stability in payment networks – a panel data analysis of ARTIS simulations” in H. Leinonen (ed.), Simulation 
analyses  and  stress  testing  of  payment  networks,  Bank  of  Finland,  for  the  Austrian  large-value  payment 
system; and K. Soramäki et al. (2007), “The topology of interbank payment flows”, Physica A, Vol. 379, pp. 
317-333, for an analysis of Fedwire, the large-value payment system operated by the Federal Reserve. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 3
I am glad that the workshop brings together a wide variety of applications. It demonstrates 
two key points: first, network analysis is advancing as a common tool for assessing dynamics 
within the various parts of the financial sector (from payment systems to interbank balance 
sheet exposures); and second, it reveals that a truly systemic perspective needs to combine 
the focus on various parts of the financial sector with an analysis of the interlinkages among 
them, ideally including the interaction with the real economy. This is, of course, an ambitious 
objective that calls for further research.  
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. The recent financial crisis has underscored the need for policy-makers and 
regulators worldwide to track systemic linkages. 
Network  analysis  offers  a  very  relevant  tool  for  addressing  this  challenge.  Its  focus  on 
interconnectedness  and  on  systemically  important  market  players  makes  it  especially 
relevant for the assessment of the fragility or resilience of the financial system as a whole. By 
applying network theories we can benefit from the important progress made in other sciences 
to  monitor  and  assess  systemic  risks,  direct  and  indirect  linkages,  vulnerabilities  and 
contagion. This is because networks allow us to look beyond the immediate “point of impact” 
of a shock, hence, also to the spillovers likely to arise from interlinkages in the system. Thus, 
network analysis can undoubtedly provide useful guidance for the analysis of systemic risk 
and can be a key tool for the future analysis of such risk.  
For us, such analysis will be of crucial importance. As you know a European Systemic Risk 
Board will be established with the mandate to map financial risks and their concentration at 
the system level for the macro-prudential supervision of systemic stability. The mandates of 
other supranational institutions and fora, such as the IMF and the Financial Stability Board, 
also refer to network aspects of the financial system that have become apparent during the 
current  crisis  and  that  should  be  taken  into  account  in  order  to  obtain  new  measures  of 
financial fragility.3  
Also for the specific field of market infrastructures the relevance of network effects are being 
taken  into  account.  The  market  for  credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  has  clearly  revealed  its 
systemic  importance,  as  the  default  of  one  major  counterparty  has  put  the  whole  system 
under  severe  strain.  Therefore,  I  welcome  very  much  that  central  counterparties  for  credit 
default  swaps  have  been  established  to  address  first,  the  high  degree  of  interconnectivity 
between  CDS  markets  and  credit  and  cash  securities  markets,  second,  the  high  leverage 
embedded  in  these  financial  instruments,  and  third,  the  significant concentration of  related 
risks in a small group of major market players. Effective implementation of central clearing of 
derivatives enables a significant reduction in counterparty risk, hence addressing some of the 
negative externalities that stem from the over-the-counter network that has formed over the 
years.4
Interlinkages within the financial system are nothing fundamentally new. However, business 
strategies developed by financial institutions over the last 20 years and financial innovations 
have made the system much more interconnected, complex and opaque than it was in the 
past.  
I believe that policy-makers and regulators of today will be judged in the future on the basis 
of the regulatory measures and analytical tools they have applied to address the root causes 
                                                 
3   See  IMF  (2009),  “Global  Financial  Stability  Report”,  Chapter  II  on  Assessing  the  Systemic  Implications  of 
Financial  Linkages,  April,  and  E.  Nier  et  al.  (2007),  “Network  models  and  financial  stability”,  Journal  of 
Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 31, pp. 2033-2060. 
4   See also ECB (2009), “OTC derivatives and post-trading infrastructures”, September. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2009
of the crisis. A key challenge is to transcend a purely national or sector-specific perspective 
and  to  take  an  approach  that  matches  the  global  nature  of  financial  networks.  A  key 
prerequisite for network analysis as a surveillance tool remains, however, the availability of 
relevant  data.  This  holds  true  especially  on  a  cross-border  basis,  but  also  at  bank  level. 
Going forward, regulators and overseers should continue to develop ways to systematically 
collect and analyse data. The crisis has clearly demonstrated that data confidentiality must 
not stand in the way of improvements in systemic risk analysis and assessment by policy-
makers. 
Once  more,  I  welcome  you  to  this  workshop  and  I  wish  you  productive  and  enriching 
discussions on this very relevant topic. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 5
