Jean-Claude Trichet: A rich variety of cultures at the heart of Europe 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  the 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung special supplement of the ECB Cultural Days, published on 
4 October 2009. 
 1.  The  ECB  Cultural  Days  have  been  held  seven  times  since  their  launch.  On  three 
occasions,  they  have  featured  countries  from  eastern  Europe.  What  does  eastern 
Europe bring to Europe and to Frankfurt, in particular? 
It is very important for the ECB – with our staff coming from all 27 EU Member States – to 
discover  or  rediscover  the  wealth  of  European  culture  in  the  international  environment  of 
Frankfurt and its surrounding area. As you say, it has always been our aim to embrace the 
whole of Europe, both the old and new members of the European Union. It is no accident 
that  we  have  welcomed  three  central  and  eastern  European  and  three  western  European 
countries.  Last  year,  on  the  occasion  of  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  ECB,  the  events 
involved  all  27  EU  Member  States  in  order  to  underline  the  diversity  of  European  culture. 
This year, the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Iron Curtain, the event takes place against 
the unique backdrop of the reunification of Europe. 
2. You made a speech on European culture in Frankfurt this spring, which explored 
the link between the concepts of roots, diversity and identity. Did you have the ECB 
Cultural Days in mind? 
Of course. I was very keen to deliver this speech upon the invitation of my friend, Professor 
Otmar Issing. I profoundly believe that culture is at the heart of the European project. The 
cultural  unity  of  Europe  is  based  on  the  recognition  of,  and  an  openness  to,  its  cultural 
diversity.  Europe  benefits  greatly  from  the  mix  of  cultures.  This  is  the  core  concept  of  the 
ECB Cultural Days. 
3. In times of crisis, culture can be seen as a luxury, a remedy or a refuge. The past 
two years must have been very difficult for you, presenting you with many challenges 
and  a  very  heavy  workload.  What  works  of  art  helped  you  to  unwind  during  this 
period?  
Particularly in very demanding and challenging crises, it is important to remain composed, to 
be  able  to  stand  back  from  immediate  events  and  to  develop  as  sound  and  as  lucid  a 
judgement as possible. I think that, in times like these, it helps more than ever to read a good 
Ismail Kadare book or a beautiful Heine poem, or to stand in quiet contemplation in front of a 
Caravaggio painting at the Städel. 
4.  Turning  to  the  ECB  Cultural  Days:  how  did  the  idea  come  about  and  what  is  the 
connection between culture and central banking? 
I have always felt that there is a profound link between the European Union and its cultural 
identity. I trust this belief is widely shared by ECB staff and our Executive Board, Governing 
Council and General Council. When I became President of the ECB, I was very happy to see 
that  this  initiative  had  already  been  launched  by  my  predecessor,  Wim  Duisenberg.  I  was 
determined to give it renewed impetus.  
The event can be seen from three different angles. From the perspective of the ECB’s staff 
and the 27 national central banks of the European System of Central Banks, it is a way of 
celebrating all the national cultures and being proud of them. For Frankfurt and the Rhine-
Main  region  as  a  whole,  it  is  a  way  of  appealing  to  a  large,  cosmopolitan  audience.  For 
Europe  as  a  whole,  it  is  an  occasion  to  celebrate  cultural  unity  and  diversity  under  the 
auspices  of  one  of  its  major  institutions,  the  ECB.  I  should  mention  that  the  ECB  and  the 
national  central  bank  co-organising  the  Cultural  Days  –  this  year  Banca  Naţională  a 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 1
României  –  benefit  from  the  remarkable  support  of  the  City  of  Frankfurt  and  other  active 
sponsors, whom I would like to thank for their contributions. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2009
