Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary policy in challenging times 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at a Barclay’s seminar, London, 19 November 2009. 
 Introduction1
I  would  first  of  all  start  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  about  the  current 
challenges facing monetary policy.  
There  are  increasing  signs  that  advanced  economies  have  started  a  gradual  recovery. 
Policy-makers  across  the  globe  have  responded  rapidly  and  forcefully  –  and  have  had  an 
effect. National governments have adopted extraordinary measures to support the financial 
sector.  They  have  also  implemented  fiscal  programmes  to  directly  stimulate  economic 
activity. Central banks have lowered policy rates close to zero and introduced a number of 
unconventional tools to provide liquidity support. The fears of a very bad outcome – like the 
Great Depression that paralysed the world economy in the 1930s – have receded. But the 
economic outlook is still uncertain. 
Today,  I’d  like  to  discuss  the  current  economic  and  financial  situation  and  outlook.  In 
particular  I’ll  be  asking:  are  the  financial  markets  recovering  more  quickly  than  the  real 
economy, bearing in mind that the growth prospects are still overshadowed by risks? If so, it 
will prove testing not only for monetary policy but also for other policies. I will consider this 
challenge against the background of a phasing-out of the exceptional policy measures taken 
by central banks over the last year.  
Economic and financial market developments  
The  outlook  for  the  economy  –  both  in  the  euro  area  and  at  global  level  –  has  improved 
significantly  during  the  last  two  quarters.  A  number  of  countries  have  returned  to  positive 
growth  rates.  Asian  economies  have  recently  performed  strongly.  In  contrast  with 
developments  one  year  ago,  most  professional  forecasters  have  started  to  revise  their 
economic projections upwards. 
The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections will be published in two weeks’ time. I will 
not  anticipate  the  outcome.  But  as  we  stated  earlier  this  month,  the  latest  information 
continues to signal an improvement in economic activity. According to the flash estimate from 
Eurostat, the euro area economy grew by 0.4% in the third quarter this year, ending a period 
of five successive quarters with negative growth rates. Available survey evidence indicates 
that the situation has continued to improve in the fourth quarter.  
But  the  pace  of  the  recovery  is  likely  to  be  gradual  and  uneven.  Many  of  the  factors 
supporting  growth  are  of  a  temporary  nature.  The  impact  of  the  strong  fiscal  stimulus  will 
progressively  fade,  and  the  positive  contribution  from  the  inventory  cycle  will  not  last.  The 
banking system is still under pressure, and many households and firms are likely to cut down 
their  debt  levels  before  increasing  spending  and  investment  again.  Unemployment,  which 
reached 9.7% in the euro area in September, is expected to continue rising for some time in 
many countries, weighing on consumer spending.  
Several  risk  factors  may  slow  the  recovery  down.  One  is  a  further  increase  in  commodity 
prices, which might take place if emerging markets pick up more quickly than expected. Oil 
                                                 
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  E.  W.  Nordbo,  G.  Camba-Méndez,  I.  Cabral  and  L.  Cappiello  for  their  input.  I  remain 
responsible for the opinions. 
BIS Review 148/2009 
 1
prices  have  been  trading  just  below  80  US  dollars  recently,  about  a  doubling  of  the  price 
level since the beginning of the year. We saw it earlier this decade: oil price increases were 
expected to be temporary, but instead they rose steadily, reducing the terms of trade of most 
advanced economies. Another risk factor is the ability of the banking system to support the 
economy by providing sufficient credit once the demand for investment starts growing again. 
This will depend on how well the system restructures its balance sheet and recapitalises over 
the next few months. Another risk is the potential instability in financial markets, in particular 
with  respect  to  excess  volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets,  which  is  detrimental  to 
export and investment decisions. 
Looking at financial markets, one gets the impression that they are expecting a somewhat 
stronger recovery. Stock markets in the euro area and the US have increased by about 50% 
since  they  bottomed  in  March,  although  they  are  still  about  30%  to  40%  below  their  2007 
peak levels (see Chart 1). However, price-earnings ratios are back to their historical average, 
even though we have just been through the worst recession since World War II. In the US 
the price-earnings ratio for financial corporations is historically high. 
In  the  corporate  bonds  market,  spreads  have  declined  rapidly  in  recent  months.  They  are 
now at levels below those prevailing just before Lehman Brothers’ failure (see chart 2). In the 
euro area the bond spread for financial corporations with a triple-B rating is currently around 
640  basis  points.  The  spread  for  non-financial  corporations  with  a  similar  rating  is  around 
120 basis  points.  Debt  issuance  by  the  corporate  sector  has  increased  substantially  over 
recent  months,  suggesting  a  shift  from  bank  to  market-based  financing.  In  the  current 
environment of improving expectations, the recent compression of corporate bond spreads 
may indicate that conditions in these markets are returning to normal. 
Information  from  long-term  government  bond  yields  may  embody  a  more  cautious 
assessment of the growth outlook, as euro area government bond yields declined over the 
summer. The ten-year government bond yield in the euro area now stands at 3.6%, down 
from 4.3% in June. But the large-scale issuance of long-term government bonds was met by 
strong  demand  from  the  banking  sector  and  institutional  investors.  Altogether,  recent 
financial market developments seem to reflect an increase in risk appetite in an environment 
of low interest rates and improved liquidity in financial markets.  
Overall,  the  assessment  underlying  financial  market  conditions  appears  somewhat  more 
optimistic than the consensus forecast for economic recovery. To some extent this is normal, 
as financial variables tend to anticipate future economic developments. Yet, the current low 
levels of interest rates and the progressive return of risk appetite may push investors to take 
speculative  positions  that  would  be  consistent  with  a  more  optimistic  scenario  than  the 
baseline.  
An  interesting  question  is  whether  the  uncertain  prospects  for  the  real  economy  might  be 
diverging  from  those  for  the  financial  markets,  which  appear  somewhat  more  optimistic.  If 
this  divergence  persisted,  monetary  policy  would  face  a  challenge.  The  underlying  stance 
would appear to be looser, in relative terms, when assessed against the conditions prevailing 
in financial markets then when compared to real economic developments. This hypothesis 
seems to be confirmed by the contrasting trends within the banking sector: credit flow to the 
real economy remains subdued while trading activity has recovered strongly. Monetary policy 
might thus be insufficiently effective in stimulating economic recovery but too effective with 
respect to risks of asset price bubbles in the financial sector.  
The challenge for monetary policy 
How does monetary policy address this potential divergence, in particular in the euro area? 
We  need  to  start  by  looking  closely  at  the  data.  Take  the  pass-through  of  policy  rates  to 
lending rates practised by banks to the end users. Evidence shows that lending rates have 
declined substantially since last autumn, both for households and firms. This has been the 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2009
result of the cuts in policy rates and the decline in money market spreads, which are now 
lower  than  they  were  just  before  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers.  At  the  three-month 
horizon, the spread has declined to about 30 basis points in the euro area. The floating rate 
on loans to households for house purchase has roughly halved since October last year, and 
was 2.8% in September (see Chart 3). Overall, the degree of pass-through has been broadly 
in line with past regularities. But surveys of both firms and banks indicate that financing costs 
related  to  non-interest  terms  and  conditions  –  such  as  charges  and  fees  or  collateral 
requirements – have been tightened. 
Credit aggregates have slowed down significantly over recent months. In September lending 
to the private sector was 0.3% lower than a year earlier. This was the first negative number 
since the start of monetary union. In analysing these credit aggregates, we have to keep in 
mind  the  interaction  between  supply  and  demand.  It  is  always  difficult  to  disentangle  two 
sides. There are several reasons for expecting loan demand to be weak now. As production 
has  declined  considerably  over  the  past  year,  firms  may  have  delayed  or  cancelled 
investment  projects,  and  thus  reduced  their  demand  for  new  loans.  Similarly,  households 
may think twice about major purchases as job prospects have become more uncertain.  
Compared with past downturns, the recent developments in credit flows seem to be in line 
with historical regularities. In the past, the pick-up in loans to non-financial corporations has 
lagged the turning points in economic activity by about three quarters. This means that we 
should  expect  lending  to  non-financial  corporations  to  remain  relatively  subdued  for  some 
time. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations was -0.1% in September. 
Lending to households, which tends to move more in line with the turning points in economic 
activity,  was  0.3%  lower  in  September  than  a  year  earlier.  The  monthly  loan  flows  to 
households have however been positive and increasing since May this year. 
Overall,  the  significant  slowdown  in  lending  experienced  so  far  can  to  a  large  extent  be 
attributed to weak demand, as surveys both of banks and firms have shown. One example is 
the  recent  survey  on  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises’  (SMEs)  access  to  finance, 
conducted  in  co-operation  between  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission.  According  to 
the survey, three out of five SMEs that had applied for a bank loan in the first half of 2009 
received the requested amount in full. Around one in five received the requested amount in 
part.  Only  about  one  in  ten  had  the  loan  application  rejected.  However,  some  supply-side 
constraints seem to have played a role. Banks have tightened credit standards substantially 
over  the  past  year.  The  quarterly  survey  of  banks  indicates  that  the  number  of  banks 
tightening credit standards has declined, but remains positive. Banks have reported that their 
liquidity position has helped to ease credit constraints very recently. 
While  private-sector  demand  for  credit  has  slowed  down,  public-sector  demand  has 
accelerated. The European Commission projects that the euro area government deficit will 
increase from 2.0% of GDP in 2008 to 6.4% in 2009 and 6.9% in 2010. The increasing deficit 
has been met by a strong supply of credit from the banking system. Euro area banks have 
been  buying  considerable  amounts  of  government  bonds  over  the  past  few  quarters.  This 
has  taken  place  against  a  steepening  of  the  yield  curve.  In  the  third  quarter  of  2009  the 
difference  between  the  yield  on  longer-term  euro  area  government  bonds  and  the  three-
month inter-bank interest rate was on average 308 basis points. This is the largest gap since 
1980.  It  suggests  that  the  funding  costs  for  banks  have  become  favourable  relative  to  the 
yield on longer-term investment such as government bonds.  
Overall, the recent purchases of government bonds by euro area banks have not been out of 
line  with  what  we  would  expect,  given  the  current  circumstances.  Historically,  bank 
purchases of government debt securities have shown a strong correlation with the steepness 
of the yield curve. Banks regard the purchase of government bonds as an attractive strategy, 
for when making such purchases they park liquidity while demand for loans remains subdued 
and at the same time they make their portfolios less risky. Beyond the influence our policy 
BIS Review 148/2009 
 3
has had on the yield curve, the available evidence does not indicate that our liquidity support 
has led to excessive purchases of government bonds by banks. 
To  sum  up,  the  divergence  between  slow  credit  flow  and  buoyant  trading  by  the  banking 
system seems to be in line with historical experience under comparable conditions.  
The current low level of interest rates is consistent with the analyses conducted under the 
economic  and  monetary  pillars  of  the  ECB’s  strategy,  which  point  to  the  absence  of 
inflationary  pressures.  The  question  is:  how  long  can  low  levels  of  interest  rates  be 
maintained  without  creating  distortions  in  the  efficient  allocation  of  funds  by  the  financial 
sector,  and  possibly  endangering  price  stability?  This  is  at  the  heart  of  the  exit  strategy. 
Before  turning  to  it,  let  me  make  a  few  remarks  about  the  divergent  behaviour  within  the 
financial sector, especially in banks. 
The challenge for other policies 
As I just mentioned, it is no surprise to see a slowdown in credit flows at the same time as a 
pick-up  in  trading.  To  some  extent  this  divergence  is  desirable  because  a  sound  financial 
system  is  the  key  to  a  sustainable  recovery.  Still,  it  might  create  undesirable  volatility  in 
financial markets. To put it in other words, if the abundant liquidity provided by the central 
banks does not find its way through to the real economy because of weak credit demand, 
and instead remains within financial channels, we could experience short-term dynamics in 
the capital markets which may hold back economic growth itself. 
Some  have  downplayed  this  risk,  saying  that  we  are  not  experiencing  the  same  feedback 
loops operating through the credit cycle that led to the pre-crisis bubble.2 According to this 
view,  even  if  financial  markets  were  to  experience  some  bubbles,  they  would  not  be  so 
dangerous as they are not linked to the real economy through the credit channel. They can 
burst with little risk and few repercussions.  
I would be a bit more cautious. Let me remind that the prevailing paradigm before the crisis 
was that the best way to deal with bubbles should have been to let them burst and thereafter 
engineer an expansionary monetary policy to counter the negative effects. It might be risky to 
now move to a new paradigm, potentially as mistaken as the previous one, that only asset 
price  bubbles  linked  to  credit  flows  are  dangerous.  Bubbles  which  feed  asset  prices, 
including  commodity  prices,  if  protracted,  can  feed  expectations  and  weaken  confidence 
when they burst, even if they are not associated with a credit boom. In addition, we should 
not forget that the effects of a bubble burst are the more damaging the more fragile is the 
state of the economy. We clearly need to study this more closely before we can be relaxed 
about it. 
As  the  economy  stabilises  and  picks  up  again  over  time,  and  the  demand  for  investment 
rebounds, the key question will be: can the banking system meet a higher demand for credit? 
In other words, when the drag on the demand for credit eases, will the supply follow, or will 
there  still  be  constraints  on  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  real  economy?  The  answer  to  this 
question is the key to the recovery. But it’s not a question that monetary policy can answer.  
The banking sector has been restructuring in response to the financial crisis. No doubt about 
it.  This  has  included  a  retrenchment  from  excessive  risk-taking  as  well  as  capital 
enhancement  and  cost-cutting.  These  measures  have  helped  to  absorb  the  shocks  which 
have  occurred  since  mid-2007,  including  the  sizeable  mark-to-market  write-downs  on 
impaired assets and, more recently, the losses triggered by the decline in loan credit quality. 
Loan loss provisions surged and were about a third higher than net interest income earned 
                                                 
2   See for instance F. Mishkin, “Not all  bubbles present a risk to the recovery”, Financial Times, 9 November 
2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2009
by euro area large and complex banking groups in the second quarter of 2009. This was the 
highest  level  seen  in  the  past  five  years.  The  increase  in  revenues  from  the  core  banking 
business and the considerable cost-cutting have nevertheless boosted profitability this year. 
Income  from  trading  has  recovered  strongly  in  this  period,  also  improving  banks’ 
performance. The restored profitability has recently enabled some European banks to start 
repaying  the  capital  injections  provided  by  governments,  suggesting  greater  robustness  in 
the system.  
However, the trend worsening of non-performing loans should not be considered over yet – it 
might turn out to be worse than projected. Banks shouldn’t assume that it’s time to go back to 
previous practices, using their profits primarily to remunerate staff and reward shareholders. 
They  need  first  of  all  to  give  priority  to  further  improving  their  capital  position,  as  a  buffer 
against worst-case scenarios. Supervisory authorities should keep an eye on banks for this 
reason. 
Banks need also to plan for more stable and sustainable long-term sources of financing. It’s 
interesting to note that non-financial corporations have successfully made large bond issues, 
while monetary financial institutions have been  much more  timid, compared with their pre-
crisis levels (see Chart 4). Since mid-2008, the annual growth rate of debt securities issued 
by monetary financial institutions roughly halved to around 4% in September. By contrast, the 
growth rate of debt securities issued by non-financial corporations increased over the same 
period from around 3% to 15%. The support mechanisms provided by governments have not 
been fully utilised, in particular with respect to guarantees (see Chart 5).  
In any case, the situation remains imbalanced. Some banks are still very reliant on unlimited 
central  bank  financing.  These  cases  have  to  be  addressed  rapidly  by  the  responsible 
national authorities. Otherwise they will create a burden on the other banks, by overbidding 
for and hoarding liquidity.  
The exit strategy 
Let me turn to the exit strategy. This is an issue on which many have spoken recently. I won’t 
repeat  the  arguments  which  have  already  been  expounded  very  clearly.  The  exit  strategy 
has  two  dimensions.  One  concerns  the  non-standard  measures  which  have  been 
implemented to improve the functioning of the transmission mechanism. The other relates to 
the stance of monetary policy, which can be calibrated through the operations conducted by 
the central bank.  
Let me make a few observations.  
First,  the  decisions  to  unwind  the  non-standard  measures  and  to  adjust  the  level  of  key 
interest  rates  can  to  some  extent  be  separated.  In  particular,  any  adjustment  to  the  policy 
stance will depend on the assessment of the risks to price stability. It can be implemented 
independently from the stage which has been reached at a given moment in the withdrawal 
of  the  non-standard  instruments.  The  withdrawal  of  a  non-standard  measure  would  not 
necessarily have an impact on the monetary policy stance.  
Secondly,  a  decision  about  the  timing  of  the  exit  from  the  very  low  level  of  interest  rate 
requires a close monitoring of all relevant developments. Any measure which could pose an 
upward  risk  to  price  stability  will  be  withdrawn  in  a  timely  fashion.  In  this  respect  I  would 
prefer not to listen to those who are recommending a bias in deciding the timing of the exit, 
i.e.  that  it’s  preferable  to  err  on  the  side  of  late  rather  than  early  withdrawal.  It’s  pretty 
obvious that a premature exit may undermine the incipient economic recovery. But a belated 
response can be equally damaging. This aspect is often underestimated, and rarely studied. 
Indeed, the later the exit – and the greater the catching-up to be done – the more disruptive 
the asset price adjustment and the bigger the impact on economic activity.  
BIS Review 148/2009 
 5
Thirdly, in assessing whether a given measure should be withdrawn, a central bank should 
ask itself two questions: are the underlying risks which led it to adopt the measure in the first 
place still looming? And: could the removal of the measure make such risks reappear? Let 
me consider the following: interest rates have been brought down to levels close to zero in 
the  face  of  the  sharp  recessionary  pressures  and  the  risk  of  deflation.  As  the  economy 
stabilises and the risks of deflation fade away, partly as a result of the measures taken, the 
question arises as to whether the exit from the low rates would lead to a re-emergence of the 
risks of recession and deflation. And there’s another question: could the low level of interest 
rates,  if  prolonged,  create  at  some  point  distortions  in  financial  markets  and  in  the  real 
economy that might complicate the exit?  
Just to be concrete, nominal one-year government bond yields in the euro area are currently 
lower than inflation expectations for the next 12 months. This means negative real rates of 
return. We have to consider thoroughly the implications this may have for the allocation of 
resources and the functioning of markets.  
These  issues  have  been  raised  over  the  past  years,  and  were  notably  analysed  by 
Raghuram  Rajan  in  his  celebrated  2005  Jackson  Hole  speech.3  However,  little  work  has 
been  done  on  this  issue  since  then.  Given  that  the  protracted  period  of  low  interest  rates 
turned out to be responsible for fuelling the credit bubble which was at the origin of the crisis, 
research on this issue is urgently needed. 
An  issue  which  also  deserves  attention  is  the  assessment  of  the  policy  stance  in  light  of 
changing underlying macroeconomic conditions. Both the public and market participants tend 
to  assess  the  policy  stance  on  the  basis  of  the  level  of  the  policy  rate.  The  stance  is 
considered  to  be  tightened  when  the  policy  rate  is  raised  and  loosened  when  the  rate  is 
lowered. In fact, monetary theory suggests that the stance can change even if the policy rate 
remains unchanged. For instance, with an unchanged policy rate an increase in the projected 
inflation  would  imply  lower  real  rates,  and  thus  a  more  expansionary  policy.  The  same 
applies for an increase in projected growth.  
In  other  words,  keeping  the  policy  rate  unchanged  when  the  projected  growth  rate  and 
inflation  rate  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon  are  systematically  revised  upwards  entails  a 
loosening of the policy stance. Policy authorities have thus to judge whether such an easing 
is appropriate in light of the prevailing conditions, especially if projected inflation is still within 
the definition of price stability.  
One variable that central banks monitor regularly to assess whether a given policy rate may 
determine  an  excessively  expansionary  policy  is  inflation  expectations.  Well  anchored 
inflation expectations may reassure policy makers that they can maintain an accommodative 
policy  stance  even  as  the  economy  recovers.  However,  experience  has  shown  that 
measures  of  inflation  expectations  have  to  be  taken  with  great  caution.  First,  inflation 
expectations  might  be  based  on  assumptions  of  a  future  interest  rate  path  that  does  not 
necessarily  coincide  with  the  intentions  of  the  central  bank.  Second,  inflation  expectations 
formulated  by  market  participants  tend  to  be  influenced  by  central  bank  behaviour,  to  the 
extent  that  the  former  expect  the  latter  to  have  superior  information.  In  this  case  inflation 
expectations  remain  low  as  long  as  the  policy  rates  remain  unchanged  but  are  suddenly 
revised  up  as  the  policy  rates  are  increased.  The  experience  of  the  1994  interest  rate 
increase by the Fed might be an example of such behaviour by market participants. Finally, 
in the current situation, more than ever, asset prices tend to be affected by the exceptional 
measures  implemented  by  central  banks  and  the  large  flow  of  capital  from  Emerging 
markets. This might distort the extraction of inflation expectations from asset prices. To sum 
up, central banks should avoid being too complacent when assessing inflation expectations 
                                                 
3   Rajan,  R.  (2005):  Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?  Speech  delivered  at  a  symposium 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
6 
 BIS Review 148/2009
on the basis of measures extracted from long term assets. A broad set of indicators needs to 
be considered.  
Overall,  it  is  appropriate  for  central  banks  –  and  authorities  in  general  –  to  discuss  exit 
strategies  in  good  time,  in  order  to  prepare  themselves  and  the  markets  adequately.  As 
economic  conditions  recover  and  financial  markets  stabilise,  the  need  for  extraordinary 
monetary policy measures diminishes. But discussing and explaining exit strategies is not the 
same as implementing them – it serves as a reminder that they will take place and that the 
exceptional measures will not last for ever. In particular, banks have to start thinking about 
standing on their own feet as soon as they can, and about resorting to the traditional sources 
of financing. 
Conclusion  
Allow  me  to  summarise  my  main  points  today.  After  going  through  the  most  synchronised 
and  severe  downturn  since  World  War  II  since  last  autumn,  the  global  economy  is  now 
gradually recovering. But uncertainty is still high. 
The situation has improved remarkably quickly in a number of financial markets. But we also 
have to take into account that the decline was just as fast, and even more dramatic in the 
months just after the Lehman bankruptcy. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that the recent 
buoyant  developments  in  asset  prices  have  been  driven  by  the  ample  liquidity  situation  in 
financial markets. 
Central banks have done their job. Ample liquidity has been made available to help the euro 
area economy recover. Looking ahead, and taking into account the improved conditions in 
financial markets, not all the liquidity measures will be needed to the same extent as in the 
past. As we have said on a number of occasions, we will make sure that the extraordinary 
liquidity  measures  are  phased  out  in  a  timely  and  gradual  fashion  and  that  this  liquidity  is 
absorbed so as to avoid any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
What is more important is that the financial sector takes advantage of the current situation to 
complete  its  restructuring  and  equip  itself  to  stand  on  its  own  feet  so  as  to  support  the 
economy on its way to the recovery. This is the priority at the current juncture. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 148/2009 
 7
Charts 
 8 
   BIS Review 148/2009
     BIS Review 148/2009 
 9
 10 
 BIS Review 148/2009
