Már Guðmundsson: Rebuilding after the financial crisis 
Statement by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, for experts 
and  journalists  on  the  occasion  of  publishing  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  Financial 
Stability Report, Reykjavik, 30 October 2009.  
 Early  in  October  2008,  nearly  nine-tenths  of  Iceland’s  banking  system  collapsed  when  its 
three large commercial banks – Glitnir, Landsbanki, and Kaupthing – were taken into special 
resolution regimes on the basis of the emergency legislation that had just been passed by 
Parliament. This collapse has caused the entire Icelandic nation economic hardships, which 
came on top of those caused by the difficult but inevitable adjustment already underway after 
the  overheating  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  that  characterised  the  period  from  2005-
2007.  The  crash  amplified  the  contraction  in  production  and  employment  and  aggravated 
households’ and businesses’ debt problems.  
The failed banks had their headquarters in Iceland and were majority-owned by Icelanders. 
But in order to better understand the chain of events, it is important to bear in mind that the 
banks were only partly Icelandic, in that a large share of their activities took place overseas. 
For example, about 60% of their lending was to non-residents and about 2/3 of their deposits 
denominated  in  foreign  currency.  It  was  these  international  operations  and  the  size  of  the 
banks relative to Iceland’s GDP that ultimately proved to be their Achilles heel.  
It is not unlikely that the current investigation of the banks’ failure will reveal weaknesses in 
areas such as asset quality and governance, in addition to the more obvious flaws in their 
business  model  and  risk  management.  Moreover,  the  estimated  recovery  ratios  from  the 
banks’ estates have given rise to questions about both the quality of their financial reporting 
and  the  reliability  of  their  financial  ratios  as  indicators  of  financial  strength.  But  it  was  the 
banks’ difficulties in refinancing their foreign assets that catalysed the crash. Then, because 
of their size, the Icelandic Government was unable to rescue them in their time of need.  
Those working in the financial sector at the time will long remember the panic that ensued 
when  US  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers  failed  in  mid-September  2008.  All  confidence 
and  trust  vanished.  Financial  undertakings  tried  to  protect  their  equity  and  hoarded  liquid 
assets as much as they possibly could. They resorted to measures that appeared sensible 
from  the  perspective  of  individual  businesses  but  had  devastating  consequences  for  the 
system as a whole. When everyone is hoarding cash, a liquidity shortage will ensue. When 
no financial undertaking is willing to lend to any other, even the staunchest of them could end 
up in difficulties. This resulted in closure of credit lines and massive margin calls. Assets that 
were  sold  to  raise  liquidity,  other  than  the  very  safest,  were  put  on  fire  sales.  Financial 
markets all over the world were close to freezing solid, and premia of all types rose to record 
heights.  The  situation  was  especially  dire  in  the  foreign  exchange  swap  markets,  and  an 
acute global dollar shortage became a fact. Banks around the world had severe difficulties 
refinancing their foreign assets.  
It  was  against  this  backdrop  that  the  Icelandic  banks  faced  illiquidity.  A  number  of  other 
banks  would  probably  have  met  the  same  fate  if  governments  all  over  the  globe  had  not 
made broad-based rescue efforts. The future will probably reveal just how close the global 
financial  system  was  to  complete  collapse  during  those  weeks.  But  the  scope  of 
governmental  measures  is  unprecedented.  They  involved  a  dramatic  increase  in  domestic 
liquidity  facilities  from  central  banks;  new  currency  swap  agreements  between  the  US 
Federal Reserve Bank and other central banks, and expansion of existing swap agreements; 
direct lending to banks from various countries’ foreign exchange reserves; expanded deposit 
insurance schemes; government guarantees of deposits and wholesale financing; and capital 
injections.  
BIS Review 136/2009 
 1
intermediation 
functioning  were  broadly  successful  under 
Rescue efforts were also carried out in Iceland in connection with the banks’ failure. They 
were  somewhat  different  in  nature,  however,  as  the  Icelandic  authorities  did  not,  on  their 
own, have the resources to rescue the banks, and international support was not forthcoming, 
even though it could be argued that the three banks concerned were systemically important 
because of the possibility of a domino effect throughout Northern Europe in the event of their 
collapse. On the contrary: The response to Iceland’s crisis was characterised by ring-fencing 
and  hostility,  yet  it  is  well  known  that  such  an  approach  creates  a  worse  outcome  in  the 
aggregate. Iceland’s rescue efforts focused on keeping payment intermediation and domestic 
banking operations up and running to the extent possible, and then on rebuilding the financial 
system and the economy on new foundations. As is described in this report, attempts to keep 
domestic  payment 
the 
circumstances.  This  is  due  in  large  part  to  attempts  made  over  the  past  several  years  to 
improve  the  efficiency  and  security  of  payment  intermediation,  in  line  with  international 
standards.  Cross-border  payment  intermediation  was  disrupted  when  the  banks  fell, 
however,  partly  because  of  the  actions  taken  by  the  British  authorities.  But  a  variety  of 
measures  described  in  some  detail  in  this  report  restored  the  functioning  of  cross-border 
payment intermediation, which is largely back to normal as of this writing. 
Rebuilding the domestic banking system is part of the economic programme prepared by the 
Government in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The restructuring of 
the  three  commercial  banks  is  well  advanced.  The  savings  banks’  restructuring  is  still 
incomplete,  and  it  remains  unclear  how  large  a  capital  injection  will  be  required  from  the 
Treasury. The cost of recapitalising the commercial banks will be much less than originally 
assumed, however. 
Although the banks’ restructuring is proceeding apace, there is still considerable work to be 
done before the long-term structure of the new Icelandic financial system is complete. The 
banks  are  still  operating  under  capital  controls,  and  they  have  limited  access  to  foreign 
funding. At this point, when the First Review of the economic programme of the Government 
and  the  IMF  appears  imminent,  it  is  timely  to  begin  lifting  the  capital  controls.  As  the 
economy and financial system are rebuilt and conditions improve on the global markets, we 
expect  that  the  Republic  of  Iceland  will  have  access  to  foreign  credit markets  once  again, 
and that the banks will follow in its wake. 
At  that  point,  it  will  be  more  important  than  it  is  now  to  decide  to  what  extent  Icelandic 
financial institutions will be allowed to engage in international banking operations. In a sense, 
the  financial  crisis  represented  a  run  on  such  operations.  The  crisis  revealed  clearly  the 
contradiction  between  the  internationalisation  of  finance,  on  the  one  hand,  and  national 
supervision and safety nets, on the other. The problem was particularly prominent in the case 
of  the  EEA  regulatory  framework,  which  had  gone  farther  in  lifting  restrictions  on  cross-
border banking activities than was the case in many other parts of the world. In this context 
and  others,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  international  or  pan-European  regulatory 
provisions represent minimum requirements. Iceland and other nations may need  to adapt 
those  provisions  to  the  specific  risks  that  they  face.  In  some  areas,  this  may  imply  more 
stringent  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  requirements,  or  special  restrictions  on  financial 
undertakings’ activities. Work is currently being done, both in Europe and globally, towards 
reforming the regulatory framework for international banking operations. Until the framework 
for  those  operations  is more  secure,  however,  the  wisest  course  for  Icelanders may  be  to 
proceed with caution and adopt tighter rules on cross-border financial activities than are set 
forth  in  the  minimum  requirements.  A  clear  example  of  this  is  a  restriction  on  the 
accumulation  of  deposits  in  foreign  bank  branches.  The  long-term  need  for  such  more 
stringent rules will be determined to a degree by Iceland’s future currency and exchange rate 
regime.  Experience  shows  that  maturity  mismatches  between  banks’  assets  and  liabilities 
that are not backed up by a lender of last resort represent a substantial risk.  
The global financial crisis has revealed a variety of weaknesses in the regulatory framework 
and the supervision of the financial sector. On the whole, the quantity and quality of financial 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2009
institutions’ capital was insufficient to provide the necessary shock absorption. In particular, 
there should have been more unpledged common equity. The risk assessment of assets and 
liabilities was distorted because it was based on historical data that did not assign sufficient 
weight  to  bad  states  of  the  world.  Liquidity  risk  was  vastly  underestimated,  and  the 
procyclical tendencies within the financial system were not sufficiently offset by the regulatory 
and supervisory framework. On the contrary, it can be argued that the interplay of regulatory 
provisions  and  financial  reporting  rules  based  on  mark-to-market  exacerbated  these 
tendencies. The remuneration schemes in financial undertakings and the decisions made by 
credit  rating  agencies  added  fuel  to  the  fire.  Financial  supervisors  tended  to  focus  on  risk 
attached to individual financial institutions more than on system-wide risk. There was also a 
tendency  to  practise  somewhat  lax  supervision  in  order  to  stimulate  the  development  of 
financial centres. As a result of all of the above factors, the financial system became far too 
leveraged.  
At  this  writing,  a  variety  of  efforts  are  being  made  internationally  towards  correcting  these 
flaws, as is described more fully in this report. The Central Bank of Iceland is following these 
developments  closely,  not  least  through  its  membership  in  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements in Basel, which is the venue for a number of the committees and institutions that 
assess  risk  in  the  global  financial  system  and  formulate  the  regulatory  framework  and 
standards that govern it.  
The experience of this financial crisis – both in Iceland and abroad – calls for a reassessment 
of  the  most  effective  architecture  for  financial  supervision,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the 
nature  of  the  relationship  with  the  central  bank.  For  some  time,  the  trend  was  towards 
separating central banks from financial supervision, particularly in countries with developed 
financial systems. But as is discussed in this Financial Stability report, banking supervision 
has remained within the central banks of a majority of European countries, and the pendulum 
might be swinging in that direction once again in countries with developed financial systems. 
An example of this is Germany’s decision to transfer its banking supervision into its central 
bank.  
The relationship between the Central Bank and the Financial Supervisory Authority (FME) is 
among  the  issues  that must  be  examined  thoroughly  in  Iceland  in  the  coming  period.  The 
arguments in favour of closer collaboration between the Central Bank and the FME touch on 
the previously mentioned shortcomings in the regulatory and supervisory framework. In order 
for  a  central  bank  to  perform  its  role  as  lender  of  last  resort,  it  must  at  all  times  have 
information that allows it to assess whether a financial institution in distress is faced illiquidity 
or insolvency. It must also have thorough knowledge of the available collateral. Moreover, it 
is important that the central bank have an overview of large exposures in the system as a 
whole and that it be able to assess the risk of contagion between financial institutions. This 
requires  that  the  central  bank  have  access  to  information  similar  to  that  possessed  by 
financial supervisors. In the event that it is decided to let capital adequacy ratios vary with 
reference to credit and asset price cycles, it will be necessary to join the tools of financial 
supervisors with the macroeconomic overview of central banks. Furthermore, it is widely held 
that  in  small  countries,  where  the  external  sector  plays  a  key  role,  there  is  a  stronger 
argument in favour of close co-operation or merger between these institutions than there is in 
larger  economies.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this:  First,  exchange  rate  movements  and 
foreign  exchange  market  conditions  can  be  of  critical  importance  to  domestic  financial 
institutions; and second, the personnel and other service elements necessary to build up two 
effective institutions in this field are limited.  
The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  published  its  last  Financial  Stability  report  in  May  2008.  The 
present  report  has  been  written  without  confirmed  information  on  the  banks’  and  savings 
banks’ balance sheets, operations, and ownership structure. Consequently, it is not possible 
to assess the status of the banking system as a whole, as has been done in previous reports. 
Nonetheless,  the  Bank  considered  it  important  to  issue  a  Financial  Stability  report  at  this 
time,  both  to  document  certain  information  on  the  financial  crisis  and  the  subsequent 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 3
recovery work, and to discuss anticipated projects related to the regulation and supervision 
of  financial  activities.  It  is  important  to  note  that  this  report  does  not  attempt  to  present  a 
comprehensive analysis of the causes of the banks’ collapse, nor does it pass judgment on 
the actions taken by the Government and the supervisory authorities prior to the crash. In 
recent years, the Central Bank has engaged in broad-based contingency work in preparation 
for  a  possible  financial  crisis,  in  collaboration  with  domestic  authorities  and  supervisory 
institutions, and with foreign central banks. That work is not discussed in the present report. 
One  of  the  roles  of  the  Parliamentary  Special  Investigative  Commission  is  to  compile 
information on these topics and present an analysis of them. The Central Bank neither has 
the capacity nor the will to front-run that analysis. The Bank will probably need to revise its 
operational practices in these areas in view of experience and the Commission’s findings, as 
will  other  supervisory  institutions.  In  addition,  the  Bank  will  soon  review  its  precautionary 
rules,  such  as  those  pertaining  to  financial  institutions’  liquidity  and  foreign  exchange 
balance,  in  light  of  recent  events.  Various  elements  of  payment  intermediation  and 
settlement will also be reviewed in the near future, with the aim of promoting financial stability 
more effectively.  
Because of the uncertainty still surrounding assets, capitalisation, and ownership of Icelandic 
financial undertakings, it is difficult to assess the main risks in Iceland’s financial system at 
this  time.  However,  those  risks  are  clearly  related  to  asset  quality,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
foreign exchange and indexation mismatches, on the other. For this reason, among others, it 
is  important  that  financial  institutions  maintain  capital  adequacy  ratios  well  above  the 
statutory minimum in the near future. At present, deposits form the backbone of the banks’ 
funding,  as  foreign  investment  in  Iceland  and  access  to  global  credit  markets  are  limited. 
Lifting the capital controls entails a certain risk, partly because it involves liberalising capital 
flows  while  the  ownership  structure  of  the  banks  is  still  being  clarified.  It  is  also  clear  that 
restructuring and recapitalising the savings banks is in the offing, and this could also pose 
some risk. The risk that had accumulated in the Icelandic financial system prior to the crash 
has  materialised,  however,  and  it  is  unlikely  such  a  situation  will  arise  again  in  the  near 
future. Broadly speaking, the risk in the system should abate over time, particularly if reforms 
of the regulation, supervision, and governance of the financial system are well and speedily 
implemented. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2009
