Philipp Hildebrand: Review of the international financial system 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 10 December 2009. 
 Introduction  
1. 
At the news conference in June of this year we spoke of a gradual calming in the general 
financial market environment, although the outlook remains uncertain. Since then we have 
seen a majority of banks returning to profitability. The horror stories being reported almost 
daily  just  over  a  year  ago  have  now  disappeared.  It  is  very  tempting  just  to  go  back  to 
business as usual.  
However,  we  must  not  forget  that  –  just  over  a  year  ago  now  –  the  international  financial 
system was on the brink of collapse. Support packages of an unprecedented size were being 
put  together  for  the  banks.  Exceptional  monetary  and  fiscal  measures  were  required  to 
combat the dramatic plunge in the global economy – measures which have had to be kept in 
place to the current time. Only by a narrow margin was a complete collapse of the financial 
system avoided and the danger of a major depression averted.  
This  experience  has  clearly  shown  us  all  that  the  principle  of  sustainability  needs  to  be  a 
much more dominant element in the development of the international financial system than it 
was previously. This serves the interests of governments and taxpayers; but it is also in the 
fundamental  interests  of  the  financial  system  itself,  since  it  is  not  impossible  that  a  future 
crisis could outstrip the resources of monetary and fiscal policy, thus rendering it impossible 
to rescue systemically important banks.  
International approach  
2. 
Consequently,  there  is  broad  international  consensus  between  the  relevant  authorities  on 
what the objectives of future regulatory measures should be. The Financial Stability Board 
(FSB), in which Switzerland is an active participant, has clearly formulated these objectives. 
The financial system must be brought to the point where it contributes to sustained economic 
growth. Never again must it be allowed to combine such high risks with such minimal safety 
buffers.  Moreover,  steps  must  be  taken  to  avoid  profits  being  privatised  while  losses  are 
borne by the public at large.  
In  essence,  there  are  two  ways  of  achieving  this  goal.  The  first  approach  is  to  adopt 
preventative  measures  aimed  at  reducing  the  probability  of  a  bank  collapse  or  a  systemic 
crisis.  This  can  be  done  by  increasing  safety  buffers  –  for  example,  by  imposing  higher 
capital and liquidity requirements. The second approach is to take steps designed to reduce 
the costs of a crisis once it has already occurred.  
2.1  Prevention  
At  the  international  level,  the  implementation  of  preventative  measures  is  already  well 
advanced,  in  that  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  –  in  coordination  with 
decisions  by  the  G20  and  the  FSB  –  has  decided  on  important  measures  in  the  fields  of 
capital and liquidity regulation. The consultation package on this matter will be published in 
early 2010.  
The  measures  designed  to  strengthen  capital  include  stricter  calibration  of  risk  weights  to 
determine the regulatory capital, improvement in the quality of this capital buffer and a direct 
limitation on the level of debt (leverage ratio). The combined effect of all these measures will 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
be  analysed  by  the  Basel  Committee  during  the  course  of  2010  in  order  to  calibrate  the 
overall capital requirements.  
Liquidity  regulation  measures  are  aimed  at  securing  financial  institutions’  flow  of  liquidity, 
particularly  during  times  of  crisis.  The  Basel  Committee  is  proposing  a  global  minimum 
standard for liquidity regulation. This is to ensure that financial institutions build up a liquidity 
buffer which allows them to remain liquid in short-term and medium-term stress scenarios.  
In line with the decisions of the Basel Committee, we have already implemented stricter risk-
weighted capital requirements in Switzerland, supplemented by a leverage ratio. The capital 
requirements are designed to be anticyclical, i.e. in good times, banks are required to build 
up a capital buffer in excess of a given minimum level. By contrast, in bad times, the capital 
buffer is permitted to fall below that level. A new liquidity regulation is currently in the test and 
calibration phase. This regulation takes into account all balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet 
items that are of relevance in liquidity considerations, and is based – as far as possible – on 
internal  bank  liquidity  management  principles.  It  makes  the  big  banks  more  resilient  to 
disturbances  in  the  interbank  market  or  larger-scale  withdrawals  of  deposits.  It  promotes 
longer-term  financing  as  well  as  higher-rated  securities  that  are  capable  of  generating 
liquidity even in a stressed market environment. The new regulation is due to come into force 
in the second quarter of 2010.  
These advances and the broad consensus achieved at the international level can certainly 
be  regarded  as  positive  achievements.  However,  so  far  they  only  apply  to  preventative 
measures.  As  mentioned  previously,  these  measures  serve  to  reduce  the  probability  of  a 
crisis, but cannot always prevent its occurrence. Another crisis is inevitable and we must be 
prepared for it.  
Resolution measures needed; “too big to fail” is biggest challenge 
3. 
Consequently, we need tools that will substantially reduce the costs of a crisis. The legacy of 
the  current  crisis  is  a  banking  system  with  large  international  institutions  that  now  enjoy  a 
virtual state guarantee. The fact that systemically important banks enjoy such a guarantee is 
now openly recognised to be a problem by the banking sector, too. A guarantee of this kind 
contradicts the basic principle of the market economy and presents us with a situation that 
cannot be tolerated. It must be possible for any financial institution, even a large one, to fail, 
without threatening the future of either the financial system or the real economy.  
In the last two years, the risks presented by systemically important banks to the stability of 
the financial system and the economy in general have become only too evident.  
First, in principle, systemically important institutions have an incentive to enter into excessive 
risks (moral hazard). Should these risks materialise, this can lead to losses of unimaginable 
dimensions, as has indeed occurred. Second, the potential costs of supporting systemically 
important  banks  are  enormous.  Third,  the  larger  the  systemically  important  institutions 
compared  to  the  size  of  a  country’s  economy,  the  greater  the  likelihood  that  the  costs  in 
question  will  exceed  the  capacity  of  that  individual  country  to  bear  them  (the  “too  big  to 
rescue” issue).  
The leaders of the G20 countries were quick to recognise the significance of these risks and 
they  asked  the  Financial  Stability  Board  to  elaborate  proposals  before  the  end  of  October 
2010 on how the “too big to fail” and “too big to rescue” issues could be addressed.  
In its interim report on this matter published at the beginning of November 2009, the FSB 
focuses  on  three  elements.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  closely  monitoring  the  development  of 
additional proposals at national and international level.  
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  FSB,  the  possibility  of  conducting  an  orderly  resolution  of  a 
failing  cross-border  financial  institution  is  an  important  element  in  finding  a  solution  to  the 
“too big to fail” and “too big to rescue” issues. Effective communication between the relevant 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
supervisory authorities as well as forward-looking elaboration of emergency procedures are 
indispensible  in  this  process.  Internationally  recognised  regulations  for  the  dissolution  of 
systemically important institutions that can be enforced under any jurisdiction are no doubt a 
splendid objective. In the real world, however, different national regulations will continue to 
exist in this field. From our point of view, reciprocal recognition of national regulations that 
are mutually compatible, and the associated adjustment of structures and processes, are a 
more realistic objective.  
The  second  element  proposed  by  the  FSB  is  to  supplement  the  increased  capital  and 
liquidity  requirements  with  various  measures  that  address  the  organisational  structures  of 
systemically important financial institutions. Measures of this kind could, for instance, create 
the possibility of extracting operations that were important for the economy and liquidating 
the remaining operations.  
The third element in the solution envisaged by the FSB is a financial market infrastructure 
whose design ensures that, as far as possible, it minimises destabilising effects in the event 
of  a  bank  collapse.  Central  counterparties  can  play  a  special  role in  this  respect.  Thus,  in 
markets cleared through a central counterparty, all market participants have just one single 
counterparty,  rather  than  numerous  bilateral  business  relationships,  and  the  complexity  of 
the financial system is significantly reduced. What is even more important, however, is the 
fact that, in the event of a bank collapse, a central counterparty guarantees that it will fulfil 
the  commitments  it  has  entered  into  with  respect  to  the  other  market  participants,  thereby 
eliminating the traditional domino effect. That is why, together with other central banks and 
supervisory authorities, the SNB is supporting the banks’ ongoing efforts to clear a larger part 
of the enormous over-the-counter derivatives market through central counterparties. These 
central counterparties come at a cost, since it goes without saying that they must run a very 
sound risk management system. For even a central counterparty could be threatened with 
failure.  Since  the  consequences  of  such  an  event  would  be  catastrophic,  central 
counterparties  need  to  command  sufficient  financial  resources  to  ensure  that  they  can 
withstand the failure of the largest market participant, even in extreme market conditions.  
Political responsibility  
4. 
The  SNB  is  investing  substantial  resources  in  actively  carrying  forward  the  approaches  to 
solving the “too big to fail” and “too big to rescue” issues that have just been outlined – not 
just in international bodies like the FSB or the Basel Committee, but also at the national level, 
in conjunction with FINMA. The reasons for this are obvious. Given the particular importance 
of the banking sector, with two big banks which hold a key position in the domestic loan and 
deposit market, the “too big to fail” and “too big to rescue” issues have particular significance 
for Switzerland.  
Consequently, we need to be very conscious of the fact that measures may be needed over 
and  above  any  international  standard.  For  this  reason  we  are  dependent  upon  political 
support in order to make our financial system more resistant and more stable with regard to 
the  “too  big  to  fail”  and  the  “too  big  to  rescue”  issues.  If  this  succeeds,  the  competitive 
position  of  the  Swiss  banking  sector  will  be  reinforced  in  the  long-term  as  a  result  of 
increased  safety,  reliability  and  credibility.  The  fact  that  the  Swiss  Federal  Council  has 
appointed  a  commission  of  experts  on  the  subject  of  “too  big  to  fail”  is  an  important  step, 
which  we  welcome.  The  willingness  of  the  big  banks  to  participate  actively  in  elaborating 
solutions to the “too big to fail” and “too big to rescue” issues is also welcome. These latest 
developments clearly show how urgent the problems are.  
Ladies and gentlemen, if we do not manage to fundamentally reform the financial system, it 
is  to  be  feared  that  a  future  crisis  of  even  greater  dimensions  will  trigger  such  a  strong 
protectionist  and  regulatory  reaction  that  the  damage  done  will  extend  even  to  the  market 
economy  to  which  we  owe  our  prosperity.  We  owe  it  to  future  generations  to  take  action 
against this danger. Doing nothing is not an option.  
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
