Sada Reddy: Liquidity risk in banking organisations 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  2009 
AFSPC Annual Workshop and Meeting, Denarau, Nadi, 26 October 2009. 
 Mr Jason George: Senior Financial Sector Specialist, BIS; 
Distinguished Resource Persons; 
Representatives of the PFTAC Office; 
Honoured participants and fellow central bank colleagues; 
Bula vinaka, and let me extend to you all a very warm welcome to the Fiji Islands. 
I am delighted to be here this morning to address this annual gathering of Bank Supervisors 
from the Pacific, on the important subject of Liquidity Risk in Banking Organisations. May 
I commend PFTAC and the AFSPC for choosing this topic for this year’s workshop. This is a 
very  appropriate  topic  for  Pacific  Supervisors,  given  what  has  transpired  in  the  global 
financial system in the last 12-months. 
I note from the programme that we have very distinguished resource persons to guide us in 
the area of liquidity risk management. 
However, at the outset, I would like to share with you some recent developments that have 
taken place in Fiji with regard to the supervisory role of the Reserve Bank of Fiji. I intend to 
do  this  as  I  presume  that  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  of  this  kind  of  gathering  is  the 
networking and sharing of each other’s experiences. 
Recent developments in Fiji 
The global financial crisis has had a significant spill-over effect on the liquidity of our financial 
system. The spill-over effect was brought forth mainly by lower foreign reserve inflows. The 
floods in January this year also affected most of the businesses especially here in Nadi, and 
as a result, further strained the liquidity available in the banking system via withdrawals and 
the need for banks to lend to assist in flood rehabilitation works. 
This was a challenging time for our commercial banks as was witnessed by the increased 
activity  observed  in  the  inter-bank  money  market.  To  address  the  threat  that  our  financial 
system faced, the Reserve Bank responded with a mix of policy measures during the year, 
including  the  reduction  of  the  Statutory  Reserve  Deposits  requirement,  tightening  of 
exchange  controls,  devaluation  of  the  Fiji  dollar,  controls  on  banks’  interest  rates  and 
spreads, and re-emphasising the importance of lending to priority sectors for a sustainable 
future. The Bank also introduced a flood rehabilitation facility to assist in the reconstruction 
and business resumption due to the flood damages. 
Lending rates of our licensed banks were trending down in 2008 but in the first three months 
of this year, they increased substantially. The RBF was forced to introduce policies in April to 
bring the lending rates down. 
This  was  important,  especially  at  a  time  when  our  economy  was  being  hit  by  the  global 
downturn and also the effects of severe flooding in early January. The lending rate is now 
down to about 7.8 percent. I expect it to go down further, because we have told the banks to 
take their average lending rates down to the levels of December 2008, so there are still some 
more reductions to be seen. 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 1
The weighted average bank deposit rates which were falling last year, have since been on an 
uptrend. I expect the deposit rates to be positively influenced by the Reserve Bank’s policy 
directive on bank spreads implemented in April, which has been set at 4 percent. 
These  were  very  tough  decisions,  but  we  had  to  take  them  to  assist  the  growth  of  our 
economy and I must say that the banks are co-operating well with the Reserve Bank. I know 
that they are not very happy but in the interest of the country, I am seeking their co-operation 
to continue to bring lending rates down. 
We would like to think that our policy efforts this year have been successful, in the sense that 
foreign  reserves  and  banking  system  liquidity  have  improved  to  comfortable  levels  and 
interest rates have started to drop, thus assisting in economic recovery. I am glad to state 
that our financial institutions remain stable and resilient despite the massive problems 
globally. 
Liquidity risk management 
I would like to make some specific comments on the topic of this year’s annual workshop. 
As  supervisors,  we  have  been  focusing  on  the  maturities/  mismatch  of  bank’s  assets  and 
liabilities and requiring our banks to establish their asset-liability management frameworks. 
Under normal conditions, this risk can be managed relatively easily. However, it is far more 
difficult to deal with, in periods of unanticipated system-wide demand for liquidity 
During times of system-wide stress, such as the one we have just experienced, significant 
liquidity  demands  can  come  from  both  the  asset  and  the  liability  side  of  a  bank's  balance 
sheet. On the liability side, banks can face challenges in refinancing short-term debt in the 
money  markets.  This  is  such  a  significant  issue  for  us  in  the  Pacific  given  our  not-so 
developed  secondary  money  market.  On  the  asset  side,  off-balance-sheet  exposures  can 
unexpectedly come onto a bank's balance sheet. 
Effective  liquidity-risk  management  is  therefore important-and  especially  challenging-during 
periods of financial stress, when liquidity in the financial system is not adequate and when 
some of our banks may find it more difficult to fund themselves. Indeed, some of the recent 
challenges in liquidity-risk management are related to the increased interconnectedness of 
global markets and the speed with which market prices can change. 
for  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and 
International  supervisory  principles 
Supervision  have  identified  the  need  for  banks  to  establish  a  robust  liquidity  risk 
management framework that is well integrated into the bank-wide risk management process. 
A primary objective of the liquidity risk management framework should be to ensure, with a 
high  degree  of  confidence,  that  the  bank  is  in  a  position  to  both  address  its  daily  liquidity 
obligations and withstand any period of liquidity stress. 
I have also read that there have been calls for the assessment of potential liquidity risks to be 
fully integrated into a bank's capital analysis. Even though strong capital positions reduce the 
likelihood  of  liquidity  pressure,  apparently  solvent  banks  can  suffer  liquidity  problems. 
Through  stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis,  banks  should  be  able  to  capture  liquidity 
problems  that  they  may  be  facing  both  at  institution  and  systemic  levels.  With  this,  banks 
should still be able to assess the impact that problems in funding-liquidity risk can have on 
their capital adequacy. 
If recent events have taught us anything, it is that, banks need to carefully manage their own 
exposure  to  liquidity  risks.  Because  liquidity  problems  can  have  significant  effects  on  both 
sides  of  banks’  balance  sheets,  liquidity  risks  should  be  evaluated  and  addressed  on  an 
enterprise-wide basis, and should be tightly integrated with capital planning. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2009
Supervisory initiatives 
Supervisors  are  collaborating  to  understand  the  causes  of  the  recent  turbulence  and  to 
identify steps to mitigate future problems. Our gathering here this week is to try to identify 
those  liquidity  challenges,  and  how  we  as  supervisors  are  positioned  to  meet  these 
challenges. 
I would like to emphasise that the achievement of sound liquidity for banking organisations is 
an objective that is not isolated. It is thus critical that necessary policies are implemented to 
ensure  that  liquidity  situations  of  our  licensed  financial  institutions  are  sound  and  stable.  I 
would also wish to highlight that though the global financial meltdown was triggered by poor 
credit risk management oversight, poor governance practices remained the root cause of the 
global financial crisis. Liquidity risk oversight by the board and senior management of banks 
is therefore an important issue which I guess our distinguished resource persons will also be 
talking to you about in the next few days. 
The annual AFSPC meeting 
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  congratulate  the  AFSPC  for  all  the  good  work  that  it  has  been 
doing for member countries. As with our peer supervisors, the Reserve Bank of Fiji has seen 
the  benefits  of  training  provided  to  our  supervision  staff  in  sessions  such  as  this,  and  we 
have also benefited from assistance provided by the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance 
Centre. 
At this juncture, I would also like to acknowledge the assistance of the IMF and PFTAC to the 
Reserve Bank of Fiji in co-hosting this year’s meeting. I would also like to thank the Resource 
persons for taking time out of your valuable itineraries to travel so far to bring your expertise 
to the Seminar. We are indeed grateful. 
To  the  Heads  of  Supervision  and  representatives  of  supervisory  authorities  who  will  be 
deliberating in this year’s meeting, I wish to highlight to you the importance of your role in 
making  the  critical  decisions  to  continue  to  move  forward  our  supervisory  efforts  in  the 
region. As supervisors, we are called upon during these challenging times to embrace a path 
toward economic recovery in the coming years, and our duty is to see that such recovery is 
not short lived, but one that is sustainable. 
Concluding remarks 
The  Chinese  have  a  saying,  “may  you  live  in  interesting  times.”  I  can  hardly  disagree. 
These have been very interesting times for me. I took on the leadership of the Reserve Bank 
of Fiji in the midst of the global crisis and its significant effects on the Fiji economy. Fiji was 
also facing one of its most critical moments in terms of balance of payments. Like all Pacific 
Central  Bank  Governors,  I  look  forward  to  the  assistance  of  our  financial  supervisors  to 
complement our efforts in developing our economies, and continuing to ensure the stability of 
our financial system. 
We are living in a globalised world and for us in the Pacific, the ramifications presented by 
developed nations have a significant impact on us given the size of our economies. I note 
from the last guiding principle of Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision that 
supervisors  should  communicate  with  other  supervisors  both  within  and  across  national 
borders, to facilitate effective cooperation regarding the supervision and oversight of liquidity 
risk management. 
Hence  our  solutions  in  addressing  liquidity  risk  must  be  global.  On  this  front,  better 
international  relations  are  critical  and  with  the  presence  of  representatives  of  international 
supervisory  organisations  with  us  today,  I  see  no  better  opportunity  to  strengthen  our 
international relations. 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 3
I wish you all a fruitful week. 
With these few words, I have much pleasure in declaring the 2009 AFSPC Annual Workshop 
and meeting open. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2009
