Ewald Nowotny: The euro’s contribution to economic stability in CESEE 
Opening remarks by Mr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at CEEI 
2009, Vienna, 16 November 2009.  
 the fall of the Iron Curtain and 
the introduction of the euro. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  at  the  annual  Conference  on  European 
Economic  Integration.  The  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  has  been  hosting  this  event  for 
many years, offering a forum for lively debates between distinguished panelists from national 
and international institutions, politics, banking and academia. I am glad that such a sizable 
number of participants and speakers show great interest in this year’s conference theme. As 
you  all  know  we  are  currently  witnessing  turbulent  and  challenging  times,  which,  to  an 
extraordinary degree, are characterized by volatility and uncertainty. Against this backdrop, 
this  year’s  conference  is  devoted  to  the  euro’s  contribution  to  economic  stability  in 
Central Eastern and Southeastern European countries. 
The conference theme goes well with two anniversaries we are celebrating this year:  
• 
• 
Ladies and gentlemen, the fall of the Iron Curtain was, clearly, a milestone in the process of 
European integration. Twenty years ago, the breakup of what we knew as the “eastern bloc” 
ended the long-lasting division of Europe. This initiated a successful process of integration, 
which culminated in the 2004 and 2007 enlargement rounds of the European Union. 
At least since then, cooperation and integration have been an integral part of our day-to-day 
European reality, a major element of our European identity.1 
The OeNB took the 20th anniversary of the opening up of Central and Eastern Europe as an 
occasion to publish a special issue of its quarterly Focus on European Economic Integration. 
It is a great pleasure for me to announce the presentation of this special issue tonight. Key 
experts, who accompanied the Eastern European economies through the transition process, 
have contributed to this publication and will be with us this evening to exchange their – very 
personal  –  views  and  experiences  on  the  most  important  topics  concerning  East-West 
integration. 
Let me now turn to another milestone of European integration, which has traditionally been 
more the focus of a central bank: the euro. Now it was a bit more than ten years ago, on 
January  1,  1999,  that  eleven  EU  Member  States  adopted the  single currency.  Against  the 
background of the economic crisis and this year’s anniversary, it seems to be the right time 
to discuss and reflect the euro’s development both from a European perspective and from a 
global angle. To start with, I would like to note that in the early stages of its existence, the 
euro  was  under  heavy  criticism.  The  well-known  argument  of  proponents  of  the  optimum 
currency area (OCA) paradigm associates the costs of joining a monetary union with the loss 
of  domestic  monetary  policy.  A  currency  union  becomes  costly  if  business  cycles  of 
individual countries are not synchronized highly enough. In the absence of country-specific 
monetary policies, an idiosyncratic shock cannot be absorbed through the real exchange rate 
but has to be digested via other channels: 
• 
• 
flexible wages, 
fiscal transfers and 
                                                 
1   OeNB (2009): Foreword, FEEI special issue: “20 years of East-West Integration- Hopes and Achievements”. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 1
mobile factors of production.2 
• 
However this argument is very static. Joining a currency area leads to a boost in trade and 
hence  to  a  convergence  of  business  cycles.  Moreover,  in  the  current  environment,  the 
question of how costly idiosyncratic shocks can become are of minor importance. The crisis 
is  a  shock  that  has  affected  all  economies.  The  past  ten  years  have  shown  that  the 
introduction  of  a  single  currency  ensured  price  stability  and  spurred  trade  flows  over  the 
region. 
To put it in the words of Richard Baldwin3 “Most of the trade effect literature treats currency 
unions as magic wand. The only question is: How big is the magic?"4 Although there is no 
consensus about the magnitude of the trade effect triggered by the creation of the currency 
union, estimates point to a significant increase in trade and foreign direct investment within 
the euro area.5 The rise in trade also went hand in hand with a surge in employment and a 
significantly  lower  price  level  than  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Therefore  we  can  say  that 
confidence in the euro is as large as confidence in its most stable predecessors used to be. 
Let  me  elaborate  a  little  bit  more  on  the  current  international  role  of  the  euro  and  its 
prospects for the medium term. In the 10 years of its existence, the euro has not only been a 
great success for its member states but has also continuously enhanced its international role. 
With the entry of Slovakia in January 2009, the euro area currently comprises 16 member 
states,  with  a  total  population  of  more  than  330  million.6  This  compares  with  a  U.S. 
population of 304.5 million in 2008. Another important determinant is economic activity. While 
in  2008,  the  euro  area’s  GDP  at  purchasing  power  was  still  below  that  of  the  U.S.A., 
economic activity in the European Union exceeded that of the U.S.A. In other words, 2008 
figures demonstrate that the potential euro area of the future outpaced the U.S.A. in terms of 
economic activity. 
From  a  micro  perspective,  the  use  of  the  single  currency  outside  the  euro  area  is  most 
prominent in its neighboring countries, where strong cultural and political ties exist. Today’s 
afternoon session will provide some insight into the use of the euro in the CESEE region, 
featuring the presentation of the main findings of the Euro Survey carried out by the OeNB.7 
They  show  that  the  dissemination  of  euro  cash  holdings  is  strong  in  some  (potential) 
candidate  countries  (the  Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia,  Serbia,  Albania  and 
Croatia). This highlights the perception of the euro as an anchor of stability and underscores 
its important role as an international means of payment and store of value. 
However,  euroization  can  also  be  accompanied  by  certain  risks,  especially  if  financial 
markets  are  still  to  deepen.  Foreign  currency  loans  to  households  (predominantly 
denominated  in  euro)  are  substantial  in  some  countries.  Without  euro  area  membership, 
balance  sheet  effects  can  seriously  jeopardize  households’  ability  to  pay  back  their  debt, 
which, ultimately, may feed through to the real economy. 
At  its  10th  anniversary  the  euro  has  been  tested  by  a  severe  global  financial  and 
economic  crisis.  The  worlds’  worst  recession  since  the  1930s  poses  a  wide  range  of 
                                                 
2   OeNB (2009), The euro – a stability anchor in turbulent times Univ.-Prof. Dr. Ewald Nowotny, Governor OeNB, 
Bologna, 10.9.2009. 
3   Exact  citation  of  Baldwin’s  statement:  “Most  of  the  Rose  effect  literature  treats  currency  unions  as  magic 
wands – one touch and intra-currency-union trade flows rise between 5% and 1400%. The only question is: 
How big is the magic?" 
4   Baldwin, R. E. (2006): “The Euro’s Trade Effect." Working Paper Series 594, European Central Bank. 
5   European  Commission  (2008):  “EMU@10:  Successes  and  challenges  after  ten  years  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union”, EUROPEAN ECONOMY 2/2008. 
6   ECB (2009), Statistics Pocket Book, http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/stapobo/spb200910en.pdf. 
7   Dvorsky, Scheiber, Stix (2009), CESEE Households amid the Financial Crisis: Euro Survey Shows Darkened 
Economic Sentiment and Changes in Savings Behavior, FEEI 4/2009, OeNB. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2009
macroeconomic and political challenges for all affected economies and is putting the single 
currency  to  the  test.  Rising  spreads  between  German  covered  bonds  and  bonds  of  other 
euro area countries as well as diverging credit default swaps (CDS) on government bonds 
within  the  euro  area  are  a  major  concern.  Still,  Nobel  Prize  Winner  Milton  Friedman’s 
prophecy that “when the global economy hits a real bump, Europe’s internal contradictions 
will tear (the euro) apart” proved wrong. Quite on the contrary, it is the euro that functions as 
an  anchor  of  stability  and  helps  weathering  the  storms  of  the  crisis.  Still,  there  are  some 
challenges ahead. 
In  its  early stage,  the  crisis  had  been  confined  to  advanced  economies.  Local  and  foreign 
banks  in  Central  Eastern  and  Southeastern  European  economies  held  only  a  negligible 
amount  of  so-called  toxic  assets.  These  innovative  financial  products  and  excessive  risk 
taking put major banks under serious stress and brought into question their business model. 
A post-crisis business model should therefore emphasize the importance of diversification of 
profit and funding sources, with the latter being most reliably provided by deposits. Also, for 
Austrian  banks  holding  a  major  stake  in  the  CESEE  region,  adaptations  in  their  business 
models will be needed. This will concern the dynamics of granting loans and in particular, the 
risks of foreign currency lending must be adequately taken into account. 
With the collapse of the investment bank Lehman Brothers, the crisis reached the CESEE 
economies during  late 2008  and  started  to  fully  feed  through  to  the  real  economy  in  early 
2009. That said, the crisis turned from a financial market crisis into a broad economic crisis 
throughout the region. The global loss of confidence and the slump in demand for exports 
almost interrupted the convergence process of the catching-up economies. 
What  followed  were  falling  stock  prices,  increasing  risk  premia  on  bonds  and  –  in  some 
cases – a downward rally of currencies. 
Since the crisis has severely hit the real economy of the region, the question arises how long 
it will take to bring the economies back to the growth track experienced in the last decade. 
Put differently, when will catching up to the euro area continue to take place at a fast rate? It 
is worth mentioning that there are several characteristics shared by most CESEE countries: 
their high growth rates have been accompanied by 
• 
• 
• 
Whereas global imbalances have been one of the focal points of policymakers over the last 
years, imbalances have widened also within the euro area. Since the launch of the euro 
in  1999,  the  euro  area  has  experienced  significant  divergence  in  the  external  economic 
positions  of  its  member  states.  Two  groups  of  economies  emerged:  surplus  countries  and 
deficit countries, with the two CESEE countries that have already introduced the euro falling 
by  large  into  the  second  category.  The  determinants  of  the  trend  of  divergence  in 
competitiveness and current accounts are manifold. Changes in price competitiveness can 
reflect 
• 
• 
• 
It  is  possible  that  the  euro  has  amplified  the  divergence  trend  in  current  accounts  since  it 
grants  better  access  to  international  capital  markets  for  catching-up  member  states  and 
hence allows running larger trade deficits. The imbalances might be attributed to 
convergence in the price level of tradable goods, 
the Balassa-Samuelson effects and 
the response to cyclical differences between euro area countries.8 
strong credit growth 
remarkably high foreign capital inflows and 
widening current account deficits. 
                                                 
8   European Commission (2009): “Quarterly report on the euro area – March 2009”. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 3
domestic demand pressures, 
surging private and external debt and 
the inefficient use of foreign capital (e.g. housing booms). 
• 
• 
• 
Adjusting imbalances remains a serious challenge particularly within Economic and Monetary 
Union.9  Whereas  the  global  crisis  has  dampened  growth  dynamics  and  lowered  potential 
output  of  both  advanced  and  catching-up  economies,  it  has  accelerated  the  adjustment  of 
imbalances.  To  a  large  part,  this  adjustment  is  achieved  through  the  trade  channel,  with 
demand  for  imported  goods  decreasing  more  strongly  than  demand  for  exports  of  the 
CESEE  region.  That  said,  it  remains  key  to  understand  the  determinants  of  these 
imbalances, while close monitoring remains essential in the near future. 
It is one of the key objectives of this year’s conference to elaborate on the euro’s role as a 
shelter, a term which has become en vogue during late 2008 and mid-2009. The last two 
years provide ample evidence that the euro has been an anchor of stability throughout the 
CESEE region. This is closely linked to the highly effective measures the ECB has taken to 
support the functioning of financial markets. The launch of international financing packages 
for some countries of the region (among them Hungary and Romania), increasing confidence 
and  an  improvement  in  the  global  risk  appetite  have  contributed  to  a  recent  easing  in 
financial  market  strains.  We  all  hope  that  this  is  not  only  a  “recent  easing”  but  that  the 
economies  will  recover  from  the  crisis  quickly.  However,  “coming  back  to  normality”  also 
bears the risk of missing chances. It is important to take the opportunity the crisis offers and 
bear  in  mind  the  lessons  we  have  learned  so  far:  enhanced  regulation,  coordination  and 
transparency  will  ensure  a  sustainable  long-term  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  help 
prevent such a global downturn in the future. 
The surge in investor confidence we currently see in the markets can be partially attributed to 
the adapted monetary policy of the ECB. This helped ensure stability in the markets, not only 
within  but  also  beyond  the  borders  of  the  euro  area.  The  ECB  reacted  promptly  to  the 
challenges  brought  about  by  the  crisis,  taking  both  traditional  and  unconvential  measures. 
Along with other major central banks, the ECB gradually cut interest rates; they are now at 
historically low levels – the lowest since the ECB’s establishment. Liquidity provided through 
unconventional measures aimed at ensuring that policy rate cuts are effectively passed on to 
the economy. 
These  instruments  also  made  it  possible  to  provide  stimuli  to  the  economy  when  interest 
rates  are  already  very  low.  In  addition  the  ECB  signed  swap  agreements  to  provide 
European central banks outside the euro area with euro funding.110 
2009 will undoubtedly enter the textbooks as the year dominated by the biggest economic 
crisis seen in decades. Certainly it will also be remembered as a year in which strong and 
coordinated policy efforts were undertaken to shield the real economy, financial markets and 
banking sectors around the globe from the most adverse effects of the global downturn. As a 
case in point I would like to point out the Vienna Initiative, which was launched in early 2009 
to  avoid  uncoordinated  national  crisis  responses.  A  key  element  of  the  multi-institutional 
forum is the commitment of major banks to maintaining their exposure to the CESEE region. 
Containing financial outflows is important to regain financial stability. In times of crisis, this is 
a  strong  sign  and  complies  with  the  long-term  investment  perspective  of  the  –  mostly 
Austrian  –  banks  operating  in  the  region.  No  doubt,  a  decade  ago,  a  lack  of  coordination 
                                                 
9   Arghyrou, M.G. and Chortareas G. (2006): “Real exchange rates and current account imbalances in the Euro-
area”. 
10   Backé,  P.  (2009):  „The  Monetary  Integration  of  Central  and  Eastern  European  EU  Member  States: 
Achievements  and  Prospects“  in  the  FEEI  special  issue:  “20  years  of  East-West  Integration-  Hopes  and 
Achievements”, OeNB. 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2009
lower transaction costs, 
increased competition and consequently lower profit margins, 
stronger financial market integration and 
a credible monetary policy target towards price stability. 
would  have  resulted  in  national  interests  prevailing,  which  would  have  made  it  nearly 
impossible to quickly and efficiently counter the crisis. 
The measures taken are only one side of the coin when it comes to discuss the euro’s role 
as a shelter. It is plain to see that EU membership alone has stabilized the region. It boosted 
access to international financial markets and enhanced the provisioning of indirect support to 
local  banks.  Membership  in  monetary  union  would  have  further  increased  access  to 
liquidity  during  the  crisis  and  provided  shelter  against  speculative  currency  attacks. 
Moreover, the longer-term benefits of monetary union include 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Capital  flows  have  enabled  the  financing  of  current  accounts  and  have  been  an  important 
ingredient of the CESEE growth model so far. However, whether in or outside the euro area, 
some CESEE countries will have to adjust their growth model in order to render their internal 
and  external  imbalances  more  sustainable.  Higher  returns  attracted  capital  inflows  from 
Western  Europe  but  in  light  of  the  crisis,  one  was  tempted  to  ask  whether  this  source  of 
financing would dry up. 
This  leads  me  to  the  question  of  whether  rapid  euro  adoption  is  reasonable  for  CESEE 
countries. During the crisis a relatively short-lived debate evolved whether countries outside 
the euro area should be allowed to join monetary union immediately. This would have meant 
to abolish – or temporarily suspend – the convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht 
Treaty.  In  this  respect,  ERM  II  is  an  important  instrument  to  stabilize  acceding  countries’ 
exchange rate and guarantees a smooth transition from a national to the single currency. It is 
important to note that the convergence criteria are key determinants of the sustainability of 
the fixed exchange rate implied by adopting the euro. 
While  entering  the  euro  area  is  obligatory  for  almost  all  EU  members,  choosing  the  right 
moment is a demanding task. There are several factors that affect the decision: 
• 
• 
are essential factors for gauging the readiness of a country to join monetary union. Besides 
that, one should bear in mind the Maastricht criteria, in particular  
• 
• 
• 
Against the backdrop of the current crisis, the discussion is revolving around the fiscal stance 
of countries. The decline in growth rates has put serious pressures on the budget and fiscal 
positions in the region. It is therefore a challenge to manage the trade-off between providing 
support  to  those  hit  hardest  by  the  crisis  and  correcting  fiscal  imbalances  to  ensure 
sustainability and to qualify for EMU.10) Let me emphasize that the CESEE region is very 
heterogeneous  and  their  achievements  with  respect  to  the  particular  factors  mentioned 
before vary from country to country. Hence the timing of euro adoption remains a country-
specific task and should be decided on a case-by-case basis. 
Let me conclude and stress that European integration is closely linked to the creation of the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  which  ultimately  led  to  the  birth  of  the  single  currency. 
Having  successfully  weathered  the  storms  of  the  worst  financial  and  economic  crisis  of 
postwar history, the euro has been and will continue to be an important anchor of European 
integration. This conference demonstrates readiness to open a discussion about the various 
convergence in prices, 
a focus on long-term interest rates and 
fiscal stability. 
the mobility of capital and labor and 
the flexibility of domestic wages 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 5
dimensions  of  the  euro’s  role  in  general  and  in  the  light  of  the  current  crisis  in  particular. 
Views  from  countries  that  have  not  yet  introduced  the  euro  will  supplement  those  of  euro 
area members on the issue of the euro’s contribution to economic stability. I am looking very 
much forward to hearing, discussing and learning from the opinions of policymakers, bankers 
and academics over the next two days. 
It is now a great pleasure for me to welcome our first keynote speaker, Joaquín Almunia, EU 
Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs. 
6 
 BIS Review 150/2009
