Guy Quaden: Crisis management at cross-roads 
Closing speech by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the joint 
Société  Universitaire  Européenne  de  Recherches  Financières  (SUERF),  Centre 
for 
European  Policy  Studies  (CEPS)  and  Belgian  Financial  Forum  Conference,  Brussels,  16 
November 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
More than two years after the US subprime crisis triggered world-wide financial turbulence 
and one year after the collapse of Lehman Brothers exacerbated the crisis dramatically, the 
title of this conference rightly suggests that crisis management is at a crossroads. Indeed, 
the  exceptional  measures  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments  do  appear  to  be 
achieving their objectives. It seems now that the most severe financial crisis since the 1930s, 
which provoked a free fall in world trade and industrial production over two quarters, will not 
develop into another Great Depression, even if its toll in terms of subdued economic activity 
and higher unemployment is not yet over. Crisis prevention will soon have to take over from 
crisis management. This will require both a timely exit from the exceptional measures taken 
to  stabilise  the  financial  system  and  the  economy,  and  the  implementation  of  fundamental 
reforms to remedy the structural defects exposed by the crisis.  
Timely exit 
1. 
Let me turn firstly to the issue of a timely exit. The policy reaction to the financial crisis was 
very  decisive.  Central  banks  were  the  first  to  react  in  August  2007,  by  providing  ample 
liquidity. After the sudden aggravation of the crisis in September 2008, they reduced interest 
rates  to  unprecedentedly  low  levels  and  took some  non-conventional  measures  to  support 
bank  lending  and  the  financial  markets.  Governments  rescued  systemically  important 
financial  institutions,  through  capital  injections  and  asset  purchases,  and  supported  bank 
funding,  through  guarantees.  They  also  launched  fiscal  stimulus  packages.  In  order  to 
consolidate  the  recovery,  to  avoid  nurturing  the  seeds  of  future  crises  and  to  promote 
sustainable development, these short-term measures have to be unwound at the right time 
and pace. 
The  effectiveness  of  fiscal  policy  depends  on  the  confidence  in  its  sustainability,  and  it  is 
important to avoid the private debt crisis being followed by a public debt crisis. The burden of 
fiscal  consolidation  should  not  be  passed  on  to  the  next  generations.  Credible  fiscal 
consolidation programmes have to be set up, and the current outlook should allow the first 
steps to be taken next year. 
But  let  me  focus  on  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy.  Too  early  an  exit  from  the  current 
very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  would  entail  the  risk  of  a  relapse:  renewed 
negative interactions between financial sector problems and the real economy, along with a 
possible threat of deflation. Too late an exit would sow the seeds for new financial excesses, 
with a risk of inflation. Obviously, the assessment of risks to medium-term price stability must 
remain the fundamental criterion. Moreover, I expect gradualism to be a key feature of the 
exit.  Certainly,  our  toolkit  would  allow  us  to  react  swiftly  to  any  abrupt  change  in  inflation 
expectations.  However,  economic  and  financial  conditions  are  likely  to  gradually  return  to 
normal  and,  consequently,  the  upward  shift  in  the  balance  of  risks  to  price  stability  will 
probably be gradual. In fact, gradualism is most appropriate in uncertain times as it dampens 
the risk of disruptions in financial markets. The sequencing of the exit is not pre-defined, nor 
is  its  end  point,  and  will  depend  on  developments  in  financial  markets  and  in  the  real 
economy. For example, the Governing Council of the ECB could change interest rates while 
keeping some non-standard measures in place, if required by a dysfunctioning of the money 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 1
market – and you may remember that this kind of separation of monetary policy and liquidity 
management measures was quite common in the first phase of the crisis, from August 2007 
to  September  2008.  Conversely,  and  this  is  may  be  more  obvious,  some  non-standard 
monetary policy measures are likely to be withdrawn before raising interest rates. 
So, where do we stand now? Even though they are not yet back up to their pre-crisis levels, 
most financial market indicators have improved considerably. Since the spring of this year, 
there have been signs of a nascent recovery, the “green shoots”, mainly thanks to the policy 
reactions  around  the  world  and  especially  to  a  rebound  in  Asia.  However,  the  economic 
recovery  is  still  fragile  and  reliant,  in  no  small  measures,  on  expansionary  monetary  and 
fiscal  policies.  Moreover,  commercial  banks  still  have  to  repair  their  balance  sheets  and 
reinforce  their  capital  base.  The  current  slack  in  the  economy  is  dampening  price 
developments, an assessment which is confirmed by the monetary analysis. Consequently, 
the Governing Council believes that current interest rates remain appropriate.  
At the same time, the situation is not quite as dire as it was a few months ago, especially in 
terms of financial market functioning. Therefore, the first steps of a gradual phasing-out of 
non-standard  measures  can  be  envisaged,  like  a  discontinuation  of  1-year  refinancing 
operations  or  a  lower  frequency  for  3-month  and  6-month  refinancing  operations.  They 
should not be seen as the start of a tightening cycle, but rather as an incentive for banks to 
restructure  their  portfolios  and  to  resume  their  market-based  funding  activities,  as  a  long 
period of cocooning in the banking sector has microeconomic drawbacks too. 
Looking further ahead, the Governing Council will continue to set the monetary policy stance 
by assessing the appropriateness of monetary and financial conditions in view of the risks to 
price stability. One of the lessons of this crisis is that central bankers should not be guided by 
excessively  narrow  inflation  targeting  but  should  pay  attention  to  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances, which may not immediately exert pressure on prices, but an abrupt correction of 
which may put price stability at risk. The Governing Council can claim that the medium-term 
orientation of its strategy and its monetary analysis are assets in this respect. A few years 
ago, at a previous SUERF conference, I announced that M3 might abandon us. And indeed, 
the long-run relationship between M3 and prices proved to show signs of instability. At the 
same time, I pointed out that monetary analysis was much richer than monitoring M3 only. 
We now monitor credit developments closely. Research at the BIS, the IMF and within the 
Eurosystem  is  exploring  the  leading  indicator  properties  of  money  and  credit  aggregates 
which may be useful in the identification of detrimental asset price bubbles. Further research 
is still needed in order to reach definite conclusions. While monetary policy should play a role 
in “leaning against the wind” of over-optimism in financial markets, it should however not be 
over-burdened.  Interest  rate  policy  on  its  own  cannot  guarantee  both  price  stability  and 
financial stability, and should therefore be backed up by prudential policies. 
Fundamental reforms 
2. 
This leads me to the second issue, the fundamental reforms which are badly needed. There 
is a long list of work in the pipeline of international fora. The Financial Stability Board at G20 
level as well as Ecofin at EU level  have drawn up detailed roadmaps to pave the  way for 
extensive reforms.  
The  authorities  must  be  determined  in  their  drive  for  better  regulation  and  supervision.  As 
explicitly  noted  by  the  Basel  Committee,  “the  banking  sector  entered  the  crisis  with  an 
insufficient  level  and  quality  of  capital,  inadequate  provisions,  imprudent  valuations, 
insufficient liquidity buffers, compensation polices that encouraged excessive leverage and 
risk taking and excessive concentration of exposures among major financial institutions”. The 
insistence on the words “insufficient”, “inadequate” and “excessive” shows that, in particular, 
more and better buffers are expected.  
2 
 BIS Review 158/2009
The crisis has given rise to a unique momentum for profound reform of the financial sector. 
We should not let this momentum slip away. I know full well that the return to more simplicity 
will be anything but simple. Of course, I realise that a lot of technical issues have still to be 
resolved.  And  I  admit  that  it  will  be  important  to  introduce  the  new  regulations  in  a  timely 
manner so as not to repress the smooth flow of credit which will be required to support the 
nascent recovery. In fact, while there is much discussion at the moment on the design of the 
exit strategy from the public support measures, we should be equally aware of the need for 
an entry strategy for moving over to more comprehensive regulatory requirements. 
But  all  these  considerations  should  not  be  an  excuse  for  prevarication  and  delaying  the 
essential decisions to take for the design of a more comprehensive framework. 
The  crisis  has  seriously  dented  belief  in  the  ability  of  the  markets  to  regulate  themselves. 
While  it  would  be  illusory  to  dispense  with  the  assistance  of  the  market  in  designing  new 
supervisory and regulatory arrangements, these market consultations have more often that 
not  been  used  by  many  financial  institutions  as  a  channel  to  lobby  for  softer  regulation, 
certainly in the past and probably still today. 
The rapid spread of the financial crisis has also served as a lesson for supervisors. It has 
shown  that  the  root  of  the  problems  was  not  linked  to  any  specific  difficulties  faced  by 
individual institutions but, rather, to the gradual build-up of common risks within the system. It 
is  now  widely  acknowledged  that  such  crystallisation  of  risk,  linked  to  major  shifts  in  the 
correlation  between  financial  products  and  markets,  requires  more  systemically-focused 
oversight  and  regulation.  To  use  the  professional  jargon,  micro-prudential  control,  the 
preserve  of  the  supervisory  authorities,  must  be  complemented  by  macro-prudential 
oversight,  resorting  to  the  expertise  of  central  banks.  To  improve  the  symbiosis  between 
these two approaches, a growing number of countries are adopting the so-called “twin peaks 
model” where the central bank is in charge of the full range of prudential supervision, in both 
its  micro-  and  macro  dimension,  leaving  the  oversight  of  market  integrity  and  investor 
protection  to  a  separate  institution.  Just  a  few  weeks  ago,  the  Belgian  authorities,  too, 
decided to introduce this “twin peaks model” here as quickly and smoothly as possible. 
Needless to say, I am  well aware that the macrodimension does not stop at our country’s 
frontiers, while the micro-supervision of cross-border groups also requires close multinational 
coordination. So, I strongly support the recent proposal to set up, at EU level, a European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS), which 
are  called  on  to  cooperate  closely  in  order  to  bring  more  comprehensiveness  and 
consistency to national and international supervision. 
Macro-prudential analysis must rely on rapid, direct and comprehensive access to data on 
individual  developments  liable  to  affect  global  financial  stability  while,  in  turn,  this  analysis 
must feed the micro-prudential control. It would be a pity if our efforts to improve this flow of 
information  in  our  respective  countries  were  to  be  impeded  by  hurdles  at  the  international 
level. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Crisis management has been effective: many banks have been rescued, the abrupt rise in 
risk aversion has been countered and it seems that financial markets are returning to normal 
and that the fall in trade and output has come to an end. For the emergency measures not to 
nurture renewed financial excesses, they have to be withdrawn in a timely and gradual way 
and,  above  all,  backed  up  by  structural  reforms.  Better  regulation  and  supervision  are 
needed.  Great  haste  in  regulating  complex  matters  would  probably  not  be  wise,  but  the 
political resolve for reforms should not lose momentum. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 3
