Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy  
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Meeting 
with Business Leaders, Hyogo, 21 October 2009.  
 Introduction  
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to  speak  before,  and  exchange  views  with,  distinguished 
business  leaders  of  the  economy  of  Hyogo  Prefecture.  Occasions  like  this  are  particularly 
valuable because they allow us to hear directly and in detail from businesspeople about the 
situation of the regional economy – including business conditions of many firms ranging from 
small to large – as well as provide our explanations, and hear your opinions, on the Bank of 
Japan's  current  outlook  for  the  Japanese  economy  and  its  thinking  behind  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy.  
I understand that members of our staff, including the General Manager of the Kobe Branch, 
visit you frequently to collect information on economic and financial conditions of the region. 
The information you provide us is very important as a means of accurately understanding the 
economic and financial situation, and of formulating the conduct of monetary policy. I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank you for your cooperation.  
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  first  like  to  explain  the  Bank's  view  on 
Japan's  economic  and  financial  situation,  as  well  as  its  thinking  behind  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. I will start with developments in the world economy and then move on to 
economic  activity,  financial  conditions,  and  price  developments  in  Japan.  In  view  of  these 
issues, I will briefly explain the Bank's thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy, and 
lastly express some of my views on medium- to long-term issues that the Japanese economy 
now faces.  
Developments in the world economy  
I.  
I would like to start with developments in the world economy.  
Until around the mid-2000s, the world economy enjoyed high levels of growth, at around 5 
percent,  with  the  innovation  in  information  and  communications  technology  and  further 
globalization as the two main engines of growth. However, in hindsight, the rapid growth in 
the world economy, particularly in the United States and Europe, relied heavily on another 
factor:  the  optimistic  expectations  that  prices  of  assets  such  as  homes  and  stocks  would 
continue to rise. Based on such expectations, households and firms aggressively increased 
their  debt  in  favor  of  consumption  and  investment,  while  financial  institutions  increased 
provision of loans and consequently their leverage – the ratio of total assets to capital bases. 
The development of securitized products spurred this buoyant mood.1 Securitized products 
are  designed  to  transfer  the  credit  risk  associated  with  the  loans  extended  by  financial 
institutions to investors who have a higher capability than financial institutions to take on the 
risk. This allowed lower-income households that previously had been unable to afford to buy 
homes to become capable of making such purchases. At the same time, massive funds from 
investors,  who  sought  higher  returns  without  sufficient  risk  management,  flowed  into  the 
securitized markets, thereby creating an overheating of the housing market. However, after 
                                                 
1   For  details  on  the  role  of  securitized  products,  see  "Financial  System  Stability  and  Market  Confidence,"  a 
summary of a speech given by Kiyohiko G. Nishimura at the Japan Society of Monetary Economics' Spring 
Annual Meeting on May 16, 2009 (available on the Bank's web site at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm). 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 1
third, 
the  effects  of  macroeconomic  policies 
home prices began to fall, the risks that investors had previously ignored came to the fore; 
this triggered the worsening of the U.S. subprime mortgage problem in summer 2007 and the 
subsequent asset bubble burst, which in turn led the world economy into severe recession 
from 2008. As a result, households and firms, as well as financial institutions, particularly in 
advanced economies, came to face the problem of balance-sheet adjustments: households 
and firms had to repay their excessive debt by curtailing their consumption and investment, 
while financial institutions had to dispose of their impaired loans and reduce their excessive 
leverage.  
The bursting of the asset bubble and ensuing increase in impaired assets at banks evolved 
into  a  financial  crisis  when  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed  last  autumn.  Providers  of  funds 
became  extremely  cautious  about  counterparties'  creditworthiness.  This  led  to  a  sharp 
decline in transactions in the interbank market, where banks lend and borrow funds, as well 
as  in  the  corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  where  firms  raise  funds,  and  financial  markets 
ultimately  stopped  functioning.  The  sharp  deterioration  in  market  functioning,  together  with 
firms' and households' excessively heightened anxiety, shrank global financial and economic 
activity, creating acute pain for the world economy.  
Such pain began to wear off from around this spring, and global economic conditions have 
recently been improving for the following three reasons. First, the supply of ample liquidity by 
central banks, together with governments' measures to restore financial system stability, has 
proved  effective,  and  global  financial  markets  have  been  regaining  stability.  Second, 
inventory  adjustments  have  progressed  markedly  as  a  result  of  a  substantial  production 
cutback  worldwide.  And 
implemented 
aggressively around the globe have begun to appear.  
In this situation, divergence and even polarization between sectors, as well as regions, have 
become  evident  all  over  the  world.  This  trend  can  be  observed  widely  in  terms  of  both 
economic  and  financial  activity.  Let  me  give  you  four  examples.  First,  production  has 
recovered  relatively  quickly  because  of  the  progress  in  inventory  adjustments,  whereas 
recovery in employment conditions has been only very moderate. Second, developments in 
production and consumption differ greatly between sectors that are more influenced by the 
effects of fiscal policies and those that are less influenced. Third, a significant difference in 
the  pace  of  recovery  has  been  observed  between  advanced  economies  –  which  face  the 
problems of balance-sheet adjustments following the collapse of the asset bubble and of an 
aging  population  –  and  emerging  economies  –  which  face  neither  of  these  problems.  And 
fourth, in financial markets, the recovery in money markets has become clear, whereas in the 
longer-term markets, market liquidity still cannot be judged to have fully recovered, as seen 
in large differences in interest rates between borrower banks.  
The outlook for the world economy greatly depends on how the divergence and polarization 
will diminish, or, conversely, will intensify. The Bank's current baseline scenario for the world 
economy is as follows: emerging economies will first pick up, partly due to the policy effects; 
this upturn will exert positive effects on advanced economies, where private demand will start 
to  improve  gradually  by  the  time  the  policy  effects  dissipate;  and  the world  economy  as  a 
whole will eventually return to a moderate growth path.  
However,  since  the  world  economy  may  unfold  a  different  scenario  depending  on  how 
divergence and polarization evolve, the outlook is still attended by a high level of uncertainty. 
For  instance,  if  the  balance-sheet  adjustments  lead  to  a  protraction  of  the  serious 
employment situation in advanced economies, thereby restraining growth in demand, world 
economic  growth  could  turn  out  to  be  weaker  than  projected.  Should  growth  in  emerging 
economies exceed expectations, world economic growth could also beat assumptions. If this 
is  the  case,  demand  for  resources  might  increase  and  the  terms  of  trade  for  advanced 
economies  could  deteriorate  as  commodity  prices  surge.  Ultimately,  advanced  economies 
may fall into stagflation. I therefore believe attention should continue to be paid to how the 
various types of divergence and polarization evolve.  
2 
 BIS Review 132/2009
Japan's economic developments  
II.  
I would now like to turn to Japan's economic developments.  
In recent years, the Japanese economy greatly depended on growth in overseas economies. 
Specifically, the driving force behind Japan's longest period of post-war economic expansion, 
which  continued  until  the  recent  financial  crisis  emerged,  was  the  growth  in  exports. 
Meanwhile,  private  consumption  remained  weak  due  to  the  change  in  the  consumption 
structure  associated  with  the  further  aging  of  the  population,  the  low  growth  in  domestic 
employment reflecting the transfer of production bases overseas, and the ensuing sluggish 
growth in household income. Such weakness in private consumption led to sluggish growth 
in  business  fixed  investment  of  the  industries  dependant  on  growth  in  consumption,  and 
domestic  private  demand  consequently  continued  to  be  relatively  weak.  Furthermore,  the 
sharp deterioration in global economic conditions – the situation that can be expressed as 
the acute pain caused by the recent financial crisis – led to a sharp contraction in the volume 
of  world  trade;  this  significantly  reduced  Japan's  exports,  and  the  country's  economy 
underwent a sharp downturn at an unprecedentedly fast pace.  
However,  positive  momentum  has  been  observed  in  Japan  since  this  spring  as  overseas 
economic  conditions  have  stopped  worsening,  and  the  Bank's  current  assessment  is  that 
"Japan's  economy  has  started  to  pick  up."  Specifically,  public  investment,  exports,  and 
production  have  been  increasing.  On  the  other  hand,  against  the  backdrop  of  the  severe 
income  situation  and  weak  corporate  profits,  private  consumption  and  business  fixed 
investment have remained relatively weak.  
For  the  time  being,  the  future  course  of  the  Japanese  economy  will  depend  greatly  on 
overseas economic conditions, and, as I mentioned earlier, these are expected to continue to 
recover,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace.  Exports  and  production  are  expected  to  continue 
increasing.  Public  investment  is  also  expected  to  keep  rising  for  the  time  being,  owing  to 
progress  in  the  implementation  of  the  policy  package.  A  recovery  in  corporate  profits 
reflecting improvement on both the supply and demand fronts, as well as the implementation 
of  various  economic  stimulus  measures,  is  projected  to  gradually  boost  business  fixed 
investment  and  private  consumption,  both  of  which  have  been  relatively  weak  recently.  In 
sum, the Bank's baseline scenario is that Japan's economic conditions are likely to improve 
gradually.  
However,  the  outlook  is  still  attended  by  a  high  level  of  uncertainty.  Needless  to  say,  the 
most  considerable  risk  factor  behind  the  outlook  is  future  developments  in  overseas 
economies;  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  these  pose  upside  as  well  as  downside  risks  to  the 
Japanese  economy.  In  addition,  domestic  risk  factors  include  a  potential  decline  in  firms' 
medium- to long-term growth expectations against the backdrop of domestic and overseas 
economic growth declining to a level lower than that realized before the current recession. As 
you can see, there are various risks to the outlook for the Japanese economy both on the 
upside  and  downside.  On  balance,  the  Bank's  present  assessment  is  that  risks  to  the 
economy  still  remain  greatly  on  the  downside.  In  either  case,  the  Bank  will  continue  to 
carefully  examine  economic  developments,  while  paying  due  attention  to  various  risks 
surrounding the economy.  
Developments in the financial environment  
III.  
In parallel with the pickup in the Japanese economy that I have just explained, the financial 
environment,  with  some  lingering  severity,  has  increasingly  been  showing  signs  of 
improvement. I would now like to explain in some detail developments in Japan's financial 
environment since last autumn.  
In  Japan,  the  acute  pain  caused  by  the  financial  crisis  emerged  markedly  last  autumn  in 
securities markets such as the corporate bond and CP markets, in which large firms, banks, 
and  institutional  investors  are  major  participants.  After  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 3
Japan's stock prices fell sharply and defaults of corporate bonds started to be observed. In 
these circumstances, the excessive anxiety of market participants prevailed in the corporate 
bond and CP markets, and this made investors excessively cautious about taking on issuers' 
credit risk. In addition, market functioning deteriorated significantly: transactions decreased 
sharply,  and  the  average  market  rates  did  not  reflect  the  market  fundamentals  but  rather 
were  influenced  strongly  by  specific  circumstances  of  individual  transactions.  As  a  result, 
conditions for corporate bonds and CP issuance deteriorated significantly. In the corporate 
bond  market,  the  credit  spread  (the  yield  differential  between  corporate  bonds  and 
government bonds) on BBB-rated corporate bonds was at around 1 percent in summer 2008 
but expanded rapidly thereafter, and exceeded 4 percent around the end of fiscal 2008. In 
fact, almost no issuance of BBB-rated bonds was observed at the time. Even the spread on 
A-rated  corporate  bonds,  which  have  been  recognized  as  medium-rated  bonds,  expanded 
and exceeded 1.5 percent around the end of fiscal 2008, although it was at about 0.7-0.8 
percent in summer 2008. There was almost no issuance of such bonds from October through 
November 2008. Issuance rates on CP also rose substantially. In November, CP issuance 
rates (3-month) exceeded banks' lending rates (in terms of the average contracted interest 
rates  on  new  short-term  loans)  for  the  first  time,  although  this  entirely  unprecedented 
phenomenon was observed only in this month.  
Accordingly, large firms, which faced difficulty in raising funds by issuing corporate bonds or 
CP,  began  to  shift  to  bank  loans  to  satisfy  their  funding  needs.  Large  firms'  shift  to  bank 
loans  reduced  the  flow  of  funds  into  small  firms,  raising  concerns  about  small  firms'  cash 
availability.  
In  this  situation,  large  and  small  firms  came  to  see  their  financial  positions  as  having 
deteriorated substantially, and around the end of fiscal 2008 the judgment index worsened to 
the level observed at the time of Japan's financial crisis in 1998. Tensions intensified not only 
in  securities  markets  but  also  in  bank  loan  markets,  and  this  caused  concerns  about  a 
potential  adverse  feedback  loop  between  financial  and  economic  activity,  whereby 
deterioration  in  financial  activity  worsens  economic  activity,  and  financial  and  economic 
activity amplify the adverse effects on each other.  
Thus,  Japan's  financial  environment  worsened  significantly,  particularly  in  the  area  of 
corporate  financing,  creating  a  situation  that  I  expressed  as  acute  pain  caused  by  the 
financial  crisis.  Recently,  however,  as  excessive  anxiety  in  financial markets  has  subsided 
and economic activity has started to pick up, the financial environment has increasingly been 
showing  signs  of  improvement,  although  there  remains  some  lingering  severity  for  small 
firms in particular.  
Let me discuss recent developments in securities markets, focusing on the changes from the 
conditions that I mentioned earlier. Conditions for corporate bonds and CP issuance, which 
had  been  worsening  and  consequently  exerting  pressure  on  large  firms'  funding,  have 
recently  become  favorable,  except  for  corporate  bonds  that  are  rated  BBB  or  lower.2  The 
credit  spread  on  A-rated  corporate  bonds  has  declined  since  around  this  spring,  and  the 
value  of  corporate  bonds  issued  publicly  has  increased  markedly.  The  number  of  firms 
issuing  bonds  has  also  increased.  There  are  even  some  market  participants  who  have 
recently pointed out some overheating of the markets. In contrast, while public issuance of 
BBB-rated corporate bonds has been observed, the number of firms issuing such bonds is 
limited as the credit spread remains at a high level. However, the unfavorable conditions for 
issuance  of  low-rated  bonds  seem  to  be  due  to  structural  factors,  rather  than  the  market 
                                                 
2   According  to  the  September  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  CP  issuance 
conditions as perceived by firms of all industries have improved only marginally. This seems to represent a 
bias  in  the  results  since  some  firms  that  do  not  issue  any  CP  responded  to  the  question  based  on,  for 
example, media reports. In fact, looking at the figures by industry, CP issuance conditions as perceived by 
firms of industries that include many CP issuing firms have improved greatly. 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2009
dysfunction; in fact, investors have attributed the continued sluggishness in the issuance of 
low-rated bonds to the rekindling of concerns about possible downgrading of issuing firms, 
while  issuing  firms  have  attributed  it  to  the  fact  that  the  terms  for  bank  loans  are  more 
appealing than those for funding in the corporate bond and CP markets. Regarding the CP 
market, the issuance rates have declined significantly regardless of credit ratings, and those 
of high-rated CP have even fallen below yields on government bills.  
As for changes in bank loan markets, firms' demands for loans to fund working capital and 
fixed investment have declined recently. In fact, the diffusion index for financial institutions' 
perception of demand for loans in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending 
Practices at Large Japanese Banks recorded the highest figure at the end of last year, then 
peaked out, and became negative in the July survey regardless of the firm size. Against such 
a backdrop, the pace of increase in bank lending, after showing high growth on the back of 
the sharp economic downturn until around the end of 2008, has been slowing.  
Since the economy has started to pick up and the functioning of securities markets has been 
improving,  large  firms  have  come  to  see  their  financial  positions  as  having  improved 
markedly. Small firms also have reported that there are signs of improvement, partly because 
the effects of the emergency guarantee scheme, introduced by the government at the end of 
last  year,  have  begun  to  appear  and  partly  because  the  economy  has  started  to  pick  up. 
However, there remains some lingering severity, as shown by the fact that the level of the 
judgment index is still around that observed at the time of the bottom of the economic cycle 
in early 2002, and that the extent of improvement is marginal compared with large firms.  
Developments in prices  
IV.  
I would now like to discuss developments in prices.  
Consumer prices have shown large swings since last year, reflecting changes in the prices of 
petroleum  products.  More  specifically,  on  the  back  of  the  surge  in  the  prices  of  petroleum 
products, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh 
food)  rose  sharply  in  the  first  half  of  2008  and  posted  an  increase  of  2.4  percent  in  the 
summer  of  that  year.  It  was  the  highest  rate  in  about  16  years,  since 1992,  excluding  the 
year when the CPI was impacted by a rise in the consumption tax rate. However, after the 
rapid increase, it started to decline significantly from the second half of 2008. The latest data 
released at the end of September showed that the CPI declined by a year-on-year rate of 2.4 
percent in August, marking the largest drop since the data began to be compiled. The level of 
the CPI in August is equivalent to the level in June 2007, just before the period when the 
prices of petroleum products began to surge.  
As for the outlook, the year-on-year decline in the CPI is likely to moderate as the effects of 
the prices of petroleum products abate and the supply-demand balance improves as a result 
of the pickup in the economy. Nevertheless, the year-on-year decline in the CPI is likely to 
continue for a relatively long time, because substantial slack seems to have emerged in the 
economy due to the significant economic downturn from autumn 2008 and because the pace 
of improvement in the supply-demand balance is expected to be slow.  
I would like to note that not only Japan but also many other major economies, including the 
United  States,  are  seeing  a  downward  trend  in  consumer  prices.  In  many  of  these 
economies, while economic conditions are likely to improve, it is expected that it will take a 
long  time  for  inflation  rates  to  return  to  desirable  levels  given  the  significant  impact  of  the 
negative demand shock to these economies.  
Against this background, the media seem to be citing the word "deflation" more frequently 
than before. "Deflation" is a common word but its meaning varies depending on the speaker. 
For instance, some use this word to mean a decline in consumer prices, whereas others use 
it to mean a decline in asset prices and in economic activity. Moreover, the price indicator 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 5
they refer to varies and there is no consensus view about the degree and duration of a price 
fall to determine "deflation."  
Regardless of the definition of "deflation," a matter of great importance is whether there are 
prospects for the economy to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. In this 
regard, it is important to prevent a situation where a decline in prices induces deterioration in 
economic conditions. To this end, it seems vital that the following two preconditions are met. 
First, financial system stability must be maintained. In a situation where the financial system 
is  working  properly,  financial  institutions  can,  to  the  extent  depending  on  their  financial 
soundness,  provide  liquidity  to  firms  that  faced  a  temporary,  sharp  fall  in  demand.  If  bank 
lending  can  act  as  a  buffer  to  absorb  a  negative  demand  shock,  firms  are  less  likely  to 
engage in fire sales to obtain funds to repay debt or engage in the sort of drastic reduction in 
prices that may lead to further deterioration in the economy. And second, it is essential that 
expectations for inflation rates over the medium to long term remain stable, uninfluenced by 
short-term  developments  in  inflation  rates.  In  such  a  situation,  firms'  price-setting behavior 
will probably be based on expectations that in the long run prices in general will turn upward. 
This  is  likely  to  prevent  prices  from  declining  continuously  and  reduce  the  possibility  of 
further economic deterioration.  
I would now like to assess the environment surrounding prices in Japan on the basis of the 
two  preconditions  I  just  described.  Regarding  financial  system  stability,  the  Japanese 
financial system has not suffered from internal factors, such as impaired assets at Japanese 
banks,  compared  to  the  U.S.  and  European  counterparts.  As  for  expectations  for  inflation 
rates  over  the  medium  to  long  term,  survey  results  and  various  market  data  suggest  that 
there  has  been  no  notable  change.  Nevertheless,  as  balance-sheet  adjustments  are  still 
continuing  on  a  global  basis,  resultant  risks  to  financial  system  stability  are  unlikely  to 
disappear in the near future. Moreover, given that prices are expected to continue falling for 
a  relatively  long  time,  there  remains  a  risk  that  expectations  for  inflation  rates  over  the 
medium to long term could possibly decrease significantly in line with developments in actual 
inflation  rates.  Therefore,  the  Bank  intends  to  continue  to  monitor  developments  in  prices 
closely, while paying careful attention to the preconditions I have mentioned.  
Conduct of monetary policy by the Bank  
V.  
I have explained economic and price developments at home and abroad, and now would like 
to  briefly  talk  about  the  Bank's  thinking  behind  its  current  and  future  conduct  of  monetary 
policy based on these developments.  
Since  last  autumn,  the  Bank  has  conducted  various  measures  to  support  the  Japanese 
economy from the financial side.  
With regard to the interest rate policy, the Bank, after reducing its policy interest rate to 0.1 
percent,  maintained  its  extremely  low  policy  interest  rate  level  and  thus  provided  an 
accommodative financial environment, contributing to underpinning economic activity.  
In addition, with a view to ensuring the stability of financial markets and facilitating corporate 
financing, the Bank, while providing ample liquidity to the markets, introduced measures such 
as  outright  purchases  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  as  well  as  special  funds-supplying 
operations to facilitate corporate financing. Although it is extraordinary for a central bank to 
use  many  of  these  policy  tools,  the  Bank  judged  it  appropriate  to  introduce  them  as 
temporary  measures  in  response  to  various  phenomena  such  as  the  spread  of  excessive 
anxiety  among  market  participants  and  the  rapid  deterioration  in  market  functioning  in  the 
corporate  bond  and  CP  markets  –  acute  pain  in  the  financial  environment  caused  by  the 
recent financial crisis. Regarding the impact of these temporary measures, I believe that the 
outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds have proved effective to a certain degree in 
reducing  excessive  anxiety  among  market  participants,  and  that  special  funds-supplying 
operations  to  facilitate  corporate  financing  have  supported  the  recovery  in  market 
6 
 BIS Review 132/2009
functioning, which previously declined sharply. Also, I believe that the expansion in the range 
of collateral that the Bank accepts has boosted supply of credit by banks to firms.  
With  regard  to  the  policy  measures  taken  in  the  recent  financial  crisis  around  the  world, 
including those taken by the Bank, the term "exit strategies" has been frequently mentioned, 
as global economic conditions have started to improve. Exit strategies are variously defined 
but  are  often  discussed  at  international  conferences  to  indicate  strategies  to  exit  from 
expansionary monetary and fiscal policies as well as measures to stabilize financial systems.  
On  this  point,  it  was  confirmed  at  the  meeting  of  the  Group  of  Twenty  (G-20)  Finance 
Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  held  last  month  that,  although  "the  .  .  .  timing  and 
sequencing of actions will vary across countries and across the types of policy measures," 
they "will continue to implement . . . necessary financial support measures and expansionary 
monetary and fiscal policies . . . until recovery is secured." This view was shared again at the 
meeting of the Group of Seven (G-7) Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors held on 
October 3, 2009.  
In fact, it will take a long time for various adjustments to progress in the United States and 
Europe, and during the adjustment process expansionary policies will continue to be required 
in order to underpin economic activity. The Japanese economy has just started to pick up, 
and on the monetary policy front it is vital that the Bank secure the accommodative financial 
environment for an extended period to facilitate the return of the economy to a sustainable 
growth path.  
As  for  the  emergency  measures  that  have  been  introduced  in  response  to  the  acute  pain 
triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and in particular to the spread of excessive 
anxiety  among  market  participants  and  the  rapid  deterioration  in  market  functioning,  the 
review  of  these  measures  should  be  separated  from  exit  strategies  regarding  the 
macroeconomic  policies  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  It  is  considered  appropriate  that  the 
emergency measures be reviewed in accordance with the degree of decrease in excessive 
anxiety and of recovery in market functioning. In the United States, the Federal Reserve has 
already set out a plan to suspend or scale back some of its facilities such as purchases of 
long-term government bonds and the Term Auction Facility (TAF), which is a tool to supply 
longer-term liquidity.  
Regarding  when  the  Bank's  temporary  measures  should  be  withdrawn,  the  Bank  will 
examine the impact and necessity of each measure as comprehensively as possible, and will 
make a decision at an appropriate time at a future Monetary Policy Meeting based on the 
comprehensive review.  
The Bank will continue to exert its utmost efforts as the central bank to facilitate the return of 
the Japanese economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability.  
Closing remarks: medium- to long-term issues that the Japanese economy faces  
In  closing  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  medium-  to  long-term  issues  that  the 
Japanese economy faces.  
For  the  Japanese  economy  to  attain  growth  that  raises  people's  standard  of  living  amid 
drastic  changes  in  the  world  economy,  Japanese  firms  need  to  address  medium-  to  long-
term  changes  in  the  world  economic  environment.  I  would  like  to  point  out  three  key 
changes.  
The first change, potentially, is a decline in the sustainable growth rate of the world economy. 
As mentioned earlier, given that the asset bubble lasted for a long time and spread globally, 
we may have to wait for some time longer than a typical short-term business cycle until the 
necessary adjustments are completed. Firms need to respond to this possibility from a long-
term perspective.  
BIS Review 132/2009 
 7
time  potential  customers 
The second change is the aging of the population, which is developing in every advanced 
economy including Japan. In an economy where the population is decreasing due to aging, 
growth in consumption will inevitably slow and the structure of consumption will also change, 
with  the  relative  importance  of  consumption  by  the  elderly  rising.  China,  which  is  enjoying 
high growth, is also likely to become subject to the effects of an aging population before long, 
although this issue is seldom discussed.  
The  third  change  is  tighter  constraints  from  limited  irreproducible  resources  and  the 
ecological environment. Global warming is not an issue for a single country but literally for 
the entire globe.  
I believe the wisdom of corporate managers – today's main audience – can produce the best 
solution to deal with these changes. Therefore, I would like to raise only two general points.  
The  first  relates  to  how  to  address  balance-sheet  adjustments  on  a  global  scale.  The 
importance of expanding domestic demand is undeniable, but I think it is also important to 
attract demand from emerging economies. They are Japan's competitors in world trade but at 
the  same 
for  Japanese  products.  Historically,  Japanese 
manufacturers  have  responded  swiftly  to  structural  changes  in  the  world  economy  and 
cultivated  new  customers.  I  believe  that  they  should  further  develop  such  competency  to 
address the medium- to long-term issues, and this would be one of the pillars supporting a 
smooth adjustment process for the Japanese economy.  
The second point relates to how to minimize the negative effects of an aging population and 
the  constraints  from  limited  irreproducible  resources  and  the  ecological  environment.  My 
opinion is that innovations that create eco-friendly products will pave the road to success. Let 
me  adduce  an  example  of  the  issue  of  an  aging  population.  Today's  development  of 
technologies,  typically  of  digital  appliances,  seems  to  be  one  that  primarily  targets  the 
younger  generation  and  generates  profits  through  mass  production.  However,  such 
development would produce less value-added than before as the proportion of the population 
comprised  by  the  younger  generation  decreases.  It  will  become  increasingly  important  for 
firms  to  employ  new  elderly-oriented  technology  ahead  of  their  competitors.  In  fact,  in  the 
area  of  finance,  product  innovations  are  necessary  to  find  the  way  to  finance  socially-
required investments by making use of financial assets held by the elderly in particular. It is 
crucial  that  different  industries  –  for  example,  financial  and  manufacturing  sectors  – 
cooperate with each other to address such issues.  
Looking  at  the  economy  of  Hyogo  Prefecture  based  on  the  argument  just  presented, 
responses to the medium- to long-term changes in the economic environment seem to be 
making  steady  progress.  As  for  responses  to  the  constraints  from  limited  irreproducible 
resources and the ecological environment, for example, there are many factories producing 
solar, lithium-ion, or nickel-hydrogen batteries in the region. A number of firms related to wind 
power generation are also clustered in Hyogo Prefecture, and I understand it is viewed as 
one of the regions with high potential in ecological business.  
The  changes  we  are  facing  in  the  economic  environment  are  a  global  phenomenon  and 
eventually will affect all of society. In such a situation, exerting originality and ingenuity is the 
only way to survive as individual firms and a nation as a whole. I sincerely hope that various 
efforts  currently  being  made  will  bear  fruit  and  bring  prosperity  to  the  economy  of  Hyogo 
Prefecture. 
8 
 BIS Review 132/2009
