Elizabeth A Duke: Keys to successful neighborhood stabilization 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Community  Stabilization  Symposium,  NeighborWorks  Training 
Institute, National Harbor, Maryland, 9 December 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good morning. I am very pleased to be here to welcome you to the NeighborWorks' Training 
Institute Symposium on Community Stabilization. The Federal Reserve is co-sponsoring this 
event  as  part  of  a  partnership  we  have  with  NeighborWorks  America  (NeighborWorks)  to 
reduce the impact of foreclosures in low- and moderate-income communities. Clearly, much 
remains  to  be  done  to  stabilize  communities  hard-hit  by  the  foreclosure  crisis,  but  we  are 
encouraged by the work of this partnership, now in its second year. We are leveraging the 
resources  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  particularly  our  data  resources  and  our  network  of 
regional Reserve Banks across the country, to assist NeighborWorks' activities with respect 
to  training,  foreclosure counseling  resources,  and  building the  capacity  of  local  community 
organizations.  
Federal  Reserve  Board  Chairman  Bernanke  asked  me  to  chair  the  Board's  Committee  on 
Consumer  and  Community  Affairs  and 
the 
NeighborWorks Board. As a former community banker, I came to my new assignments with 
an understanding of the role that financial institutions, in partnership with local stakeholders, 
play  in  creating  healthy  sustainable  communities.  But  I  wanted  to  see  first-hand  how  the 
economic crisis was impacting communities, how NeighborWorks was responding, and how 
the  Reserve  Banks  were  assisting  communities  under  stress  and  the  organizations  that 
serve  them.  So,  Community  Affairs  staff  in  the  twelve  Reserve  Bank  Districts  and  the 
community  organizations they work with – including many NeighborWorks Organizations – 
arranged for me to tour several stressed communities across the country. And I must say, 
these  visits  have  enriched  my  understanding  of  the  vital  work  being  done  in  local 
communities, and its importance for the nation's economic future.  
So I thought the best way I could kick off this conference would be to tell you a little bit about 
what  I  learned  on  my  visits,  particularly  as  these  lessons  relate  to  community  stabilization 
efforts. I know that most of what I say will come as no surprise to those of you who work with 
these issues every day. But I want to recognize the significant work you do and express my 
profound  appreciation,  especially  to  those  who  shared  their  experiences  with  me  as  we 
toured your cities and learned about your work.  
the  Federal  Reserve  on 
to  represent 
Regional economic conditions matter 
The  first  lesson  I  learned  during  my  travels  is  that  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  strategy  for 
community  stabilization. The downturn in housing  has affected communities in a variety of 
ways,  depending  on  the  underlying  economics  of  each.  Because  of  these  variations,  a 
stabilization strategy that is effective in an industrial city facing high unemployment is unlikely 
to suit a suburban community where employment has remained relatively stable.  
Communities  with  weak  underlying  economies  are  characterized  by  a  long  trend  of 
population  loss,  gradual  impoverishment,  and  strained  municipal  resources.  For  cities  like 
Cleveland, Detroit, and Indianapolis the increase in foreclosures over the last few years has 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
exacerbated a pre-existing vacancy problem.1 The increased rates of foreclosures and the 
related economic downturn have hastened a cycle of decreasing property values. Declines in 
state  and  local  property  and  sales  tax  revenues  result  in  even  more  vacant  homes  and 
deteriorating neighborhoods.  
Many community organizations and homeowners have been frustrated by the difficulties of 
working  with  mortgage  lenders  and  servicers,  and  these  problems  are  even  more 
exaggerated in weaker market cities. In the most devastated neighborhoods, some lenders 
do  not  even  complete  the  foreclosure  process  or  record  the  outcome  of  foreclosure  sales 
because  the  cost  of  foreclosing  exceeds  the  value  of  the  property.  Anecdotal  evidence 
suggests that these "toxic titles" have placed significant numbers of properties in a difficult 
state of legal limbo.2   
As a result of the high rates of abandonment, many cities such as Flint, Michigan, Cleveland, 
Ohio,  and  Youngstown,  Ohio  have  pursued  plans  to  "right  size"  by  demolishing  vacant 
properties  and  creating  land  banks.  These  strategies  effectively  align  housing  supply  with 
demand  and  create  open  spaces  and  parkland  that  promote  community  health  and 
sustainability. Several community organizations in Detroit, for instance, have joined together 
to  promote  an  urban  farming  initiative  that  not  only  reclaims  abandoned  properties  but 
capitalizes  on  the  growing  popularity  of  locally  grown  food.  Detroit's  Garden  Resource 
Program provides hundreds of home, school, and community gardens access to resources 
and information that empower residents to grow, harvest, prepare, and preserve food in their 
backyards and neighborhoods. In 2008, the program supplied over 169 community gardens, 
40  schools,  and  359  families  with  seeds,  plants,  and  training  that  produced  thousands  of 
pounds of food inside the City of Detroit.3   
Even  communities  with  strong  underlying  economies  have  not  been  immune  to  the 
destabilizing  effects  of  high  foreclosure  rates.  I  visited  California's  Inland  Empire  and  Los 
Angeles,  as  well  as  areas  in  Atlanta,  that  until  recently  were  economically  vibrant.  Many 
coastal cities – even those with jobs and growing populations – now are in distress because 
of high rates of foreclosure. For instance, the Florida cities of Cape Coral, Miami, Orlando, 
Tampa, and Sarasota are among those with the highest rates of foreclosure – between 3.8 
and  10  percent.  These  areas,  and  others  in  the  West,  such  as  Las  Vegas  and  Phoenix, 
experienced  very  high  rates  of  new  home  construction  and  speculative  investments  that 
resulted in unsustainable price escalation throughout the early part of this decade.4  
Vacant  properties  are  creating  a  different  kind  of  problem  in  some  California  markets. 
Indeed,  as  investors  sense  that  home  prices  have  bottomed  out,  they  are  approaching 
servicers  with  cash  offers  for  the  bulk  purchase  of  properties.  In  fact,  community 
organizations in areas of California complain that investor interest has heated up to the point 
that  qualified  first-time  homebuyers  and  local  community  organizations  are  being  crowded 
out of the market.  
Foreclosure rescue scams that have taken up residence in nearly every community appear 
to be even more prevalent in stronger market areas where retaining title to a home is more 
economically feasible. One counselor in Los Angeles told me that as many as 80 percent of 
the homeowners she counseled had been victims of rescue scams.  
                                                 
1   Mallach,  Alan.  Stabilizing  Communities:  A  Federal  Response  to  the  Secondary  Impacts  of  the  Foreclosure 
Crisis. Brookings Institute. February 2009. 
2   Mallach,  Alan.  Stabilizing  Communities:  A  Federal  Response  to  the  Secondary  Impacts  of  the  Foreclosure 
Crisis. Brookings Institute. February 2009. 
3   http://www.detroitagriculture.org/garden_resource_program.htm. 
4   Mallach,  Alan.  Stabilizing  Communities:  A  Federal  Response  to  the  Secondary  Impacts  of  the  Foreclosure 
Crisis. Brookings Institute. February 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
issues  can  vary 
from  neighborhood 
In  addition  to  the  economic  dynamics  of  any  particular  city,  it  is  clear  that,  even  within 
metropolitan  areas,  community  stabilization 
to 
neighborhood.  For  example,  Cleveland's  highest  vacancy  rates  are  primarily  in  its  urban 
core, while in Atlanta, the problem of high foreclosure rates is found not only in the urban 
core,  but  also  in  outer  suburban  communities  that  experienced  significant  growth  recently. 
For  cities  like  Atlanta,  strategies  addressing  high  foreclosure  rates  must  take  into  account 
wide variations in local capacity across and within metropolitan areas. Newer suburbs have 
not, for the most part, had time to develop the community resources and technical expertise 
that exist in urban centers.  
Another lesson I learned in my travels is about the need to understand community dynamics. 
In the end, the success of any community stabilization plan depends on the dedication and 
expertise  of  local  leaders  like  those  of  you  here  today.  Cleveland's  Detroit  Shoreway 
neighborhood, for example, clearly demonstrates that with the right vision, leadership, and 
planning  even  a  highly  distressed  community  can  regain  its  position  as  a  dynamic  and 
attractive neighborhood by maximizing its natural and cultural assets.  
them 
from  securing  and  maintaining  employment  by  providing 
Holistic approach is key 
Foreclosure mitigation activities, by necessity, focus on individual houses and mortgages in 
an  attempt  to  resolve  legal  and  economic  issues  between  borrowers,  servicers,  and 
investors.  Nonetheless,  after  visiting  with  community  organizations  and  seeing  their  work 
first-hand, it is clear to me that the most effective community stabilization approaches look 
beyond homes and mortgages. Successful community stabilization requires a broader vision 
of community, one that factors in the many elements that make a neighborhood a desirable 
place to live.  
The bottom line is that housing alone is not sufficient to create sustainable and economically 
resilient communities.  
I have seen several compelling examples of this kind of multi-faceted approach to community 
development. Atlanta's development efforts, for example, included the creation of the Center 
for Working Families. The Center serves people who are seeking employment and are eager 
to learn new skills that will help them support their families, build wealth, or start a business. 
The  Center  also  offers  its  clients  individual  coaching  to  help  them  hurdle  the  barriers  that 
keep 
transportation 
assistance, childcare subsidies, and computer literacy training. And, unlike a traditional job 
training and placement program, the Center's relationship with its clients continues long after 
they secure employment.  
Nearby,  in  the  Centennial  Place  neighborhood,  a  mixed-income,  mixed-use  community 
developed  by  the  Atlanta  Housing  Authority  on  the  site  of  one  of  the  nation's  first  public 
housing  complexes,  I  found  Centennial  Place  Elementary  School.  Centennial  Place  is  a 
math,  science,  and  technology-oriented  school  that  is  breaking  records  as  one  of  the  top 
performing schools in the Atlanta school system. They have steadily improved test scores in 
reading and math. Students and parents alike are fully engaged in the learning process in 
this state-of-the-art school.  
In Dallas, I was introduced to Lone Star Investment Advisors, an organization that invests in 
low- to moderate- income areas throughout Texas. Lone Star created a private equity fund 
that invests in Texas companies that are located in, or willing to move to, low-income census 
tracts. The fund's managers have focused on manufacturing and distribution companies that 
are  valued  at  $20  million  and  up  and  can  create  jobs  in  the  state's  lower-income 
communities.  Its  double  bottom-line  approach  to  investments  –  making  a  profit  while 
benefitting the community – makes it attractive to bankers with Community Reinvestment Act 
(CRA)  obligations  as  well  as  other  socially-minded  investors.  PrimeSource  Food  Service 
Equipment  is  one  such  business  that  Lone  Star  moved  from  an  affluent  northern  Dallas 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
suburb to South Dallas, where the poverty rate is 43.6%. PrimeSource relocated over 100 
employees and hired new employees from South Dallas.  
In Philadelphia, I toured a supermarket that provides for one of the most basic needs in many 
low-income neighborhoods: fresh food. The Pennsylvania Fresh Food Financing Initiative is 
an innovative program that works to increase the number of supermarkets and groceries in 
underserved communities across Pennsylvania. The initiative is supported by a partnership 
among The Reinvestment Fund, a non-profit developer, and two community organizations, 
The Food Trust and the Greater Philadelphia Urban Affairs Coalition.5 This partnership has 
stepped in to fill a financing need where infrastructure costs were not met by conventional 
financial  institutions.  In  addition  to  improving  the  neighborhood's  access  to  nutritious  food, 
the supermarket initiative meets several other community needs, including job creation and 
lower food costs for those with limited incomes. It also provides a focal point for other vital 
retail needs in the community.  
Other  organizations  are  dedicated  to  meeting  the  healthcare  needs  of  their  community. 
Chicago's  Lawndale  Christian  Health  Center  is  one  such  organization.6  The  center  serves 
the  Lawndale  and  Garfield  communities  on  the  West  Side  of  Chicago  by  providing  quality 
primary care services without regard to a patient's ability to pay, and in so doing, it works to 
eliminate  the  impact  of  healthcare  disparities  among  the  city's  residents.  The  Lawndale 
Center is known for its holistic approach to healthcare: it offers not only primary medical care, 
including internal medicine, pediatrics, cardiology, optometry, and dentistry, but also services 
that  support  patients'  psychological,  spiritual,  and  social  health.  In  2006  alone,  the  Center 
accommodated  more  than  110,000  outpatient  medical  visits,  4,200  hospital  visits,  840 
deliveries, 8,000 dental visits, and 3,100 optometry visits.  
The  Center  also  offers  programs  in  leadership  development  and  organizational  capacity 
building for the community, and it employs more than 300 people, many of whom live in the 
community or were attracted to the community because of the Center.  
But even more impressive to me is the Center's connection to the community it serves. The 
Center  was  founded  in  1984  when  a  group  of  Lawndale  residents  saw  a  need  in  their 
community and worked to fill it. Ownership of the Center is retained by community members, 
ensuring that it will continue to meet the needs in its neighborhood.  
As  these  examples  illustrate,  a  vibrant  community  is  made  up  of  more  than  houses. 
Neighborhoods need the right blend of housing, retail, and community services in order to 
remain desirable and resilient to economic cycles. Of course, the solution is not that simple. 
Even  a  neighborhood  with  that  perfect  mix  of  housing,  retail,  and  services  can  find  itself 
struggling. In my travels I realized that there is one characteristic shared by the communities 
that have coped most successfully in the economic downturn: organizational capacity.  
Organizational capacity 
As  I  am  sure  you  are  aware,  the  relationship  between  organizational  capacity  and  the 
success of community  stabilization efforts cannot be underestimated. I have had  the good 
fortune  to  observe  many  communities  whose  response  to  the  foreclosure  crisis  was 
immediate  and,  ultimately,  has  been  more  effective  because  of  the  deep  roots  of 
organizations in the community and the experience they have developed over many years.  
Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago, where Bruce Gotschall has served as Executive 
Director  since  its  founding  in  1975,  is  probably  one  of  the  finest  examples  of  this  kind  of 
organizational capacity. In the mid-1990s, NHS of Chicago identified predatory lending as a 
                                                 
5   http://www.trfund.com/financing/realestate/supermarkets.html. 
6   http://www.lawndale.org/index.html. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2009
threat to the neighborhoods it served. In collaboration with the City of Chicago, the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  and  many  others,  NHS  formed  the  first  Home  Ownership 
Preservation  Initiative  (HOPI).  This  initiative  became  the  model  for  foreclosure  prevention 
and  has  been  replicated  across  the  country.  Because  of  this  experience,  NHS  was  well-
prepared to assist Chicagoans in the recent housing market downturn.  
By contrast, many communities are facing the issues of vacancy, abandonment, and decay 
for the first time, and these communities need help to grow the human and financial capital 
required  to  address  neighborhood  decline.  These  capacities  do  not  appear  overnight,  but 
they can be developed. As your attendance at this Training Institute demonstrates, there is a 
strong  appetite  among  community  organizations  for  information,  training,  and  leadership 
development. And I am encouraged by your dedication.  
As  a  NeighborWorks  Board  member,  I  am  aware  that  the  demand  for  training  has  grown 
dramatically in the last few years and I am very impressed by the breadth, depth, and quality 
of  the  Training  Institute's  offerings.  In  fact,  a  significant  part  of  the  Federal  Reserve's 
partnership  with  NeighborWorks  involves  funding  the  development  of  courses  designed  to 
help  community  leaders  address  stabilization  challenges,  particularly  with  respect  to  the 
acquisition  and  disposition  of  real  estate.  In  the  first  year  of  the  partnership  alone,  640 
training certificates were awarded in the new community stabilization coursework, with even 
more  community  development  practitioners  attending  workshops  and  events  designed  to 
highlight best practices and new programs available to stabilize communities. In addition to 
training  sessions,  practitioners  can  access  this  information  on  StableCommunities.org,  a 
website developed by NeighborWorks with the Federal Reserve's support.  
The role of the Federal Reserve 
The  partnership  between  the  Federal  Reserve  and  NeighborWorks  America  is  just  one 
aspect  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  effort  to  stabilize  neighborhoods.  Community  Affairs  staff 
across the Federal Reserve System are providing data analysis and technical assistance to 
state  and  local  governments  trying  to  address  foreclosures  in  their  communities.  For 
example, the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, and Atlanta are collaborating 
on a series of capacity-building sessions for several communities in Appalachia to improve 
their  ability  to  leverage  federal  Neighborhood  Stabilization  Funds.  In  addition,  we  are 
studying  the  Neighborhood  Stabilization  Program  and  interviewing  some  50  program 
grantees  nationwide  to  learn  about  the  early  successes  and  challenges  to  this  effort  to 
restore health to communities with high foreclosure rates.  
We  continue  to  engage  in  a  good  deal  of  outreach  to  stay  informed  about  the  challenges 
facing communities as this crisis evolves. Federal Reserve staff recently attended a series of 
meetings organized by National People's Action (NPA). These meetings, held in nine cities 
chosen  by  NPA,  were  designed  to  gather  first-hand  information  about  the  impact  of 
foreclosures in low-income communities. In each city, Fed staff met with local leaders, toured 
communities  hit  by  foreclosures,  and  attended  public  meetings.  In  addition  to  giving  us 
information  about  foreclosure's  impact  on  various  communities,  the  public  meetings  have 
been  effective  in  drawing  local  press  coverage,  which  hopefully  has  heightened  local 
attention to the issues faced by residents.  
The Federal Reserve is committed to continuing to identify ways in which our strengths as a 
research institution, combined with our network of Community Affairs outreach staff, can be 
leveraged  to  help  communities  recover  from  high  numbers  of  foreclosures  and  related 
economic impacts.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I want to thank you all for your commitment to your communities and for your 
attendance here today. This symposium is designed to provoke and inspire our best thinking 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 5
today's  discussion 
– and action – related to neighborhood stabilization. I hope that each of you finds something 
in 
the  underlying  economic  conditions  of  your 
neighborhood, that encourages holistic solutions to the problems your community faces, and 
that improves your ability to meet the demands placed on you as a leader in your community.  
that  applies 
to 
6 
 BIS Review 164/2009
