Svein Gjedrem: Experiences with the financial crisis 
Lecture by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)/BI  Norwegian  School  of  Management,  Oslo, 
30 September 2009. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The last time I addressed this assembly was on 12 September 2008, only a few days before 
the US investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. The Norwegian economy had 
entered a new phase. Low inflation and high growth were late in the upturn being followed by 
somewhat  higher  inflation  and  slower  growth.  Early  summer  the  key  policy  rate  had  been 
raised to 5.75 per cent – a fairly normal level. It seemed that the elevated level of capacity 
utilisation in the Norwegian economy would gradually drift down.  
The  economic  conjuncture  took  a  different  turn.  The  Lehman  Brothers’  bankruptcy  on  15 
September triggered a crisis with failing confidence in banks, counterparties and contractual 
partners and confidence in the future plummeted. The world economy entered into a sharp 
downturn. It became increasingly evident that the Norwegian economy would slow at a faster 
pace  and  to  a  further  extent  than  we  had  envisaged.  In  August  last  year,  manufacturing 
enterprises in our regional network reported that growth would hold up. In November, they 
described  the  turnaround  as  a  “cardiac  arrest”.  Developments  abroad  fed  through  to  the 
Norwegian economy, translating into a shortfall in funding for banks, weaker demand for our 
export  goods  and  heightened  uncertainty  surrounding  economic  developments.  The 
Norwegian authorities responded to the slowdown in activity with active measures, and the 
key policy rate was reduced in steps to 1.25 per cent to mitigate the fallout on the Norwegian 
economy.  
Fiscal  and  monetary  policy  have  been  effective  and  the  situation  in  some  sectors  of  the 
Norwegian  economy  is  improving.  The  financial  industry  has  been  exposed  to  a  liquidity 
crisis, but the Norwegian banking system did not experience a solvency crisis and Norway 
escaped a real economic crisis. House prices and equity prices are again on the rise, output 
moved  up  in  the  second  quarter  and  unemployment  has  been  markedly  lower  through 
summer than we had expected.  
There  are  still  risks  ahead.  Many  of  our  trading  partners  are  struggling  with  large  and 
mounting  public  debt  and  underlying  external  imbalances.  This  may  give  rise  to  new 
disturbances that may also influence our economy.  
Crisis management  
2.  
The financial market turbulence started in August 2007 after banks started to suffer subprime 
losses  in  the  US  market.  After  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  risk 
premiums  surged  in  funding  markets  and  equity  prices  plunged  –  particularly  financials. 
Today  we  can  observe  that  the  element  of  surprise  at  how  closely  financial  markets  are 
interwoven amplified the crisis.1  
                                                 
1   See  for  example  Caballero  and  Kurlat  (2009),  “The  ‘Surprising’  Origin  and  Nature  of  Financial  Crises:  A 
macroeconomic  policy  proposal”,  paper  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas’  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 1
Central banks around the globe cut key rates swiftly and forcefully, in some cases to levels 
close  to  zero.  In  Sweden,  the  central  bank  set  the  interest  rate  on  banks’  deposits  in  the 
central bank at negative ¼ per cent. In Norway, it was not appropriate to use instruments as 
forcefully. But Norges Bank also reduced the key policy rate markedly and rapidly and more 
rapidly than the inflation and growth outlook alone suggested.  
Central  banks  have  a  long  history  of  dealing  with  financial  crises.  The  economist  and 
journalist Walter Bagehot formulated as early as in 1873 the principles for central banks’ role 
in this area: 
“To avert panic, central banks should lend early and freely (without limit), to 
solvent firms, against good collateral, and at ‘high rates’.”2  
Bagehot’s  principles  describe  central  banks’  liquidity  provision  in  the  first  phase  of  the 
financial  crisis  –  from  autumn  2007.  Central  banks  responded  swiftly  and  supplied  an 
extraordinary  amount  of  liquidity  through  their  conventional  instruments,  i.e.  loans  against 
good  collateral  at  a  price  close  to  the  key  policy  rate.  In  most  countries,  banks  also  have 
access to liquidity through automatic drawing rights against the provision of collateral. These 
facilities  are  priced  at  a  premium  on  the  key  policy  rate  in  line  with  Bagehot’s  advice.3  In 
addition,  agreements  were  entered  into  between  central  banks  so  that  liquidity  in  different 
currencies could be provided across borders. Many banks were particularly in need of US 
dollar funding.  
After the failure of Lehman Brothers, the financial system became fully dependent on central 
bank funding. The situation required new instruments. 
Central  banks  supplied  liquidity  at  longer  maturities  than  normal  and  eased  the  collateral 
requirements for central bank loans.  
Many  countries  introduced  government-guaranteed  credit  lines  and  swap  lines  for  lending 
liquid securities – primarily government securities – against less liquid securities. In a number 
of  countries,  central  banks  have  purchased  both  public  and  private  bonds  with  longer 
maturities directly in the market.  
Private bonds have primarily been purchased with a view to improving liquidity and reducing 
bond premiums. The Government Bond Fund was also established for that purpose.  
Government bond purchases can influence long-term government bond yields and indirectly 
the interest rate on mortgage and corporate bonds and asset prices. Moreover, the Bank of 
England  notes  that  the  purchases  increase  the  money  supply,  which  can  contribute  to 
underpinning  inflation  expectations.  It  has  not  been  relevant  for  Norges  Bank  to  buy 
government bonds in the market.  
But we have also been highly active. As mentioned, we reduced the key policy rate from 15 
September last year. We supplied substantial liquidity to the banks and eased the collateral 
requirements for loans. We entered into a credit agreement with the Federal Reserve and 
supplied  US  dollar  liquidity  to  Norwegian  banks.  Krone  liquidity  was  provided  through 
currency  swap  agreements,  both  in  euros  and  US  dollars.  We  also  proposed  the  covered 
bond swap arrangement and a capital injection of core capital from the government to banks.  
                                                 
2   Walter Bagehot (1873), “Lombard Street: A description of the Money Market”. 
3   Norges Bank’s automatic borrowing facility for banks is referred to as D-loans. The interest rate on overnight 
D-loans  is  one  percentage  point  higher  than  the  key  policy  rate  and  forms  a  ceiling  for  short-term  money 
market rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2009
The Norwegian monetary policy measures have been effective 
Before the crisis the daily surplus liquidity in the Norwegian market of about NOK 20 billion 
was sufficient to keep short-term money market rates near the key policy rate. From autumn 
2008, Norges Bank has supplied ample liquidity, bringing bank deposits in Norges Bank to 
well  above  NOK  100  billion  in  periods.  The  substantial  supply  was  necessary  to  prevent 
short-term  money  market  rates  from  rising  too  high  above  the  key  policy  rate  or  from 
fluctuating widely. Risk premiums at shortest end of the money market fell.  
Through  the  currency  swap  agreements,  under  which  Norwegian  kroner  were  offered  in 
exchange  for  US  dollars  or  euros,  we  reached  participants  who  were  active  in  Norwegian 
kroner  but  who  did  not  have  access  to  loans  from  Norges  Bank.  The  currency  swap 
agreements helped to limit the risk premiums in Norwegian interest rates.  
Norwegian  banks  are  dependent  on  US  dollar  liquidity,  which  was  on  occasion  difficult  to 
procure  in  the  market.  Norges  Bank,  like  other  central  banks  in  Europe,  provided  dollar 
liquidity to banks in periods.  
Banks’  access  to  funding  at  all  but  the  shortest  horizons  has  been  very  limited  during  the 
crisis.  A  key  problem  was  that  banks  were  heavily  reliant  on  international  market  funding. 
When that source of funding seized up the Norwegian authorities had to intervene. 
Several instruments have been deployed. Loans have been offered at longer maturities than 
earlier, in some cases up to 2 and 3 years. The arrangement where banks and bank-owned 
mortgage  companies  can  swap  covered  bonds  (OMF)  for  government  securities  was 
introduced to facilitate banks’ access to medium-term and long-term funding, but also to ease 
money market conditions so that money market premiums could be reduced.  
In the mid-1980s Norwegian banks also relied heavily on foreign funding. In spring 1986 – 
following  a  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices  –  confidence  in  the  Norwegian  economy  weakened  and 
liquidity  flowed  out  of  the  country,  as  was  the  case  last  autumn.  Norges  Bank  had  to 
purchase NOK and sell foreign exchange to maintain a fixed krone exchange rate. The krone 
liquidity that flowed into the foreign exchange market flowed back into Norges Bank as loans 
to  the  banks  to  avoid  a  liquidity  crisis  and  a  surge  in  money  market  rates.  Bank  lending 
continued to grow in 1986 and 1987, and in retrospect it might almost seem as though the 
central bank through its lending operations had played an active part in financing the credit 
boom. There was no time or basis for the banks to provide collateral for borrowing from the 
central  bank,  and  when  the  banking  crisis  became  full-blown  a  few  years  later  the  central 
bank was highly exposed. This gave the banks a strong negotiating position in the first crisis 
resolution rounds.  
This  time,  funding  support  for  banks  came  from  the  government’s  balance  sheet,  not  as 
loans  from  Norges  Bank.  This  provided  transparency.  Norges  Bank  could  to  large  extent 
concentrate  on  restoring  the  functioning  of  the  money  market.  Moreover,  the  government 
was  provided  with  sound  collateral,  while  the  banks  were  provided  with  government 
securities that they could use as collateral for borrowing or sell in the market.  
The Norwegian measures were designed in such a way that Norges Bank’s balance sheet 
has not increased to the same extent as that of a number of other central banks.  
The measures led to a gradual improvement in Norwegian banks’ funding. So far, drawings 
on the covered bond swap line have amounted to NOK 225 billion. The swap line soothed 
the panic among banks and led to a moderation in the tightening of bank lending standards.  
Since spring, risk premiums on fixed-income securities have declined and activity in money 
and bond markets has picked up. In recent months, many financial institutions have again 
procured funding in traditional commercial paper and bond markets.  
BIS Review 119/2009 
 3
The winding down of extraordinary measures has started 
In  Norway,  it  has  been  appropriate  to  start  winding  down  the  unconventional  measures 
earlier than in other countries. In recent months, liquidity has not been supplied through the 
currency swap lines or liquidity in foreign currency. Loans at long maturities have not been 
provided since February – several of the loans have now matured. 
As the markets are now returning to normal, the supply of liquidity will be adjusted so that the 
money market rate reflects the key policy rate. We want the banks to redistribute liquidity in 
the interbank market.  
The  underlying  structural  liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  i.e.  liquidity  excluding  Norges 
Bank’s liquidity provision, has been negative in recent years.  
Structural liquidity was influenced by ingoing and outgoing payments  via the government’s 
account  in  Norges  Bank  and  is  projected  to  increase  ahead,  primarily  because  the 
government  can  partly  finance  increased  lending  to  state  banks,  payments  from  the 
Government Bond Fund and the State Finance Fund and share subscriptions by drawing on 
their large deposits in Norges Bank. The banking system’s demand for central bank loans 
can then decrease considerably. 
The swap arrangement involving covered bonds in exchange for government securities has 
made a considerable contribution to securing banks’ long-term funding. This spring we saw 
that the covered bond market started to reopen. The minimum price in the swap arrangement 
is thus adjusted to the interest rate forming in the market. The arrangement will be phased 
out in the course of autumn.  
Norges  Bank  eased  its  collateral  requirements  to  facilitate  banks’  borrowing  access  in  the 
central bank. That will be reversed. Moreover, we have earlier announced that Norges Bank 
will reduce the share of banks’ access to loans from the central bank backed by bank bond 
collateral.  
The interest rate is now extraordinarily low. The Executive Board considered raising the key 
policy  rate  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  23  September,  but  decided  to  leave  it 
unchanged. Norges Bank has previously noted that if developments continue as expected, it 
may  be  appropriate  to  increase  the  key  policy  rate  earlier  than  projected  in  the  June 
Monetary Policy Report.  
The financial crisis and economic policy – lessons 
3.   
In Norway, there is a division of roles in economic policy. Wage formation, the tax system 
and  economic  regulation  should  contribute  to  well  functioning  markets  and  promote  the 
efficient use of labour and other real economic resources.  
The government budget – growth in public spending – influences the real exchange rate and 
the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  long  term.  The  fiscal  rule 
enhances the predictability of petroleum revenue spending in the Norwegian economy even 
when  the  budget  is  actively  used  from  one  year  to  the  next  to  stabilise  economic 
developments  and  even  when  the  automatic  stabilisers  are  allowed  to  operate.  A  smooth 
phasing in of petroleum revenues dampen krone fluctuations and reduce the risk of abrupt 
and major shifts between internationally exposed and sheltered industries.  
Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long term and can in addition contribute to 
smoothing fluctuations in output and employment.  
Inflation targeting has served us particularly well in the lead-up to the crisis, during the crisis 
and after the crisis. After some years of very low inflation earlier this decade, the interest rate 
was set at a low level with a view to holding up inflation expectations. That was an important 
contribution.  Before  the  crisis,  when  it  was  appropriate  to  tighten  the  stance  again,  the 
interest  rate  hikes  were  effective.  Inflation  targeting  made  it  possible  for  us  to  cut  interest 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2009
rates  markedly  in  autumn  2008.  Thanks  to  well  anchored  inflation  expectations,  the  real 
interest  rate  rapidly  declined  to  a  low  very  level.  Under  the  former  fixed  exchange  rate 
regime,  the  key  policy  rate  would  have  been  highest  when  the  degree  of  uncertainty  was 
highest and demand for small currencies such as the Norwegian krone was lowest. Inflation 
targeting has enabled monetary policy to curb substantially the downturn in the economy. 
The crisis may show that the real economy of countries with solid state finances, such as 
Norway, is less severely affected. The OECD notes that financial markets in countries with 
high  public  debt  may  react  sharply  so  that  market  interest  rates  rise  when  fiscal  policy  is 
used  to  stimulate  the  economy  during  a  crisis.4  This  may  reduce  the  effect  of  an 
expansionary fiscal and monetary policy. If an upward shift in public spending is perceived as 
permanent,  forward-looking  households  and  firms  will  increase  saving  to  meet  higher  tax 
payments in the future. Consequently, the effects of increased public spending on demand 
for  goods  and  services  may  be  limited.  If  households  know  that  the  increase  in  public 
spending is temporary, and is subsequently matched by lower spending, state finances will 
not be a source of concern for households and firms further ahead. In that case, they do not 
have to increase saving and increased public spending today will have a stronger effect on 
total  demand.  It  is  therefore  important  to  tighten  the  fiscal  stance  in  favourable  periods  to 
secure  the  effectiveness  of  economic  policy  in  difficult  periods.  Norway  is  in  a  favourable 
position in this respect. The fiscal rule provides a good framework for tightening the stance 
when the economic cycle turns.  
Fiscal policy in Norway is conducted with the knowledge of how monetary policy will react. 
Today’s flexible inflation targeting provides a monetary policy framework and guidelines as to 
how  monetary  policy  is  to  be  conducted  in  different  situations.  The  fiscal  authorities  can 
internalise the monetary policy response pattern. It is also natural for them to do so as the 
government  and  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  have  laid  down  the  mandate  for 
monetary policy. 
When the monetary policy response pattern is known and is consistent over time, the social 
partners can factor in a monetary policy reaction when setting wages. This viewpoint is most 
relevant  when  wage  formation  is  centralised.  When  wage  formation  is  decentralised, 
monetary  policy  will  instead  influence  wage  growth  via  market  mechanisms,  by  stabilising 
aggregate demand. The existing monetary policy guidelines will function effectively whether 
wage bargaining is at a centralised, local or individual level.  
There  is  a  fine  balance  in  the  division  of  roles  between  fiscal  policy,  wage  formation  and 
monetary policy. This balance will be disturbed if the objective of monetary policy is changed 
or broadened.  
Should monetary policy give particular weight to asset prices? 
House prices in Norway have risen sharply and probably excessively.  
The  level  of  house  prices  in  Trondheim  in  central  Norway  was  an  eye-opener  for  the 
American  Nobel  Laureate  Georg  Akerlof,  who  happens  to  be  of  Swedish  ancestry.  At  a 
family gathering, he was told that a distant relative had bought a house in Trondheim at a 
price  equivalent  to  more  than  USD  1  million,  providing  a  source  of  inspiration  for  his  and 
Robert  Schiller’s  book  “Animal  Spirits:  How  Human  Psychology  Drives  the  Economy,  and 
Why it Matters for Global Capitalism”.5  
                                                 
4   OECD Interim Economic Outlook, (March) 2009. 
5   Georg Akerlof and Robert Shiller (2009): “Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the Economy, and 
Why it Matters for Global Capitalism”, Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 5
Self-reinforcing mechanisms in financial markets, which lead to slower credit flows and falling 
asset prices in downturns and the inverse in upturns, pose a challenge to monetary policy.6  
We must take account of developments in equity prices and property prices when projecting 
inflation and output. Norges Bank’s interest rate setting does not rely solely on one simple 
rule, such as the Taylor rule.7 Instead, we seek to take account of all factors that influence 
inflation  and  output  in  the  medium  term,  and  the  key  policy  rate  is  set  on  the  basis  of  an 
overall assessment. Asset prices such as house prices, the exchange rate and credit growth 
therefore  have  a  bearing  on  Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  setting.  A  written  formulation  of 
Norges Bank’s monetary policy reaction function would be fairly comprehensive and include 
all the variables that are considered.8  
However,  a  reaction  function  must  not  be  confused  with  the  monetary  policy  target  –  our 
target  function  or  loss  function.  The  fact  that  we  give  weight  to  variables  such  as  the 
exchange  rate,  house  prices  and  credit  growth  in  interest  rate  setting  does  not  imply  that 
there  are  specific  targets  for  these  variables.  The  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is 
annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. 
Interest rate setting in a small, open economy can be particularly challenging in periods of 
strong credit growth and a wide interest rate differential vis-à-vis other countries. A tightening 
of monetary policy in Norway specifically aimed at curbing property prices and credit growth 
can  result  in  a  rising  krone  exchange  rate,  a  weaker  labour  market  and  excessively  low 
inflation.  
Moreover, a higher interest rate aimed at influencing the housing market would not eliminate 
the source of repeated credit cycles. There is a risk of a bubble in both the housing and the 
foreign  exchange  market  when  credit  growth  is  high,  as  observed  in  Iceland  and  Hungary 
and perhaps even New Zealand in the years prior to the financial crisis. Interest rates were 
high in national currencies, but households and enterprises chose to borrow in low-interest-
rate currencies.9  
There was probably a sentiment of euphoria in the Norwegian housing market in 2006 and 
2007, but the boom was financed by loans in NOK and not foreign currency.  
Should  we  seek  to  avert  bubbles  in  the  housing  market  even  when  medium-term  inflation 
prospects are moderate? On this point, it is our judgement that a distinction must be made 
between  giving  greater  weight  to  credit  growth  and  house  price  inflation  in  the  reaction 
function and defining house price inflation as an independent monetary policy objective. So-
called “leaning against the wind” would not require adjustments to Norges Bank’s approach, 
bearing in mind our reaction function which already gives weight to asset price movements 
and credit growth.10  
                                                 
6   See for example Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist: “The Financial Accelerator and the Flight to Quality”, The 
Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  78(1),  1996,  pp.  1-15.  See  also  Nina  Langbraaten  (2001): 
“Formuespriser  –  konsekvenser  for  pengepolitikken?  (Asset  prices  –  consequences  for  monetary  policy?)”, 
Penger og Kreditt No 4. 
7   See  for  example  IMF  (2009),  [October]  World  Economic  Outlook,  Chap.  3,  and  Lars  Svensson  (2009): 
“Flexible  Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis”,  speech  at  a  conference  arranged  by  De 
Nederlandsche Bank in Amsterdam, 21 September 2009. 
8   We also cross-check using simple monetary policy rules, cf. Norges Bank’s Monetary Policy Report. 
9   Olivier  Blanchard,  chief  economist  at  the  IMF,  refers  to  this  phenomenon  when  he  states  that  the  most 
effective instrument in relation to credit growth that amplifies swings in the economy is better regulation. See 
IMF (2009): “Lessons of the Global Crisis for Macroeconomic Policy”. 
10   See  for  example  White  (2009):  “Should  Monetary  Policy  ‘Lean  or  Clean?’,  Working  Paper  nr.  34,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
6 
 BIS Review 119/2009
Should central banks also set explicit targets for asset prices? In our judgement, the answer 
is no, but we should probably apply a fairly long horizon for achieving the target so that we 
seek to take account of any imbalances that might disturb activity and inflation further ahead. 
The  interest  rate  should  be  set  so  that  developments  in  inflation  and  output  become 
acceptable  also  under  alternative,  albeit  not  unrealistic,  assumptions  concerning  economic 
developments and the functioning of the economy.  
Norges  Bank’s  mandate  states  that  monetary  policy  shall  be  aimed  at  stability  in  the 
Norwegian krone's internal and external value. The internal value of the krone is determined 
by inflation. 
Our interpretation of the mandate is that the external value of the krone – the exchange rate 
– cannot be fine-tuned. However, low inflation also makes a contribution to exchange rate 
stability. The Ministry of Finance has not suggested, and Norges Bank has not requested, 
that house prices should be given particular weight. 
Macroprudential supervision and systemic risk  
Even  though  inflation  targeting  has  served  us  well,  it  was  not  possible  to  shield  Norway’s 
small, open economy, in an environment of free capital markets, from the liquidity crisis in 
global financial markets last autumn. 
As we have observed abroad, when many banks encounter liquidity problems at the same 
time, triggered by a deterioration in some banks’ financial strength, solvency problems can 
easily  spread  to  other  banks  and  to  other  countries.11  This  can  occur  when  banks  facing 
liquidity  problems  are  forced  to  sell  assets  in  a  weak  market.  The  market  value  of  other 
banks’  assets  may  then  also  be  reduced.  Even  otherwise  solid  banks  can  then  lose  their 
equity capital.  
Distrust spread among banks in Norway despite our generous and sound deposit guarantee 
scheme. Deposits were not withdrawn, but funding in foreign money and bond markets dried 
up.  It  was  not  easy  for  foreign  investors  to  assess  the  value  of  banks’  assets.  They  also 
wanted to keep liquidity with themselves.  
Just as a bank deposit insurance scheme dissuades households and firms from withdrawing 
their  deposits  when  uncertainty  increases,  new  and  improved  banking  regulation  can 
contribute to bolstering confidence among financial institutions.12 It is important that banks’ 
balance sheets are easy to understand. It is also important that banks improve their deposit-
to-loan ratios and increase their access to long-term market funding with a view to reducing 
their  vulnerability  to sentiment  shifts  in  money markets.  We  cannot  have  a  situation  in  the 
future  where  our  banks  panic  after  only  a  few  weeks  of  unrest  in  international  financial 
markets.  
Banking regulation should also be adjusted in order to dampen the impact of credit cycles on 
the economy. In an upturn, banks’ loan losses are low and profits rise. The supply of capital 
                                                 
11   Charles Bean (2009) refers to the spread of liquidity problems as a result of solvency problems in individual 
banks  as  a  “lemons”  problem  in  money  markets.  The  expression  comes  from  an  article  by  George  Akerlof 
(1970):  “The  market  for  ‘lemons’:  Quality  uncertainty  and  the  market  mechanism”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 84:488-500. The article shows how a market can collapse when the buyer of a product (a second-
hand  car,  which  can  prove  to  be  a  defective  car  or  “lemon”)  cannot  verify  the  quality  of  the  product 
beforehand. The analogy to the money market is when a lender in the money market does not always know 
the financial strength of the borrowing bank. The money market may then function poorly. See Charles Bean 
(2009):  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great  Contraction”,  Schumpeter  Lecture,  Annual 
Congress of the European Economic Association. 
12   See  Jean  Tirole  (2009):  “Illiquidity  and  All  Its  Friends”.  Paper  presented  at  the  BIS  annual  conference  on 
“Financial Systems and Macroeconomic Resilience: Revisited”. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 7
is  ample  and  provides  room  for  brisk  growth  in  lending.  In  a  downturn,  earnings  decline, 
losses increase and banks tighten lending. Banking sector behaviour is thus procyclical. 
This  first  implies  that  a  higher  level  of  equity  capital  must  be  required  for  a  given  risk 
assessment.  Second,  capital  requirements  must  reflect  risk  through  the  entire  business 
cycle.  Third,  banks  must  build  up  solid  buffers  above  the  minimum  requirement  in  normal 
periods.  
Today the capital requirements for mortgage loans are very low. NOK 1 in equity capital can 
actually  be  behind  as  much  as  NOK  250  in  mortgage  loans.  House  price  fluctuations  are 
amplified  as  a  result  because  access  to  mortgage  finance  becomes  almost  unlimited  in 
favourable periods. The requirements imposing an upper limit on banks’ capital-to-loan ratio 
can remedy this to some extent. 
Tax rules  
Improved tax rules can also counteract credit cycles and promote housing market stability.  
The household debt-equity ratio and house prices are influenced by the tax system. A sound 
principle is that the net return on capital, after deduction of capital costs, should be taxed. 
Net return is indicative of the capacity to pay tax. But households are not taxed on the net 
return on their housing capital. Deductions are allowed for capital costs without taxation of a 
rise in the value of the property or the imputed value of owner-occupied housing.  
Over  the  years,  taxation  of  the  value  of  owner-occupied  housing  in  Norway  has  gradually 
been  reduced.  The  tax  benefit  for  owner-occupied  dwellings,  introduced  in  1882,  was 
abolished in 2005. The tax allowance for debt interest, however, was retained. This system 
subsidises household borrowing, it subsidises owning rather than renting a dwelling, it leads 
to higher house prices than would otherwise have been the case and to overinvestment in 
housing capital. Households inflate their balance sheets and housing capital in order to take 
advantage of the tax benefit.  
Taxation of housing in line with other forms of capital implies taxation of the value of owning 
a dwelling, the rent saved and the rise in the value of the dwelling.  
Housing  taxation  reform  can  contribute  to  curbing  the  house  price  fluctuations  that 
successive generations seem to be exposed to.  
Conclusion 
4.  
Developments in recent months indicate that the financial crisis in Norway will not turn into a 
crisis  in  the  real  economy.  There  has  been  no  recurrence  of  the  solvency  crisis  in  the 
banking sector twenty years ago.  
The  Norwegian  economy  has  nonetheless  been  exposed  to  major  shocks.  Oil  prices  and 
prices for other important export goods rose sharply through the upturn. The liquidity crisis hit 
the  banking  sector  as  growth  started  to  slow.  The  impact  on  unemployment  has  not  been 
pronounced and inflation has remained low and fairly stable throughout. We can safely say 
that fiscal and monetary policy have been fairly effective so far. But we must obviously not 
turn a blind eye to the possibility that new disturbances may expose other weaknesses.  
Household  behaviour  in  the  housing  market  poses  a  considerable  challenge  to  economic 
policy,  particularly  because  demand  for  housing  and  residential  mortgages  is  heavily 
subsidised via the tax  system and because the very low level of equity capital required to 
extend a mortgage is reflected in the supply of loans. These challenges must be confronted 
at the source. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 8 
 BIS Review 119/2009
    BIS Review 119/2009 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 119/2009
    11
BIS Review 119/2009 
     12 
 BIS Review 119/2009
    BIS Review 119/2009 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 119/2009
    BIS Review 119/2009 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 119/2009
    BIS Review 119/2009 
 17
 18 
 BIS Review 119/2009
