Ardian Fullani: The western Balkans – from regional cooperation to EU 
membership 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  conference  “The 
western  Balkans:  overcoming  the  economic  crisis  –  from  regional  cooperation  to  EU 
membership", Brussels, 9 December 2009. 
 During the last 20 years the region has undergone significant structural changes, which have 
fueled economic incentives and economic growth. In the early stages of transition a fast and 
significant transformation in the labor and later in the capital market reoriented all factors of 
production toward more productive sectors. This contributed to higher total factor productivity 
and consequently fast economic growth. 
The final stage of transition was dominated by a robust financial deepening process fueled 
among  others  from  EU  based  capital  inflows.  This  financial  intermediation  busted  credit 
growth and consumption yielding to absorption led growth model in the region. 
In the aftermath of crises our policy choices are limited. From a broad prospective the region 
should  chose  a  new  philosophy,  different  from  the  boom-bust  model  of  the  last  decade.  I 
strongly believe this must be the focal point of the Regional Policies. 
The current crisis pointed out several problems in our growth models. The so called catching 
up process was a model of unsustainable consumption behavior rather than sustainable long 
run equilibrium. Despite the overall fiscal consolidation and relatively high rate of growths, it 
resulted in increasing macroeconomic imbalances mostly evidenced in the fast enlargement 
of  current  account  deficits.  From  a  micro  analysis  point  of  view  that  was  reflected  on 
unsustainable  financial  position  of  enterprises  and  households  balance  sheets,  lead  by 
persistent fighting for market share in products and services in the banking system.  
It  is  for  that  reason  that  hard  gained  achievements  attained  during  the  last  15  years  in 
eastern Europe, got reversed within one week.  
Today, one year after the eruption of the financial crisis, I have to affirm that all the measures 
undertaken  by  central  banks  of  countries  in  the  region  resemble  one  another.  Generally 
speaking, in my opinion the measures adopted during this period are of an extreme nature; 
they are unusual and go against the “constitution” of the modern central bank with regard to 
liquidity,  money  market  and  monetary  policy  transmission  channels.  However,  we  have 
embraced the philosophy that “the end justifies the means”.  
Nevertheless, I think the central bank has become more vulnerable in terms of independence 
and  monetary  policy  efficiency.  Providing  liquidity  in  any  case,  in  any  quantity,  with  any 
maturity and accepting any kind of collateral would definitely damage the monetary policy, 
with potential second round effects on financial stability. If central banks in the short run shift 
their  focus  from  the  primary  objective  to  supporting  economic  growth  at  any  cost,  it  would 
indirectly create premises for long rung economic imbalances. 
The  current  polices  pursued  by  both  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  should  not  be 
considered  as  a  new  normality.  While  the  global  economy  is  adjusting  toward  a  new 
equilibrium,  solid  macro-prudential  long  run  policies  should  replace  current  stimulating 
efforts.  Therefore  the  challenge  for  our  economies  in  the  long  run  is  to  address  current 
problems  and  the  inherited  ones  based  on  a  new  model  of  growth,  based  on:  (i)  higher 
savings  and  investments,  aiming  toward  a  contained  consumption  matched  by  domestic 
production;  (ii)  persistent  FDI  inflows  oriented  toward  tradable  sectors;  (iii)  regional 
cooperation.  
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
Let me briefly share with you some of my thoughts on the importance of this last remark, 
namely regional cooperation. Following arguments illustrate the benefits of cooperation, at 
several levels: 
• 
From  a  development  point  of  view,  increased  cooperation  and  integration  on  a 
regional level creates a greater scope for economies of scale. This would increase 
incentives  for  local  and  foreign  investors  to  undertake  big  investment  project  that 
would  not  be  profitable  otherwise.  A  related  advantage  would  be  increased 
specialization of our economies, leading to a higher economic performance. 
On  a  policy  level,  coordinated  macroeconomic  policies,  legal  and  prudential 
frameworks,  would  tend  to  improve  the  allocation  of  resources  and  to  prevent 
beggar-thy-neighbor policies. This race to the bottom type of philosophy would not 
benefit the region as a whole. 
From a strategic point of view, our region is in competition with several emerging 
regions  on  a  global  scale.  It’s  not  sufficient  any  more  to  be  the  best  guy  in  the 
village;  especially  when  there  are  an  increasing  number  of  villages  on  a  global 
scale, with an ever increasing number of clever guys. 
From a convergence point of view, the sharing of experiences would avoid costly 
errors, while coordinated policies and steps would make a stronger case for a faster 
EU  integration.  We  should  demonstrate  that  the  region  is  fit  to  enter  the  club,  by 
firstly adopting the rules of the club among ourselves. 
   In a more technical and concrete approach, the efforts of the public authorities in our region 
to achieve a real and meaningful cooperation should consider the followings: 
First, the mentality of the societies in our region should change. It is noted that this region 
has a history full of conflicts and many other disputes. It is now up to the young generations 
and  to  the  people  with  an  open-minded  approach  in  our  region,  to  find  solutions  and  to 
promote behaviors that will build our future path toward Europe.  
Second,  the  commitment  to  full  integration  with  the  European  Union,  should  serve  as  a 
solid  platform  for  cooperation,  and  as  an  anchor  for  pursuing  sound  policies  and 
coordinated structural reforms.  
Third,  a  very  important  precondition  will  be  the  strengthening  of  countries  domestic 
anchors, specifically  in the  form  of medium-term  fiscal  rules,  fiscal  councils,  or  embedding 
fiscal constraints in countries’ constitutions.  
Fourth, the legal basis that supports such international cooperation should be fully in 
place. It is important that such cooperation be guided from a set of consolidated principles 
with regional relevance. 
Fifth, there is urgent need for policies that would encourage stronger inward FDI and other 
non-bank flows. The region’s growth model might need to be more self-reliant, emphasizing 
domestic  savings,  better  mobilization  of  labor  resources,  and  a  much  greater  role  for  the 
traded good sector as an engine of growth. 
Dear participants, 
Let  me  conclude  by  pointing  out  that  our  region  offers  an  interesting  combination  of 
countries,  languages,  culture  and  geographical  composition.  Analyzed  individually,  it  is 
difficult  to  think  that  our  economies  generate  substantial  incentives  for  foreign  investors, 
particularly for strategic and technologically advanced investors, able to use the advantages 
provided  by  the  economies  of  scale.  Moreover,  the  cost  associating  different  strategic 
projects at a national level would be higher for our still lagging economies. I do believe that 
there is plenty of room to establish a joint regional market and our duty is to make utmost use 
of it. There are still a few gaps in the region with respect to infrastructure, energy, tourism, 
financial  architecture,  mining  and  agriculture.  Out  task  is  to  jointly  identify  missed 
opportunities, to jointly incorporate those into realistic business plans and to jointly present 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
these  regional  projects  in  a  contemporaneous  way  to  private  investors  and  supranational 
agencies,  to  benefit  their  political,  financial  and  technological  support  and  finally  ensure  a 
stable growth model. On a national level, there is still the need for deep structural reforms 
and  all  efforts  should  be  made  for  them  to  operate  in  a  concerted  way  across  the  SEE 
region.  I  believe  that  the  European  Union  structures  should  closely  orientate,  monitor  and 
assess  this  process.  This  is  the  only  way  to  steadily  convert  our  countries  into  highly 
productive  economies,  attractive  to  foreign  investors  against  the  backdrop  of  favourable 
labour  cost.  This  all  makes  sense  once  we  fully  re-dimension  our  educational  capacities, 
particularly in technology and other areas where we could discover and explore advantages 
compared to other economies. Instead of looking at each other merely as competitors, we 
should approach the regional cooperation as a non-zero-sum game, where each country has 
to gain in partnership. 
Summarizing,  this  process  calls  for  risk  adverse  macro  and  development  policies; 
well coordinated policy mix; stronger cross border co-operation, and concerted efforts 
–  perhaps  harmonized  and  motivated  across  the  region  –  to  deepen  the  quality  of 
structural reforms. Structural reforms targeted to improving the business environment 
will help foster new capital inflows and strong and sustainable growth.  
In this respect (and in the light of the last crisis lessons), countries can make better 
use  of  the  EU  fiscal  surveillance  process  as  explicit  policy  commitment  devices. 
Candidate and potential candidate countries on one side and the EC on the other have 
the opportunity to transform this surveillance process (possibly enhancing it with an 
analytical input form IMF) into an efficient foreign anchor. 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
