Ben S Bernanke: On the outlook for the economy and policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Economic Club of New York, New York, 16 November 2009.  
 When  I  last  spoke  at  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York  a  little  more  than  a  year  ago,  the 
financial  crisis  had  just  taken  a  much  more  virulent  turn.  In  my  remarks  at  that  time,  I 
described  the  extraordinary  actions  that  policymakers  around  the  globe  were  taking  to 
address the crisis, and I expressed optimism that we had the tools necessary to stabilize the 
system.  
Today,  financial  conditions  are  considerably  better  than  they  were  then,  but  significant 
economic challenges remain. The flow of credit remains constrained, economic activity weak, 
and unemployment much too high. Future setbacks are possible. Nevertheless, I think it is 
fair  to  say  that  policymakers'  forceful  actions  last  fall,  and  others  that  followed,  were 
instrumental  in  bringing  our  financial  system  and  our  economy  back  from  the  brink.  The 
stabilization of financial markets and the gradual restoration of confidence are in turn helping 
to provide a necessary foundation for economic recovery. We are seeing early evidence of 
that  recovery:  Real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  in  the  United  States  rose  an  estimated 
3-1/2  percent  at  an  annual  rate  in  the  third  quarter,  following  four  consecutive  quarters  of 
decline. Most forecasters anticipate another moderate gain in the fourth quarter.  
How the economy will evolve in 2010 and beyond is less certain. On the one hand, those 
who see further weakness or even a relapse into recession next year point out that some of 
the  sources  of  the  recent  pickup  –  including  a  reduced  pace  of  inventory  liquidation  and 
limited-time  policies  such  as  the  "cash  for  clunkers"  program  –  are  likely  to  provide  only 
temporary support to the economy. On the other hand, those who are more optimistic point 
to  indications  of  more  fundamental  improvements,  including  strengthening  consumer 
spending outside of autos, a nascent recovery in home construction, continued stabilization 
in financial conditions, and stronger growth abroad.  
My own view is that the recent pickup reflects more than purely temporary factors and that 
continued  growth  next  year  is  likely.  However,  some  important  headwinds  –  in  particular, 
constrained  bank  lending  and  a  weak  job  market  –  likely  will  prevent  the  expansion  from 
being  as  robust  as  we would  hope.  I'll  discuss each  of  these  problem areas  in  a bit  more 
detail  and  then  end  with  some  further  comments  on  the  outlook  for  the  economy  and  for 
policy.  
Bank lending and credit availability 
I began today by alluding to the unprecedented financial panic that last fall brought a number 
of major financial institutions around the world to failure or the brink of failure. Policymakers 
in the United States and abroad deployed a number of tools to stem the panic. The Federal 
Reserve sharply increased its provision of short-term liquidity to financial institutions, the U.S. 
Treasury injected capital into banks, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
guaranteed bank liabilities. The Federal Reserve and the Treasury each took measures to 
stop a run on money market mutual funds that began when a leading fund was unable to pay 
off its investors at par value. Throughout the fall and early this year, a range of additional 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 1
initiatives  were  required  to  stabilize  major  financial  firms  and  markets,  both  here  and 
abroad.1  
The ultimate purpose of financial stabilization, of course, was to restore the normal flow of 
credit, which had been severely disrupted. The Federal Reserve did its part by creating new 
lending programs to support the functioning of some key credit markets, such as the market 
for commercial paper – which is used to finance businesses' day-to-day operations – and the 
market for asset-backed securities – which helps sustain the flow of funding for auto loans, 
small-business  loans,  student  loans,  and  many  other  forms  of  credit;  and  we  continued  to 
ensure that financial institutions had adequate access to liquidity. Additionally, we supported 
private credit markets and helped lower rates on mortgages and other loans through large-
scale asset purchases, including purchases of debt and mortgage-backed securities issued 
or backed by government-sponsored enterprises.  
Partly as the result of these and other policy actions, many parts of the financial system have 
improved substantially. Interbank and other short-term funding markets are functioning more 
normally;  interest  rate  spreads  on  mortgages,  corporate  bonds,  and  other  credit  products 
have narrowed significantly; stock prices have rebounded; and some securitization markets 
have  resumed  operation.  In  particular,  borrowers  with  access  to  public  equity  and  bond 
markets,  including  most  large  firms,  now  generally  are  able  to  obtain  credit  without  great 
difficulty.  Other  borrowers,  such  as  state  and  local  governments,  have  experienced 
improvement in their credit access as well.  
However, access to credit remains strained for borrowers who are particularly dependent on 
banks, such as households and small businesses. Bank lending has contracted sharply this 
year,  and  the  Federal  Reserve's  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending 
Practices  shows  that  banks  continue  to  tighten  the  terms  on  which  they  extend  credit  for 
most kinds of loans – although recently the pace of tightening has slowed somewhat. Partly 
as a result of these pressures, household debt has declined in recent quarters for the first 
time  since  1951.  For  their  part,  many  small  businesses  have  seen  their  bank  credit  lines 
reduced  or  eliminated,  or  they  have  been  able  to  obtain  credit  only  on  significantly  more 
restrictive  terms.2  The  fraction  of  small  businesses  reporting  difficulty  in  obtaining  credit  is 
near a record high, and many of these businesses expect credit conditions to tighten further.  
To be sure, not all of the sharp reductions in bank lending this year reflect cutbacks in the 
availability of bank credit. The demand for credit also has fallen significantly: For example, 
households  are  spending  less  than  they  did  last  year  on  big-ticket  durable  goods  typically 
purchased with credit, and businesses are reducing investment outlays and thus have less 
need  to  borrow.  Because  of  weakened  balance  sheets,  fewer  potential  borrowers  are 
creditworthy,  even  if  they  are  willing  to  take  on  more  debt.  Also,  write-downs  of  bad  debt 
show  up  on  bank  balance  sheets  as  reductions  in  credit  outstanding.  Nevertheless,  it 
appears  that,  since  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  banks  have  tightened  lending 
standards by more than would have been predicted by the decline in economic activity alone.  
Several factors help explain the reluctance of banks to lend, despite general improvement in 
financial  conditions  and  increases  in  bank  stock  prices  and  earnings.  First,  bank  funding 
markets were badly impaired for a time, and some banks have accordingly decided (or have 
                                                 
1   For an overview of the crisis from an international perspective, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Reflections on a 
Year of Crisis", speech delivered at "Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy," a symposium sponsored 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 20-22. 
2   According to the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, moderate fractions 
of banks continued to tighten standards and terms for loans to small firms, though the net fractions doing so 
generally continued to decline from the peaks last fall. The Survey of Terms of Business Lending indicates 
that spreads on small loans and loans extended by small banks (both proxies for loans to small firms) have 
increased significantly during the first three quarters of 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2009
been urged by regulators) to hold larger buffers of liquid assets than before. Second, with 
loan  losses  still  high  and  difficult  to  predict  in  the  current  environment,  and  with  further 
uncertainty  attending  how  regulatory  capital  standards  may  change,  banks  are  being 
especially  conservative  in  taking  on  more  risk.  Third,  many  securitization  markets  remain 
impaired,  reducing  an  important  source  of  funding  for  bank  loans.  In  addition,  changes  to 
accounting rules at the beginning of next year will require banks to move a large volume of 
securitized assets back onto their balance sheets. Unfortunately, reduced bank lending may 
well slow the recovery by damping consumer spending, especially on durable goods, and by 
restricting the ability of some firms to finance their operations.  
The Federal Reserve has used its authority as a bank supervisor to help facilitate the flow of 
credit through the banking system. In November 2008, with the other banking agencies, we 
issued guidance to banks and bank examiners that emphasized the importance of continuing 
to  meet  the  needs  of  creditworthy  borrowers,  while  maintaining  appropriate  prudence  in 
lending  decisions.3  This  past  spring,  the  Federal  Reserve  led  the  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment  Program,  or  SCAP  –  a  coordinated,  comprehensive  examination  designed  to 
ensure that 19 of the country's largest banking organizations would remain well capitalized 
and  able  to  lend  to  creditworthy  borrowers  even  if  economic  conditions  turned  out  to  be 
worse  than  expected.  The  release  of  the  assessment  results  in  May  increased  investor 
confidence in the U.S. banking system. A week ago, the Federal Reserve announced that 9 
of 10 firms that were determined to have required additional capital were able to fully meet 
their  required  capital  buffers  without  any  further  capital  from  the  U.S.  Treasury,  and  that 
aggregate Tier 1 common equity at the 10 firms increased by more than $77 billion since the 
conclusion of the assessment.4  
The Federal Reserve will continue to work with banks to improve the access of creditworthy 
borrowers  to  the  credit  they  need.  Lending  to  creditworthy  borrowers  is  good  for  the 
economy,  but  it  also  benefits  banks  by  maintaining  their  profitable  relationships  with  good 
customers.  We  continue  to  encourage  banks  to  raise  additional  capital  to  support  their 
lending.  And  we  continue  to  facilitate  securitization  through  our  Term  Asset-Backed 
Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF)  and  to  support  home  lending  through  our  purchases  of 
mortgage-backed  securities.  Normalizing  the  flow  of  bank  credit  to  good  borrowers  will 
continue to be a top priority for policymakers.  
While I am on the topic of bank lending, I would like to add a few words about commercial 
real  estate  (CRE).  Demand  for  commercial  property  has  dropped  as  the  economy  has 
weakened, leading to significant declines in property values, increased vacancy rates, and 
falling rents. These poor fundamentals have caused a sharp deterioration in the credit quality 
of  CRE  loans  on  banks'  books  and  of  the  loans  that  back  commercial  mortgage-backed 
securities (CMBS). Pressures may be particularly acute at smaller regional and community 
banks that entered the crisis with high concentrations of CRE loans. In response, banks have 
been reducing their exposure to these loans quite rapidly in recent months. Meanwhile, the 
market  for  securitizations  backed  by  these  loans  remains  all  but  closed.  With  nearly  $500 
billion of CRE loans scheduled to mature annually over the next few years, the performance 
of this sector depends critically on the ability of borrowers to refinance many of those loans. 
Especially  if  CMBS  financing  remains  unavailable,  banks  will  face  the  tough  decision  of 
whether to roll over maturing debt or to foreclose.  
                                                 
3   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and 
Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," 
joint press release, November 12. 
4   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Federal  Reserve  Board  Makes 
Announcement Regarding the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP)," press release, November 
9. 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 3
Recognizing the importance of this sector for the economic recovery, the Federal Reserve 
has  extended  the  TALF  programs  for  existing  CMBS  through  March  2010  and  newly 
structured CMBS through June. Moreover, the banking agencies recently encouraged banks 
to  work  with  their  creditworthy  borrowers  to  restructure  troubled  CRE  loans  in  a  prudent 
manner, and reminded examiners that – absent other adverse factors – a loan should not be 
classified as impaired based solely on a decline in collateral value.5  
The job market 
In addition to constrained bank lending, a second area of great concern is the job market. 
Since December 2007, the U.S. economy has lost, on net, about 8 million private-sector jobs, 
and  the  unemployment  rate  has  risen  from  less  than  5  percent  to  more  than  10  percent.6 
Both the decline in jobs and the increase in the unemployment rate have been more severe 
than in any other recession since World War II.7  
Besides  cutting  jobs,  many  employers  have  reduced  hours  for  the  workers  they  have 
retained. For example, the number of part-time workers who report that they want a full-time 
job  but  cannot  find  one  has  more  than  doubled  since  the recession began,  a  much  larger 
increase than in previous deep recessions. In addition, the average workweek for production 
and nonsupervisory workers has fallen to 33 hours, the lowest level in the postwar period. 
These  data  suggest  that  the  excess  supply  of  labor  is  even  greater  than  indicated  by  the 
unemployment rate alone.  
With the job market so weak, businesses have been able to find or retain all the workers they 
need with minimal wage increases, or even with wage cuts. Indeed, standard measures of 
wages show significant slowing in wage gains over the past year. Together with the reduction 
in hours worked, slower wage growth has led to stagnation in labor income. Weak income 
growth, should it persist, will restrain household spending.  
The best thing we can say about the labor market right now is that it may be getting worse 
more slowly. Declines in payroll employment over the past four months have averaged about 
220,000 per month, compared with 560,000 per month over the first half of this year. The 
number  of  initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  is  well  off  its  high  of  last  spring,  but 
claims still have not fallen to ranges consistent with rising employment.  
Although  economic  pain  is  widespread  across  industries  and  regions,  different  groups  of 
workers  have  been  affected  differently.  For  example,  the  unemployment  rate  for  men 
between  the  ages  of  25  and  54  has  risen  from  less  than  4  percent  in  late  2007  to  10.3 
percent  in  October  –  nearly  double  the  rise  in  unemployment  among  adult  women.  This 
discrepancy likely reflects the high concentration of job losses in manufacturing, construction, 
and financial services, industries in which men make up the majority of workers. From the 
perspective  of  America's  economic  future,  the  effect  of  the  recession on  young  workers  is 
particularly worrisome: The unemployment rate among people between the ages of 16 and 
24 has risen to 19 percent – and among African American youths, it is now about 30 percent. 
When young people are shut out of the job market, they lose valuable opportunities to gain 
                                                 
5   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement 
Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts," press release, October 30. 
6   This  job  loss  figure  includes  an  adjustment  to  reflect  the  preliminary  estimate  of  the  benchmark  revision  to 
payroll employment recently announced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). According to the BLS, when 
the published data on payroll employment are benchmarked this coming February to comprehensive counts of 
employment from unemployment insurance tax records, the level of private payroll employment in March 2009 
is expected to be revised down by 855,000. 
7   This statement remains true when job loss is measured as a percentage of total initial payrolls rather than in 
absolute terms. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2009
work  experience  and  on-the-job  training,  potentially  reducing  their  future  wages  and 
employment opportunities.8  
Given this weakness in the labor market, a natural question is whether we might be in for a 
so-called jobless recovery, in which output is growing but employment fails to increase.  
Productivity is defined as output per hour of work. Thus, essentially by definition, a jobless 
recovery  –  in  which  output  is  growing  but  hours  of  work  are  not  –  must  be  a  period  of 
productivity growth. In the jobless recoveries that followed the 1990-91 and 2001 recessions, 
productivity  growth  was  quite  strong.  It  may  seem  paradoxical  that  productivity  growth  – 
which in the longer term is the most important source of increases in real wages and living 
standards – can have adverse consequences for employment in the short term. But, when 
the demand for goods and services is growing slowly, that may be the case.  
In  fact,  productivity  growth  has  recently  been  quite  high,  even  when  the  economy  was 
contracting.  Output  per  hour  in  the  nonfarm  business  sector  is  estimated  to  have  risen  at 
about  a  5-1/2  percent  annual  rate  so  far  this  year,  well  above  longer-term  averages.  One 
reason for recent productivity gains likely was the reaction of employers to the freefall in the 
economy that began in the second half of 2008. Normally, employers are slow to cut their 
workforces when the economy turns down. The process of finding, hiring, and training new 
workers is costly. Thus, if employers expect the downturn will be neither too severe nor too 
lengthy, they retain more existing workers than they need in the short term, rather than laying 
them  off  and  replacing  them  when  the  recovery  begins.  However,  in  the  recent  downturn, 
employers were exceptionally uncertain about the future, some even fearing a second Great 
Depression. Moreover, tight credit conditions left little margin for error. Accordingly, to protect 
themselves against the worst possibilities, employers shed workers much more sharply than 
usual  in  recessions.  Thus,  the  productivity  gains  this  year  generally  reflected  pronounced 
declines in labor input rather than greater output.  
Will the increases in productivity persist? It is likely that, in some cases, firms achieved their 
productivity  gains  by  asking  their  remaining  workers  to  provide  extra  effort.  The  additional 
gains  that  can  be  achieved  in  this  way  are  limited  and  probably  temporary.  Although 
continuing  uncertainty  and  financial  constraints  might  make  such  firms  hesitant  to  hire,  if 
demand, production, and confidence pick up, they will find their labor forces stretched thin 
and will begin to add workers. However, other firms, facing difficult financial conditions and 
intense  pressures  to  cut  costs,  seem  to  have  found  longer-lasting,  efficiency-enhancing 
changes  that  allowed  them  to  reduce  their  workforces;  and  some  less-efficient  firms,  no 
longer able to compete, closed their doors. Again, improved efficiency confers great benefits 
in  the  longer  term.  However,  to  the  extent  that  firms  are  able  to  find  further  cost-cutting 
measures as output expands, they may delay hiring.  
Other  factors  will  affect  near-term  employment  growth  as  well.  Business  confidence  in  the 
durability of the expansion, for example, will help determine employers' willingness to hire. 
The current prevalence of part-time work and short workweeks may slow job creation early in 
the recovery period, as employers may prefer to convert workers from part-time to full-time 
status  and  to  add  overtime  work  before  turning  to  new  hires.  In  addition,  difficulties  in 
obtaining  credit  could  hinder  the  expansion  of  small  and  medium-sized  businesses  and 
prevent  the  formation  of  new  businesses.  Because  smaller  businesses  account  for  a 
significant portion of net employment gains during recoveries, limited credit could hinder job 
                                                 
8   Labor  economists  have  documented  these  points.  See,  for  example,  David  T.  Ellwood  (1982),  "Teenage 
Unemployment: Permanent Scars or Temporary Blemishes?" in Richard B. Freeman and David A. Wise, eds., 
The  Youth  Labor  Market  Problem:  Its  Nature,  Causes,  and  Consequences  (Chicago:  National  Bureau  of 
Economic  Research  and  University  of  Chicago  Press),  pp.  349-90;  and  Thomas  A.  Mroz  and  Timothy  H. 
Savage  (2006),  "The  Long-Term  Effects  of  Youth  Unemployment,"  Journal  of  Human  Resources,  vol.  41 
(Spring), pp. 259-93. 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 5
growth. Overall, a number of factors suggest that employment gains may be modest during 
the early stages of the expansion.  
The outlook for the economy and policy 
I  return  now  to  the  outlook  for  the  economy  and  policy.  As  I  noted,  I  expect  moderate 
economic  growth  to  continue  next  year.  Final  demand  shows  signs  of  strengthening, 
supported  by  the  broad  improvement  in  financial  conditions.  Additionally,  the  beneficial 
influence of the inventory cycle on production should continue for somewhat longer. Housing 
faces  important  problems,  including  continuing  high  foreclosure  rates,  but  residential 
investment  should  become  a  small  positive  for  growth  next  year  rather  than  a  significant 
drag,  as  has  been  the  case  for  the  past  several  years.  Prospects  for  nonresidential 
construction are poor, however, given weak fundamentals and tight financing conditions.  
In the business sector, manufacturing activity has been expanding and should be helped by 
the continuing strength of the recovery in the emerging market economies, especially in Asia. 
As  the  recovery  takes  hold,  enhanced  business  confidence,  together  with  the  low  cost  of 
capital for firms with access to public capital markets, should lead to a pickup in business 
spending on equipment and software, which has already shown signs of stabilizing.  
I  have  discussed  two  of  the  principal  factors  that  may  constrain  the  pace  of  the  recovery, 
namely, restrictive bank lending and the weak job market. Banks' reluctance to lend will limit 
the  ability  of  some  businesses  to  expand  and  hire.  I  expect  this  situation  to  normalize 
gradually,  as  improving  economic  conditions  strengthen  bank  balance  sheets  and  reduce 
uncertainty;  the  fallout  for  banks  from  commercial  real  estate  could  slow  that  progress, 
however. Jobs are likely to remain scarce for some time, keeping households cautious about 
spending.  As  the  recovery  becomes  established,  however,  payrolls  should  begin  to  grow 
again, at a pace that increases over time. Nevertheless, as net gains of roughly 100,000 jobs 
per month are needed just to absorb new entrants to the labor force, the unemployment rate 
likely will decline only slowly if economic growth remains moderate, as I expect.  
The  outlook  for  inflation  is  also  subject  to  a  number  of  crosscurrents.  Many  factors  affect 
inflation,  including  slack  in  resource  utilization,  inflation  expectations,  exchange  rates,  and 
the  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities.  Although  resource  slack  cannot  be  measured 
precisely, it certainly is high, and it is showing through to underlying wage and price trends. 
Longer-run  inflation  expectations  are  stable,  having  responded  relatively  little  either  to 
downward  or  upward  pressures  on  inflation;  expectations  can  be  early  warnings  of  actual 
inflation,  however,  and  must  be  monitored  carefully.  Commodities  prices  have  risen  lately, 
likely  reflecting  the  pickup  in  global  economic  activity,  especially  in  resource-intensive 
emerging  market  economies,  and 
the  dollar.  On  net, 
notwithstanding significant crosscurrents, inflation seems likely to remain subdued for some 
time.  
The foreign exchange value of the dollar has moved over a wide range during the past year 
or so. When financial stresses were most pronounced, a flight to the deepest and most liquid 
capital markets resulted in a marked increase in the dollar. More recently, as financial market 
functioning has improved and global economic activity has stabilized, these safe haven flows 
have  abated,  and  the  dollar  has  accordingly  retraced  its  gains.  The  Federal  Reserve  will 
continue  to  monitor  these  developments  closely.  We  are  attentive  to  the  implications  of 
changes in the value of the dollar and will continue to formulate policy to guard against risks 
to  our  dual  mandate  to  foster  both  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  Our 
commitment  to  our  dual  objectives,  together  with  the  underlying  strengths  of  the  U.S. 
economy, will help ensure that the dollar is strong and a source of global financial stability.  
The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  continues  to  anticipate  that  economic  conditions, 
including  low  rates  of  resource  utilization,  subdued  inflation  trends,  and  stable  inflation 
expectations,  are  likely  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of  the  federal  funds  rate  for  an 
the  recent  depreciation  of 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2009
extended  period.  Of  course,  significant  changes  in  economic  conditions  or  the  economic 
outlook  would  change  the  outlook  for  policy  as  well.  We  have  a  wide  range  of  tools  for 
removing monetary policy accommodation when the economic outlook requires us to do so, 
and  we  will  calibrate  the  timing  and  pace  of  any  future  tightening  to  best  foster  maximum 
employment and price stability.  
BIS Review 145/2009 
 7
