Ben S Bernanke: Asia and the global financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Conference on Asia and 
the Global Financial Crisis, Santa Barbara, California, 19 October 2009. 
 The  rise  of  the  Asian  economies  since  World  War  II  has  been  one  of  the  great  success 
stories  in  the  history  of  economic  development.  Japan's  transition  to  an  economic 
powerhouse was followed by the rapid ascent of the Asian tigers, and subsequently by China 
taking a prominent place on the world economic stage.1 Since the beginning of this decade, 
Asia has accounted for more than one-third of the world's economic growth, raising its share 
of  global  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  from  28  percent  to  32  percent.2  Importantly,  its 
economic  success  has  resulted  in  large-scale  reductions  in  poverty  and  substantial 
improvements in the standards of living of hundreds of millions of people. China and India, 
which together account for almost 40 percent of the world's population, have seen real per 
capita  incomes  rise  more  than  10-fold  and  3-fold,  respectively,  since  1980.  As  would  be 
expected given the increasing size and sophistication of their economies, the nations of the 
region  have  also  begun  to  exert  a  substantial  influence  on  global  economic  developments 
and on international governance in the economic and financial spheres.  
It is widely agreed that a key source of Asia's rapid advancement has been the openness of 
countries  in  the  region  to  global  trade  and  finance.  Notwithstanding  this  consensus,  the 
considerable  progress  of  these  countries  in  developing  domestic  institutions,  policies,  and 
industrial capacity – together with their strong growth in the initial phase of the ongoing global 
financial crisis – led some to speculate that the Asian economies had "decoupled" from the 
advanced  economies  of  North  America  and  Europe.  Of  course,  in  hindsight,  given  the 
magnitude  of  the  shocks  that  have  struck  these  advanced  economies  over  the  past  two 
years, as well as their strong economic and financial links to Asia, it should not have been 
surprising  that  Asia  was  ultimately  hit  quite  hard  by  the  global  downturn,  even  though  the 
origins of the turmoil were elsewhere. 
As a prelude to the papers and discussions to follow, I will provide a brief overview of the 
Asian experience during the global financial crisis. I will highlight the diversity of experiences, 
both within Asia and between Asia and other regions, and draw some inferences about the 
different channels through which the effects of the financial crisis were transmitted around 
the world. I will discuss Asia's policy response to the economic and financial consequences 
of the crisis. Finally, I will focus on medium-term challenges. For both Asia and the United 
States,  perhaps  the  greatest  medium-term  challenge  is  to  achieve  more  balanced  growth 
and, in the process, to further reduce global imbalances. 
Asia's experience in the crisis 
During  the  years  following  the  financial  crisis  of  the  late  1990s,  many  emerging  market 
economies,  in  Asia  and  elsewhere,  took  advantage  of  relatively  good  global  economic 
conditions to strengthen their economic and financial fundamentals; they improved their fiscal 
and  external  debt  positions,  built  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  reformed  their  banking 
sectors.  Hence,  at  the  onset  of  the  financial  turmoil  in  the  summer  of  2007,  the  Asian 
economies  appeared  well-positioned  to  avoid  its  worst  effects.  Although  global  financial 
                                                 
1   The term "Asian tigers" refers to the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan. 
2   This estimate is based on purchasing power parity measures of GDP. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 1
markets, including Asian markets, deteriorated sharply following the start of the crisis, Asia's 
recovered  swiftly,  with  equity  prices  reaching  new  highs  early  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  that 
year. Moreover, economic activity in the region continued to expand. 
However, toward the end of 2007, at about the same time that the United States entered a 
recession, the headwinds facing the Asian economies appeared to strengthen. Asian equity 
markets began to fall again – they were to underperform global markets throughout much of 
2008  –  and  other  signs  of  financial  stress,  such  as  widening  credit  spreads,  appeared  as 
well.  By  the  second  quarter  of  2008,  many  of  the  region's  economies  were  slowing,  and 
growth in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan – small, open economies particularly sensitive 
to shifts in global conditions – had ground to a halt. 
In  September  and  October  2008,  as  you  know,  the  global  financial  crisis  intensified 
dramatically.  Concerted  international  action  prevented  a  global  financial  meltdown,  but  the 
effects  of  the  crisis  on  asset  prices,  credit  availability,  and  consumer  and  business 
confidence resulted in sharp declines in demand and production worldwide. Reflecting this 
worsening economic climate, Asian GDP growth slowed further in the second half of 2008. 
For  the  region  as  a  whole,  the  economic  contraction  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  was 
pronounced,  with  activity  falling  at  an  annual  rate  of  nearly  7  percent.3  The  fourth-quarter 
declines  were  especially  dramatic  in  Taiwan  and  Thailand  (more  than  20  percent  at  an 
annual rate) and in South Korea and Singapore (more than 15 percent at an annual rate). 
Among  the  major  Asian  economies,  only  those  of  China,  India,  and  Indonesia  did  not 
contract during the crisis. 
Early  this  year,  with  many  of  the  Asian  economies  in  freefall,  a  quick  recovery  seemed 
difficult to imagine, but recent data from the region suggest that a strong rebound is, in fact, 
under way. Although the regional economy continued to contract in the first months of 2009, 
it expanded at an impressive 9 percent annual rate in the second quarter, with annualized 
growth rates well into double digits in China, Hong Kong, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and 
Taiwan.4 At this point, while risks to the economic outlook certainly remain, Asia appears to 
be leading the global recovery. 
Diversity of experiences 
This  brief  review  of  Asia's  experience  during  the  crisis  raises  a  number  of  important 
questions: Through what channels were the effects of the financial crisis transmitted across 
the globe? In particular, why was Asia, whose financial systems largely escaped the serious 
credit  problems  that  erupted  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  hit  so  hard  by  the  global 
recession? What enabled the Asian economies to bounce back so sharply more  recently? 
And  why  did  some  countries  –  around  the  world  and  within  Asia  –  suffer  much  deeper 
contractions  than  others?  Some  light  can  be  shed  on  these  questions  by  examining  the 
diversity of experiences among both Asian and non-Asian economies during the downturn. 
Transmission channels: trade and finance 
The  crisis  that  began  in  the  West  affected  Asia  through  various  transmission  channels, 
whose relative importance depended in some degree on the particular characteristics of each 
economy.  However,  for  virtually  all  of  the  Asian  economies,  international  trade  appears  to 
have been a critical channel. Exhibit 1 shows the course of global merchandise exports since 
                                                 
3   The Asian region here refers to Australia, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, 
Pakistan,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  South  Korea,  Taiwan,  Thailand,  and  Vietnam.  The  economic  growth 
calculation weights these economies by GDP at market exchange rates. 
4   These growth rates are measured on a quarter-to-quarter basis at an annual rate. China's quarterly growth 
rate is estimated from published four-quarter growth rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2009
the  beginning  of  this  decade.  As  the  exhibit  shows,  after  a  period  of  strong  growth, 
international  trade  plunged  about  20  percent  in  real  terms  from  its  pre-crisis  peak  to  its 
trough  in  early  2009  (the  dashed  red  line),  and  about  35  percent  in  U.S.  dollar  terms  (the 
solid blue line).5 The trade-dependent economies of Asia could certainly not be immune to 
the effects of such a decline. 
Why  did  global  trade  fall  so  abruptly?  The  severe  recession  in  the  advanced  economies 
greatly  restrained  aggregate  spending,  including  spending  on  imports,  but  the  decline  in 
international  trade  appears  surprisingly  large  even  when  the  depth  of  the  recession  in  the 
advanced countries is taken into account. One possible explanation for the outsized decline 
in trade volumes lies in the extreme uncertainty that prevailed in the darkest months of the 
crisis. Consumers and businesses knew last fall that economic conditions were poor, but, in 
light of the severity and the global nature of the financial crisis, many feared outcomes that 
might  be  much  worse.  Perhaps  to  a  greater  extent  than  they  might  have  otherwise, 
households and firms put off purchases of big-ticket items, such as consumer durables and 
investment  goods.  Durable  goods  figure  prominently  in  trade  and  manufacturing,  so  these 
sectors  may  have  been  particularly  vulnerable  to  the  elevated  uncertainty  and  weakened 
confidence that prevailed during the height of the crisis. 
Credit  conditions  also  likely  affected  the  volume  of  trade,  through  several  channels.  The 
turmoil  in  credit  markets  doubtless  exacerbated  the  sharp  decline  in  demand  for  durable 
goods,  and  thus  in  trade  volumes,  as  purchases  of  durable  goods  typically  involve  some 
extension of credit. Manufacturing production, a major component of trade flows, may have 
been  cut  back  more  sharply  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case  as  producers, 
concerned about credit availability, attempted to preserve working capital. Finally, although it 
is difficult to assess the size of the effect, problems in obtaining trade finance may have also 
impeded trade for a time. 
With trade falling sharply around the world, economies particularly dependent on trade were 
hit  especially  hard.  Exhibit  2  illustrates  this  point  for  a  group  of  Asian  and  non-Asian 
economies.  The  vertical  axis  of  the  figure  shows  real  GDP  growth,  measured  relative  to 
trend,  during  the  most  severe  stage  of  the  downturn,  and  the  horizontal  axis  shows  a 
measure of openness to trade.6 Combinations of growth and openness observed in various 
economies are indicated by red squares for a number of Asian countries and by black dots 
for several non-Asian countries. The exhibit shows that countries most open to trade (those 
located further to the right in the figure) suffered, on average, the greatest declines in growth 
relative to trend. The most extreme cases are Hong Kong and Singapore, shown to the far 
right; the economies of Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Malaysia, which are also very open, 
suffered significant growth deficits as well.  
Indeed,  the  GDP  contractions  in  some  Asian  economies  during  that  period  rivaled  those 
during the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s. Relative to pre-crisis trend, the six Asian 
economies just mentioned plus Japan experienced declines in real GDP growth of about 13 
to 20 percentage points at an annual rate during the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter 
of  2009.  Growth  fell  somewhat  less  severely  in  the  Philippines  and  only  moderately  in 
Australia and New Zealand. As noted earlier, real GDP growth remained positive throughout 
                                                 
5   The nominal data are the sum of the total merchandise exports of 44 economies, including the United States, 
expressed  in  U.S.  dollars.  The  real  data  are  calculated  by  deflating  these  dollar-value  nominal  exports  by 
export  price  indexes  constructed  from  local-currency  deflators  drawn  from  country  sources  and  dollar 
exchange rates. 
6   Specifically, the vertical axis shows each country's deviation of average GDP growth from trend growth (at an 
annual  rate)  over  2008:Q4  and  2009:Q1.  Trend  growth  is  defined  as  the  average  annualized  growth  rate 
during 2006 and 2007 of historical GDP data smoothed using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. The horizontal axis 
shows each country's trade openness as measured by the sum of its imports and exports as a fraction of its 
nominal GDP in 2007. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 3
the  crisis  in  China,  India,  and  Indonesia,  but,  as  exhibit  2  shows,  even  those  fast-growing 
economies  experienced  noticeable  declines  in  growth  relative  to  their  earlier  trends.  The 
exhibit  shows  that  a  similar  relationship  between  growth  and  openness  to  trade  holds  for 
non-Asian countries; for example, more trade-dependent nations like Germany saw sharper 
declines in output during the crisis than other less-open economies. 
Variations  across  countries  in  trade  openness  do  not  fully  explain  the  diversity  of  growth 
experiences during the downturn, suggesting that other factors were also at work. Notably, 
although  financial  institutions  in  emerging  market  economies  were  not,  for  the  most  part, 
directly affected by the collapse of the market for structured credit products and other asset-
backed  securities,  financial  stress  nevertheless  affected  these  countries.  As  international 
investors' appetite for risk evaporated, the flow of capital shifted away from countries that had 
historically  been  viewed  as  more  vulnerable,  including  some  emerging  Asian  and  Latin 
American  economies,  even  though  many  of  these  countries  appeared  to  be  much  better 
positioned to weather an economic crisis than in the past. Moreover, regardless of perceived 
risks, financial institutions pulled money from risky assets in advanced and emerging markets 
alike in an effort to strengthen their balance sheets.  
Following the reversal in capital flows engendered by the crisis, strains in banking appeared 
across Asia, leading to severe credit tightening in some countries. Fears of counterparty risk 
disrupted  interbank  lending  in  many  countries,  intensifying  already  existing  funding 
difficulties.  The  drying  up  of  the  wholesale  funding  market  hurt  Korea's  banking  system  in 
particular; prior to the crisis, it had accounted for about one-third of Korean bank funding. In 
Japan, some banks' exposures to equity markets damaged their capital positions. With Asian 
banks experiencing dollar funding pressures similar to those arising elsewhere in the world, 
the  Federal  Reserve  established  5  of  its  14  liquidity  swap  lines  with  central  banks  in  the 
region: Australia, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, and Singapore. The reversal in capital flows 
also  caused  rapid  exchange  rate  depreciation  in  some  countries,  particularly  Korea, 
Indonesia, and Malaysia. The Korean won depreciated 40 percent against the dollar from the 
beginning of 2008 through its trough in March of this year, and it has only partially recovered. 
Over the same period, the Indonesian rupiah fell 22 percent against the dollar. 
Exhibit 3 shows the relationship between rates of GDP growth during the downturn, relative 
to  trend,  and  financial  openness,  as  measured  by  the  sum  of  each  country's  international 
assets  and  liabilities  relative  to  its  GDP.7  The  exhibit  shows  that,  for  both  Asian  and  non-
Asian economies, financial openness was associated with greater declines in output, though 
the linkage appears somewhat less tight than that for trade.8 Again, the most extreme cases 
are Singapore and especially Hong Kong (which is not shown, as it is more than twice as 
open as even Singapore). Taiwan is another example of a financially open Asian economy 
that  experienced  a  particularly  severe  downturn.  By  the  same  token,  China,  India,  and 
Indonesia,  the  three  Asian  countries  in  which  output  expanded  throughout  the  crisis,  are 
among the least financially open.  
Trade and financial channels influenced other emerging markets as well, such as those in 
Latin America and Eastern Europe. Many of these economies also contracted sharply, but 
thus  far  they  have  recovered  more  slowly  than  economies  in  Asia.  In  the  case  of  Latin 
America,  closer  links  to  the  U.S.  economy  (especially  in  the  case  of  Mexico)  and  greater 
dependence on commodity exports (whose prices declined during the most intense phase of 
the  crisis)  were  additional  sources  of  weakness. 
In  Eastern  Europe,  preexisting 
                                                 
7   A country's international assets are claims on foreigners by its residents, and liabilities are foreigners' claims 
on the country's residents. Data on these claims are from Haver and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 
8   Whether the relationship shown in Exhibit 3 is causal is not entirely clear, however, as economies that are 
more exposed to the global financial system also tend to be those economies most open to trade, as can be 
seen by comparing Exhibit 3 to Exhibit 2. 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2009
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  structural  weaknesses  likely  magnified  the  effects  of  the 
adverse global shocks. 
It is important not to take the wrong lesson from the finding that more open economies were 
more severely affected by the global recession. Although tighter integration with the global 
economy naturally increases vulnerability to global economic shocks, considerable evidence 
suggests  that  openness  also  promotes  stronger  economic  growth  over  the  longer  term. 
Protectionism and the erecting of barriers to capital flows should thus be strongly resisted. 
Instead,  as  I  will  discuss,  striking  a  reasonable  balance  between  trade  and  growth  in 
domestic demand is the best strategy for driving economic expansion. 
Policy responses 
By  and  large,  countries  in  Asia  came  into  the  crisis  with  fairly  strong  macroeconomic 
fundamentals,  including  low  inflation  and  favorable  fiscal  and  current  account  positions. 
Good fundamentals, in turn, provided scope for strong policy responses in many countries. 
China,  Japan,  Korea,  and  Singapore  were  among  those  employing  relatively  aggressive 
policy  strategies;  in  particular,  China  undertook  a  sizable  fiscal  program,  supplemented  by 
accommodative  monetary  and  bank  lending  policies.  The  stimulus  packages  in  China  and 
elsewhere have lifted domestic demand throughout the region, boosting intraregional trade. 
Not all Asian nations responded so aggressively to the crisis. Some countries with weaker 
fiscal  positions  no  doubt  felt  constrained  in  the  extent  of  fiscal  stimulus  they  provided. 
Similarly, monetary policies were likely influenced by differences in inflation performance. On 
the one hand, countries experiencing low inflation or deflation, such as China, Japan, and 
Thailand,  were  able  to  implement  expansionary  monetary  policies  without  concerns  about 
increasing  inflationary  pressures.  Indeed,  Japan  used  unconventional  monetary  easing  in 
part to avoid deeper deflation. On the other hand, inflation concerns were more pressing for 
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Korea, with the  result that their monetary policy responses 
may  have  been  more  muted  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  The  national 
variation  in  policy  responses  likely  also  reflected  differences  in  the  severity  of  the  crisis 
across countries. 
Generally speaking, the Asian response to the crisis appears thus far to have been effective. 
Importantly, as I have suggested, the Asian recovery to date has been in significant part the 
result of growth in domestic demand, supported by fiscal and monetary policies, rather than 
of growth in demand from trading partners outside the region. To illustrate the point, for each 
of the countries in the region, exhibit 4 shows industrial production (the solid blue bars) and 
exports (the striped red bars) measured relative to the pre-crisis peak.9 You can see that the 
blue bars are generally taller than the red bars, indicating that, except for New Zealand and 
Hong  Kong,  industrial  production  has  rebounded  by  more  than  exports.  Indeed,  industrial 
production  in  China,  India,  and  Indonesia  has  already  reached  new  highs,  and  it  is  within 
about  5  percent  of  its  previous  peak  in  Australia  and  Korea.  We  would  expect  to  see  this 
pattern if growth in domestic demand, rather than growth in exports, was the predominant 
driver of increases in domestic production.10 The revival of demand in Asia has, in turn, aided 
global economic growth. 
Despite the initial successes of Asian economic policies, risks remain. As in the advanced 
economies, unwinding the stimulative policies introduced during the crisis will require careful 
judgment. Policymakers will have to balance the risks of withdrawing policy support too early, 
which might cut short a nascent recovery, against the risks of leaving expansionary policies 
                                                 
9   The data are quarterly through the second quarter of 2009. Exports are measured in U.S. dollars. 
10   In principle, some rebuilding of inventories for export could also be boosting production, but such inventory 
data for the region that are available do not strongly support this view. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 5
in  place  for  too  long,  which  could  overheat  the  economy  or  worsen  longer-term  fiscal 
imbalances. In Asia, as in the rest of the world, the provision of adequate short-term stimulus 
must not be allowed to detract from longer-term goals, such as the amelioration of excessive 
global  imbalances  or  ongoing  structural  reforms  to  increase  productivity  and  support 
balanced and sustainable growth. 
Lessons from crises and medium-term challenges 
For now, Asian countries look to be weathering the current storm. In part, their successful 
responses reflect the lessons learned during the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s, including 
the need for sound macroeconomic fundamentals.  
One crucial lesson from both that crisis and the recent one is that financial institutions must 
be  carefully  regulated,  transparent,  and  sufficiently  well  capitalized  and  liquid  to  withstand 
large shocks. In part because of the reforms put in place after the crisis of the 1990s, along 
with  improved  macroeconomic  policies,  Asian  banking  systems  were  better  positioned  to 
handle  the  more  recent  turmoil.  With  the  increased  prominence  of  the  Group  of  Twenty 
(G-20)  as  a  forum  for  discussing  the  global  responses  to  the  crisis,  emerging  market 
economies, including those in Asia, will play a larger role in the remaking of the international 
financial system and financial regulation. 
Another set of lessons that Asian economies took from the crisis of the 1990s may be more 
problematic.  Because  strong  export  markets  helped  Asia  recover  from  that  crisis,  and 
because many countries in the region were badly hurt by sharp reversals in capital flows, the 
crisis  strengthened  Asia's  commitment  to  export-led  growth,  backed  up  with  large  current 
account surpluses and mounting foreign exchange reserves. In many respects, that model 
has  served  Asia  well,  contributing  to  the  rapid  growth  rates  in  the  region  over  the  past 
decade. In fact, it bears repeating that evidence from the world over shows trade openness 
to  be  an  important  source  of  economic  growth.  However,  too  great  a  reliance  on  external 
demand can also pose problems. In particular, trade surpluses achieved through policies that 
artificially enhance incentives for domestic saving and the production of export goods distort 
the mix of domestic industries and the allocation of resources, resulting in an economy that is 
less able to meet the needs of its own citizens in the longer term. 
To achieve more balanced and durable economic growth and to reduce the risks of financial 
instability, we must avoid ever-increasing and unsustainable imbalances in trade and capital 
flows.  External  imbalances  have  already  narrowed  substantially  as  a  consequence  of  the 
crisis, as reduced income and wealth and tighter credit have led households in the United 
States and other advanced industrial countries to save more and spend less, including on 
imported  goods.  Together  with  lower  oil  prices  and  reduced  business  investment,  these 
changes in behavior have lowered the U.S. current account deficit from about 5 percent of 
GDP  in  2008  to  less  than  3  percent  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year.  Reflecting  in  part 
reduced  import  demand  from  the  United  States,  China's  current  account  surplus  fell  from 
about 10 percent of GDP in the first half of 2008 to about 6-1/2 percent of GDP in the first 
half of this year. 
As  the  global  economy  recovers  and  trade  volumes  rebound,  however,  global  imbalances 
may  reassert  themselves.  As  national  leaders  have  emphasized  in  recent  meetings  of  the 
G-20, policymakers around the world must guard against such an outcome. We understand, 
at least in principle, how to do this. The United States must increase its national saving rate. 
Although  we  should  deploy,  as  best  we  can,  tools  to  increase  private  saving,  the  most 
effective  way  to  accomplish  this  goal  is  by  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  trajectory, 
anchored by a clear commitment to substantially reduce federal deficits over time. For their 
part,  to  achieve  balanced  and  sustainable  growth,  the  authorities  in  surplus  countries, 
including most Asian economies, must act to narrow the gap between saving and investment 
and  to  raise  domestic  demand.  In  large  part,  such  actions  should  focus  on  boosting 
consumption.  Admittedly,  just  as  increasing  private  saving  in  the  United  States  is 
6 
 BIS Review 128/2009
is  not  necessarily 
challenging,  promoting  consumption 
straightforward.  One  potentially  effective  strategy  is  to  reduce  households'  precautionary 
motive for saving by strengthening pension systems and increasing government spending on 
health  care  and  education.  Of  course,  such  measures  are  likely  to  improve  welfare  and 
productivity  as  well  as  to  contribute  to  more  balanced,  robust,  and  sustainable  economic 
growth. 
in  a  high-saving  country 
Indeed, 
Conclusion 
The United States has benefited significantly from Asia's rapid development and integration 
into  the  global  economy,  and  the  payoffs  to  the  Asian  economies  from  global  economic 
integration  have  been  substantial  as  well. 
financial  crisis  has  starkly 
demonstrated the extent to which the fortunes of the United States, Asia, and the rest of the 
global  economy  are  intertwined.  These  powerful  economic  linkages,  as  well  as  the 
importance of both the United States and Asia in the global economy, underscore the need 
for  consultation  and  cooperation  in  addressing  common  issues  and  concerns.  Our  shared 
stakes in the prospects of the global economy bring with them a heightened responsibility to 
work together to maintain those prospects. I am optimistic that the United States and Asia 
will  rise  to  the  challenge  and  address  in  a  mutually  beneficial  fashion  the  range  of  issues 
confronting  the  global  economy.  Conferences  such  as  this  one,  which  bring  together 
policymakers  and  scholars  from  both  sides  of  the  Pacific,  will  further  the  cause  of  this 
cooperation. 
the 
 BIS Review 128/2009 
  7
 8 
   BIS Review 128/2009
 BIS Review 128/2009 
 9
