Thomas Jordan: Swiss monetary policy and provisions 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 10 December 2009. 
 Introduction  
Tension in the global financial markets began to abate this spring, and has continued to do 
so ever since – though despite all the talk of recovery, they are still far below their pre-crisis 
levels.  Whereas  initial  price  rises  were  mostly  corrections  of  previous  excessive  falls, 
markets are currently being driven mainly by the improving economic outlook, by companies’ 
predominantly  positive  earnings  reports  and  by  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policies. 
However, there is still considerable uncertainty in the financial markets.  
In  the  course  of  the  crisis  the  Swiss  National  Bank  aggressively  relaxed  its  monetary 
restraints,  sometimes  treading  new  paths  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  I  shall 
now briefly summarise the instruments that we used in connection with the financial crisis, 
highlighting  their  effects  on  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet.  The  risks  that  exist  in  the  SNB’s 
balance sheet or that the SNB could potentially be required to take onto the balance sheet 
demonstrate the importance of strengthening our equity capital. I shall therefore, as already 
indicated by the Chairman of the Governing Board, Jean-Pierre Roth, briefly explain to you 
the new regulations governing our policy on provisions. One of these monetary policy crisis 
measures  is  the  SNB’s  stabilisation  fund  (StabFund),  which  I  shall  deal  with  later.  I  shall 
conclude my remarks by commenting on a change in the terms of admission to the Swiss 
franc repo system.  
Deployment of monetary policy instruments in the crisis and trends in the SNB 
balance sheet  
From  October  2008  to  March  2009  we  carried  out  a  massive  reduction  in  the  Libor  target 
range  in  several  steps.  The  most  important  instruments  for  expanding  liquidity  during  this 
phase were repo transactions and currency swaps. Since the reduction of the repo rate to 
5 basis points in December 2008, we have been pursuing a de facto zero interest rate policy. 
Beginning in October 2008, the heavy foreign demand for Swiss francs was influencing the 
level of the Libor – and this made it necessary to conduct Swiss franc/euro currency swaps. 
Swap agreements with other central banks gave more foreign banks access to Swiss francs, 
thus bringing the Libor down faster.  
As  of  March  2009,  in order  to  loosen  the  monetary  reins  further  when  there  was  no  more 
room  for  interest  rate  reductions,  we  adopted  so-called  unconventional  measures.  These 
took two forms: intervention in the foreign exchange market and purchases of bonds issued 
by domestic borrowers. In addition we concluded long-term repo transactions with terms of 
up to 12 months. So far the measures we have taken have achieved the objectives we set 
ourselves. The three-month Libor has been close to our target range of 25 basis points since 
the middle of September. Foreign currency purchases prevented the Swiss franc from rising 
against the euro, and in addition the exchange rate of the euro against the Swiss franc has 
been  significantly  less  volatile.  Chart  1  shows  the  substantial  increase  in  our  holdings  of 
foreign exchange reserves as a result of the interventions. Positive conclusions can also be 
drawn with regard to the bond purchases, which helped to reduce risk premia in the Swiss 
capital market. To date, bond purchases have totalled around CHF 3 billion. However, we 
have hardly made any purchases since mid-September due to the substantial improvement 
on the Swiss franc bond market.  
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
These  measures  were  accompanied  by  a  substantial  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet 
(charts 1  and  2):  from  around  CHF  110  billion  before  the  crisis,  the  SNB’s  total  assets 
reached  a  peak  of  CHF  245  billion  in  April  of  this  year.  The  figure  then  began  to  decline, 
reaching around CHF 210 billion in November. On the asset side of the balance sheet, the 
fall in foreign currency swaps was mainly responsible for this drop. On the liabilities side, the 
domestic  banks’  sight  deposits  played  the  most  important  role.  These  have  fallen  from  a 
weekly peak of CHF 81 billion at the end of April to CHF 47 billion at the end of November. 
However,  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  is  still  very  high.  Before  the  crisis,  sight  deposits 
amounted to an average of some CHF 5 billion only. 
The  use  of  unconventional  measures  has  also  changed  the  nature  of  part  of  the  liquidity 
created.  Liquidity  resulting  from  repos  and  currency  swaps  is  temporary:  it  flows  back 
automatically when the transactions are not renewed. Liquidity created by acquiring foreign 
exchange and Swiss franc bonds, conversely, is permanent. We expect to keep the foreign 
exchange  and  bonds  we  have  purchased  on  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  for  an  extended 
period. As part of the impending normalisation of monetary policy, SNB Bills – introduced a 
year  ago  –  will  therefore  play  a  central  role.  Liquidity  absorption  will  mainly  be  conducted 
through the issuance of SNB Bills. Consequently, part of the balance sheet will in future be 
funded with interest-bearing debt capital. Moreover, the expansion of the balance sheet will 
substantially increase the SNB’s credit and currency risks. 
Strengthening the SNB’s provisions 
The  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  how  important  it  is  for  the  SNB  to  have  a  solid  equity 
capital buffer. Without it, the SNB would be unable to carry the risks on its currency reserves 
internally – nor would it be in a position to take the measures to stabilise the financial system 
that  proved  essential  in  the  financial  crisis.  Equity  capital,  furthermore,  is  central  to  the 
independence and credibility of the SNB.  
In  spite  of  the  extensive  crisis  measures  we  have  taken,  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  is  as 
robust as ever – though its financial stress resistance is heavily dependent on the distribution 
reserve,  which  is  high  at  present.  Like  the  provisions,  this  forms  part  of  the  SNB’s  equity 
capital.  In  the  short  term  it  helps  to  absorb  any  losses,  while  in  the  longer  term  it  is 
transferred to the Confederation and the cantons as a distribution of profits. If it were not for 
the distribution reserve, the SNB’s resilience could only be guaranteed to a limited degree. 
There are two reasons for this: for one thing, a need for measures to safeguard the system 
could  arise  unexpectedly,  greatly  increasing  the  risks  faced  by  the  SNB  suddenly;  and  for 
another, these risks are significantly higher because of the permanently expanded balance 
sheet. 
The  SNB  has  therefore  decided  to  additionally  strengthen  its  equity  capital,  and  thus  its 
balance  sheet.  The  SNB’s  ability  in  the  long  term  to  respond  to  a  crisis  must  not  be 
dependent  on  the  distribution  reserve.  This  is  only  possible  if  the  SNB  increases  its 
provisions from their current level. In the past, it increased its provisions each year at a rate 
equal to average nominal GDP growth for the previous five years. The SNB now intends to 
double this allocation in financial years 2009–2013: instead of approximately CHF 1.5 billion, 
some CHF 3.0 billion will now be allocated to provisions in 2009.  
Strengthening  provisions  will  reduce  the  potential  for  future  profit  distributions  to  the 
Confederation and the cantons. On a current view, however, the annual profit distribution of 
CHF 2.5 billion can be expected to be maintained until 2017, when the current agreement on 
profit  distribution  lapses.  This  view  is  substantiated,  in  particular,  by  the  fact  that  the 
distribution reserve will increase considerably as a result of the profit expected for the year 
2009.  A  collapse  in  the  gold  price  or  heavy  currency  losses  by  the  SNB,  however,  would 
increase the risk that the profit distribution would have to be adjusted before 2017. The SNB 
has been pointing out this risk for some considerable time, regardless of the current plan to 
strengthen its provisions. 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
The SNB StabFund 
It is just over a year since the package of measures to support UBS was announced. Over 
that  period,  the  risks  in  the  SNB  StabFund  have  been  significantly  reduced.  Two  key 
indicators are in the spotlight: the amount of the SNB’s loan to the StabFund, and the SNB’s 
overall risk exposure, including non-funded assets. 
The StabFund took over assets of USD 38.6 billion as of 30 September 2008. Of that total, 
USD 8.8 billion consisted of contingent liabilities that did not need to be funded at the time. 
The remainder was funded with the equity capital paid in by UBS (10% of total assets, i.e. 
USD 3.9 billion) and the debt capital advanced by the SNB, which thus initially amounted to 
USD 25.8  billion.  Risk  exposure  for  the  SNB,  i.e.  the  total  portfolio  less  the  equity  capital, 
was thus equal to USD 34.7 billion as at end-September 2008. 
The SNB’s loan to the StabFund stood at USD 20.8 billion at end-October 2009, a reduction 
of USD 5 billion – almost one-fifth – on the initial figure. The funds to repay the loan came 
from  repayments  and  earnings  on  the  assets,  and  from  proceeds  of  asset  sales.  The 
StabFund  came  to  the  market  for  the  first  time  in  June  2009.  The  market’s  more  positive 
performance made it possible for occasional sales to a total value of USD 1.5 billion to be 
conducted by the end of October 2009. 
Contingent  liabilities  declined  by  USD  4.7  billion,  mainly  as  credit  default  swaps  (CDS) 
expired or were prematurely terminated. At the end of November 2009, non-funded assets 
totalled  USD  4.1  billion.  Total  risk  exposure  fell  by  USD  10.2  billion  to  USD  24.5  billion. 
Changes in the SNB’s risk exposure with respect to the StabFund are summarised in table 1. 
One effect of the recovery in the financial markets that began this spring was to trigger rises 
in  the  market  values  of  most  of  the  investment  categories  held  in  the  StabFund.  This 
development, together with the results of a comprehensive cash flow projection for the entire 
portfolio, confirm the SNB in its view that it has unimpaired prospects of receiving repayment 
of the loan in full. However, these calculations are bedevilled by great uncertainty – and the 
risk to the SNB remains substantial. 
As the StabFund values much of its portfolio at amortised cost, the recovery in the financial 
markets has only modest effects on its financial reporting. The cumulated loss at the end of 
the  third  quarter  (since  1  October  2008)  was  USD  4.4  billion.  Equity  capital  reported  thus 
remains negative, though this loss was entirely covered at the time by the secondary loss 
protection – the warrant for the purchase of 100 million UBS shares at nominal value. 
By the end of the StabFund’s first financial year it will have largely completed the build-up of 
its  operating  activities.  In  the  last  few  months,  following  the  asset  transfer  phase  between 
December 2008 and April 2009, the asset management process was set up, risk monitoring 
and  financial  reporting  expanded,  and  an  internal  control  system  and  operational  risk 
management  introduced.  These  processes  will  be  further  improved  next  year,  with  asset 
management taking on a key role. While the intrinsic values of the assets represent a key 
element in managing the portfolio, the process must not be merely mechanistic. Now that it 
has  been  possible  to  sell  off  some  of  the  more  liquid  assets  over  the  last  few  months, 
attention will focus more closely on two tasks: minimising the larger concentration risks, and 
ensuring that – as the portfolio is disposed of – the best possible equilibrium is maintained in 
various respects, including the degree of liquidity of its holdings. 
Broadening participation in the Swiss franc repo market 
The unsecured money market collapsed when the financial crisis broke out in August 2007 
and it has not properly recovered to this day. The repo market, conversely, in which money is 
lent  against  securities, has  emerged  as  a  crisis-resistant mainstay  of  the  financial  system. 
The  efficient  Swiss  repo  system  –  through  which  the  SNB  conducts  its  normal  monetary 
policy transactions – has proved to be especially robust.  
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
The SNB depends on a liquid Swiss franc money market for the efficient implementation of 
its monetary policy. This is why, in addition to domestic banks, foreign banks were admitted 
to the Swiss franc repo market as long as ten years ago. From 2010, the SNB will open the 
repo market to financial market participants in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein) that do 
not enjoy the status of banks. However, these new participants will have to be supervised by 
FINMA (or the regulatory authorities in Liechtenstein), and they must be genuinely active in 
the Swiss franc money market. Furthermore, they will have to guarantee that business will be 
transacted  in  a  professional  manner.  The  initial  candidates  are  likely  to  be  insurance 
companies  with  significant  treasury  activities  in  Swiss  francs,  and  possibly  managers  of 
Swiss franc money market funds. In expanding participation in the repo market, the SNB is 
seeking to further increase the liquidity of the Swiss franc repo market. In this way we plan to 
further promote the secured money market and increase the stability and crisis resistance of 
the financial system. 
 
 
 4 
 BIS Review 167/2009
 BIS Review 167/2009 
   5
