Emsley D Tromp: Recent economic developments and their 
repercussions for small and medium-sized enterprises in Curaçao 
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de Nederlandse Antillen), at the ADECK fundraising lunch, Willemstad, 21 October 2009. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
Our economy is currently facing many challenges. First, the world economy is experiencing 
its greatest slowdown since the Second World War. This slowdown is affecting the Curaçao 
economy in general and small and medium-sized enterprises in particular. At the same time, 
we are in the process of constitutional changes leading to a status aparte for Curaçao. This 
process provides us a unique opportunity to address certain weaknesses in our investment 
climate, which, if corrected, would benefit small and medium-sized enterprises. I have been 
asked  to  discuss  the  recent  economic  developments  and  their  impact  on  the  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises in Curaçao. However, before discussing the local situation, I shall 
take a look at the international environment. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  since  July  2007  the  global  economy  has  experienced  a  severe 
financial  crisis  originating  in  the  US  housing  and  credit  sectors.  Due  to  the  increased 
integration of goods, services and financial markets, the crisis has spread from the housing 
and credit markets in the United States to other markets and countries around the world. The 
result has been a deep worldwide recession with severe economic and social impacts. Few, 
if any economies have not been affected by the crisis. Output has contracted in the major 
industrial  countries,  including  the  United  States  and  the  Euro  area,  and  has  slowed  in  the 
emerging economies.  
Fortunately,  global  economic  growth  has  started  to  rebound  and  financial  conditions  have 
improved markedly. World economic recovery has been driven largely by wide-ranging and 
coordinated  public  intervention,  particularly  in  the  industrial  countries  through  supporting 
demand and reducing uncertainty and systemic risk in the financial markets.  
The  pace  of  recovery  however,  is  expected  to  be  slow,  as  uncertainties  remain  in  the 
financial markets, and public intervention will gradually have to be phased out. Against this 
background, it is projected that the world economy will contract by 1% in 2009 and recover 
by about 3% in 2010.  
The global economic downturn has had severe repercussions for the Caribbean region. As 
external  demand  dropped,  output  in  countries  with  relatively  large  manufacturing  sectors 
contracted.  In  addition,  foreign  exchange  revenues  from  tourism  have  been  dropping 
reflecting  the  weakening  US,  Canadian,  and  European  markets.  Inflows  from  remittances 
and  foreign  direct  investments  have  also  been  declining.  As  a  consequence,  real  Gross 
Domestic Product is expected to contract in most countries in 2009 including the Bahamas 
by 3.9%, Barbados by 3.0%, and Aruba by 5.5%. 
Contrary  to  most  countries  in  the  region,  the  economy  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  is  not 
expected to contract in 2009. One of the main reasons why our economy is an exception in 
the  region,  is  the  implementation  of  the  debt  relief  program  and  the  Social  Economic 
Initiative. The inflow of debt relief funds has a positive impact on the current account of the 
balance of payments. In addition, it contributes to a cash surplus at the general government 
level and, hence, a decline in public sector debt. Thanks to the debt relief program, our debt-
to-GDP ratio is projected to decline from 82% to 62% during 2009.  
However, an analysis by sector shows that activities in the tourism-related industries have 
been  negatively  affected  by  the  world  economic  recession.  All  islands  of  the  Netherlands 
Antilles have experienced a drop in the number of stay-over visitors. In Curaçao, the number 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 1
of tourist arrivals dropped by 1.4% during the first half of 2009 as a result of a decline in the 
North  American  and  Caribbean  markets.  The  South  American  and  European  markets,  in 
contrast, expanded during the first six months of 2009. The latter was largely related to the 
appreciation  of  the  Euro  vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar  making  Curaçao  an  attractive  tourism 
destination in terms of costs for Europeans. Meanwhile, hotel occupancy rates dropped from 
86.5%  in  the  first  half  of  2008  to  74.5%  in  the  first  six  months  of  2009.  Activities  in  the 
wholesale and retail trade sector weakened during the first months of 2009 because of the 
decline in stay-over tourism, slower activities in the free-zone industry, and lower domestic 
demand.  
The transport, storage and communication sector showed a mixed performance in the first 
quarter  of  2009.  On  the  one  hand,  airport  activities,  as  measured  by  the  number  of 
passengers  handled,  declined  in  line  with  the  downturn  in  tourism.  The  number  of 
passengers  transported  by  the  national  carriers  dropped  also.  On  the  other  hand,  harbor 
activities  rose  as  a  result  of  increased  cargo  movements  and  oil  storage  activities.  The 
manufacturing sector recorded a remarkable decline in value added, attributable to the poor 
performance of both the “Isla” refinery and the Curaçao dry dock company.  
The financial and construction sectors were the main contributors to economic growth in the 
first quarter of 2009. The increase in financial sector activities was driven entirely by the good 
performance  of  domestic  financial services  as activities  in the  international  financial  sector 
declined due to the financial crisis. Construction work expanded largely because of ongoing 
tourism-related  projects.  However,  the  growth  in  construction  moderated  compared  to  the 
first quarter of 2008, in line with the slower growth in private investment.  
Against this background and in line with the latest forecast for world economic growth, we 
expect  economic  growth  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles  to  slow  to  0.8%  this  year.  Given  the 
expected  recovery  of  the  world  economy,  we  project  the  Curaçao  economy  to  expand  by 
1.3% in 2010. 
Needless to say, the projected economic slowdown for this year translates into less activity 
for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises. These enterprises are either active in the  sectors 
being affected by the slowdown, including the hotel and restaurant sector, the wholesale and 
retail sector, and the international financial services sector or they provide services to these 
sectors. The main pressures faced by these enterprises are weak demand, both  domestic 
and foreign, and tighter credit conditions.  
According to the Central Bureau of Statistics, 97% of all enterprises in Curaçao are small or 
medium sized. These enterprises are crucial for the island economy, accounting for 56% of 
employment and 31% of Gross Domestic Product.  
Given their importance, it is imperative that actions be taken to help the small and medium-
sized enterprises survive the economic slowdown.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  currently  in  the  historic  process  of  the  dismantling  of  the 
Netherlands Antilles. In the near future, Curaçao will become an autonomous country within 
the  Dutch  Kingdom.  An  autonomous  status  will  provide  us  with  the  unique  opportunity  to 
address  certain  economic  issues  in  a  more  island-specific  way  and  thereby  stimulate 
economic growth. This situation should be beneficial for the business community, including 
the small and medium-sized firms. 
A  crucial  factor  in  this  new  context  is  macroeconomic  stability.  In  my  view,  one  of  the 
greatest  threats  to  our  macroeconomic  stability  is  our  vulnerability  to  external  shocks.  Our 
balance  of  payments  has  become  more  susceptible  to  external  shocks  with  far-reaching 
implications for the real economy. The rapidly expanding current account deficit in the last 
few  years,  financed  by  capital  inflows  from  abroad,  brings  to  fore  an  increasing  external 
vulnerability, which has been masked by the recent inflows of funds related to the debt relief 
program.  A  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows  could  deplete  our  foreign  exchange  reserves 
quickly, undermining confidence in our currency.  
2 
 BIS Review 131/2009
As we are preparing to close the last chapter of the Netherlands Antilles, it is crucial that we 
address  these  vulnerabilities  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  new  countries’  citizens.  With 
regard to the monetary system in the new constitutional structure, it has been agreed that the 
countries of Curaçao and Sint Maarten will form a monetary union with one central bank and 
a common currency.  
The balance of payments vulnerability however, compels us to consider alternatives, one of 
which is dollarization. Three of the five islands comprising the Netherlands Antilles, i.e., the 
BES  islands,  have  chosen  to  introduce  the  US  dollar  as  the  legal  tender  once  their  new 
status takes effect, while Sint Maarten is already de facto dollarized. Moreover, the US dollar 
is widely accepted in Curaçao. Therefore, it would not be such a big step to formally dollarize 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten.  
Having the dollar as legal tender removes the possibility of a balance of payments crisis with 
the risk of devaluation. An economic downturn or reversal of capital flows would not turn into 
a currency crisis. An immediate benefit from  the elimination of currency crises would be a 
reduction of the country risk premium, consequently lowering interest rates. In other words, 
the  spread  between  the  interest  rates  of  the  dollarized  economy  and  the  United  States  is 
reduced.  Lower  interest  rates  benefit  growth  by  reducing  the  cost  of  credit,  encouraging 
investments. 
In  addition,  as  a  result  of  dollarization,  transaction  costs,  related  to  the  conversion  into 
foreign currency, are lowered. These lower costs would benefit trade, including tourism and 
foreign  direct  investments.  Due  to  the  perceived  currency  risk,  local  financial  institutions 
might  be  more  inclined  to  invest  in  foreign  assets.  In  the  absence  of  currency  risk,  the 
appetite to invest capital locally might increase.  
By  adopting  the  US  dollar,  the  financial  system  would  become  more  open  to  international 
capital  flows.  Capital  mobility  promotes  financial  intermediation,  competition  and  efficiency 
among  institutions,  and  promotes  confidence  in  the  financial  system.  It  also  encourages 
integration of the domestic financial system with the rest of the world.  
Although  the  public  finances  of  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  are  closely  monitored  by  the 
budget  supervisor  CFT,  dollarization  would  provide  an  extra  long-term  constraint  for  fiscal 
policy because it eliminates the possibility of printing money to finance fiscal deficits. Given 
our  long  history  of  fiscal  deficits  and  troubled  adjustment  programs,  the  restrictions  on 
increasing the money supply would improve our policy credibility.  
Nevertheless, dollarization also has some disadvantages. First, the authorities lose monetary 
policy as an instrument to steer the economy, limiting the available policy mix to correcting 
macroeconomic disequilibria. Second, the “lender of last resort” function of the central bank 
disappears.  Finally,  under  dollarization,  the  central  bank  would  lose  its  main  sources  of 
income,  i.e.,  investment  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  seigniorage  from  issuing 
banknotes.  
With respect to the first argument against dollarization, the loss of a policy instrument, the 
following  counter  argument  can  be  made.  Given  the  limited  scope  to  pursue  independent 
monetary policy under the current exchange rate regime, this loss would not be substantial. 
The  recent  adjustment  periods  have  indicated  that  small  open  economies  like  ours  are 
limited to fiscal policies and structural measures to remain competitive and hence improve 
their  investment  climates.  With  regard  to  the  issue  of  profitability  and  the  function  of  the 
central bank as lender of last resort, it is important to put the current reality into perspective. 
The lion’s share of the central bank’s profit consists of license fees, which will continue to 
exist under dollarization. In addition, since the balance of payments constraint is no longer 
binding, the need to hold foreign exchange reserves to maintain the peg no longer applies. 
Therefore,  the  Bank’s  reserves  will  all  become  investable  funds,  thereby  preserving  the 
Bank’s profitability. To address the issue of lender of last resort, we need to accelerate the 
introduction  of  a  deposit  insurance  scheme.  Aside  from  providing  depositors  with  added 
security,  the  funds  of  such  a  scheme,  some  of  which  can  come  from  the  current  reserve 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 3
requirements,  will  support  the  function  of  lender  of  last  resort.  Moreover,  the  government 
would  have  to  assume  this  function  even  under  the  current  exchange  rate  regime,  which 
became abundantly clear during the recent international financial crisis. 
Hence, dollarization would result in no perceptible changes in the profit of the central bank 
and  hence  no  impact  on  the  government  budget.  Rather,  dollarization  might  lead  to  an 
increase  in  the  Bank’s  profit  since  the  balance  of  payments  constraint  always  has 
constrained the Bank from pursuing a policy of profit maximization. The Bank also has non-
interest sources of income in terms of the fees it charges the financial institutions to cover the 
costs of financial sector supervision. 
Realistically  assessing  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  dollarization  for  Curaçao 
should be part of the public debate for choosing the most suitable monetary system for the 
future countries in the Kingdom. The balance seems to point in the direction of dollarization, 
given our vulnerabilities in the present world economic order. 
However,  dollarization  does  not  stand  alone  as  a  remedy  for  economic  ills.  It  must  be 
accompanied by a series of structural reforms to achieve economic growth and development 
in the long term. These reforms will improve our competitiveness and create opportunities for 
businesses, including small and medium-sized enterprises. 
First  is  increasing  labor  market  flexibility.  In  the  absence  of  monetary  policy  instruments, 
external shocks that require a change in real wages will not have lasting effects on the rate of 
unemployment  if  the  labor  market  is  not  flexible.  Another  aspect  of  the  labor  market  that 
needs  to  be  addressed  is  the  reduction  in  the  qualitative  mismatch  between  demand  and 
supply.  In  my  opinion,  education  is  crucial  to  reduce  this  mismatch.  Our  vocational 
institutions should take into account to a much greater degree the skill needs of the private 
sector.  
A second area for reform is the further development of our capital market, promoting more 
financing  opportunities  for  entrepreneurs  and  more  local  investment  opportunities  for 
investors.  Increasing  local  investment  opportunities  has  become  even  more  relevant  as  a 
result of the declining significance of government bonds as an investment instrument in light 
of the debt relief. The development of private debt instruments and equity-based financing 
especially should be promoted. These types of financing are still rarely used on our island, 
but  they  are  significantly  cheaper  than  bank  financing.  Specifically  for  start-ups  and  small 
and medium-sized enterprises, the establishment of a venture capital fund could be crucial to 
raise the necessary financing for promising investment projects.  
Another important area of reform is the reduction of administrative barriers. One of the most 
common complaints from the business sector is the number and complexity of government 
formalities  and  paperwork  that  frustrate  new  investment  initiatives  and,  hence,  the 
opportunity for stronger economic growth. The elimination of the double layer of government 
on the island is certainly a step in the right direction. However, it should be complemented by 
streamlining  administrative  procedures  aimed  at  eliminating  all  unnecessary  bureaucracy 
and simplifying the procedures for obtaining business and work permits and business visas.  
We  must  realize  that  “entrepreneurial  firms”  are  the  ones  that  will  really  benefit  from  the 
rising  economic  opportunities.  In  addition,  the  likelihood  of  surviving  is  also  higher  among 
firms  that  are  creative  and  entrepreneurial.  In  this  context,  being  entrepreneurial  entails 
identifying  and  introducing  new  products,  new  ways  of  production,  distribution,  and 
marketing. At the same time, an entrepreneur is not afraid to take risks. In my opinion, our 
business  owners  should  become  more  entrepreneurial  to  maximize  the  benefits  from  the 
economic opportunities offered by the future country of Curaçao. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  play  a  crucial  role  in  our 
economy  as  they  are  an  important  contributor  to  employment  and  GDP.  As  a  result,  we 
should  take  all  the  necessary  steps  to  create  a  business  environment  that  stimulates  the 
creation and growth of truly entrepreneurial small and medium-sized enterprises especially 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2009
now when the world economy is recovering from a severe crisis and a new world economic 
order is being developed. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 5
