Rundheersing Bheenick: First commemorative platinum coin of 
Mauritius 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion 
of the Launching Ceremony of the first commemorative platinum coin of the “Father of the 
Nation − Platinum Series”, Port-Louis, 30 October 2009. 
 Life has not been treating Central Bankers at all well since Lehman Brothers went belly-up. 
Those  who  found  themselves  at  the  epicentre  of  this  perfect  storm  have  been  doing  a 
creditable job, keeping the global economy on an even keel. The economic jargon has been 
much enriched with such exotic terms as toxic assets, TARP, and quantitative easing. There 
was even a brief period when banking ran the risk of once again becoming – one of the less 
reputable professions! 
Tonight, as I welcome you all to the Bank, we are putting these concerns aside. Tonight, I am 
exercising one of the powers, and indeed, one of the great privileges, of being Governor of a 
central bank, by issuing a new coin. I am the only person in this country with the license to do 
that. If anyone else here has a go, he goes straight to jail.  
So,  thank  you  all  for  being  with  us  tonight.  And  a  very  special  “thank  you”  to  our  Prime 
Minister, Dr the Honourable Navinchandra Ramgoolam, for having agreed to officiate at this 
launching  ceremony.  We  have  some  special  overseas  guests  tonight  and  I  extend  a  very 
special  welcome  to  my  fellow-Governors  and  Deputy  Governors  from  COMESA  Central 
Banks,  to  the  Commissioner  of  Economic  Affairs  of  the  African  Union  Commission,  to  the 
Secretary-General  of  the  Central  Bank  Governance  Forum  at  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, and to the members of the IMF Article lV consultation.  
Some of you were here last year when we launched a gold coin to mark the 40th anniversary 
of the Independence of Mauritius. You may recall that, on that occasion, I promised to go one 
better this year. Tonight, I redeem that promise. Tonight, we are going not just for gold but for 
platinum. And tonight, we launch not just one coin but we inaugurate a series of three coins. I 
do not know how to better this one in future, but I promise to give it some thought. 
The coin we are formally issuing today is the first in our platinum series. It is a fitting tribute to 
Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, our first prime minister, and subsequently Governor-General, 
and acknowledged by one and all as the Father of the Nation.  
The  coin  is  the  first  of  a  series  of  three  commemorative  coins,  dubbed  the  “Father  of  the 
Nation” Platinum Series, to be issued over three years, one coin being issued each year. The 
first  coin  depicts  on  the  obverse,  the  State  House,  Réduit,  with  the  inscription  “Rs1500” 
underneath,  with  the  surrounding  inscription  “FATHER  OF  THE  NATION  PLATINUM 
SERIES  *  MAURITIUS  2009  *  STATE  HOUSE  –  REDUIT  *”.  The  platinum  content  of  the 
coin is ¼ oz, its weight is 7.8 grams and it has a diameter of 25mm.  
The  second  and  third  coins  will  be  issued  in  September  2010  and  in  September  2011, 
respectively. Both coins will have the inscription “Rs1200” underneath, with the surrounding 
inscription  “FATHER  OF  THE  NATION  PLATINUM  SERIES  *  MAURITIUS  2010  * 
AAPRAVASI GHAT *” and “FATHER OF THE NATION PLATINUM SERIES * MAURITIUS 
2011  *  LE  MORNE  BRABANT  *”  respectively.  Their  platinum  content  will  be  1/5  oz;  their 
weight will be 6.2 grams with a diameter of 22mm. After the third year, a set of three coins 
will  be  issued.  All  three  coins  will  bear  on  the  reverse  the  effigy  of  Sir  Seewoosagur 
Ramgoolam  with  the  surrounding  inscription  “DR  THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE  SIR 
SEEWOOSAGUR RAMGOOLAM KT *”. The coins will be minted by Monnaie de Paris, and 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 1
will  be  legal  tender  for  their  face  value.  We  are  putting  the  first  platinum  coin  for  sale  at 
Rs14,000.  
For  the  benefit  of  our  visitors  from  abroad,  the  State  House,  also  known  as  Château  du 
Réduit;  Aapravasi  Ghat  and  Le  Morne  Brabant  form  part  of  our  national  heritage.  The 
Château  du  Réduit  was  built  under  the  French  Occupation  in  the  mid-18th  Century.  The 
Château  du  Réduit  became  the  official  residence  of  former  governors  and  that  of  Sir 
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam in his last official function as Governor-General of Mauritius. It is 
presently the official residence of the President of the Republic of Mauritius. The Aapravasi 
Ghat, or Immigration Depot, in Mauritius was inscribed on the World Heritage List at the 2006 
session of the World Heritage Committee as "the site where the modern indentured labour 
diaspora began". The Morne Brabant which was at the time of slavery a shelter for runaway 
slaves was classified as a National Heritage site by UNESCO in July 2008. 
A word now about the metal itself. Platinum has a very curious history and is now used in 
industry, in the jewellery trade and, in very few countries for special coinage. Platinum is rare 
in Nature; much rarer than gold; hence it has an intrinsic value greater than gold, weight for 
weight. It is curious, isn’t it, that in these days of currency volatility, we hear a lot about “gold 
bugs”, vaunting the merits of the yellow metal as a “safe haven”, but have you ever heard of 
a “platinum bug”? 
It was not known to the Egyptians, to the Romans, to the Greeks, to the Babylonians, to the 
Hindus, to the Chinese and other people of the Ancient World. It first emerged, in the 15th 
century, in Central America. Platinum was found basically within the diggings of other mineral 
mines and was considered a nuisance metal or a trash metal, difficult to be got rid of to get to 
the copper and the gold and the silver with which it was often associated.  
The first European reference to platinum appears in Italy, in 1557, where it is described as a 
metal found in Mexico, "which no fire nor any Spanish artifice has yet been able to liquefy." 
Its name actually is derived from the Spanish term platina del Pinto, which literally translates 
as  "little  silver  of  the  Pinto  River."  A  detailed  account  of  platinum  as  a  metal  was  only 
presented to the Royal Society of the UK in the mid-18th century. Since then, lots of work 
were done to find the merits of platinum for different uses. And then we hear nothing about it 
until about 1875 at a time when, you will recall, the gold standard was the bedrock on which 
economies and currencies were being built. Platinum came up for a mention as the basis for 
another International Standard, the measure of length – the International Standard Unit. This 
was  defined  as  the  distance  between  two  lines  on  a  standard  bar  of  an  alloy  which 
comprised ninety per cent platinum. So platinum became, so to speak, the gold standard for 
the measure of length. 
I think I must pause here to tell you the story of how I myself first heard about platinum, if you 
can spare me a minute. Like most Mauritians, we speak a mixture of Creole, French, English, 
Indian languages and other languages; some speak Mandarin, Cantonese and so forth. We 
speak lots of languages. In the old days we used to run British cars as part of the legacy of 
imperial  preference.  Cars  from  other  countries  would  only  be  allowed  after  paying 
extortionate rates of import duty. British cars in those days were not as reliable as cars tend 
to be today and one would spend probably as much time going to see the mechanic as we 
do these days to call at the petrol pump station. So I used to run this old Hillman car which 
had some problems with its engine. It seemed to be having some screws loose and it was 
not firing on all cylinders. Probably, as some of you will say, it was just reflecting the state of 
the  owner  himself!  Be  that  as  it  may,  when  the  mechanic  had  a  good  look  at  it,  he 
pronounced  authoritatively  “Missié,  problème  platine  ça!”.  For  those  of  you  who  don’t 
understand our local language, what he said was: “Sir, I’ve got it! You’ve got a problem of 
platinum!”.  
Now that I must have got you thoroughly bemused, let me explain. “Platinum” in the English 
language has nothing to do, or at that time had nothing to do, with the internal combustion 
engine. But its french-language equivalent platine stood for what you call “points” or “contact 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2009
points”  in  the  English  language.  And  those  of  you  who  are  familiar  with  the  English 
terminology  –  with  carburettor,  with  the  air  intake,  with  the  mixture  of  fuel  and  air  and  the 
technology to send the spark in the right cylinder at the right time – you will readily appreciate 
there was a critical role for a contraption called the French equivalent of “platinum” there. So 
that was my first contact with platine or platinum, and I am sure that’s what it meant for most 
Mauritians in the streets if you asked them about platine in those days. But those of you who 
are tech-savvy know that now carburettors have almost vanished as fuel injection has taken 
over.  If  you  happen  to  open  the  bonnet  of  a  car,  you  can’t  recognise  anything  anymore! 
Platine may have left the front part of the car but platinum is still very closely associated with 
the ubiquitous internal combustion engine. It’s now present at the other end – no longer on 
the intake side, but now on the exhaust side – as platinum is also a “green” metal. It’s very 
ecologically-friendly. It’s a key element in catalytic convertors to reduce our carbon footprint.  
Let me end that diversion and continue with the platinum story. Did you know that the bulk of 
platinum that we have today is mined in just two parts of the world: South Africa and Siberia 
in  Russia?  They  produce  two-thirds  and  one-quarter  of  the  world's  platinum  supply 
respectively.  Another  curiosity  relating  to  platinum  is  the  fact  that  it  was  not  until  the  19th 
century that this rare metal was first used in rather special platinum coins. Russia started the 
fad  in  1828.  Spain  produced  platinum  coins  in  the  19th  century.  But  we  have  to  wait  until 
much closer to our own times, the 70's, before any more platinum coins come to be issued. 
The first was a medal issued in Israel in 1973, followed by Panama in 1976. The Russians 
perhaps come closest to qualifying as “platinum bugs”. The USSR produced platinum coins 
from 1977 to 1980. Perestroika and glasnost did not dim their fascination with the metal and 
the  newly-independent  state  of  Russia  issued  platinum  coins  from  1992.  Nearer  to  us, 
Lesotho  issued  a  platinum  coin  of  half  an  ounce  of  platinum  in  1981.  Other  countries 
producing platinum coins include Australia, Canada, France and Portugal. 
Tonight, therefore, we continue the coinage chapter of the platinum story. Tonight, Mauritius 
joins  this  select  and  fairly  exclusive  list.  We  now  rank  among  the  three  countries  in  the 
southern  hemisphere  to  have  issued  platinum  coinage.  And  we  are  the  only  small  island 
developing state to do so.  
The gold coin we issued last year became one of the fastest-selling coins in the history of the 
Bank – the bulk of the edition was sold out within five days. The value of platinum is greater 
than gold and so today we are issuing a collectors’ coin that goes one better than last year’s 
gold coin. Moreover, bearing in mind the strange story of platinum, the choice of this metal 
with  its  special  range  of  qualities  and  uses  may  well  be  claimed  to  reflect  those  of  the 
reputation  of  the  great  statesman  it  commemorates,  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam: 
exceptional, precious, rare, durable and, as we can go to pay our respects at his “Samadhi” 
at the national Botanical gardens, environmentally-friendly! 
Let  me  say  a  word  before  I  conclude  about  a  project  that  I  have  at  heart.  The  downward 
trend in the savings rate in the economy has been a subject of growing concern to us for 
quite some time. It has continued tumbling from nearly 30 per cent at its peak in 1992 to 26 
per cent at the start of the millennium and now stands dangerously close to 12 per cent. The 
launch of the platinum coin gives me thus an opportunity to kick-start our “Saving for a Better 
Future”  programme  which,  we  hope,  will  help  foster  a  better  culture  of  savings  for  our 
population. We think our dodo has too easy a time, just sitting there in the logo of the Bank. 
We plan to press-gang our dear, daft, and defunct dodo into service to advance this cause of 
saving.  Hopefully,  domestic  savings  will  do  what  the  dodo  never  did  –  that  is  fly  off  the 
danger zone. Do not be surprised therefore if piggy-banks in our part of the world will never 
look the same again! 
I thank you again for your presence at this launch ceremony. Thank you very much for your 
attention and I look forward to some active sales this evening. 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 3
