Ewart S Williams: Quality citizens, transforming Caribbean society 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the  Roytec  Graduation  Ceremony  on  “Quality  citizens,  transforming  Caribbean  society”, 
Port-of-Spain, 19 November 2009. 
 Dear Members of the 2009 Graduating Class; as many of you may know, my job requires me 
to do a fair amount of public speaking, but 99 per cent of the time, my remarks are in the 
realm of the dismal and boring arena of economics. Not many people have taken the chance 
to invite me to provide inspiration and uplift. 
I was therefore both surprised and flattered when Roytec, through my friend Kelvin, invited 
me to give this Graduation Address. 
Of  course,  I  gladly  accepted,  largely  because,  as  I  am  going  to  urge  you  later,  you  must 
always be prepared to venture beyond your comfort zone. 
I am, therefore truly honored to be here this evening and I am mindful that I am here because 
of you all and what you have accomplished. You have made today possible and we are all 
here to honor you. 
For your family and friends it is a day to celebrate, in recognition of your achievements. As a 
father of three, who have all passed this way, I know the pride and the relief that your parents 
and loved ones feel. 
Today your graduation marks an important milestone in your life. You have worked hard and 
you have applied yourself to your studies; some of you have had to juggle studies with family 
and work responsibilities and for some, it may have implied financial challenges. I am sure 
that at times, many of you wondered whether it was worth the effort.  
Today, you could proudly answer that it was. 
Perhaps,  the  major  motivation  behind  your  pursuit  of  tertiary  education  may  have  been  to 
fulfill a career dream or for those who are already in the work-place, to enhance your career 
prospects. These are laudable motives.  
Your  education  should  be  in  your  interest,  even  while  it  is  clearly  in  the  interest  of  your 
country, whose economic future hinges on the development of a knowledge economy, and 
on having well-educated people, like you are. 
Your education is certainly going to be the key to your success, notwithstanding the current 
economic environment, with its weak job market. Some of you may find that, for the moment, 
job  opportunities  commensurate  with  your  newly-acquired  qualifications,  are  not  as  readily 
available, as they were at other points of the business cycle.  
Many of you may not immediately get the exact position that you want. But you must not lose 
heart. Rather, you must be prepared to be flexible, perhaps even adventurous, as you begin 
your careers.  
Things will turn around you can be certain, and there will surely be need for people with your 
abilities and talents. I should warn you, though, that even when the economy rebounds and 
your career path starts in earnest, you should be prepared to deal with the unpredictability 
that is inherent in our modern day existence. 
As I am sure that many of you already realize, life is much less predictable than we would 
wish. We invariably have limited control over the opportunities and the challenges that we will 
face.  We  have  considerably  more  control,  however,  over  how  well-prepared  and  open  we 
are, to make the most of the opportunities that life provides us. As the saying goes, “chance 
favors the prepared mind”. 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 1
I can testify to that aphorism. On graduating from UWI with my first degree in Economics (a 
long,  long  time  ago),  I  sought,  to  get  a  scholarship  to  go  abroad  to  do  my  PhD.  My 
supervisors,  Eric  St  Cyr  and  Lloyd  Best,  arranged  to  establish  a  Masters  programme  with 
one candidate – myself. I did the course work on campus and after about eighteen months, 
abandoning my PhD ambitions, I proceeded to the Central Bank, intent on making it a career. 
Within another twelve months, as fate would have it, a visiting IMF mission selected me for a 
two-year Young Professional Programme at the IMF. I ended up staying thirty years, rising to 
the top echelons of this very competitive international institution. 
And  how  did  I  manage  to  get  there?  Because  armed  with  my  UWI  groundings,  I  was 
prepared for all Washington had to offer. 
And, that IMF platform paved the way for my return to Trinidad and Tobago in my current 
position. 
You  are  all  going  to  have  your  own  twists  and  turns.  You  are  all  going  to  have  your 
opportunities. Be prepared to seize them, even if it means going out of your comfort zone. 
But,  my  dear  graduands,  there  is  another  dimension  to  your  success  that  you  must  not 
forget. It has to do with your obligations as graduates, in our present space and time, when 
our Caribbean societies are beset by all manner of social problems.  
We all recognize the most glaring outward manifestations of our current condition, as youth 
indiscipline, the unacceptably high level of crime and violence; including domestic violence; 
the drug menace and the HIV-aids pandemic. But there are more subtle signs of our decline, 
such as the absolute disregard for law and order at all levels of society. We see it in how we 
drive  on  the  road  (making  the  shoulder  another  lane  or  showing  no  respect  for  the  traffic 
lights) and we see it in the lack of civility and in the boorishness that pervade so many facets 
of our every day life. 
There is a most unfortunate perception, nowadays, that we have become a selfish and self-
centered society, with a drive only for material gain, without an awareness of self and society 
and possessed by a type of moral uncertainty. We seem to be unsure, at times, about right 
and wrong. 
(Granted  it  is  not  only  a  Caribbean  challenge).  In  a  recent  discussion  on  the  international 
financial crisis, some of the top bankers in the United Kingdom, conceded that “some of their 
colleagues had lost their way and that the crisis was largely triggered by the absence of a 
moral compass”. 
Contributing  to  the  same  debate,  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  noted 
pointedly that “if it is correct that we won’t ever write a perfect set of rules – we didn’t in the 
past and we won’t in the future – then there needs to be some other constraint, something 
that deals with values in a more basic sense”.  
These comments are pertinent to our home-grown financial crisis.  
But even outside finance, we are facing a crisis of morality.  
(And  if  you  have  doubts),  how  else  could  we  explain  our  seeming  acceptance  of  another 
murder in Laventille or Beetham as just another statistic or “collateral damage” even while we 
are  roused  to  the  highest  state  of  indignation  at  a  shooting  incident  in  Westmoorings  or 
Glencoe. Or why do we tend to cast a blind eye on white collar crime but are quick to punish 
lesser transgressions. 
Clearly we need to find the correct moral weight to put on these matters.  
As graduates of Roytec, you should have a commitment to UWI’s mandate of service to the 
region. You are the product of a system which sees the ultimate goal of your education as 
the  creation  of  new  Caribbean  persons  who  respect  human  life,  have  strong  moral,  family 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2009
and  community  values,  who  are  able  and  independent  thinkers  and  who  respect  ethnic, 
religious and cultural diversity. 
Graduating  from  Roytec  sets  you  apart  in  your  community.  It  says  that  you  can  make  a 
difference in the world. Be conscious that as a Roytec graduate you have the potential to do 
something significant and important. You should be aware also that you have the opportunity 
to be leaders and innovators, and an obligation to help shape your community for the better. 
Oft  times,  leadership  is  not  what  is  commonly  thought.  When  I  say  leaders,  I  don’t 
necessarily  mean  politicians  or  CEOs,  or  church  leaders  or  anything  of  the  kind.  The 
demands  on  leadership  will  be  with  you  all  your  life  as  parent,  supervisor  in  your  office, 
member of the PTA, neighbor or resident in your community. 
With leadership goes responsibility to those who you lead and to the broader community, be 
it  your  neighborhood,  your  village,  your  church,  or  your  club.  After  all,  these  situations 
provide an opportunity for you as the leader, to give back. 
Now  I  know  that  at  times  community  involvement  would  be  difficult,  as  you  also  have  to 
juggle family and career but I encourage you to make the effort. I am sure that you will find it 
worthwhile.  
In addition to looking out for the less-fortunate your new status requires you to understand 
the real imperatives of being a quality citizen in our still-evolving democracy – and by that I 
mean one who is attuned to and has an opinion on the public issues that affect the society, 
and who is prepared to stand up and be counted, if and when the need arises.  
I notice that a significant proportion of the graduands are women and some of you will need 
to  strike  a  balance  between  career  objectives  and  family.  It  is  a  major  challenge  but  the 
balance is worth struggling for since the breakdown of the family is at the centre of so many 
of our societal ills. 
Let me conclude this speech by acknowledging that graduates almost always remember their 
graduation (at least they have photographs of it) but they almost never remember anything 
from their graduation address. 
I  put  the  question  to  my  kids  and,  as  I  expected,  they  remembered  little  or  nothing. 
Interestingly enough I remembered something from my graduation speech almost forty years 
ago and it was this “education makes us what we are”. That theme stuck with me not only 
because it sounded profound, but because my personal experience proved it to be true. 
I do believe that education has made me, as a person, as a professional and as a member of 
the community. And I also believe that your education will, in the end, make each and every 
one of you in this graduating class.  
Hence my plea that you pursue lifelong learning as it would serve you in good stead. 
One last thing, my kids warned me not to be too long and I sincerely hope that I have not 
been. 
Thank you again for inviting me to share in your celebration. I wish each and every one of 
you all the best in the future. 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 3
