Norman T L Chan: Remarks for TraHK 10th Anniversary 
Remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, SBS, JP, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  TraHK  10th  Anniversary  Gathering  Celebration/Reception,  Hong  Kong, 
12 November 2009. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. 
I am delighted to be here today on the 10th anniversary of the listing of the Tracker Fund of 
Hong  Kong  and  to  see  so  many  familiar  faces  from  the  original  project  team.  Thank  you 
State Street for organizing this timely get-together. 
A decade has come and gone since we created Tracker. We’ve seen another crisis and a 
whole raft of intervention measures by governments, some of which are of unprecedented 
scale. 
Now the focus is turning to "exit strategies" and, looking back ten years' on, I think we can all 
take some collective pride in having been part of one of the most innovative, and dare I say 
elegant, exit strategies. The strategy, of course, was to dispose of the stocks acquired by the 
Government in the stock market operations of the summer of 1998 with minimal disruption to 
the market. This was by no means a small task – but together we rose to the challenge with 
an exit strategy that saw us launch the first ETF in Asia ex-Japan, in a public offering which 
turned out to be the largest in Asia ex-Japan at the time of launch, raising HK$33.3 billion 
from over 180,000 retail investors and institutions. 
We  created  the  Tracker  Fund  in  a  little  under  6  months,  from  the  time  the  EFIL  Board 
recommended on 21st June 1999 that this was the way to launch the disposal programme. 
We  did  this  at  a  time  when  market  sentiment  in  Asia  was  just  beginning  to  become  less 
negative. If this were not enough of a challenge, we also had the shadow of Y2K hanging 
over us! By some miracle or rather due to the sheer hard work, long hours and perseverance 
on the part of the project team, we overcame countless operational, IT, legal and regulatory 
challenges thrown at us. 
Just  to  add  to  the  degree  of  difficulty,  we  had  to  work  in  the  full  glare  of  the  public  eye, 
knowing that any miscommunication (however slight) could have a severely negative effect 
not only on our stock market but also on the international perception of Hong Kong.  
I have to tell you that making the decision to use an ETF as the disposal strategy was not an 
easy one. The strategy was then unorthodox and unproven in Asia, as was the investment 
appetite  for  such  a  product.  The  investment  banking  community  was  perplexed  that  we 
should launch an ETF when a block trade or a convertible bond option was so much more 
“familiar” or “safer”. Our legal advisers were perplexed that we should launch a fund through 
an IPO. Our global coordinators were amazed by our determination to create an innovative 
“Tap Facility” to allow the continued block creation of more Tracker units from the remaining 
portfolio of shares. Also we insisted on not giving any discount to the public at launch of the 
IPO and instead we offered an innovative back-end loaded incentive scheme in the form of a 
loyalty bonus. 
From the Government perspective, we had by April 2001 recouped more than the HK$118 
billion used by the Exchange Fund in the stock market operation. In total, we sold HK$140 
billion worth of shares into Tracker, received $24 billion from dividends on our shareholdings 
and still retained $50 billion in the Exchange Fund’s long term equity portfolio when the "tap" 
into Tracker was terminated. 
We  could  not  have  achieved  this  without  the  dedication  and  support  of  our  highly 
professional  project  team  members:  Tracker  Fund’s  manager  and  custodian  (our  hosts 
tonight), the three global coordinators, the lawyers, the Marketing & PR Firms, colleagues at 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 1
the SFC, HKEx & CCASS, and of course the Chairman (Mr TL Yang), all the directors and 
fellow staff of EFIL. 
If  one  were  to  mark  the  Tracker  Fund  as  an exit  strategy,  I  think  it  deserves  a  fine  report 
card.  We  did  dispose  of  the  shares  with  minimal  disruption  to  the  market.  The  Fund  did 
encourage  longer  term  investment  into  unit  trusts  and  kick  started  the  ETF  market  on  the 
HKEx and elsewhere in Asia, where we now have a variety of ETFs covering a wide range of 
asset classes. The result has been the provision of more choice to investors, both retail and 
institutional, at lower cost than traditional unit trusts. 
As we enjoy our 10th anniversary celebration, I cannot help but wonder if the exit strategies 
currently on drawing boards around the world will be as successful as we were? Only time 
will tell. 
I wish you all a very pleasant day and once again many thanks to State Street for organizing 
this celebration. 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2009
