Sada Reddy: Development of e-money in Fiji 
Statement  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  launch  of  the 
Digicel Mobile Money Transfer Services, Suva, 15 July 2010. 
 Executive Management & Staffs of the Digicel Fiji Limited,  
Members of the Media,  
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen.  
Today  marks  another  achievement  towards  the  development  of  e-money  in  Fiji.  I 
congratulate Digicel and its partner Flex Pacific (Fiji) for this remarkable achievement, having 
only entering Fiji’s cellular phone market in late 2008. The launch of Digicel Money today is a 
testament  to  the  people  of  Fiji  that  Digicel  is  committed  to  providing  competitive  services. 
Today  we  have  become  a  leading  country  in  the  Pacific  region  to  offer  mobile  money 
services, an achievement that the people of Fiji should be proud of.  
Mobile  money  is  a  quicker,  easier  and  cheaper  way  of  transferring  money  using  mobile 
phone  technology  and  network  and  customers  will  be  able  to  use  this  service  right  away. 
However mobile money also has the capabilities to pay for bills and other goods and services 
and  even  has  the  potential  to  connect  with  banks  and  provide  banking  services  to  the 
unbanked. I believe that Digicel has phased its mobile money project and this will become 
possible in the near future. Mobile money service is important for Fiji because it is estimated 
that  about  50  percent of  Fiji’s  population  does not  have  easy  access  to  financial services. 
The launching of Digicel mobile money service would ensure bringing this number down to 
an acceptable level given its extensive network coverage. 
Most  of  you  may  be  aware  that  the  Reserve  Bank  launched  the  “E-money  Fiji  project”  on 
9th of June this year to support the development of mobile money in Fiji. We have worked in 
close  consultation  and  collaboration  with  the  mobile  network  operators  for  the  orderly  and 
sustainable development of mobile money in Fiji. Following a provisional licence provided by 
the RBF early this year, Digicel undertook their pilot test phase on mobile money services, 
which was assessed as successful. I am happy to say that Digicel has met all the Reserve 
Bank requirements to gain approval for the full launch of Digicel mobile money.  
Having said this, I wish to emphasize that the product will only be as useful as its ability to 
have great penetration in Fiji, particularly to the remote and maritime areas. Likewise, that 
the people of Fiji are able to witness and experience a reduction in costs for remitting funds 
domestically  through  this  mode.  Also,  that  Digicel’s  mobile  money  system  is  interoperable 
with  other  entrants  in  this  market.  Public  awareness,  customer  education  on  the 
requirements  to  use  the  service,  training  and  proper  selection  of  agents  and  proper 
disclosure of charges are just some of the factors that will contribute to success in this new 
venture.  These  are  some  challenges  that  I  wish  to  pose  to  Digicel  at  the  outset  as  they 
endeavor on this significant accomplishment.  
The  RBF  felt  it  appropriate  to  adopt  a  more  flexible  approach  in  our  regulation  of  this 
particular payment system at these early stages in-order to allow this initiative to develop and 
thrive.  We  welcome  innovation  and  investment  and  at  same  time  will  build  up  regulatory 
oversight  as  the  market  develops.  We  are  currently  working  on  a  best  practice  Payment 
Systems Legislation, to licence and regulate all providers of the E-Money services in Fiji. The 
legislation will be based on four general principles of i). safety; ii). efficiency at the national 
level; iii). equitable access to all users; and iv). consumer protection. The draft legislation has 
been sent to experts for their comments.  
The RBF’s commitment to the Digicel mobile money initiative is because we realize the great 
potential this development will have in extending financial services to the unreached areas 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 1
and in the process, there will be greater economic activity in the remote and maritime areas 
hence  eradication  of  poverty.  Overall,  that  it  will  improve  the  lives  of  our  people  in  these 
regions.  
I  wish  Digicel  mobile  money  every  success  and  thank  Digicel  for  continuing  to  have 
confidence in Fiji and contributing to our development.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2010
