 Inia Naiyaga: Increasing activity in the capital markets 
Opening address by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Acting Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at 
the Capital Markets & Listing Seminar, Nadi, 3 September 2010. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Ni  sa  Bula  Vinaka  and  a  very  warm  welcome  to  this  afternoon’s 
Capital  Markets  &  Listing  Seminar.  This  is  the  second  of  a  series  of  seminars  that  will  be 
organised as part of our efforts to increase activity in the capital markets. The first one was 
held in Suva on 18 August, 2010. 
Let me thank you all for accepting the invitation by the Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF) and the 
South Pacific Stock Exchange (SPSE) to be part of today’s seminar on the topic “Grow your 
company, grow the economy: have you considered the capital markets?” Like most of you 
and your businesses, we want to see the economy grow. As the economy grows, so does 
the size of the pie that can be shared by all. 
Your businesses are critical players in this growth objective. The economy will be as strong 
as your active investment and expansion. And the capital markets can help facilitate this. 
Before I proceed further, let me say that developments in the capital markets have come a 
long way but there is still a lot of ground to be covered in order to fully develop this market. 
Most of you may be aware that on 19 August, 2009, the administration of the Capital Markets 
Development  Authority  (CMDA)  was  transferred  to  the  RBF  under  the  Capital  Markets 
Decree 2009. The Capital Markets Unit has successfully integrated into Team Reserve Bank 
and has added a different dimension and skills-set to the Bank. 
Having said this, I wish to emphasise here that the work on capital markets is nothing new for 
the RBF since the initial planning, legislative and policy development of the capital markets in 
Fiji  was  birthed  and  housed  in  the  RBF  before  it  was  decided  to  establish  a  separate 
institution to carry on the task once it took shape. This led to the establishment of the CMDA. 
Ironically, work in this area has now taken a full circle and returned to the RBF again. We can 
expect  some  major  activities  and  events  for  the  capital  markets  in  the  future.  Since  being 
given  this  added  responsibility,  the  RBF  is  determined  to  developing  the  capital  markets 
further and in partnership with relevant stakeholders such as the SPSE. 
Now very briefly, let me discuss with you some recent updates on Fiji’s economy. 
The global economy is recovering markedly and this should augur well for our exports and 
tourism  industries,  which  are  supporting  the  domestic  economic  recovery.  On  the  sectoral 
performance,  aside  from  the  sugar  industry,  which  continues  to  show  low  performance, 
recent data indicate continued strong growth in visitor arrivals and improvements for the gold 
and fish sectors. There is also some indication of modest increases in consumption activity 
with consumer spending aided by improvements in the labour market, increased lending and 
higher inward personal remittances. 
Inflation declined further to 5.4 percent in July from 5.5 percent in June and is expected to 
further decrease to around 5.0 percent by the end of the year. On the external sector, the 
trade deficit narrowed in the first five months of this year, thus keeping the foreign reserves 
at adequate levels. Consequently, bank liquidity remains at high levels. 
Overall,  the  domestic  economy  is  showing  sign  of  improvements  however,  the  speed  of 
recovery is slow. Given the need to support economic activity and kickstart the economy, the 
Reserve Bank decided to maintain the Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) at 3.00 percent during 
the August Board meeting. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 1
 Capital markets in Fiji 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me brief you on some of the work that we are doing to develop 
the capital markets to another level. At the outset, I wish to state that a partnership approach 
will help progress this faster. 
As I mentioned earlier, two weeks ago we had a similar seminar in Suva and I am happy to 
say that it was a great success. The RBF had also organised 2 Microfinance Expos – one in 
Ba and the recent one last week during the Hibiscus Festival. Financial literacy sessions by 
financial  institutions,  SPSE  and  some  players  in  the  capital  markets  were  also  carried  out 
during  these  events.  It  was  encouraging  to  see  the  general  public  at  these  two  venues 
expressing interest and wanting to know more about the capital markets. In March this year, 
the Reserve Bank formed the Capital Markets Development Taskforce. The membership of 
the Taskforce is mainly from the private sector with Governor Sada Reddy as the Chair. It 
was the RBF’s intention that the private sector involvement in the development of the capital 
market, similar to the CMDA days, continued hence the formation of the Taskforce. 
The Taskforce will assist the RBF in strategising on how to tackle some of the longstanding 
challenges that have hindered the development of capital markets in Fiji. 
“Grow your company, grow the economy: have you considered the Capital Markets?” – 
What can be done? 
Our  role  is  to  see  that  we  create  the  regulatory  and  business  environment  in  the  capital 
market  that  is  conducive  and  supportive  of  private  sector  development  such  that  they 
become the engine of growth in the economy. We hope that by having this seminar in the 
West and inviting some prominent companies listed on the SPSE to share their experiences, 
businesses  in  the  community  will  be  better  informed  and  encouraged  to  use  the  capital 
market given its associated benefits. 
I assure you that the Reserve Bank will do whatever it can to ensure the development of the 
capital  markets,  and  will  play  a  pivotal  role  in  public  education  and  investor  awareness 
programs  to  foster  confidence  in  the  markets.  We  will  also  spearhead  initiatives  in 
partnership  with  other  agencies  including  Government  to  develop  the  capital  market. 
Similarly, we will dialogue with fellow regulators and find amicable solutions to areas that are 
deemed restrictive to the capital markets realising its full potential. 
Our commitment to creating an enabling environment for businesses in the capital markets is 
evident in the reduced corporate tax of 20% incentive for companies that list on SPSE and 
with minimum 40 percent local equity shareholding. 
I wish to mention that following Cabinet approval, reviews are currently underway to amend 
the  Capital  Markets  and  Unit  Trust  legislations.  This  we  hope  will  facilitate  economic 
development and improve the governance structures of companies. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  today  we  are  fortunate  that  we  have  with  us  those  that  have 
experienced what it is like to be listed on the SPSE. They will share with us their experiences 
pre  and  post  listing.  It  is  my  sincere  hope  that  this  seminar  will  demystify  some  of  the 
concerns that surround this industry and that in the process we would see more activities in 
the SPSE and capital markets going forward. 
I urge you all to make best use of this opportunity to hear from them and also network with 
our licensed intermediaries who can assist and answer questions that you may have relating 
to capital raising in the capital markets and listing on the stock exchange. 
Thank you again for your time and I wish you all a very good evening. 
VINAKA. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2010
