Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Financial integration and stability – efficiency 
gains vs pitfalls 
Keynote address by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European Central Bank, at the conference “Heterogeneous Nations and Globalized Financial 
Markets:  New  Challenges  for  Central  Banks”,  organised  by  the  National  Bank  of  Poland, 
Warsaw, 11 June 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen1, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  speak  at  this  conference  today  here  in  Warsaw.  Heterogeneous 
nations  and  globalized  financial  markets  –  the  title  of  this  conference  –  are  an  old 
phenomenon. In fact, in the late medieval ages of the 14th to the 16th century, the Kingdom 
of  Poland,  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  and  the  Hanseatic  area  have  formed  a  well  financially 
integrated area contributing to more specialization in trade and hence to economic growth at 
that time. In fact, despite the existence of many currencies, money was easy to transport and 
so financial integration was rather more advanced than the integration of markets for goods. 
The Kingdom of Poland was playing a particular role for the financial integration at that time 
as  a  key  provider  of  silver  from  its  silver  mines  for  the  coin  production,  also  for  the 
neighbouring regions.2 
In  today’s  modern  economies,  we  think  of  financial  integration  having  mainly  two  positive 
impacts.  First,  to  improve  the  allocative  efficiency  of  capital,  and  second,  to  help  the 
diversification of risks. 
The mission statement of the Eurosystem very well reflects this by stating that, beyond the 
overriding objective of maintaining price stability, “we aim to safeguard financial stability and 
promote European financial integration.”  
In the light of the recent events, the benefits of financial integration are sometimes put into 
question  and  it  may  look  like  that  the  two  objectives  –  safeguarding  financial  stability  and 
promoting financial integration – potentially conflict with each other. It is exactly because we 
live  in  an  increasingly  interconnected  world  that  the  crisis  has  been  so  severe  and 
widespread. 
So  why  should  we  –  after  the  recent  crisis  –  still  promote  financial  integration?  And  still 
believe in the reconcilability of financial integration and financial stability? 
I  will  argue  that  financial  integration  is  not  only  a  fact,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
functioning of the euro area economy. It is an irreversible process which should be promoted. 
While it may be true that financial integration poses some risks to financial stability – such as 
contagion  fostered  by  greater  interconnectedness  –  the  benefits  stemming  from  financial 
integration  far  outweigh  its  costs.  I  will  try  to  convince  you  that  –  instead  of  containing 
financial integration – our efforts need to be directed at a better understanding of the different 
forms  of  financial  development,  particularly  related  to  two  aspects,  namely  complexity  and 
size.  Opaque  products,  when  difficult  to  understand,  may  lead  to  mispricing  of  risks  and 
distorted allocation of resources. With respect to size, an overly large financial system could 
have negative effects on the functioning of the economy, either because it drains too many 
I would like to thank Simone Manganelli for his valuable input. 
                                                 
1  
2   Volckart, Oliver and Nikolaus Wolf (2006). Estimating Financial Integration in the Middle Ages: What can we 
learn  from  a  TAR-model?,  Journal  of  Economic  History  66,  1,  122–139,  Late  medieval  financial  market 
integration: the Hanseatic Area, the Holy Roman Empire and the Kingdom of Poland, c. 1300–1550, research 
project proposal by O. Volckart, London School of Economics. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 1
resources  from  other  sectors,  or  because  it  increases  the  risks  of  bubbles.  I  will  conclude 
with a few considerations on how the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board 
can contribute to enhance the stability of our financial system. 
Financial integration: an irreversible process 
1. 
In my view, three elements constitute an integrated financial market: (i) a single set of rules, 
(ii) equal access to financial instruments or services, and (iii) equal treatment in operating in 
the  market.  If  these  conditions  are  satisfied,  any  price  difference  between  assets  with 
identical risk-return characteristics will be immediately arbitraged away. 
This  definition  stems  from  the  intuition  that  lack  of  integration  reflects  the  existence  of 
barriers  to  cross-border  activities.  One  can  think  of  three  main  categories  of  obstacles  to 
financial integration: cultural, legal and technical. Recent academic research has shown that 
there  are  non-negligible  psychological  and  cultural  barriers  to  financial  integration.  While 
further cultural integration may take time, the integration policies of the European Union (EU) 
had  the  explicit  aim  of  removing  legal  barriers  and  building  the  necessary  technical 
infrastructure. Indeed, the recent economic history of the EU has been marked by distinctive 
efforts aimed at the removal of barriers to cross-border activities. The EU Banking Directives 
(1977,  1988),  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  (1999),  the  White  Paper  (2005)  are  all 
examples of EU initiatives aimed at creating a true level playing field in the financial sector. 
Financial  integration  is  essential  for  the  functioning  of  the  euro  area  as  it  is  for  other 
economies and regions. The financial system represents the primary channel through which 
monetary policy affects the economy. A stable, efficient and integrated financial market is the 
basis  for  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  which  monetary  policy  decisions  are 
transmitted equally across member countries.  
The  Eurosystem  has  taken  since  the  launch  of  the  euro  a  proactive  stance  to  promote 
financial  integration  in  the  single  currency  area.  For  instance,  the  establishment  of  an 
integrated European payments infrastructure – through the creation of the Eurosystem large-
value payment system TARGET and its successor TARGET 2 – has been instrumental for 
the  integration  of  the  money  market.  The  integration  of  the  money  market  has  been  of 
particular  help  in  the  recent  crisis  for  the  ECB  to  react  promptly  and  successfully.  It  has 
proven to be beneficial in effectively providing liquidity to the market, and thereby ensuring a 
proper and smooth transmission of monetary policy.  
Therefore,  to  improve  financial  stability  by  a  lower  degree  of  financial  integration  would 
certainly be the wrong measure. We should not undo those reforms which have paved the 
way  to  financial  integration  and  revert  back  to  a  retrenchment  within  the  national  borders. 
This is certainly not the right strategy for the euro area, and it would be undesirable at global 
level.  
Admittedly,  financial  integration  generates  greater  interconnectedness,  which  in  turn  may 
increase  the  risk  that  failure  in  one  part  of  the  system  may  trigger  chain  reactions  in  the 
formation of expectations which could have a destabilizing effect. But financial isolation – the 
opposite of financial integration – is not the rational answer to such a risk. We nowadays live 
in a global world, where not only financial, but also economic and cultural links have become 
increasingly  tighter.  News  spread  instantaneously  and  shape  global  market  sentiments; 
products are designed, assembled and sold in different countries; political events in a small 
region can send shockwaves around the world. It would be naïve to think that a country could 
isolate itself financially. And even if it were possible, the costs in terms of lost efficiency and 
productivity would far outweigh any possible benefit. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2010
Financial development – opportunities and risks 
2. 
If  financial  integration  is  both  an  irreversible  process  and  a  process  we  do  not  wish  to 
reverse, finance per se is not always good in any form and size. This is where we can and 
should  have  a  reasonable  and  fruitful  discussion.  Financial  development  refers  to  the 
process  of  financial  innovation  and  organisational  improvements  that  reduces  asymmetric 
information, increases the completeness of the markets, and reduces transaction costs. 
When these conditions are satisfied, finance can promote economic growth and serve best 
the society at large. Indeed, a well developed financial system serves the primary functions 
of  screening  and  monitoring  investment  projects,  allowing  the  diversification  of  risks, 
facilitating the process of price discovery, and providing the service of liquidity transformation 
by  matching  short-term  savers  with  long-term  borrowers.  Overall,  finance  helps  lifting 
financial  constraints  for  firms,  allowing  the  realisation  of  projects  with  positive  net  present 
value, which would have otherwise not been implemented.  
There  are  however  some  forms  of  financial  innovation  which  may  generate  perverse 
incentives, reduce transparency, and overall weaken the stability of the financial system.  
Let me take securitisation as an example. When correctly implemented, securitisation allows 
risk to be transferred from the originators of the loans to financial investors willing to hold that 
risk. This in turn generates a more efficient allocation of risks. The recent financial crisis has, 
however, highlighted severe weaknesses of such a scheme, related to misaligned incentives, 
lack of transparency and poor risk management. This form of intermediation has introduced 
several layers of management between the investor and the investment. Managers had the 
incentive  to  place  in  the  market  as  many  instruments  as  possible,  as  their  compensations 
were mainly coming from collection of fees. Investors, on the other hand, were attracted by 
the relatively higher return in times of low investment rate levels and by the sense of security 
provided  –  among  other  things  –  by  the  assessment  of  rating  agencies.  The  ultimate 
outcome was that instead of dispersing risks associated with bank lending, securitisation had 
the opposite effect of concentrating them in the banking system, with harmful consequences 
for financial stability.  
The size of the financial sector is another aspect which deserves close scrutiny. When the 
financial system grows too large it may eventually lead to a misallocation of resources. Of 
course, it has to be acknowledged that developed credit markets are important for business 
start-ups.  However,  while  finance  is  a  crucial  element  for  the  Schumpeterian  process  of 
creative  destruction,  the  recent  financial  crisis  has  also  highlighted  the  role  that  large 
financial markets play in downside risk.  
A  growing  number  of  academics  and  opinion  makers  are  questioning  the  theory  that  the 
effect of financial markets on growth is always positive and increasing. The relationship may 
well be non-linear: when of reasonable size, financial markets do help allocating resources 
efficiently and promote economic growth. However, as they grow larger, it may well be that 
financial markets may exert a decreasing marginal contribution to growth. In extreme cases, 
as the size of financial systems exceeds some threshold, their effect on growth could even 
turn  negative.  In  fact,  when  the  financial  system  grows  out  of  proportion  with  respect  to 
economic fundamentals, this may go hand in hand with the creation of exceedingly complex 
financial  products,  herding  behaviour,  materialization  of  tail  risks  and  it  may  attract  more 
resources relative to its value added.  
The theoretical channels through which excessive finance may be detrimental for growth are 
still unclear. One possibility is that distorted incentives – deriving from the increasingly higher 
payoff  coupled  with  limited  downside  risks  –  may  lead  managers  to  take  hidden  tail  risks. 
That  is,  managers  may  have  increasingly  higher  incentives  to  invest  in  assets  offering 
generous compensation most of the time, but generating severe losses with small probability. 
These incentives may be further exacerbated by herding behaviour, as the performance of 
managers  is  often  evaluated  in  comparison  with  that  of  peers.  Herding  behaviour,  in  turn, 
generates bubbles and makes the loss associated to the unlikely bad outcome even more 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 3
severe  than  it  would  have  been  otherwise.  During  financial  bubbles,  the  search  for  yield 
intensifies, risk-taking increases, and leverage in the system reaches unsustainable levels. 
The  exponentially  rising  volume  of  financial  assets  and  transactions,  especially  by  highly 
leveraged  and  interconnected  institutions,  leads  to  financial  fragility.  Shocks  to  the  system 
can lead to fire sales and asset price decreases, resulting in liquidity squeezes and solvency 
risks. 
Another channel through which an exceedingly large financial sector may have a negative 
impact on the real economy is the brain drain of human capital from other sectors, owing to 
the  high  compensation  schemes  in  the  financial  profession.  The  overexpansion  of  the 
financial  sector  has  induced  banks  to  increase  their  demand  for  highly  skilled  employees, 
driving  up  the  average  wage  of  the  industry.  The  depletion  of  human  capital  from  other  
– potentially more productive – sectors may have a long term effect on economic growth.  
Although  theoretical and  empirical research  on  this  channel  has  just started,  I  believe  it  is 
important for policy makers to have a better understanding of how financial excesses may 
produce  significant  macroeconomic  distortions.  And  I  have  not  mentioned  the  impact  on 
fiscal balances yet.  
Improving the resilience of the financial system 
3. 
Market economies are based on the simple principle that economic agents reap the benefits 
and  bear  the  risks  from  their  actions.  It  is  this  trade-off  which  leads  to  optimal  decision-
making, given the available opportunities and the tolerance of risks. If, however, the costs of 
bad  decisions  are  not  entirely  borne  by  the  economic  agent,  significant  distortions  are 
introduced, leading to misallocation of resources. Therefore, as a fundamental principle, one 
has to ensure that incentives of all agents are correctly aligned with the cost and benefits of 
their financial decisions.  
Still,  even  when  from  an  individual  perspective  agents  seem  to  follow  a  sound  behaviour, 
macro-financial  factors,  particularly  related  to  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets 
and institutions, the interaction between finance and the macro-economy can contribute to 
the build-up and propagation of aggregate macro-systemic risks. These effects have been at 
the heart of the recent financial crisis and it has specifically highlighted the need for a macro-
prudential  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision,  focusing  on  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole,  complementing  the  existing  micro-prudential  framework.  Macro-prudential  policies 
aim to contain the build up of imbalances and ensure that the financial system is better able 
to withstand shocks. They will focus on regulatory and supervisory actions aimed at curbing 
the  macro  risks  of  financial  market  activity.  In  this  regard,  it  Is,  of  course,  of  utmost 
importance  to  have  a  close  co-operation  and  exchange  of  information  between  the 
institutions in charge of macro- and micro-prudential supervision. 
In the EU, the Ecofin Council has agreed to establish a new independent body responsible 
for macro-prudential supervision, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The main task 
of the ESRB – in which the European System of Central Banks, the Supervisory Agencies of 
the 27 Member Countries as well as the newly created European authorities will play a key 
role – is to identify and assess risks to the stability of the EU financial system and issue risk 
warnings  if  systemic  risks  appear  to  be  significant.  If  deemed  appropriate,  the  ESRB  can 
make explicit policy recommendation. However, the responsibility for the implementation of 
macro-prudential policies lies with national authorities. 
Conclusions 
4. 
We  live  in  very  challenging  times.  Although  the  increased  interconnectedness  of  global 
financial  markets  have  facilitated  the  build  up  of  imbalances  and  transmission  of  shocks, 
financially integrated markets have served Europe well and remain a necessary pre-condition 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2010
for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  euro  area.  The  ECB  will  therefore  continue  its  efforts  to 
promote closer integration of our financial system.  
At the same time we should be aware of the opportunities, but also the challenges and risks 
that new developments in financial markets pose to financial stability and to the functioning of 
the real economy. With its involvement in the ESRB, the ECB will continue to play an active 
role in safeguarding the financial stability of the euro area. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 5
