K C Chakrabarty: New paradigms in IT security in Indian banks 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Indian Bank’ Association (IBA) – Data Security Council of India (DSCI) Conference on 
“Security Framework in Indian Banks”, Mumbai, 26 April 2010. 
Assistance  provided  by  Shri  G  Padmanabhan,  Shri  S  Ganesh  Kumar,  and  Shri  A  Madhavan  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 1. 
Shri  M.  V.  Nair,  Chairman,  IBA  and  CMD,  Union  Bank  of  India,  Shri  B. 
Sambamurthy,  Director, 
IDRBT,  Shri  Shyamal  Ghosh,  Chairman,  DSCI,  Dr.  K. 
Ramakrishnan,  CEO,  IBA,  distinguished  speakers  and  panelists,  IT  and  IT  Security 
professionals, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
2. 
Information  is  at  the  heart  of  today’s  business,  and  the  all-pervasive  impact  of 
Information Technology in harnessing, collating and processing huge volumes of information 
is  definitive.    In  this  scenario,  the  need  for  ensuring  that  information  is  kept  confidential 
adhering  to  accepted  norms  of  privacy  and  making  it  available  to  authorized  users  at  the 
appropriate time assumes great significance. This is particularly valid for the banking sector 
where day-to-day operations are centered on information and information processing, which 
in turn is highly dependent on Technology. This conference on “Security Framework in Indian 
Banks” jointly organized by the Indian Banks’ Association, the Data Security Council of India 
in collaboration with the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology as 
the  Knowledge  partner  is  thus not  only  appropriate  but  also  of  topical  relevance to  banks. 
This joint effort on the subject is extremely laudable and I deem it a privilege to be present 
amidst  this  distinguished  gathering  for  sharing  my  thoughts  on  the  theme  of  today’s 
conference. 
3. 
Banking as a business involves the management of risks based on a repository of 
trust  extended  by  the  customers.  If  this  objective  has  to  be  accomplished,  it  becomes 
imperative for all security concerns especially customer sensitive data to be addressed in an 
effective way so as to ensure that the trust levels are well preserved and information assets 
perform the role that they are supposed to. While every banker understands the implications 
of financial risks, the risks arising out of the large scale implementation of technology and IT 
is  not  so  well  defined.  Security  in  banks  thus  assumes  significant  proportions,  comprising 
physical security in addition to the factors relating to security of Information and Information 
Systems, all of which have an impact on the reputational risk faced by banks. 
4. 
Technology  has  augmented  the  scope,  reach  and  coverage  of  banking  through 
significant networking and the availability of a wide variety of new delivery channels to such 
an extent that the death of distances and death of identity has already been accomplished. In 
addition,  banking  is  poised  to  be  omnipresent  through  facilities  such  as  “Anywhere  and 
Anytime Banking”, proliferation of services offered through ATM networks, IT enabled instant 
remittances across banks, customer payments, mobile payments and many more. The giant 
project of ICT supported Financial Inclusion is all set to change the face of Indian banking by 
making banking services fully inclusive. 
5. 
Technology  implementation  has  benefited  the  banks  also  due  to  the  facilitation  of 
the  Reserve  Bank  –  both  from  the  operational  and  legal  perspectives.  In  addition,  the 
Reserve  Bank  had  provided  the  broad  framework  for  many  innovative  technology  based 
systems.  The  guidelines  on  Internet  Banking,  and  the  Guidelines  for  Information  Systems 
Security/Audit in 2001 were early initiatives aimed at ensuring safe and secure technology 
based operations by banks. Keeping pace with time and marshalling international practices, 
RBI has issued broad guidelines on mobile banking and prepaid (stored) value cards. These, 
along with the setting up of systemically important payment and settlement systems such as 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 1
Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS)  and  other  retail  payment  systems  like  the 
Electronic  Clearing  Systems  (Credit  and  Debit  Clearing),  the  National  Electronic  Funds 
Transfer (NEFT) System, National Electronic Clearing System (NECS), Regional Electronic 
Clearing System (RECS), have transformed the way of banking and today’s customers have 
a wide array of options to choose from. All these have safety and security at the heart of the 
respective systems. 
6. 
A major area where IT security assumes significance pertains to the transmission of 
information  using  IT  as  a  channel  for  communication.  Traditionally,  paper  based  systems 
have  been  subject  to  certain  controls  to  ensure  that  the  basic  requirements  pertaining  to 
genuineness,  authenticity,  etc.  are  met  with.  These  included  verification  of  signatures, 
ensuring  that  there  are  no  corrections,  or  if  there  are  corrections,  these  are  authenticated 
properly and so on. In the IT-based scenario, these aspects gain greater importance not only 
because of the speed with which IT based electronic information flows but also on account of 
the potential havoc that could arise on account of incorrect instructions. 
7. 
The  last  decade  witnessed  a  sea  change  in  the  way  banking  services  are  made 
available to customers. The implementation of Core Banking Systems has proven to be a big 
boon in providing anywhere access to banking services and the treatment of a customer as 
that of a bank and not as a constituent of a specific branch. With the interlinking of ATMs, the 
customer has been further transformed into constituent of the financial sector rather than a 
bank. Alongside, the banking sector has made significant efforts to identify security gaps in 
an  IT  enabled  scenario  and  have  addressed  them  effectively  as  well.  The  time  is  now 
appropriate to review the adequacy of the measures taken by banks. As the banks and IT 
industry  came  up  with  layers  of  protection  for  their  systems,  fraudsters,  hackers  and  a 
bewildering variety of other such entities made voracious attempts at breaking the security 
layers. When the application layer was fortified, the attention was on to break the network 
layer. When the network equipment manufacturers hardwired the security protocol making it 
extremely difficult to break them, the attack switched over to the internet servers. Activities 
like phishing require customers and bankers to migrate to the higher levels of security. While 
these examples relate to Internet-based banking, the latest dimension relates to security for 
mobile banking. As the horizon of ICT keeps widening, the security gaps also keep rising, 
leaving the banks and customers lagging. It becomes essential that bankers, regulators, ICT 
manufacturers and system providers, software professionals and auditors all work in unison 
to proactively identify, anticipate and plug the gaps as a regular activity instead of acting after 
fraudulent attempts fructify. It is to be recognized that Information Security has two important 
dimensions, namely:  
i. 
protection of investment in information assets and to the actual information thereon, 
and,  
availability of assets for use whenever and wherever required.  
ii. 
8. 
Management  of  fraud  or  attempted  fraud  throws  open  the  challenge  of  response 
time in reacting which is very critical to avert further frauds and loss of valuable customer 
information. With advancement and globalization, cross border banking, cyber crimes from 
specific geographic zones would take deep roots if the cyber crimes are not responded in 
quick  time.  The  entire  industry  would  be  benefited  by  swift  action  and  system  of  reporting 
under  a  common  umbrella,  for  which  set  standards  specifying  the  action  to  be  initiated  at 
such  times  is  clearly  indicated.  Though  compliance  to  CERT  (i.e  Computer  Emergency 
Response  Team)  requirements  would  address  this  issue  to  some  extent,  it  would  be 
preferable to have a dedicated institutional set-up for the financial sector to report security 
breaches, quick responding team for major breaches, monitoring compliance and reporting to 
the regulators. I believe that IDRBT can play a nodal role towards building such a set up. The 
major  challenge  would  be  to  foresee  the  possibility  of  a  fraud  taking  place  and  to  have 
systems in place to avert them let alone responding to them after the event. It is necessary to 
address  basic  concerns  relating  to  safety  and  security  of  Information  and  Communication 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2010
Technology (ICT) assets, to data and to information pertaining to the bank as a whole and 
the customer in particular. 
9. 
Against this background, I thought that it would be appropriate to define a set of best 
practices which would enhance the value of IT security. I prefer to christen them as the “Ten 
Commandments of IT Security/Management in Banks”. I shall dwell briefly on each of these 
now. 
i. 
Thou shall take adequate care of the human factor in IT implementation. IT security 
is  more  often  than  not  a  people  related  aspect  than  a  technical  issue.  This  is 
applicable to both insiders and customers of banks as well. There is a need to be 
vigilant  against  an  insider  who  may  know  more  than  what  is  required  and  when 
aided  with  unfettered  access,  could  wreak  havoc  on  the  bank  concerned.  Equally 
important is a customer who exploits technology loop holes for malafide intentions. It 
is thus imperative that IT Security parameters provide adequate focus on the set of 
people directly related to the systems in addition to the targeted audience as well. In 
this  connection,  communication  in  a  language  understood  by  these  stakeholders 
assumes critical importance.  
Thou shall ensure permeation of IT security throughout the organization. World over, 
it has been recognized and accepted that IT security is optimal if the implementation 
is top driven. The cue for this is that the Top Management of banks need to provide 
a  missionary  zeal  for  implementing  IT  security;  their  efforts  would  automatically 
ensure that the IT security related procedures are effectively implemented across all 
levels in the banks.  
Thou  shall  have  clear  IT  security  policies  and  procedures.  One  of  the  main 
characteristics  of  banking  in  India  relates  to  the  existence  of  well  documented 
policies  and  procedures  pertaining  to  their  areas  of  operation.  The  IT  security 
domain,  however,  cannot  boast  of  a  similar  level  of  compliance.  Well  laid  down 
processes  and  procedures  not  only  enhance  employee  efficiency  but  also  aid  a 
great deal in ensuring that there is clarity of objective apart from acting as a veritable 
guide to the conduct of operations in a safe and secure manner. It is also imperative 
that these procedural requirements are fully disseminated to all sections of the staff 
for their unflinching compliance at all times. 
Thou  shall  take  action  at  the  appropriate  time.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  achieve 
complete  IT  security  in  any  organisation.  Addressing  IT  security  related  concerns 
and breaches thus assume significance. The watch word here is timeliness; it is only 
those banks which take quick corrective action which can survive the onslaught of 
security breaches. Such prompt action is possible only if the banks have already put 
in  place  well  defined  systems  and  procedures.  The  need  to  focus  on  attempted 
security violations also needs to be taken care of since these offer themselves as 
excellent early warning signals which, if left unattended or improperly attended, may 
result in substantial losses and a small lapse often becomes a mega event due to 
lack of right decision at the right time. 
Thou shall ensure that adequate resource capability is provided for. An effective IT 
security  framework  cannot  be  implemented  in  isolation.  It  is  imperative  that  all 
resources  which  facilitate  the  accomplishment  of  this  objective  are  adequately 
provided for. These include adequate personnel, effective and efficient IT systems, 
good vendor management policies, and sound IT/ARE Audit mechanisms. Costs are 
certainly  associated  with  these  but  the  benefits  accruing  on  account  of  reduced 
impact of IT security breaches more than compensates for the costs incurred in this 
regard. 
IT 
Thou  shall  provide 
implementations  in  the  Indian  Banking  scenario  are  replicas  of  the  manual  work 
processes which have been only tweaked to perform in an IT-enabled environment. 
for  optimal  Business  Process  Re-engineering.  Most 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 3
in 
vii. 
viii. 
The result is the existence of redundant processes and loss of efficiency. Business 
Process  Re-engineering  leads  to  cost  savings,  better  work  flows,  improved 
efficiency  and  better  customer  service  levels  as  Business  Process  systems  are 
cross-functional, i.e. the system boundary is not within a single function but actually 
goes across boundary lines.  
Thou shall take care of obsolescence issues for IT security as well. Perhaps the only 
industry 
today’s  world  where  advancements  are  very  rapid  and  every 
advancement  brings  in  its  wake  reduced  costs  for  adoption  is  the  ICT  industry. 
Network based communication has reached rock-bottom levels as far as costs are 
concerned  while  the  prices  of  IT  systems  have  exponentially  reduced.  The  rapid 
degree  of  product  and  feature  obsolescence  in  the  IT  industry  is  a  formidable 
challenge  for  banks.  Such  obsolescence  needs  to  be  tackled  in  a  systematic  and 
proactive manner for mutual benefit of the banks and their customers. Care needs to 
be, taken in such a way that upgradation to take care of technology obsolescence is 
performed in a scientific manner and on a need-to-upgrade basis. This would help 
banks  avoid  falling  into  the  technology-obsolescence  trap  requiring  huge  sums  of 
money for to come out. 
Thou shall provide a framework for Incident Management. Security related incidents 
cannot  be wished  away.  The  best  tool  towards  an  effective  IT  security  framework 
would thus be one which acknowledges such security instances and provides for a 
framework  for  appropriate  incident  reporting  within  the  organization  and  to  the 
regulators. Such a mechanism would provide insights into the security violations and 
other  such  attempts,  but  the  single  largest  beneficial  factor  would  be  the 
development of a set of knowledge workers who hold the key to success of any IT 
based  initiative  by  banks  in  a  country  which  can  boast  of  some  of  the  best  IT 
companies runs by effective IT Czars.  
Thou shall take care of Data Quality and Integrity. The most vital component of IT 
security is the data which forms part of the IT enables business processing system. 
Data is hard to get or create, easy for misuse and is tough to be channeled towards 
beneficial interpretation resulting in meaningful analysis. To this end, banks need to 
work out effective standards aimed at high levels of data quality and integrity. I am 
reminded  at  this  juncture  of  a  book  called  “Database  Nation”  written  by  Simson 
Garfinkel which outlines the death of privacy in the twenty-first century. The author 
skillfully  elucidates  the  various  facets  governing  data  piracy  while  concluding  that 
the owner of one’s own private information is not himself! Banks cannot afford to fall 
into this category and data refinement is one approach which would facilitate good 
data management with adequate levels of protective covers.  
Thou shall provide for IT security as a way of life. The last commandment is more 
like  a  synopsis  but  is  at  the  heart  of  all  IT  security  related  initiatives.  IT  security 
cannot  be  viewed  in  isolation;  neither  can  it  be  implemented  in  fits  and  starts. 
Examples of good IT security implementation reveal that good IT security features 
are  impregnated  as  essential  requirements  in  a  normal  way  of  life.  As  banks,  we 
need  to  imbibe  the  security  culture  in  our  normal  day-to-day  activities.  This  is  a 
challenging  and  daunting  task  since  the  normal  human  mind  is  more  attuned 
towards an easy, Laissez faire approach towards reduced security so as to enhance 
convenience. IT security does add on to inconvenience as it does towards increased 
costs, but it is economical in the long run.  
10. 
Having  set  out  the  commandments;  let  me  share  a  few  thoughts  of  immediate 
operational relevance to banks. We have seen that the security standards has been evolving 
over  the  years  and  maturing  along  with  the  advancement  of  hardware  and  software 
applications.  Financial  sector  has  also  been  fine  tuning  and  catching  up  with  the  global 
standards.  All  regulated  entities  have  IT  policy  driven  by  their  board  and  this  policy  has 
ix. 
x. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2010
various sub-policies such as Information Security Policy. The latest is the security standards 
for  mobile  banking.  Banks  have  also  put  in  place  mechanism  for  IS  Audits  and  these  are 
seriously reviewed by the Audit Committee of the Board of the banks. While there have been 
conscious efforts on the part of the regulator as well as regulated entities, I still feel there is 
considerable scope in working towards having a uniformly accepted standards and practices 
for operational risks especially information security risks across all financial institutions. It is 
in this context that I have attempted to set out the standards for IT security. These are not 
intended  to  add  on  to  the  existing  complexities  facing  banks  in  their  normal  operational 
levels;  on  the  other  hand,  those  banks  which follow  these  would  be well  insulated  against 
future  shocks  arising  out  IT  security  related  outages.  I  am  sure  that  in  the  world  of  today 
where only the fittest have any chances of survival, our banks will not only survive but also 
grow  in  prosperity  and  mature  as  well,  using  the  best  of  Information  and  Communication 
Technology. The deliberations during the Conference would add value to the audience and I 
am sure that all of you would be more enlightened and be the better knowledge workers of 
tomorrow. It is this goal which we would have to achieve and to this end, I wish each and 
every one of you God speed and success. I am sure that the Conference would be thought 
stimulating, packed with high energy contents and be rewarding to you all. Let me conclude 
now by wishing the Conference all success. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 5
