Njuguna Ndung’u: Growing agriculture through finance 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at an Interactive 
Forum on “Growing Agriculture through Finance”, at the Kenya School of Monetary Studies, 
Nairobi, 17 March 2010. 
 Deputy Prime Minister & Minister for Finance, Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta; 
Minister for Agriculture, Hon. William Ruto; 
US Government Representative – Deputy Chief of Mission, Mr. Lee A Brudvig; 
CEOs of Commercial Banks Present; 
Resource Persons; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  morning,  and  to  welcome  you  all  as  we 
deliberate and exchange views on this crucial matter of growing Agriculture through Finance. 
The  Agricultural  sector  is  the  livelihood  of  many  in  Kenya.  The  sector  contributes  directly 
about  24%  of  GDP,  65%  of  the  country’s  export  earnings  and  employs  about  80%  of 
Kenya’s labour force, directly and indirectly. But more important, food security is the most 
critical and cuts across all other developmental objectives. The policy paradigm that supports 
this sector is indeed the cornerstone of our development blueprint. 
It is tempting to say that financing Agriculture will rely on the financial sector in totality. The 
subject is broader than this and this is what we want to generate via dialogue this morning. 
But what is not in doubt in financing Agriculture is the presence of long-term funds as well as 
appropriate avenues to develop crop insurance. 
Small-holder  farmers  have  done  well  in  increasing  quality  production and  adoption  of  high 
yielding  varieties,  but  have  done  poorly  where  they  are  not  supported  by  cooperatives  to 
market  and  create  buffers  for  them.  That  is,  they  have  been  failed  by  lack  of  supporting 
agricultural infrastructure. 
A policy to support Agricultural infrastructure should focus on: 
– 
Financing production – crop insurance/crop finance 
Financing processing 
– 
Investing in storage 
– 
– 
Investing in distribution and marketing networks 
– 
Complemented with an appropriate credit policy. 
In  this  way,  the  farmer  can  participate  in  the  market  fully.  This  is  what  will  ensure  food 
security and stability of domestic prices – food is now accounting for 36% of the Consumer 
Price  Index  (CPI)  basket  –  an  important  tool  to  fight  national  inflation.  To  that  extent, 
increased agricultural productivity, particularly in food helps reduce food inflationary pressure 
that also feeds to the national inflation. In addition, GDP growth in this country is determined 
by growth in this sector. 
From the Central Bank side, our support in this initiative is important. The Central Bank of 
Kenya through its capacity building arm – the Kenya School of Monetary Studies (KSMS) 
intends to develop a certified agricultural finance program in collaboration with COMPETE – 
USAID. This program will be suitable for agricultural officers as well as credit officers. This is 
important  in  developing  the  critical  mass  of  human  capital  that  fully  understands 
agribusiness, such as agribusiness cycles, risk management practices, farm cash-flows and 
BIS Review 42/2010 
 1
finance and insurance. This will support farmers and also develop a strong drive to lift the 
policy paradigm in this area. But the wider scope of monetary policy support is not in doubt. 
Finally,  Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  brief 
remarks by wishing all of you fruitful deliberations this morning. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2010
