Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Point 
Interview by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, with Le Point, 
Frankfurt am Main, conducted by Messrs Romain Gubert and Patrick Bonazza on 15 March 
2010 and published on 17 March 2010. 
 Le Point: The countries of the euro area have just come to an agreement on helping Greece 
and saving it from attacks by speculators. Does this not reward bad behaviour and betray the 
principles of the Maastricht Treaty? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  The  countries  of  the  euro  area  have  just  echoed  the  commitment 
made  by  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government  with  regard  to  taking  determined  and 
coordinated  action,  should  it  prove  necessary,  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  euro  area. 
One  thing  I  see  from  the  Greek  crisis  –  and  this  is  of  fundamental  importance  –  is  that 
nobody is now questioning the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact. On the contrary, 
those principles have been robustly reaffirmed. The Greek government has just adopted a 
series of very significant, necessary, convincing and bold measures. It has clearly indicated 
its  objective  of  complying  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
within a reasonable period of time. This is important. Remember that in 2003 and 2004, a 
period that was less turbulent than the current situation, the Pact was strongly criticised – in 
particular  by  the  previous  French  President  and  the  former  German  Chancellor  –  and  the 
ECB stepped in with a robust defence of the Pact in order to prevent it from being rendered 
meaningless.  Now,  nobody  questions  it.  The  people  who  vehemently  criticised  the  Pact  in 
the past have now realised the extent of the need to respect it – both for the cohesion of the 
euro area as a whole and in order to preserve and strengthen the confidence of households, 
firms and investors, thereby fostering growth and job creation. 
Le Point: You’re an optimist. The Greeks are demonstrating their dissatisfaction. They don’t 
really seem ready to tighten their belts … 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Surveys  –  including  those  conducted  very  recently  –  show  that  the 
people of Greece understand well the need to put their public finances in order and adopt the 
measures necessary in order to return to growth and job creation. Like everyone else who 
shares  the single  currency,  the  Greek  economy  has  –  from  the  moment  it  joined  the  euro 
area – enjoyed a number of significant advantages in monetary terms. Being part of the euro 
area has strengthened the Greek economy. Thanks to the euro, it was no longer subject to 
exchange rate risk, it has access to an integrated economy comprising 330 million European 
citizens,  and  it  has  benefited  from  having  a  currency  which  inspires  confidence  and  has 
therefore  afforded  Greece  low  medium  and  long-term  market  interest  rates.  Its  external 
current account deficit has been financed by the very fact of belonging to the euro area. Of 
course, in exchange for these significant advantages, the rules of the Stability and Growth 
Pact must be fully respected. 
Le Point: All the same, we have just found out that Greece cheated. It hid shameful secrets 
about its financial situation from its partners. How can we stop this happening again? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  This  situation  is  totally  unacceptable.  And  it’s  a  major  problem 
because all of the countries in the euro area are suffering as a result of this misconduct. To 
ensure  the  good  governance  of  our  currency,  the  credibility  of  the  budgetary  information 
provided by the euro area countries must be absolutely above reproach. We fully support the 
European Commission: Eurostat, the European statistical office, must have extremely broad 
powers at its disposal. It must be able to check the information supplied by Greece in the 
country and on the basis of actual evidence with all of the necessary powers of investigation. 
Such a situation must not recur, either in Greece or in any other country. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 1
Le Point: There are two scenarios in the coming weeks. The positive scenario: Greece is 
saved. In the second, Spain is the next weak link … 
Jean-Claude Trichet: At this stage, I have no reason to doubt the solidity of the other euro 
area countries, as long as they implement their respective stability programmes rigorously. 
Each  country  is  determined  to  stabilise  the  situation  as  far  as  its  public  finances  are 
concerned. I am keen to stress that the consolidated situation of the euro area as a whole, as 
far as its budget deficit is concerned, is not the worst among the industrialised countries. For 
example, the consolidated public deficit of the euro area amounts to 7% of GDP, while those 
of the United States and Japan amount to more than 10%. All of us, without exception, have 
very serious problems. 
Le  Point:  Many  people  are  criticising  you,  despite  the  crisis,  for  not  having  agreed  to  be 
more flexible – in short, for not having allowed the euro area countries to take on more debt 
in order to stimulate their economies. Do these critics have a case? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Frankly, I don’t know how anyone could want our current budgetary 
situation to be any worse! Do we really want to be responsible for burdening our children and 
grandchildren with our debts? I believe that, in the face of the worst crisis since the Second 
World War, central banks, and the ECB in particular, have acted quickly, clearly and boldly. 
Governments in Europe and throughout the world have taken the necessary decisions in real 
time. In my opinion, they have done their job well. Weighing down their budgets even further 
would not have been at all sensible. 
Le Point: You are, conversely, also being criticised for having provided liquidity support to 
the banks. And for having prompted the creation of speculative bubbles ... 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  That  is  not  the  case.  We  have  adopted  a  host  of  bold  –  or  “non-
standard” – measures since the summer of 2007 in order to provide European banks with the 
necessary liquidity. This was essential in order to allow banks to continue financing the real 
economy in spite of the crisis. That said, the markets are now slowly recovering, and, as they 
gradually  return  to  normal,  we  are  progressively  unwinding  the  exceptional  measures  that 
were introduced in order to refinance the banks. 
Le  Point:  Given  their  sheer  size,  would  the  return  of  inflation  be  the  only  way  for 
governments to eliminate their debts? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Throughout  this  crisis,  since  the  summer  of  2007,  the  European 
Central Bank and all the central banks of the euro area, the Banque de France among them, 
have  always  acted  with  a  view  to  restoring  confidence.  Do  you  really  believe  that  by 
suggesting  we  give  inflation  a  looser  rein  we  would  have  restored  that  confidence? 
Households’ confidence? Firms’ and investors’ confidence? If I were to say to you today – 
obviously an absurd hypothesis – that I’m not against a rate of inflation of around 4%, you 
would  see,  in  real  time,  every  single  market  participant  drastically  raising  market  interest 
rates  to  price  in  future  inflation.  What’s  more,  a  sizeable  risk  premium  to  cover  possible 
further  changes  would  be  added.  Households  would  lose  confidence.  Financing  would  be 
much  costlier  for  firms.  And  governments  would  see  the  cost  of  servicing  their  debt  soar. 
Inflation – which, incidentally, our fellow citizens have said a firm “no” to – is most definitely 
not the solution! 
Le  Point:  Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  politicians  have  been  saying  they  will  carry  out  a 
thorough  review  of  the  financial  system.  But  they’ve  only  tackled  tax  havens  and  traders’ 
bonuses. Not much of a review, is it? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  There  is  a  global  consensus  among  industrialised  countries  and 
emerging economies, first, that the principles of the market economy remain the best way of 
creating wealth, second, that the global system has to be a lot less fragile and much more 
robust and resilient and, third, that the best methodology consists in working together in the 
G20,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and,  in  particular,  the  Basel  Committee.  We  have  an 
obligation to achieve results. Our democracies would not forgive us if, in the future, we had 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2010
another crisis as deep as the one we experienced in 2008 and 2009. We’re not looking for 
scapegoats.  We  have  to  strengthen,  systematically  and  methodically,  the  frailties  of  the 
global financial system. Those who say that once the storm has passed, we should return to 
“business  as  usual”  are  grossly  mistaken.  That’s  not  the  way  we  will  achieve  growth  and 
create the jobs that are so necessary. 
Le Point: Would you, for example, be in favour of the creation of a European rating agency? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: It is true that rating agencies have a great deal of influence. It is not 
ideal  to  have  a  global  oligopoly  of  just  three  agencies.  That  said,  artificial  creations  must 
always be avoided. We are closely monitoring this issue. 
Le Point: And the creation of a European monetary fund (EMF)? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The Governing Council of the ECB has not yet taken a position on this 
issue. I will only say that, if my understanding is correct, this would be a possible source of 
financing, subject to extremely strict conditions and without constituting any form of subsidy, 
that  would  aim  to  prevent  phenomena  that  could  cause  financial  instability  in  a  euro  area 
country. It would not be a monetary entity, so that adjective does not seem appropriate to 
me.  In  any  case,  I  believe  that  the  activity  of  such  a  fund,  if  created,  should  be  strictly 
controlled  and  confined  to  cases  of  an  extremely  serious  and  specific  threat.  But  I  would 
repeat that the Governing Council of the ECB has not yet taken a position on this issue. 
Le Point: Could a scenario be envisaged in which a country is no longer able to meet its 
obligations and leaves the euro area? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  I  have  always  said  that  I  will  not  comment  on  absurd  hypotheses. 
Joining the euro area is a major decision. It is not a membership that can be adapted to suit 
the circumstances. It is about sharing a common destiny with other countries. All the current 
members  have  joined  the  euro  area  not  only  on  the  basis  of  the  Maastricht  criteria,  in 
accordance with the Treaty, but also on the basis of a broad consensus across the major 
strands of the political spectrum of each country. This seems to me to be essential, precisely 
because it involves sharing a common destiny. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 3
