Darmin Nasution: Strengthening Indonesian banking, embracing global 
recovery 
Speech by Dr Darmin Nasution, Acting Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bankers’ Dinner 
2010, Jakarta, 22 January 2010. 
 We  have  successfully  navigated  2009  with  a  number  of  achievements  that  would  make 
anyone  proud.  Our  economic  resilience  to  the  global  economy  remains  relatively  high. 
Economic growth in 2009 reached 4.3%, which includes our economy in the exclusive group 
of countries that achieved positive growth. Meanwhile, our accommodative monetary policy 
stance  throughout  2009  bolstered  economic  performance  and  this  policy  was  further 
buttressed  by  several  operational  measures,  for  example  strengthening  open  market 
operations as well as refining the interest rate structure.  
In future, monetary policy will be directed towards maintaining low and stable inflation in the 
5%±1% range for 2010; and continuing its declining trend until it is as low as neighbouring 
countries  at  around  3%.  Efforts  to  bring  medium-term  inflation  down  to  a  lower  level  are 
relevant in terms of maintaining the competitiveness of the domestic economy, especially in 
view of the upcoming ASEAN Economic Community in 2015.  
In addition to sustaining economic conditions, financial sector stability was also maintained, 
which  is  inseparable  from  a  number  of  policy  measures  instituted  by  the  Government  and 
Bank  Indonesia  to  overcome  the  effects  of  the  global  crisis  in  the  final  quarter  of  2008, 
followed  by  additional  measures  implemented  in  2009.  The  financial  sector,  which  was 
placed under significant pressure in November 2008 with the Financial Stability Index (FSI) 
peaking at 2.43, gradually recovered in December 2009 with FSI dropping to 1.91; below the 
critical indicative level of 2.0.  
Direction of banking policy 
Learning from our extensive experience with crises, Bank Indonesia introduced four incentive 
and disincentive based policies in 2010.  
1. 
Strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system  by  underpinning  a  number  of 
regulations,  reinforcing  the  bank  supervision  system,  restructuring  the  banking 
industry in Indonesia, as well as deepening the financial market.  
a. 
b. 
c. 
The applicable regulations include capital regulations in order to buttress the 
resilience of banks against risk, transparent financial reporting, improving the 
quality of good corporate governance, as well as improving the effectiveness 
of risk management.  
Policy  to  shore  up  the  bank  supervision  system  will  be  achieved  by 
strengthening risk-based supervision, enhancing operational bank supervision, 
feasibility  and  compliance  testing,  as  well  as  improving  collaboration  among 
supervisory authorities domestically and abroad.  
Policy  to  reorganize  competition  in  the  domestic  banking  industry  will  be 
achieved through bank restructuring in harmony with the appropriate business 
scale  and  capital  requirement,  as  well  as  increasing  the  capacity  to  absorb 
business  risk.  In  addition,  several  regulations  will  cover,  among  others, 
mergers,  consolidation,  sources  of  funds  for  bank  acquisition,  the  terms  for 
bank  acquisitions,  the  role  of  individual/family  owners,  as  well  as  the  terms 
and conditions of business development.  
BIS Review 8/2010 
 1
d. 
Policy  to  deepen  the  financial  market  will  encourage  the  development  of 
financial products that can be used as an alternative by banks for productive 
channelling  and  placements  to  the  real  sector,  especially  infrastructure 
financing. Therefore, the financial market is expected to become more liquid 
with banks becoming less dependent on BI instruments.  
Improving the bank intermediation function through refined regulations and greater 
availability  of  supporting  infrastructure.  The  regulations  in  question  include  the 
Statutory  Reserve  Requirement,  optimizing  the  efficiency  of  bank  operations  and 
simplifying  the  terms  and  conditions  governing  foreign  exchange  in  order  to 
stimulate credit allocation. BI will also help form an institution to supply credit basis 
data per sector, per region to assist banks asses risk.  
Expanding the role played by sharia banks in the national economy and bolstering 
resilience.  Sharia  banking  policy  will  become  more  intensive  to  raise  capital, 
facilitate the development of sharia business units and facilitate the requirement for 
competent sharia human resources.  
Improving  the  role  of  rural  banks  in  terms  of  micro  finance  and  strengthening 
resilience.  This  policy  will  become  more  intensive,  among  others,  to  raise  capital 
and facilitate the requirement for competent human resources, as well as assert the 
position of rural banks as community banks.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
A  need  will  arise  after  the  global  crisis  for  a  systemic  regulator  that  can  monitor  the 
soundness and stability of the financial system as a whole. The role of such an institution will 
be to collate, analyze and report information regarding significant interactions on the markets 
and inter-institutional risk; investigate whether an institution is exposing the financial system 
to  systemic  risk;  design  and  implement  regulations;  and  coordinate  with  other  regulatory 
institutions, including the fiscal authority, to resolve systemic crises that may emerge.  
There are three reasons why the central bank may take the role of systemic regulator. First, 
the  central  bank  has  daily  contact  with  market  players  in  its  function  of  implementing 
monetary policy.  
Second, the responsibility of maintaining macro-economic stability corresponds closely with 
guaranteeing financial system stability. History has shown that economic crises around the 
world  are  always  linked  to  financial  crises;  therefore,  the  central  bank  naturally  has  to 
consider interactions between the financial sector and monetary policy.  
Third, the central bank has the function of lender of last resort. Therefore, the central bank 
must utilise its resources to supply short-term emergency funds during a crisis.  
Bankers are expected the shift their business strategy away from merely surviving the crisis 
to exploiting the opportunities presented by the global economic recovery. Strengthening the 
banking industry does not imply that its soundness is in doubt, however, it will lead to more 
efficient banks and a more optimal intermediation function. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2010
