Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  
Il Sole 24 Ore, conducted by Mr Beda Romano and published on 9 April 2010. 
 Il Sole 24 Ore: Greece is in dire straits as it struggles with a huge public debt and a fall in 
competitiveness. Some market players and newspaper commentators see Italy as being the 
next in line to experience a financial crisis in the euro zone. 
Trichet: Of course, Italy is not at all in the same situation of Greece. Your country has shown 
resilience in this difficult period. In particular it was able to contain its yearly budget deficit 
and it has committed to get back to a sustainable situation according to the European rules. 
The  ECB  strongly  encourages  it  to  implement  rigorously  this  programme.  This  said,  the 
current crisis has demonstrated that all 16 countries of the euro zone must work hard, in a 
determined  and  efficient  way,  in  order  to  make  their  economies  more  flexible  and  elevate 
their growth potential thanks to determined structural reforms. Improving labour productivity 
in particular is good for export growth and job creation. If this had been done more efficiently 
in the last years better results would have been attained in Italy as well as in the euro area as 
a whole. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: The EU plan to help Greece relies on bilateral aid from EMU countries and 
on the involvement of the International Monetary Fund. The ECB was clearly against the IMF 
participation. What do you make of the EU plan? 
Trichet: I was not against the IMF involvement in itself. I was against the involvement of the 
IMF alone. I have always been in favour of the maximum level of responsibility exerted by the 
governments of the euro area as is prescribed by the Stability and Growth Pact. The pact is 
at the very heart of EMU: it calls for member countries to assess and judge the fiscal policies 
of their peers; this peer’s surveillance can impose sanctions. In the days preceding the EU 
meetings, I called all governments to live up to their treaty responsibility and to the provisions 
of the Stability and Growth Pact which is essential for the EMU to function well. From this 
point of view, the declaration of the euro area Heads of State or Government is appropriate. 
It is also a good and workable solution. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: Do you expect it will be used? 
Trichet:  At  this  moment  in  time  I  don’t  expect  this  mechanism  to  be  necessary.  Greece 
should proceed with its recovery program in a very determined way as committed in front of 
the Eurogroup. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: Is a default of Greece a distinct possibility as some commentators seems to 
expect? 
Trichet: It is not an issue, taking into account the decisions taken by the Greek government 
to  reduce  the  public  deficit  and  the  statement  by  the  euro  area  Heads  of  State  or 
Government. 
Il  Sole  24  Ore:  Will  the  current  crisis  suggests  a  slowdown  of  the  EMU  enlargement 
process? 
Trichet: Participating in the euro zone requires from all member governments sound fiscal 
policies, a sound monitoring of production costs and structural reforms. Today’s difficulties 
have shown that a bad management influences negatively all participants, while a good one 
is  positive  to  all,  given  how  our  economies  are  closely  intertwined  because  of  the  single 
currency. As I said before, peer pressure is a crucial aspect of the euro zone functioning and 
it has a profound economic rational and legitimacy. Therefore it is also true that to enter the 
euro  zone  there  must  be  an  overwhelming  sentiment  within  society  that  the  country  is 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 1
preparing to share a common destiny with the other members. This calls, in my opinion, on 
newcomers to have a clear bipartisan agreement on the desire to join EMU. 
Il  Sole  24  Ore:  In  a  certain  sense  participation  in  the  euro  area  must  have  both  a 
multinational and a multipartisan framework. 
Trichet: That’s correct. We are participating in an endeavour of great historical importance. 
One  cannot  jump  in  and  jump  out  of  the  euro  area  as  one  hops  on  and  off  from  a  bus. 
Participation in EMU commits the destiny of a country. At the start there were 11 member 
states; today we are 16. Nine other countries have no “opting out” clause and are supposed 
to enter the euro area when they meet the criteria. We will see what happens. Needless to 
say that any country that seeks to join EMU will have to fulfil all the Maastricht criteria not 
only for one year but also on a sustainable basis. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: How do you judge the mood in the countries that are queuing to enter the 
euro area? Do you see a broad acceptance of the idea that EMU commits the destiny of a 
country? 
Trichet: In some cases there is a clear and broad political consensus to join EMU. In others 
there is not. In any case I consider that you have to judge the process through the lenses of 
history. This said, I do believe that all EU institutions and governments should point out the 
euro area’s meaning in terms of sharing a common destiny. More specifically, we all must 
understand that we have to fully accept peer surveillance to preserve the good functioning of 
our monetary union. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: What about Germany: Convincing the Federal Republic to help Greece was a 
long  and  difficult  process.  Do  you  think  that  Germany  believes  in  the  common  destiny 
created by the euro? 
Trichet: I trust that all EMU countries are aware of this fact. And I trust the Germans as well 
as the Italians, the French, the Spanish, the Dutch and all other fellow citizens were all aware 
of this aspect when they joined EMU. By the way Germany demonstrated how attached it is 
to  the  single  currency  when  it  argued  in  favour  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  is 
precisely based on peer responsibility and peer pressure and is a vivid illustration of how our 
destinies are interconnected. Therefore, yes, I believe that Germany is fully aware of the fact 
that we are sharing a common destiny. Remember in the run up to the Maastricht treaty: both 
Helmut  Schmidt  and  Helmut  Kohl  were  at  the  forefront  of  European  integration  with  their 
peers, following in the footsteps, in particular, of Robert Schuman and Alcide De Gasperi. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: Regarding Germany, the French finance minister did criticize its economic 
model  based  on  exports  rather  than  internal  demand,  pointing  out  that  its  partners  cannot 
count sufficiently on German imports. Are you in agreement with Christine Lagarde? 
Trichet:  No,  and  for  a  number  of  reasons.  Firstly,  had  Germany  not  increase  its 
competitiveness in the first 11 years of EMU by keeping its costs and inflation under control, 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole  would  have  had  the  threat  of  higher  inflation  and  therefore  a 
tougher  monetary  policy.  Secondly,  Germany,  with  a  large  current  account  surplus,  is 
financing the current account deficit of other countries members of the euro area. Thirdly, the 
Federal Republic is a major world competitor in sectors such as machine tools and industrial 
equipment. Its global competitiveness is a major asset for the euro area given how closely 
intertwined  EMU  countries  are.  Therefore,  I  would  point  out  to  all  those  who  argue  in  a 
similar fashion that what looks as a disadvantage for the euro area as a whole from a specific 
angle is in reality an advantage when seen from the right perspective. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: But in a more general way Ms Lagarde did point out that the euro area is 
experiencing  large  economic  imbalances.  Is  there  a  Europe-wide  agenda  to  solve  this 
problem? 
Trichet: The aim must be to elevate significantly growth potential in all countries through the 
structural reforms that are overdue in Europe. This will remain strategically important in the 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2010
next decade. The 2020 Agenda will have to be implemented in a more effective way than the 
2010 Lisbon Agenda, as President Van Rompuy has recommended. More generally let me 
say  that  given  the  nature  of  monetary  union,  some  countries,  because  of  a  rapidly  aging 
population for example, will have to run current account surpluses, while other countries with 
very significantly fewer pension liabilities will not be called to run such surpluses. Similarly, 
some countries, to regain competitiveness, will have to keep inflation below the EU average. 
So  a  certain  degree  of  dispersion  of  economic  parameters  might  be  possible  within  an 
integrated economy which has the dimension of the United States, provided this dispersion 
has economic justification. 
Il  Sole  24  Ore:  Even  accepting  a  period  of  deflation,  with  all  the  possible  social 
consequences this might have? 
Trichet: Yes. We are an immense economy. It is normal that some regions, after growing 
above the EMU average for some time, and after having accumulated high national inflation, 
experience  a  correction  and  therefore  a  period  of  negative  inflation,  as  it  is  currently 
happening in Ireland. 
Il  Sole  24  Ore:  The  recent  EU  declaration  regarding  the  Greece  plan  says  that  member 
states should push ahead toward a stronger economic governance. What are you expecting: 
a  more  coordinated  approach  or  a  transfer  of  competencies  from  the  national  to  the 
supranational level? 
Trichet: As citizens we all have personal opinions on this matter. As a citizen, I would call 
myself  when  time  comes  and  when  people  are  ready  to  move  towards  an  accomplished 
political federation. As of today our aim is to make the current institutional framework work as 
best as possible. We call for the full respect of the present Treaty. EMU is politically a bold 
endeavour:  don’t  forget  that  with  regard  to  fiscal  policies  the  Treaty  allows  the  college  of 
governments to impose decisions on other governments and parliaments. Implementing fully 
the  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  calls  for  a  much  stronger  governance  in  the 
future than what has been experienced in the past years. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: We are at the very heart of democracy: no taxation without representation. 
Trichet: I repeat: peer surveillance on government and parliament as regards fiscal policy is 
a  bold  political  endeavour.  I  do  believe  that  by  going  back  with  great  determination  to  the 
letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  we  will  make  a  jump  in  terms  of 
governance of the 16 members of the euro area, and that jump is overdue. Moreover, the 
2020 Agenda is also extremely important to reinforce economic governance in the EU as a 
whole, at the level of the 27. 
Il Sole 24 Ore: A last word: are you optimistic that EMU will survive the current crisis? 
Trichet: Absolutely. Sometimes, we don’t realize how much Europe has achieved in the last 
half  a  century.  The  founding  fathers  could  not  even  imagine  the  creation  of  a  Parliament 
elected  by  universal  polling,  of  a  European  Court  of  Justice  determining  jurisprudence  for 
Europe  as  a  whole,  of  a  fully  integrated  single  market  and  of  a  single  currency,  today  for 
330 million fellow citizens and 16 countries. Europe has also proved in the past two years 
that  it  was  able  to  cope  with  the  worst  global  crisis  since  World  War  I.  This  has  been  in 
particular true for the central banks, the ECB as well as the National Central Banks, in Italy 
Banca d’Italia. We are experiencing a challenging historical period at a global level and I am 
fully confident in the capacities of Europe and of EMU to surmount the difficulties of the time. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 3
