Ben S Bernanke: Regulatory reform implementation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 30 September 2010. 
 Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you 
for the opportunity to testify about the Federal Reserve’s implementation of the Dodd-Frank 
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act).  
In the years leading up to the recent financial crisis, the global regulatory framework did not 
effectively keep pace with the profound changes in the financial system. The Dodd-Frank Act 
addresses  critical  gaps  and  weaknesses  of  the  U.S.  regulatory  framework,  many  of  which 
were  revealed  by  the  crisis.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  committed  to  working  with  the  other 
financial  regulatory  agencies  to  effectively  implement  and  execute  the  act,  while  also 
developing complementary improvements to the financial regulatory framework.  
The act gives the Federal Reserve several crucial new responsibilities. These responsibilities 
include being part of the new Financial Stability Oversight Council, supervision of nonbank 
financial  firms  that  are  designated  as  systemically  important  by  the  council,  supervision  of 
thrift  holding  companies,  and  the  development  of  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  large 
bank  holding  companies  and  systemically  important  nonbank  financial  firms  designated  by 
the council (including capital, liquidity, stress test, and living will requirements). In addition, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  or  shares  important  rulemaking  authority  for  implementing  the 
so-called  Volcker  Rule  restrictions  on  proprietary  trading  and  private  fund  activities  of 
banking  firms,  credit  risk  retention  requirements  for  securitizations,  and  restrictions  on 
interchange fees for debit cards, among other provisions.  
All told, the act requires the Federal Reserve to complete more than 50 rulemakings and sets 
of  formal  guidelines,  as  well  as  a  number  of  studies  and  reports,  many  within  a  relatively 
short period. We have also been assigned formal responsibilities to consult and collaborate 
with  other  agencies  on  a  substantial  number  of  additional  rules,  provisions,  and  studies. 
Overall, we have identified approximately 250 projects associated with implementing the act. 
To ensure that we meet our obligations in a timely manner, we are drawing on expertise and 
resources from across the Federal Reserve System in areas such as banking supervision, 
economic  research,  financial  markets,  consumer  protection,  payments,  and  legal  analysis. 
We have created a senior staff position to coordinate our efforts and have developed project-
reporting  and  tracking  tools  to  facilitate  management  and  oversight  of  all  of  our 
implementation responsibilities. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  committed  to  its  long-standing  practice  of  ensuring  that  all  its 
rulemakings  be  conducted  in  a  fair,  open,  and  transparent  manner.  Accordingly,  we  are 
disclosing  on  our  public  website  summaries  of  all  communications  with  members  of  the 
public – including banks, trade associations, consumer groups, and academics – regarding 
matters subject to a proposed or potential future rulemaking under the act.  
In addition to our own rulemakings and studies, we have been providing technical and policy 
advice  to  the  Treasury  Department  as  it  works  to  establish  the  oversight  council  and  the 
related  Office  of  Financial  Research.  We  are  working  with  the  Treasury  to  develop  the 
council’s organizational documents and structure. We are also assisting the council with the 
construction  of  its  framework  for  identifying  systemically  important  nonbank  financial  firms 
and financial market utilities, as well as with its required studies on the proprietary trading 
and private fund activities of banking firms and on financial-sector concentration limits.  
Additionally, work is well under way to transfer the Federal Reserve’s consumer protection 
responsibilities specified in the act to the new Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. A 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 1
transition  team  at  the  Board,  headed  by  Governor  Duke,  is  working  closely  with  Treasury 
staff responsible for setting up the new agency. We have established the operating accounts 
and initial funding for the bureau, and we have provided the Treasury detailed information 
about our programs and staffing in the areas of rulemaking, compliance examinations, policy 
analysis,  complaint  handling,  and  consumer  education.  We  are  also  providing  advice  and 
information  about  supporting  infrastructure  that  the  Bureau  will  need  to  carry  out  its 
responsibilities, such as human resource systems and information technology. 
Well  before  the  enactment  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  was  working  with 
other  regulatory  agencies  here  and  abroad  to  design  and  implement  a  stronger  set  of 
prudential requirements for internationally active banking firms. The governing body for the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision reached an agreement a few weeks ago on the 
major elements of a new financial regulatory architecture, commonly known as Basel III. By 
increasing  the  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  that  banking  firms  must  hold  and  by 
strengthening liquidity requirements, Basel III aims to constrain bank risk-taking, reduce the 
incidence  and  severity  of  future  financial  crises,  and  produce  a  more  resilient  financial 
system. The key elements of this framework are due to be finalized by the end of this year.  
In concordance with the letter and the spirit of the act, the Federal Reserve is also continuing 
its  work  to  strengthen  its  supervision  of  the  largest,  most  complex  financial  firms  and  to 
incorporate  macroprudential  considerations  into  supervision.  As  the  act  recognizes,  the 
Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies must supervise financial institutions 
and  critical  infrastructures  with  an  eye  toward  not  only  the  safety  and  soundness  of  each 
individual firm, but also overall financial stability. Indeed, the crisis demonstrated that a too 
narrow focus on the safety and soundness of individual firms can result in a failure to detect 
and thwart emerging threats to financial stability that cut across many firms.  
A critical feature of a successful systemic or macroprudential approach to supervision is a 
multidisciplinary  perspective.  Our  experience 
the  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment Program (popularly known as the bank stress tests) demonstrated the feasibility 
and benefits of employing such a perspective.1 The stress tests also showed how much the 
supervision  of  systemically  important  institutions  can  benefit  from  simultaneous  horizontal 
evaluations  of  the  practices  and  portfolios  of  a  number  of  individual  firms  and  from 
employment of robust quantitative assessment tools. Building on that experience, we have 
reoriented  our  supervision  of  the  largest,  most  complex  banking  firms  to  include  a 
quantitative surveillance mechanism and to make greater use of the broad range of skills of 
the Federal Reserve staff.  
A final element of the Federal Reserve’s efforts to implement the Dodd-Frank Act relates to 
the  transparency  of  our  balance  sheet  and  liquidity  programs.  Well  before  enactment,  we 
were providing a great deal of relevant information on our website, in statistical releases, and 
in regular reports to the Congress. Under a framework established by the act, the Federal 
Reserve will, by December 1, provide detailed information regarding individual transactions 
conducted across a range of credit and liquidity programs over the period from December 1, 
2007,  to  July 20,  2010.  This  information  will  include  the  names  of  counterparties,  the  date 
and  dollar  value  of  individual  transactions,  the  terms  of  repayment,  and  other  relevant 
information. On an ongoing basis, subject to lags specified by the Congress to protect the 
efficacy  of  the  programs,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  will  routinely  provide  information 
regarding  the  identities  of  counterparties,  amounts  financed  or  purchased  and  collateral 
in  2009  with 
                                                 
1   See  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2010),  “The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  –  One  Year  Later”,  speech 
delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  46th  Annual  Conference  on  Bank  Structure  and 
Competition, held in Chicago, Ill., May 6; and Daniel K. Tarullo (2010), “Lessons from the Crisis Stress Tests”, 
speech  delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
Washington, March 26. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2010
pledged  for  transactions  under  the  discount  window,  open  market  operations,  and 
emergency lending facilities. 
To conclude, the Dodd-Frank Act is an important step forward for financial regulation in the 
United States, and it is essential that the act be carried out expeditiously and effectively. The 
Federal  Reserve  will  work  closely  with  our  fellow  regulators,  the  Congress,  and  the 
Administration  to  ensure  that  the  law  is  implemented  in  a  manner  that  best  protects  the 
stability of our financial system and strengthens the U.S. economy.  
BIS Review 124/2010 
 3
