K C Chakrabarty: Financial literacy – challenges, strategies and 
instruments 
Welcome address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India-Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  
(RBI-OECD) International Workshop on Financial Literacy, Bengaluru, 22 March 2010. 
 Mr.  Pranab  Mukherjee,  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister,  Government  of 
1. 
India, 
Dr. D Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Mr. Richard A. Boucher, OECD Deputy 
Secretary  General,  Mr.  Andre  Laboul,  Head,  OECD  Financial  Affairs  Division  and  Chair, 
International  Network  on  Financial  Education  (INFE),  Ms.  Flore-Anne  Messy,  Principal 
Administrator,  OECD,  Distinguished  Guests  and  Workshop  Participants  from  all  over  the 
globe, Ladies and Gentlemen 
2. 
A very warm welcome to you all to the first ever RBI-OECD initiative on Financial 
Literacy Workshop in India at this garden city of Bengaluru, lovingly referred by the global 
community as the Silicon Valley of India. In fact, there could have been no better place than 
this  city  as  it  can  not  only  boast  of  locating  some  of  the  world’s  best  known  financial  and 
knowledge-based  services  technology  providers,  but  the  State  of  Karnataka  has  taken 
pioneering initiatives in promoting financial literacy through school curriculums. 
3. 
It is a matter of profound pleasure and privilege to welcome Mr Pranab Mukherjee, 
the Hon’ble Minister of Finance, Govt. of India who, despite his hectic schedule and multiple 
responsibilities, has kindly agreed to deliver the Keynote Address and spare some thoughts 
for  the  attendees  to  work  further  on.  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister,  Sir,  while  welcoming,  we 
express our sincere gratitude to you. 
4. 
I  also  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  Dr  Subbarao,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, who has successfully steered the policy course of the RBI through one of the difficult 
phases  in  recent  times.  I  welcome  you  Sir.  It  was  your  idea  that  RBI’s  Platinum  Jubilee 
celebration  should  be  marked  with  an  event  of  international  impact  and  long-lasting 
importance in the financial services sector. This Workshop is a fructification of your idea, Sir. 
5.  
My special welcome for Mr. Richard A. Boucher, Deputy Secretary General, OECD 
for  making  this  workshop  possible,  along  with  other  OECD  officials,  who  are  partners  in 
conducting this workshop. My heartiest welcome to Mr Andre Laboul, Head, OECD Financial 
Affairs  Division  and  Chair,  International  Network  on  Financial  Education,  Mr  Helmut-Hans 
Kotz, Member of Bundesbank Executive Board and Chair of OECD Committee on Financial 
Markets and Ms Flore-Anne Messy, Principal Administrator, OECD. 
6. 
I welcome various panelists of the workshop and other distinguished delegates from 
various countries who have come to share their experiences and perspectives to this very 
encouraging initiative. 
Established  in  1961,  OECD  is  engaged  to  help  its  member  countries  to  achieve 
7. 
sustainable economic growth and employment and to raise the standard of living in member-
countries  while  maintaining  financial  stability  –  all  this  in  order  to  contribute  to  the 
development of the world economy. As one of its key objective, OECD has been working in 
collaboration  with  a  host  of  governmental  agencies  and  central  banks  across  the  globe  to 
promote and impart financial education for creating an embedded protective guard against 
potential financial risk.  
8. 
OECD has also established the International Network on Financial Education (INFE) 
in  mid-2008,  which  brings  together  senior  government  officials  from  both  OECD  member 
countries  and  non-member  economies  to  discuss  issues,  new  developments,  experiences 
and programmes related to financial education.  
BIS Review 41/2010 
 1
I must add that the reason why OECD has so readily agreed to conduct this joint 
9. 
workshop with RBI by sharing and sparing their resources is that we in RBI want to adopt the 
international best practices honed by OECD and improve upon them for multiplier effect to 
cover  vast  multitudes  of  unbanked  and  financially  illiterate  population.  After  all,  financial 
inclusion is a necessary precondition for sustainable and inclusive growth. 
10. 
Simply  speaking,  financial  literacy  refers  to  knowledge  required  for  managing 
personal  finance.  It  does  not  necessarily  refer  to  formal  education  in  finance.  Instead,  it 
encompasses  an  understanding  of  how  to  use  credit  responsibly,  manage  money  and 
savings, minimise financial risks and derive long-term benefits of savings. 
11. 
It is now well known that financial illiteracy afflicts both developing and developed 
countries although in different measures. Several surveys in countries like UK, Australia, etc. 
have  found  out  that  many  people  are  taking  on  financial  risks  without  realising  or 
understanding it, and in fact are very poor managers of money.   
12. 
It  is  genuinely  believed  that  the  recent  financial  crisis  is  largely  precipitated  by 
rampant financial illiteracy or the lack of transparency that financial literacy is supposed to 
bring  into  the  model  code  books  of  financial  service  providers.  We  have  a  plethora  of 
instances of mis-selling and customers undertaking financial contracts without understanding 
the  risk  import  of  such  transactions  leading  to  unforeseen  volatility  and  unsustainable 
business. 
13. 
Financial literacy is also a necessary pre-condition for success in financial inclusion 
drive. Dimensions of this issue can be gauged from the recent paper by the Financial Action 
initiative, a consortium of researchers. For the benefit of this august audience, let me quote 
3 important findings of the paper: 
• 
2.5 billion adults, just over half of world’s adult population of 4.7 billion, do not use 
formal financial services to save or borrow. 
2.2 billion of these unserved adults live in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Middle 
East. 
Of the remaining 2.2 billion adults who are financially served, a little more than 800 
million live on less than US$ 5 per day.  
14. 
With such estimates of the dimensions of the financial exclusion problem, and the 
understanding that achieving financial inclusion is not possible without financial literacy, the 
promotion of financial literacy acquires an even greater urgency. 
15. 
Financial literacy can be promoted by bringing in wider section of public within the 
institutional literacy framework. Such institutional initiatives would largely focus on improving 
literacy standards. Also, all financial service providers have a moral responsibility to bring in 
a  fair  degree  of  transparency  and  fairness,  more  so  those  engaged  in  selling  financial 
products  and  financial  counseling  and  the  ethical  grid  within  which  they  are  supposed  to 
work. This initiative is no less challenging than propagating financial literacy to the members 
of the public.  
16. 
Hence, there is no doubt that financial literacy should be one of the key initiatives in 
coping  with  the  ever-expanding  horizon  of  risk.  In  RBI,  we  have  started  a  unique  public 
interface  programme  whereby  RBI  is  trying  to  bridge  the  gap  in  understanding  regulatory 
perspectives of some key policy initiatives. However, Reserve bank or central banks or bank 
regulators acting alone would not be successful in meeting this extraordinary responsibility in 
propagating financial literacy and bringing transparency in dealing with financial services and 
products.  Wider  and  active  participation  of  all  stakeholders  like  other  financial  regulators, 
government – state & federal both – financial service providers, academia and others in civil 
society,  is  needed  in  this  grand  initiative.  Also  we  require  massive  global  efforts  and 
co-operation for achieving tangible results in this area. 
  2 
 BIS Review 41/2010
I am happy to share that the whole-hearted participation by all the stakeholders in 
17. 
today’s  Workshop  is  a  testimony  of  this  commitment  of  all  the  stakeholders  and  our 
determination to invoke global efforts and co-operation in this area.  
18. 
We look at this financial education effort as a journey together by world economies 
to  spread  awareness,  impart  financial  education,  empower  less  privileged  by  providing 
access to financial products and markets so that they can play a meaningfully active role in 
ensuring sustainable growth and prosperity of the mankind. 
19. 
experience to all of us. Once again, a hearty welcome to all of you. 
Thank you. 
I  am  sure  this  historic  Workshop  in  India  will  offer  a  rewarding  and  enriching 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 3
