Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Islamic finance and the collaboration between 
Malaysia and Bahrain 
Special remarks by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Signing  Ceremony  of  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  Bursa 
Malaysia – Bahrain Financial Exchange, Manama, 24 January 2010. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  on  this  occasion  of  the  signing  ceremony  of  the 
Memorandum of Understanding between Bursa Malaysia Berhad and the Bahrain Financial 
Exchange.  The  signing  we  are  about  to  witness  today  will  lay  the  foundation  for  the 
collaboration by the two exchanges on Bursa Suq Al-Sila’. I wish to thank the two exchanges 
for inviting me to give some remarks at this auspicious occasion. I also wish to applaud this 
commendable effort by the two exchanges which marks another important milestone in the 
development of the global Islamic financial services industry and in bridging further our two 
countries.  
from 
intensifies, 
the  exposure 
to  risks  arising 
Maintaining the stability of Islamic financial system 
This  effort  takes  place  at  a  time  when  the  global  economy  is  entering  into  a  period  of 
improved  international  economic  and  financial  conditions.  The  global  financial  crisis  has 
highlighted  several  structural  weaknesses  and  drawbacks  in  the  international  financial 
system. While Islamic finance is not insulated from the effects of the current environment, the 
Shariah  principles  and  values  that  are  inherent  in  Islamic  finance  provide  an  important 
underlying  foundation.  The  Islamic  financial  system  has  continued,  during  this  period,  to 
become increasingly integrated with the international financial system. However, as this inter-
connectivity 
financial  and  economic 
developments  from  other  markets  will  increase.  Indeed  disruptions  in  the  functioning  of 
financial markets have brought the focus of attention on financial stability issues. 
In  addition,  this  recent  financial  market  turmoil  has  demonstrated  the  consequences  of 
liquidity  constraints.  This  has  accentuated  the  importance  of  a  strong  and  well  developed 
liquidity  management  infrastructure.  Essentially,  international  Islamic  financial  transactions 
will  require  the  development  of  the  supporting  financial  infrastructure,  in  particular,  the 
systems and structures for the management of liquidity. Several key measures are required 
to  improve  the  ability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  in  managing  such  disruptions  and 
ensure its stability. A well functioning markets and liquidity management framework are vital 
for Islamic financial institutions to effectively manage funding of Islamic financial transactions. 
These would also facilitate cross border capital flows and help expand the Islamic financial 
markets as well as manage liquidity risks in a Shariah compliant manner.  
This current global financial crisis has prompted a search for an enduring solution to ensure 
the  stability  of  financial systems.  As  part  of  the  global  collaborative  efforts  to  enhance  the 
efficiency  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  managing  liquidity  at  both  national  and  across 
borders,  a  Liquidity  Management  Task  Force  was  established  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board (IFSB) and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) early last year to develop a 
liquidity management framework.  
Timely collaboration between Malaysia and Bahrain to strengthen interlinkages 
The  collaborative  effort  we  are  witnessing  today  is  expected  to  strengthen  the  liquidity 
management  framework  between  Malaysia  and  Bahrain,  thereby  enhancing  the  financial 
interlinkages  between  the  two  countries.  Bursa  Suq  Al  Sila’  is  a  purposefully  designed 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 1
exchanged-traded  platform  to  facilitate  commodity  murabahah  transactions.  It  is  the  first 
internet  based  platform  in  the  world  with  crude  palm  oil  (CPO)  as  its  underlying  base 
commodity.  The  establishment  of  Bursa  Suq  Al  Sila’  in  August  2009  is  a  collaborative 
initiative of the Central Bank of Malaysia, the Securities Commission, Bursa Malaysia and the 
market  players  that  was  conceptualised  some  three  years  ago.  Bursa  Suq  Al-Sila’  will 
provide a viable alternative to the well functioning of liquidity management in Islamic financial 
system. 
The platform will provide another dimension to the liquidity management infrastructure of the 
Islamic  banking  industry;  thus  providing  market  players  with  greater  tools  to  manage  their 
assets and liabilities. It is expected to unlock a vast potential of opportunities for the Islamic 
financial industry by providing a wider range of new instruments. Not only can it be used for 
liquidity  management  and  risk  management  purposes  but  players  can  derive  additional 
linkages by utilising the platform to facilitate the creation of financing and deposit products. It 
creates a more transparent and streamlined commodity transaction practices based on the 
concept of murabahah or tawarruq. Leveraging on the experience of Bursa Malaysia in the 
area  of  exchange  traded  products,  this  platform  is  able  to  eliminate  uncertainty  in  the 
transactions and could mitigate risks such as legal risk, market risk and counter-party risk.  
As  Bursa  Suq  Al-Sila’  is  designed to  be  a  multi-currency  platform,  it  can  enhance  liquidity 
and risk management capacity of the international Islamic banking community. Furthermore, 
it could be harnessed into a cost effective global platform to develop universally acceptable 
Islamic financial products for the financial and capital market. Overtime, in making it into a 
truly multi-commodity global exchange, the scope of the exchange-traded product offerings 
could  be  expanded  to  include  other  commodities  and  the  level  of  participation  should  be 
expanded to include players from outside the financial services industry as well. 
The proposed collaboration between the Bahrain Financial Exchange and Bursa Malaysia is 
expected  to  strengthen  cross  border  financial  traffic  between  both  our  markets,  as  this 
platform has a vast potential to facilitate liquidity flows from one financial centre to another. It 
will  also  pave  the  way  for  optimisation  of  financial  resources  across  borders  as  well  as 
diversification of risks between our markets. Furthermore, this venture will also allow both our 
markets to explore various opportunities for further collaboration in the future, leveraging on 
each  other’s  strengths  and  achieve  synergies  for  effective  and  efficient  Islamic  financial 
services industry. I urge the banks in Bahrain and Malaysia to work together and use Bursa 
Suq  Al-Sila’  to  enable  the  flows  of  funds  that  would  enhance  the  liquidity  management 
framework.  
Bahrain  and  Malaysia  has  one  of  the  strongest  relationships  among  the  countries  in  the 
Middle East. It was further cemented with the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding 
between  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  in  2001  to  jointly 
develop  Islamic  finance  internationally.  In  fact,  an  80-strong  Malaysian  delegation  led  by 
HRH  Raja  Dr.  Nazrin  Shah,  Crown  Prince  of  the  State  of  Perak  and  Malaysia’s  financial 
ambassador, visited Bahrain in October 2009 to forge greater financial ties with the Bahraini 
Islamic  financial  community.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  common  grounds  have  been 
reached  on  the  standard  contracts  that  the  Association  of  Islamic  Banking  Institutions 
Malaysia or AIBIM, and the International Islamic Financial Market, or IIFM, have produced. 
This is invariably a reflection of the growing cross border harmonisation of interpretations of 
concepts and agreements.  
Furthermore,  AIBIM’s  interbank  Murabahah  master  agreement  (IMMA)  and  the  corporate 
Murabahah master agreement (CMMA), recently launched in Malaysia, would further unlock 
the potential of the Malaysian Islamic money market, which saw around US$2 billion worth of 
transactions  daily  last  year.  In  the  global  scene,  it  is  estimated  that  the  global  commodity 
murabahah  market  is  valued  at  more  than  US$1  trillion,  giving  rise  to  a  huge  business 
potential. I would encourage you to focus more resources here as it is one of the key areas 
that we can jointly promote in our regions.  
2 
 BIS Review 8/2010
Other challenges ahead for the global Islamic financial system 
The Islamic banking and finance industry is still relatively young and to a certain extent, is 
functioning at the experimental stage of development. At this stage, it requires an enabling 
and  conducive  environment  to  innovate  new  products  and  try  out  the  various  Shariah 
concepts  in  Islamic  finance.  However,  going  forward,  there  are  some  challenges  that  may 
impede our efforts in developing the Islamic financial system. A rigorous and well developed 
Shariah framework is needed to govern market practices of the Islamic financial institutions. 
To achieve  consistency in the development of Islamic finance, all stakeholders involved in 
Islamic  finance  must  work  in  a  concerted  manner  on  interpretation  issues.  Nonetheless, 
there has to be a check and balance between the need to have innovative and advanced 
products and the need to uphold the Shariah requirements. 
Efforts, time and resources must be pooled among the Islamic finance community to expand 
the  industry  and  compete  healthily  with  the  larger  conventional  finance  markets.  As  such, 
mutual recognition and understanding of different practices are essential in allowing Islamic 
finance to grow. For instance, Bursa Suq Al-Sila’ could also be used as a unifying application 
of Tawarruq practices by adopting acceptable best market practices for the Islamic financial 
institutions  and  at  the  same  time  observe  the  Shariah  principles.  In  Malaysia,  we  adopt  a 
stance  of  mutually  recognising  the  various  Shariah  interpretations.  This  is  because  the 
interpretations  have  been  derived  from  the  Quran  and  Sunnah  and  accomplished  through 
rigorous  juristic  reasoning  or  ijtihad  by  the  learned  Shariah  scholars  based  on  religious 
knowledge and norms. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  Awareness  and  appreciation  of  the  inherent  strengths  of 
Islamic  finance  and  its  vast  potential  for  progress  have  generated  interests  amongst  the 
global  financial  community.  Needless  to  say,  the  Islamic  finance  community  should  take 
advantage by increasing the role of Islamic finance in linking with the different parts of the 
world.  Today,  the  signing  of  the  memorandum  of  understanding  between  Bursa  Malaysia 
Berhad and the Bahrain Financial Exchange, marks an exciting future in Islamic finance. 
I would encourage you to fully exploit the opportunity presented through this memorandum of 
understanding. Islamic finance has a potential role in contributing not only to global financial 
stability  but  also  towards  a  more  balanced  global  growth  of  our  countries  and  the  Islamic 
world at large. Indeed, both Malaysia and Bahrain can pave the way towards bridging Islamic 
financial  markets  between  our  regions,  while  we  prepare  ourselves  for  the  next  phase  of 
development of the global economic and financial system, insyaAllah. 
On that note, let me congratulate both the Bahrain Financial Exchange and Bursa Malaysia 
Berhad on the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding on Bursa Suq Al-Sila’ and on 
exhibiting the commitment in making this collaboration a successful one. I am indeed grateful 
to the All Mighty be here today to witness this event. 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 3
