Alan Bollard: Handling our economic recovery 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  the  Local 
Government New Zealand, Dunedin, 6 May 2010. 
 The global financial crisis caused major market damage 
1. 
We  are  now  seeing  the  world  pull  gradually  out  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  It  was  an 
unexpected,  deep  and  costly  event,  the  world’s  worst  since  the  Great  Depression.  The 
recovery is mixed, fragile in some places and has a long way to go. Just as we were very 
uncertain about the depths of recession, so no one can be sure how robust and widespread 
the recovery will be. Already we have had many surprises. The purpose of this presentation 
is to analyse New Zealand’s recovery from the recession to date, and to indicate how it might 
proceed.  
The  crisis  struck  across  almost  all  countries  and  almost  all  sectors.  Like  a  virulent  virus  it 
transmitted speedily from one market to another. Some of these markets produced their own 
antibodies very quickly, while others sustained prolonged damage.  
The figure gives an impression of when the virus hit and how it quickly passed through the 
world’s financial and economic systems. 
 
 Economic recoveries can be slow and fragile 
2. 
Recovery  from  a  global  economic  recession  that  has  been  sparked  by  a  financial  crisis  is 
particularly hard to predict. That is because established fundamental economic relationships 
have been put at risk and may need to be rebuilt over time.  
Research  into  historical  world  crises  yields  some  interesting  results.  International  financial 
crises  yield particularly  deep  and  prolonged  recessions  when  they  are  linked  with  banking 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 1
and currency crises. A similar trend can be seen for globally synchronized recessions (IMF, 
2009).  Economic  contractions  tend  to  last  for  around  six  quarters,  with  an  output  loss  of 
around 3.5 per cent. Such periods are also associated with employment continuing to decline 
for substantially longer than GDP (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2008). On balance after a banking 
crisis, recoveries tend to be more gradual, and are associated with weak domestic demand, 
tight credit conditions, and continued contractions in residential and business investment.  
In addition, recovery is not even across countries and across sectors. Typically certain parts 
of the economy like equities and stocks recover early. Others like the labour market can lag 
significantly. The figure shows the paths of recession and recovery for US GDP during past 
recessions over the last 40 years. It can be seen that the recovery from this Global Financial 
Crisis is slow and still fragile, fraught with uncertainties.  
 New Zealand was assisted by significant stimulus  
3. 
Something  that  has  marked  out  this  global  crisis  as  compared  with  the  1930’s  Great 
Depression  is  that  we  have  learned  the  importance  of  government  policy  stimulus  being 
applied  early,  forcefully  and  consistently.  While  still  too  early  to  be  definitive,  economists 
generally see government stimulatory policies as having been quite successful in stemming 
the recession. Of course long-term outcomes cannot be judged until we see how successful 
countries are at exiting their stimulus without long-term costs.  
New Zealand like Australia has been fortunate in several respects: the crisis did not hit deep, 
the financial sector stayed broadly sound, and recovery is being helped by strong commodity 
markets.  That  has  meant  we  did  not  have  to  stimulate  the  New  Zealand  economy  by 
anything like the levels in Europe and the US. Nevertheless we have just been through the 
biggest co-ordinated stimulatory programme involving monetary policy, fiscal policy, liquidity 
assistance  and  government  guarantees  since  World  War  II.  These  look  to  have  been 
relatively  effective  in  their  timing  and  design,  and  are  not  expected  to  have  left  big  public 
costs behind. 
The graph of GDP shows that the New Zealand economy went in to recession in Q1 2008, 
although this was initially triggered by an unusually-severe drought, rather than the Global 
Financial  Crisis.  The  figure  also  summarises  the  main  stimulus  measures  that  were  put  in 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2010
place,  together  with  another  important  market  insulator,  the  exchange  rate  reaction  during 
the crisis. It shows that many of the measures were implemented fairly quickly. The economy 
contracted 3.4 per cent over the period, reaching a trough around March 2009, and back to 
fragile growth later in the year. By the time we received the last quarter 2009 GDP data we 
were in a position to say that recovery was firming and we would need to exit much of the 
stimulus.  Most  but  not  all  of  the  special  liquidity  measures  have  now  been  terminated, 
leaving conventional monetary policy to guide the stages of recovery.  
 Note:  
 
    Fiscal  policy  stimulus  defined  as  significant  increase  in  fiscal  impulse  measured, 
New Zealand Treasury in Half-Year Economic and Fiscal Update, December 2009.  
Exchange  rate  depreciation  is  the  major  fall  in  the  New  Zealand  TWI  from 
March 2008 to March 2009.  
Very  stimulative  monetary  policy  refers  to  the  major  reduction  in  OCR  from 
8.25 per cent to 2.5 per cent followed by a conditional undertaking to hold the rate 
low.  
Retail deposit guarantee refers to the original scheme, terminating in December 2011. 
The extended scheme is likely to have much less impact.  
Wholesale funding guarantee has now expired.  
Term  auction  facility  relates  largely  to  the  acceptance  of  residential-mortgage-
backed securities.  
With the termination of these special programmes, the Reserve Bank does not feel it needs 
quite as much risk-based capital on its own balance sheet, and consequently has returned 
$45 million to the Crown.  
BIS Review 62/2010 
 3
The world is on two different recovery paths 
4. 
A feature of this recession is that we are seeing quite different troughs and recoveries in two 
regions of the world, as shown in the figure.  
 
  In  the  “East”,  defined  as  emerging  market  economies  and  commodity  exporters,  the  cycle 
has  been  more  shallow,  and  a  very  strong  “V-shaped”  recovery  is  underway.  Of  most 
relevance to us, China and Australia are both in this group, but also other Asian economies, 
and oil exporters and commodity exporters from Latin America, Southern Africa, South-East 
Asia and Australasia. 
In  the  “West”,  an  Icelandic-style  cloud  of  despondency  still  settles  over  the  old  Northern 
economies with large financial sectors and high production costs. In the US, Eurozone, and 
particularly UK and Japan the cyclical trough was historically deep, and the recovery looks 
slow and fragile. 
The  difference  in  these  two  zones  shows  up  clearly  in  the  figure.  The  Eastern  region  lost 
2.5 per cent growth through the crisis, but is now back on to a pre-crisis growth trend, and 
has  clearly  passed  pre-crisis  income  levels.  The  Western  region  lost  a  lot  more  income 
through the period – around 4.5 per cent and is struggling to resume its (much lower) pre-
crisis growth trend, and has not yet made up for lost income.  
4 
 BIS Review 62/2010
The  economic  recovery  is  involving  some  degree  of  global  rebalancing.  The  huge  current 
account deficits of the West and surpluses of the East have been partly reduced as a result 
of  a  rebalancing  of  consumption  and  savings.  The  broader  economic  and  geopolitical 
implications  of  rebalancing  are  only  now  starting  to  be  seen  in  the  G20  and  in  bilateral 
negotiations.  
 Our own recovery is externally-driven  
5. 
New Zealand has been considerably helped during this recovery period by a strong China 
and emerging market growth in consumption, a strong minerals-driven Australia, and some 
other market and climatic factors. We saw a commodities boom in the pre-crisis year, but few 
people expected to see it repeated immediately post-crisis. Most would be aware that world 
dairy  prices  have  recovered  significantly  over  the  past  year.  But  in  addition,  beef,  forestry 
and aluminium prices have also risen to very high levels. These high world prices have not 
completely benefitted New Zealand growers because of the relatively strong $NZ. (Of course 
these high commodity prices are themselves one of the drivers of the strong $NZ). 
Interestingly when we look at longer-term movements in New Zealand’s export and import 
prices,  we  can  see  the  origins  of  our  country’s  post-war  strength,  followed  by  some  very 
difficult decades of declining terms of trade through the 1970’s and 1980’s reflected in slower 
growth  relative  to  the  OECD.  Now  we  might  speculate  whether  we  are  on  a  gradually 
improving trend in the terms of trade, one that has shown itself very resilient to the global 
crisis.  
Overall, we are emerging from the crisis with some reconstruction of our external deficit as a 
result  of  strong  exports,  weaker  import  growth,  suppressed  domestic  profits,  and  some 
consolidation of balance sheets. This too is a desirable trend, although it is still unclear how 
much will be an enduring development.  
BIS Review 62/2010 
 5
   Domestically cautious rebalancing is underway  
6. 
While the export sector has strong drivers, the domestic sector is seeing much more fragile 
recovery. There are no strong drivers here. Businesses and households have been through a 
harsh  experience  and  they  are  responding  very  cautiously,  deleveraging  their  balance 
sheets.  Balance  sheet  adjustment  can  take  some  time.  We  have  not  been  through  an 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2010
adjustment  quite  like  this  before,  so  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  in  the  minds  of 
households and business people, and also in how we interpret their behaviours.  
 
   The  business  sector  has  emerged  from  the  crisis  bruised  but  not  permanently  scarred.  In 
general,  businesses  went  into  the  period  with  healthy  balance  sheets,  in  contrast  to  the 
1990–92 recession. However they are now behaving very cautiously and as a generalisation, 
are  still  not  looking  to  invest  in  plant  and  equipment  or  re-employ  staff.  Together  with  the 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 7
deleveraging taking place, that means they are not undertaking new borrowing. Indeed the 
banking  sector  credit  data  continues  to  be  extraordinarily  restrained.  This  is  probably  an 
unusual combination of demand weakness and supply constraint. Whatever the explanation 
we  certainly  wish  to  see  credit  available  for  all  sound  business  ventures.  In  the  meantime 
business credit growth continues to contract by 8 per cent (as can be seen in the figure), a 
most  unusual  situation  and  one  that  contributes  to  our  monetary  aggregates  showing  no 
growth over the past year.  
The  household  sector  looks  correspondingly  soft.  House  prices  and  activity  contracted 
markedly  through  the  recession,  although  they  ended  up  a  little  more  robust  than  we  had 
feared.  However,  as  we  now  record  positive  growth  again,  we  have  seen  only  a  very  soft 
pick-up  in  house  prices,  new  building  and  sales,  despite  moderate  demographic  growth. 
Despite this, rather than building up housing assets, so far in this recovery, householders are 
concentrating on reducing their mortgage borrowing sharply, and hence building up housing 
equity. Another way to see this is as householders building up savings and reducing debt. 
This is happening through borrowers not taking on new mortgages as in the past, and using 
lower interest rates with constant repayments to reduce the size of outstanding loans. The 
net effect can be seen in the figure. 
Our focus is how to reduce monetary stimulus  
7. 
With unconventional stimulus programmes now largely terminated, the stage is set for us to 
influence the pace of recovery through more conventional discretionary monetary policy. This 
should be more comfortable ground for us all.  
In our official cash rate review last week we noted: “As previously indicated, we expect to 
begin removing policy stimulus over the coming months, provided the economy continues to 
evolve as projected.”  
 
 8 
  BIS Review 62/2010
We used the words “begin removing stimulus” deliberately. With an official cash rate at an 
historically low level of 2.5 per cent we are clearly in a very stimulative position. Using a truck 
driver  analogy,  our  foot  is  strongly  on  the  accelerator.  Over  coming  months  we  expect  to 
reduce the pressure on this pedal, but in effect to keep some throttle  going. Truck drivers 
know  they  must  reduce  acceleration  long  before  the  corner.  We  are  not  talking  about 
tightening policy yet. We do not expect to have to touch the brake pedal for some time.  
Analysts  differ  in  their  views  as  to  what  level  of  the  OCR  implies  moving  the  foot  from 
accelerator  to  brake.  Actually,  given  the  behavioural  changes  that  are  in  place  due  to 
financial  market  pressures,  it  is  unclear  exactly  what  the  “neutral”  official  cash  rate  is, 
something that can only be established incrementally over time.  
Financial markets currently expect the Reserve Bank to begin raising the official cash rate 
around the middle of the year and continue to do this in small steps for some time. This is 
broadly in line with our current views as outlined at last week’s OCR Review. However, the 
timing  and  pace  of  returning  the  OCR  to  less  stimulatory  levels  will  ultimately  depend  on 
economic developments.  
Both markets and ourselves foresee that the official cash rate will not need to rise as far in 
this  cycle  as  it  did  in  the  last  one.  There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  this,  none  of  them 
individually definitive, but all pointing in the same direction: in brief the financial markets have 
already effectively tightened conditions as a result of more costly funding; the New Zealand 
private  sector  is  reducing  debt  and  cautious  about  new  borrowing;  most  borrowers  are  on 
shorter  duration  mortgages  and  the  steeper  yield  curve  does  not  much  encourage 
lengthening  this;  increasing  policy  rates  in  the  shadow  of  Australia  should  be  easier  than 
being  a  world  leader;  and,  finally,  we  believe  there  may  be  alternative  ways  of  influencing 
over-exuberant bank lending through macrofinancial policies.  
Our economic recovery is out of its first stage of intense fragility, and into a new phase of 
rebalancing growth. But a final caution: recovery so far has been full of surprises. There will 
be more to come! 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 9
