Duvvuri Subbarao: “Central banks must distill lessons from the global 
crisis and make concrete reforms” – interview in Finance & Development 
Interview with Mr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, in Finance & 
Development, 2 July 2010. 
 Central banks have been at the heart of the global financial crisis. They have been blamed 
for policies and actions that got the world into the crisis; they have been praised for leading 
the world out of it. Both are fair assessments. Central banks have been a part of the problem 
and a part of the solution.  
As  the  crisis  unwinds  and  recovery  takes  hold,  central  banks  face  a  number  of  issues,  of 
which I will address five.  
Monetary policy in a globalizing environment 
The crisis has demonstrated the difficulties of macroeconomic management in a globalizing 
world. Even as governments and central banks acted with an unusual show of policy force, 
they were unable to get the situation under control because of the interconnectedness of the 
financial  system  and  the  effects,  positive  and  negative,  of  external  developments  on 
domestic  policy  actions.  Most  important,  they  found  that  sentiment  and  confidence  were 
remarkably correlated across countries.  
External developments interact with the domestic economy in complex, uncertain, and even 
capricious  ways.  Central  banks  have  to  deepen  their  understanding  of  these  interactions. 
Some of the channels through which cross-border transmission occurs are quite familiar – 
global  prices,  including  commodity  price  movements;  synchronization  of  business  cycles; 
capital  flows;  strong  comovement  of  asset  prices;  exchange  rates  of  key  international 
currencies;  and  interest  rate  policies  of  major  central  banks.  Some  of  the  transmission 
channels  are  less  familiar.  For  example,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  even  differences  in 
regulatory  regimes  can  trigger  arbitrage-based  action  and  dilute  the  efficiency  of  domestic 
policies. 
Take  managing  capital  flows.  Emerging  market  economies  experienced  a  sudden  stop  in 
capital inflows during the crisis as well as capital outflows – the result of global deleveraging. 
Now  the  situation  has  reversed  and  many  emerging  market  economies  again  have  net 
inflows.  Managing  these  flows,  especially  if  they  are  volatile,  will  test  the  effectiveness  of 
central  bank  policies  in  semi-open  emerging  market  economies.  A  country  whose  central 
bank  does  not  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  will  incur  the  cost  of  currency 
appreciation  unrelated  to  fundamentals.  If  central  banks  intervene  to  prevent  appreciation, 
they  will  have  to  contend  with  additional  liquidity  and  potential  inflation  pressures.  If  they 
sterilize (soak up) the resulting liquidity, they run the risk of driving up interest rates, which 
would hurt growth prospects. 
Volatility  in  capital  flows  could  also  impair  financial  stability.  How  emerging  market 
economies manage the impossible trinity of an open capital account, a fixed exchange rate, 
and  an  independent  monetary  policy  will  affect  their  prospects  for  growth  and  price  and 
financial stability. 
Redefining the mandate of central banks  
The crisis has triggered vigorous and wide-ranging debate on the role and responsibilities of 
central banks and raises three big questions:  
BIS Review 92/2010 
 1
Should central banks persist with inflation targeting? In the years before the crisis there 
was a powerful intellectual consensus in favor of inflation targeting – that is, basing monetary 
policy on achieving a target inflation rate, usually consumer prices. Even where central banks 
did not target a precise inflation rate, their policy objectives were informed, if not dominated, 
by price stability. This approach seemed successful. There was an extended period of price 
stability accompanied by stable growth and low unemployment. In the world before the crisis, 
central bankers were a triumphant lot. The unraveling of the Great Moderation has diluted, if 
not dissolved, the consensus around solely targeting inflation. The mainstream view before 
the crisis was that price stability and financial stability reinforce each other. The crisis has 
proved  that  wrong:  price  stability  does  not  necessarily  ensure  financial  stability.  The  crisis 
has given fresh impetus to the “new environment hypothesis” that pure inflation targeting is 
inadvisable  and  that  the  mandate  of  central  banks  should  extend  beyond  price  stability  to 
include  bank  regulation  and  supervision,  financial  stability,  and  preventing  asset  price 
bubbles.  
What is the role of central banks in preventing asset price bubbles? The emerging view 
is  that  preventing  an  asset  price  buildup  should  be  within  the  purview  of  a  central  bank. 
Opinion is divided, however, on whether central banks should prevent asset bubbles through 
monetary  policy  action  or  through  regulatory  action.  What  is  indisputable,  though,  is  that 
central banks’ efforts to check asset price bubbles demand not just analytical capability but 
mature judgment of the nature of the risk. 
Should  central  banks  also  engage  in  bank  regulation  and  supervision?  In  many 
regulatory models the central bank is purely a monetary authority, with bank regulation and 
supervision vested in another agency. The emerging view is that the crisis was caused, at 
least  in  part,  by  a  lack  of  coordination  and  communication  between  central  banks  and 
supervisors  and,  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability,  it  is  optimal  to  entrust  regulation  and 
supervision of banks to central banks. Admittedly, this is not a settled issue. There is no one-
size-fits-all answer, as is clear from the variety of regulatory models around. Each country 
and each central bank will have to resolve this issue according to its specific circumstances. 
Central banks and financial stability 
While  there  is  broad  agreement  that  financial  stability  is  neither  automatic  nor  inevitable, 
there is less agreement on whether it should be explicitly included in the mandate of central 
banks. One argument is that explicit inclusion would be redundant, because financial stability 
is  a  necessary  –  although  not  sufficient  –  condition  for  achieving  the  conventional  central 
bank objectives relating to inflation, output, and employment. On the other hand, there is a 
growing  view  that  unless  financial  stability  is  explicitly  included  in  the  mandate  of  central 
banks, it is likely to fall through the cracks. 
Complicating  matters,  defining 
in  a  precise,  comprehensive,  and 
measurable manner is proving to be difficult. Nevertheless, we now know that there are two 
attributes of financial instability:  
 
excessive  volatility  of  macro  variables  such  as  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates 
that have a direct impact on the real economy; and  
financial institutions and markets threatened by illiquidity to the extent of jeopardizing 
systemic stability. 
financial  stability 
 Do  central  banks  have  the  instruments  to  address  the  mandate  of  financial  stability?  One 
clear instrument for preserving financial stability is the lender-of-last-resort function. During 
the  crisis,  central  banks  pumped  in  enormous  amounts  of  liquidity  to  unfreeze  the  system 
through  the  lender-of-lastresort  window.  While  this  made  individual  institutions  liquid,  the 
market  remained  illiquid,  thereby  revealing  the  limitation  of  the  window  instrument  in 
combating  illiquidity.  A  central  bank  can  infuse  liquidity,  but  it’s  hard  to  ensure  that  the 
available  cheap  and  abundant  money  is  used  to  purchase  assets  whose  value  is  rapidly 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2010
eroding. The only option may be for the central bank to buy the assets. This means that the 
central  bank  must  be  not  only  the  lender  but  also  the  market  maker  of  last  resort.  These 
issues have yet to be clearly defined, let alone resolved. But they must be resolved soon.  
Managing the costs and benefits of regulation 
To  safeguard  financial  stability,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  used  a  variety  of  prudential 
measures,  including  specification  of  exposure  norms  and  preemptive  tightening  of  the  risk 
weights attached to assets and the requirements for loss provisioning. But these measures 
often carry a cost. For instance, tightening risk weights arguably tempers the flow of credit to 
certain  sectors,  but  excessive,  premature,  or  unnecessary  tightening  can  blunt  growth. 
Similarly, exposure norms offer protection against concentration risks; however, such limits 
can restrict the availability of credit for important growth sectors. Thus, as in the case of price 
stability,  central  banks  face  the  challenge  of  managing  the  trade-off  between  financial 
stability and growth. 
After  a  crisis,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  all  conservative  policies  appear  safe.  But 
excessive conservatism can thwart growth and stifle innovation. The question is, what price 
are we willing to pay, or – conversely – what potential benefits are we willing to give up, to 
cope with the unexpected, a black swan event? Experience shows that balancing the costs 
and benefits of regulation is more a question of good judgment than analytical skill. Central 
banks, especially those of developing countries, such as India, need to hone their judgment 
skills as they pursue growth and financial stability. 
Autonomy versus accountability 
During  the  crisis,  governments  and  central  banks  coordinated  their  efforts  to  launch 
unprecedented expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. As countries contemplate exiting 
these expansionary policies, the familiar tensions between monetary and fiscal policies are 
showing  up  again.  And  a  possible  return  of  fiscal  dominance  could  undermine  the 
independence of central banks. 
Responsibility for financial stability must be shared by the government, the central bank, and 
other regulators. Although that shared responsibility is not in itself a problem, there are two 
related concerns. The first is that the rescue of financial institutions is an inherently political 
act,  and  involvement  in  such  decisions  may  compromise  central  banks’  technocratic 
credentials.  The  second  concern  is  the  risk  that  coordination  with  the  government  for  the 
purpose  of  financial  stability  may  spill  over  into  other  areas  within  central  banks’  purview, 
thereby undermining their independence. 
The case for central bank independence is coming under increasing assault as a result of 
crisis-spawned  developments.  Central  banks  must  advocate  for  independence  not  with 
weighty  arguments  but  through  more  vigorous  and  voluntary  efforts  to  be  transparent, 
responsive, and accountable. 
This list of issues addressed here is by no means exhaustive, nor have all the nuances been 
considered.  But  central  banks  must  gain  a  better  understanding  of  how  to  begin  tackling 
these issues, and on that basis adapt and change the way they function. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 3
