Perks M Ligoya: The challenge of making sound policy choices 
Speech  by  Dr  Perks  M  Ligoya,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the  official 
opening of the Financial Programming and Polices Course, Lilongwe, 1 March 2010.  
 The Director, Macroeconomic Management Programme, MEFMI  
Distinguished Resource Persons 
MEFMI staff 
Course Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to join you on the occasion of the official opening of 
this regional course on Financial Programming and Policies.  
Allow me to begin by extending a very warm welcome to you all on behalf of the Government 
and the people of Malawi, and also on my own behalf. I wish to extend a warm welcome to 
the  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Management  Institute  of  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa 
(MEFMI) staff and resource persons. We in Malawi are most delighted to be associated with 
MEFMI and to host one of your capacity building events once again. A special welcome to 
colleagues  from  MEFMI  member  states.  May  your  two  week  stay  in  Malawi  be  both 
enjoyable and fruitful.  
Let me acknowledge the presence of our regional resource persons, who have taken time off 
their busy schedules to assist us in this important event. I am pleased to note that the team 
wholly  comprises  experts  trained  by  MEFMI  under  its  flagship  Fellowship  Development 
Programme. This is an indication that MEFMI’s capacity building efforts are now bearing fruit 
on a sustainable basis. We wish to commend the institute for this achievement. 
This course, I am informed, is designed for middle to senior level officials from the ministries 
of  finance  and  economic  planning  and  central  banks.  These  officials  provide  an  important 
technical input into macroeconomic and financial policies and are sometimes also involved in 
policy design and implementation. This course aims at enhancing their understanding of the 
design  and  implementation  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  policies.  It  is  most  pleasing 
therefore to see a number of you here representing key economic and financial institutions in 
our region. May I urge you all to make the most of this rare opportunity. 
Experience from the region shows a general institutional bias in skills among our economists. 
For  example,  economists  in  the  Ministries  of  Finance  tend  to  have  a  firm  appreciation  of 
fiscal issues but limited understanding of Balance of Payments and Monetary and Financial 
issues.  Similarly  economists  in  central  banks  may  also  be  weak  in  Fiscal  and  National 
accounting.  This,  coupled  with 
the  weak  coordination  among  key  macroeconomic 
management  agencies,  often  leads  to  the  formulation  of  inconsistent  macroeconomic 
policies, resulting in poor economic performance. We should at all cost avoid this. 
This  course  on  Financial  Programming  is  designed  to  take  care  of  this  problem  by 
addressing  inter-linkages  between  sectors  and  trade-offs  associated  with  different  policy 
mixes.  The  main  challenge  of  making  sound  policy  choices  however  still  remains  with 
principal  officers  in  our  institutions.  The  financial  programming  framework  makes  for  more 
informed  policy  decisions  and  is  not  in  itself  a  substitute  for  all  important  policy  making 
process. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  the  programme  for  this  course  is  quite  comprehensive  and  covers 
theoretical issues, practical linkages and applications. The course also covers an analysis of 
the  key  macroeconomic  accounts  in  an  economy  (the  general  government,  non  financial 
corporations, 
institutions  serving 
households).  We  hope  that  resource  persons  will  demonstrate  how  an  appropriate  set  of 
financial  corporations,  households  and  non  profit 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 1
policy  measures  can  be  developed  and  coordinated  to  promote  growth  and  achieve 
macroeconomic adjustment. The course will of course also cover forecasting techniques.  
At  the  end  of  the  course,  it  is  our  expectation  that  the  tools  and  techniques  imparted  to 
participants will help them achieve the following: 
– 
Sharpen their understanding of the essential sectoral linkages and their impact on 
policy design; 
Improve  capacity  in  forecasting  and  projection  skills  and  applications  to  policy 
formulation;  
Improve appreciation of policy trade-offs and consistency; 
Enhance appreciation of the sequencing issues in policy design and implementation 
and the importance of commitment to see policy measures run their course. 
  This should enable participants tackle the following: 
 
Formulate in a fairly precise way the nature of interrelationships among sectors of 
the economy; 
Establish outcomes of various policy options and; 
Recommend desirable policy packages and possible sequencing of measures. 
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, I appreciate that this is a fairly heavy agenda for the two week period, 
but  I  would  like  to  believe  that  you  will  be  up  to  the  challenge.  MEFMI  capacity  building 
events  fortunately  are  not  designed  as  holiday  packages!  Note  however,  that  as  in  any 
learning process, the ultimate success of this programme will hinge upon the extent to which 
each and every participant exerts himself or herself. Needless to say there is great potential 
for you to learn from each other as you come from diverse backgrounds and experiences, 
and there are unique contributions that each one of you can bring to the table. 
It  is  therefore  my  hope  that  after  this  course,  you  will  go  out  fully  motivated  to  make  a 
difference at your places of work by implementing what you have learnt. Share the fruits of 
this  course  with  colleagues  in  your  respective  institutions.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  the 
MEFMI capacity building model and we expect you to be agents of this effort. It is also our 
expectation that a few months down the line, MEFMI will get a positive feedback from your 
institutions.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to wish you all a fruitful programme. While I expect you to 
apply yourselves with full dedication to the core business at hand, please also find time to 
enjoy our Malawi hospitality. Lilongwe and its environs has quite a lot to offer, and I hope that 
over the next two weeks those of you visiting Malawi for the first time will be able to sample 
Malawi’s social and cultural menu.  
Without  further  ado,  it  is  now  my  humble  honour  and  duty  to  declare  this  workshop  on 
Financial Programming and Policies officially open. 
I thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2010
