Thomas C Baxter, Jr: Too big to fail – expectations and impact of 
extraordinary government intervention and the role of systemic risk in 
the financial crisis 
Testimony by Mr Thomas C Baxter, Jr, Executive Vice President and General Counsel of the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry  Commission, 
Washington DC, 1 September 2010. 
 Chairman Angelides, Vice Chairman Thomas, and members of the Commission, thank you 
for the opportunity to appear before you today. For the past 15 years, I have been privileged 
to serve as the General Counsel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I welcome the 
opportunity to speak to you about the events that brought Lehman Brothers to bankruptcy, 
events  that  occurred  during  2008  when  our  Nation  was  in  the  midst  of  the  worst  financial 
crisis it has experienced since the Great Depression.  
During  the  crisis,  Federal  Reserve  policymakers  needed  to  respond  to  a  series  of 
extraordinary  and  hugely  consequential  problems,  usually  with  little  time  and  imperfect 
information.  Today  I  will  be  speaking  to  you  about  the  facts  surrounding  one  of  these 
problems, Lehman Brothers. In 2008, my job was to provide legal advice to Federal Reserve 
policymakers, and so while I am happy to share with the Commission my recollections of the 
events that I will describe, I do not want to exaggerate my own importance. It was Chairman 
Bernanke,  the  Board  of  Governors,  and  President  Geithner  who  made  the  policy 
determinations on behalf of the Federal Reserve System – determinations that in my view 
were careful, creative, and right. 
With  this  introduction,  I  would  like  to  start  with  a  question  that  I  am  often  asked  about 
Lehman: “Why did you allow Lehman to fail?” It is an understandable question, but one that 
nevertheless contains a false premise. The Federal Reserve did not “allow” Lehman Brothers 
to die, bankruptcy being the equivalent of death to a financial company. Instead, the Federal 
Reserve, the United States Treasury Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), and others tried hard to save it – not for its own sake, of course, but for the sake of all 
the families and businesses who would be harmed by the devastating effects of a Lehman 
bankruptcy. We did not succeed, but the effort made was serious and determined. We came 
very close. 
In my remarks today, I will summarize the Federal Reserve’s actions to address the Lehman 
problem  in  two  parts.  In  the  first  part,  I  will  describe  how  the  Federal  Reserve  monitored 
Lehman’s efforts to stabilize itself and pressed its most senior management to find a long-
term solution for its liquidity and capital problems. In the second part, I will review how we 
attempted to facilitate a rescue from bankruptcy and, when this failed, to mitigate the impact 
of Lehman’s demise on the economic system as a whole. 
Lehman’s decline 
The  New  York  Fed  had  no  role  in  supervising  Lehman  Brothers.  The  SEC  supervised 
Lehman’s  broker-dealer  pursuant  to  express  statutory  authority,  and,  as  Chairman  Mary 
Shapiro  pointed  out  in  her  testimony  before  the  House  Financial  Services  Committee,  the 
SEC  also  supervised  Lehman’s  parent  holding  company  under  a  voluntary  program  called 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 1
the Consolidated Supervised Entity (CSE) program.1 The Federal Reserve had a business 
relationship with Lehman’s broker-dealer, but our transactions with the broker-dealer were for 
the  most  part  repurchase  agreements  done  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  and  purchases 
and sales of Treasury and agency securities. 
In  March,  events  in  our  financial  system  caused  several  responses  that  expanded  the 
Federal Reserve’s business relationship with Lehman Brothers and certain other investment 
banks. First, the Federal Reserve announced, on March 11, 2008, what became known as 
the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF). The TSLF was designed to address a liquidity 
problem that we had observed with respect to certain types of mortgage-backed securities. 
The TSLF addressed this problem by enabling primary dealers to borrow from the Federal 
Reserve certain securities that they could more easily exchange for cash and secure these 
borrowings by pledging securities to the Federal Reserve that were less easy to exchange. 
This enabled the primary dealers to obtain much-needed liquidity from the market. 
Second, at around the time this program was announced, one of the primary dealers, Bear 
Stearns,  was  experiencing  an  extraordinary  liquidity  run.  On  Friday,  March  14,  2008,  the 
New  York  Fed  received  authority  from  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
make  a  loan  that  enabled  Bear  Stearns  to  avoid  a  bankruptcy  filing  and  to  continue  in 
operation  through  the  weekend  of  March  15  and  16.  During  that  weekend,  the  Federal 
Reserve  and  the  United  States  Treasury  Department  facilitated  an  acquisition  of  Bear 
Stearns by J.P. Morgan Chase. The Federal Reserve also developed a new liquidity facility 
to  lend  cash  directly  to  primary  dealers,  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  (PDCF).  The 
PDCF  became  operational  on  Monday,  March  17,  2008,  and  it  was  intended  to  provide  a 
liquidity backstop for primary dealers who might face circumstances similar to Bear Stearns. 
Lehman Brothers was one of these dealers. 
It  is  impossible  to  know  what  would  have  happened  to  Lehman  without  the  TSLF  and  the 
PDCF,  but  it  is  safe  to  say  that  these  facilities  calmed  markets  and  allowed  Lehman  and 
others  more  time  to  examine  available  options  and  to  seek  potential  solutions.  As  history 
shows, Lehman had six months from the date of the Bear Stearns transaction to find a long-
term solution to its myriad problems. Of course Lehman’s challenges were very serious – it 
suffered from capital deficiency, liquidity drain and a low level of market confidence. Any of 
these three could potentially prove fatal to a publicly traded financial company, even in the 
healthiest of economies. Lehman had the misfortune of trying to solve all three at once. 
With the introduction of the TSLF and the PDCF, the New York Fed sent small teams of two 
monitors into each of the four remaining investment banks, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, 
Morgan Stanley and Lehman Brothers – something it had never done before. Let me again 
emphasize that we were not intending to conduct supervisory activities with our personnel, 
nor were we attempting to displace the SEC, the primary regulator of the investment banks. 
To the contrary, we were acting as a potential lender to these potential borrowers, and we 
wanted to know our new borrowers better. Because of concern that our monitoring role could 
be misunderstood or misconstrued, Vice Chairman Donald Kohn described our objectives in 
public  testimony.  He  said  that  the  on-site  monitors  had  two  narrowly  tailored  goals:  (1) to 
ensure that any credit that the Fed extended to the investment banks would be repaid, and 
(2) to  ensure  that  the  investment  banks  did  not  become  too  dependent  upon  Federal 
Reserve credit and would continue to work on improving their liquidity positions and financial 
strength.2  The  Federal  Reserve  monitors  did  not  take  on  the  broader  responsibility  of 
                                                 
1  Mary  L.  Schapiro,  Chairman,  U.S.  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Testimony  Concerning  the 
Lehman  Brothers  Examiner’s  Report,  before  the  United  States  House  of  Representatives  Committee  on 
Financial Services, April 20, 2010. 
2  Donald L. Kohn, Vice Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Risk Management and 
Its  Implications  for  Systemic  Risk,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Securities,  Insurance,  and  Investment, 
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate, June 19, 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2010
supervising Lehman. The SEC continued to be the supervisor of the broker-dealers and their 
parents, including Lehman’s broker-dealer and its parent, Lehman Holdings. 
Lehman showed some signs of recovery during this period. It raised capital in June of 2008. 
But liquidity continued to be a significant disability. As part of its monitoring, the New York 
Fed,  in  conjunction  with  the  SEC,  conducted  liquidity  stress  analyses  of  the  investment 
banks,  in  part  to  evaluate  their  creditworthiness.  Those  analyses  suggested  that  Lehman 
needed  to  improve  its  liquidity  should  the  credit  crisis  intensify.  Again,  to  Lehman’s  credit, 
and in response to our analyses, Lehman took steps to, and did, improve its liquidity. At no 
time, however, did anyone at the New York Fed believe that Lehman had sufficient liquidity 
to  withstand  what  was  to  come  in  September,  events  that  Richard  Fuld,  Lehman’s  former 
chief executive officer, has described as the “perfect storm.”3 
Accordingly, as has been well-documented in the press and in the comprehensive report by 
Anton  Valukas,  the  Lehman  Brothers’  bankruptcy  examiner  (the  Valukas  Report),  senior 
Federal officials, including President Geithner, continually pressed Lehman to find workable 
solutions  for  its  capital  and  liquidity  problems  from  March  to  September  2008.  Lehman 
executives  pursued  potential  merger  partners.  They  engaged  in  discussions  with  potential 
Korean buyers and approached Warren Buffett. At no time did the New York Fed tell Lehman 
that it would be bailed out with taxpayer money, nor did the New York Fed instruct Lehman to 
act as if such an option was available. Lehman’s CEO, Mr. Fuld, and the Chairman of the 
Lehman  board  of  directors,  Thomas  Cruikshank,  have  made  clear  that  Lehman  was  not 
expecting  any  Federal  bailout.4  Both  men  fully  understood  that  Lehman  was  a  public 
company and needed to be fully responsible for its own financial situation. 
Lehman weekend 
September of 2008 will likely be remembered as an epochal period in the history of American 
finance.  The  bankruptcy  filing  by  Lehman  occurred  during  that  month,  and  it  must  be 
analyzed in the context of that most distressing time. On September 7, the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship, and the Treasury 
Department used its authority, granted by Congress in July 2008, to make financial support 
available to these two government-sponsored entities. While Lehman is often considered the 
trigger for the systemic consequences that were to come later in the month, it is also clear 
that  Fannie  and  Freddie’s  decline,  among  other  factors,  caused  a  number  of  market 
participants to begin “hunkering down” to protect their balance sheets. Exposure to Lehman 
was  one  of  the  items  to  be  addressed.  Counterparties’  reluctance  to  deal  with  Lehman 
intensified starting on Monday, September 8, 2008, such that by Thursday, September 11, 
2008, it was apparent to us that Lehman faced a liquidity crisis – i.e., it would not be able to 
pay its debts as they came due. The issue was no longer whether this public company could 
fashion  its  own  rescue.  We  had  come  to  the  point  of  no  return,  where  Lehman  faced  two 
alternatives: bankruptcy, or some kind of third-party rescue. 
The  United  States  Treasury  Department,  working  in  conjunction  with  the  Federal  Reserve 
and  the  SEC,  convened  a  meeting  of  the  chief  executive  officers  of  major  financial 
institutions at the New York Fed after the close of markets on Friday, September 12, 2008. 
Secretary Paulson opened the meeting with a short and plain declaration that there would be 
no public money to support Lehman. The Government then gave the CEOs two tasks. First, 
it  was  suggested  they  form  a  consortium  to  finance  certain  of  Lehman’s  illiquid  assets  in 
                                                 
3  Richard  S.  Fuld,  Jr.,  Statement  before  the  United  States  House  of  Representatives  Committee  on 
Financial Services, April 20, 2010. 
4  Transcript,  Hearing  on  Lehman  Brothers  Bankruptcy  Examiner  Report,  United  States  House  of 
Representatives Committee on Financial Services, April 20, 2008, pp. 136, 153. 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 3
order to facilitate an acquisition. Second, as a contingency, should the banking organizations 
fail  to  come  up  with  a  workable  rescue  plan,  they  should  present  an  alternative  plan  to 
address  the  effects  of  a  Lehman  bankruptcy,  because  they  should  anticipate  that  would 
happen Monday morning. 
As was the case with Bear Stearns, the Government knew that a third party would have to 
finance  a  portfolio  of  Lehman’s  illiquid  assets  in  order  to  make  Lehman  acceptable  as  a 
merger partner. In this case, drawing upon the precedent of the rescue of Long Term Capital 
Management in 1998, the Government arranged for a consortium of private banks to provide 
the  financing.  And  in  fact,  after  much  discussion  and  some  disagreeable  moments,  the 
private banks agreed to do so. By Sunday, September 14, the counterparties had agreed to 
finance approximately $30 billion of Lehman’s illiquid assets in order to facilitate Lehman’s 
rescue.  While  the  structure  was  never  finalized,  it  would  presumably  have  resembled  a 
private sector version of Maiden Lane LLC, the vehicle used to acquire the assets from Bear 
Stearns. The banks would have lent $30 billion to their SPV, and the special purpose vehicle 
(SPV)  would  have  purchased  largely  real  estate-related  assets  from  Lehman.  This  would 
have made Lehman more attractive to a potential acquirer. 
Lining up financing for the illiquid assets was a necessary condition for a rescue, but it was 
not sufficient. The sine qua non of the plan, as Secretary Geithner and others have pointed 
out, was a willing and capable merger partner.5 In the end, the rescue failed because we had 
no  willing  and  capable  merger  partner  able  to  provide  the  necessary  commitments  to 
stabilize Lehman. And, lest there is confusion on the point, this would be true no matter who 
was financing the acquisition of Lehman’s illiquid assets, the counterparties or the New York 
Fed. 
As  of  that  Friday,  there  were  two  prospective  Lehman  acquirers:  Bank  of  America  and 
Barclays. On Saturday, September 13, Bank of America abandoned the potential acquisition 
of  Lehman  and  reached  an  agreement  to  acquire  Merrill  Lynch.  Barclays  was  the  only 
remaining  suitor.  On  Sunday,  September  14,  with  the  consortium  financing  committed,  we 
learned for the first time that Barclays would not be able to deliver a key document to carry 
the merger to conclusion: a guarantee of Lehman’s trading obligations between the signing 
of the merger agreement and its closing. 
The  Bear  Stearns  transaction  taught  us  the  importance  of  the  guarantee  to  a  successful 
rescue.  A  guarantee  maintains  the  ability  of  the  troubled  company  to  operate  as  a  going 
concern  and,  thus,  preserves  value.  It  does  this  by  providing  protection  to  counterparties 
during  an  especially  vulnerable  period  –  the  period  between  merger  contract  and  merger 
closing. Without such a guarantee, the creditors and counterparties of the firm would be at 
risk in the event that the merger fell apart because of a failed shareholder vote or some other 
contingency.  Consequently,  as  a  market  matter,  the  guarantee  is  an  indispensable  part  of 
any such rescue operation. 
On Sunday, September 14, we learned that Barclays could not proffer the needed guarantee 
without a shareholder vote. This vote would take days, if not weeks or months, and there was 
no  way  to  predict  if  the  shareholders  would  even  vote  for  the  transaction  to  proceed.  I 
explored with counsel whether the U.K. government, or one of its instrumentalities like the 
FSA, might waive this U.K. requirement, such that the guarantee could be delivered and the 
rescue  effected.  I  learned  that  the  U.K.  authorities  were  not  amenable  to  a  waiver.  Thus, 
Barclays ceased to be available as the willing buyer that we needed to rescue Lehman, and 
there was no other interest from any firm of sufficient size and capability that could acquire 
Lehman, a company with consolidated assets of about $600 billion. 
                                                 
5  Timothy  F.  Geithner,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Statement  before  the  United  States  House  of 
Representatives Committee on Financial Services, April 20, 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2010
Many have asked why, when the Barclays guarantee problem presented itself, the Federal 
Reserve did not step forward and guarantee the trading obligations of Lehman pending its 
merger with Barclays. They observe that we lent approximately $29 billion to Maiden Lane 
LLC to facilitate the merger of J.P. Morgan Chase and Bear Stearns, and they look at our 
commitment to lend up to $85 billion to AIG. 
Under  the  law,  the  New  York  Fed  does  not  have  the  authority  to  provide  what  I  would 
characterize  as  a  “naked”  guarantee  –  one  that  would  be  unsecured  and  not  limited  in 
amount,  and  would  put  the  U.S.  taxpayers  at  risk  for  the  entirety  of  Lehman’s  trading 
obligations. As Chairman Bernanke has observed, “the Federal Reserve has done, and will 
continue to do, everything possible within the limits of its authority to assist in restoring our 
nation to financial stability and economic prosperity….”6 In this case, Lehman had no ability 
to  pledge  the  amount  of  collateral  required  to  satisfactorily  secure  a  Fed  guarantee,  one 
large  enough  to  credibly  withstand  a  run  by  Lehman’s  creditors  and  counterparties.  As 
events subsequently played out, several weeks after Lehman weekend, on October 2, 2008, 
Congress  passed  the  Emergency  Economic  Stabilization  Act  (EESA),  which  provides  the 
U.S.  Treasury  Department  with  legal  authority  to  issue  a  guarantee.7  Again,  the  Federal 
Reserve did not then, and does not now, have such authority. 
Even  if  it  had  been  legally  possible,  a  Government  guarantee  would have  also  placed  the 
taxpayer at enormous risk because it would have undermined deal certainty. It is important 
for the acquirer – and not a third party – to issue the guarantee because it gives the acquirer 
a  strong  incentive  to  close  the  deal  and  assume  control  of  the  target.  For  example, 
J.P. Morgan  Chase,  which  proffered  the  guarantee  needed  to  merge  with  Bear  Stearns, 
negotiated a host of provisions from Bear Stearns that assured deal certainty. And, during 
the  period  between  March  2008  (when  J.P.  Morgan  Chase  and  Bear  Stearns  agreed  to 
merge) and June 2008 (when the merger closed), counterparties of Bear Stearns continued 
to do business with it because of the J.P. Morgan Chase guarantee. 
On the other hand, where a third party provides the guarantee, the acquirer enjoys all the 
benefits if the target’s condition improves and none of the burdens if the target’s condition 
declines. It is the third party who is on the hook, and in this case that third party would have 
been  the  taxpayer.  Similarly,  from  the  perspective  of  the  merger  target,  an  unlimited 
guarantee by the Government could provide the merger target with the means to try to stay 
independent – its shareholders might vote the merger down with an unlimited Government 
guarantee. 
Some observers ask why if we were not able to backstop Lehman, we were able to provide 
substantial credit to AIG immediately afterwards. The answer is that in the case of AIG, there 
was  sufficient  collateral  to  support  the  commitment  to  lend.  Unlike  the  naked  guarantee 
needed  to  facilitate  the  merger  of  Barclays  and  Lehman,  our  committed  credit  to  AIG  on 
September  16,  2008,  was  fully  secured  by  good  collateral,  namely,  AIG’s  sound  retail 
insurance  businesses.  In  fact,  before  any  money  was  disbursed  to  AIG  on  September  16, 
AIG delivered share certificates to the New York Fed that we continue to hold as collateral in 
our vaults. These shares fully secured every penny we lent to AIG on September 16, 2008. 
And today, the credit extended to AIG by the New York Fed remains fully secured. 
Likewise, the Federal Reserve’s loan to Maiden Lane LLC, which facilitated the Bear Stearns 
rescue,  was  and  is  fully  secured.  The  security  is  important  because  it  is  the  taxpayer’s 
                                                 
6  Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Policies 
to  Ease  Credit  and  Their  Implications  for  the  Fed's  Balance  Sheet,  National  Press  Club  Luncheon, 
National Press Club, Washington, D.C., February 18, 2009 (emphasis added). 
7  See EESA, §102(c)(4), “Adjustment to purchase authority” (“The purchase authority limit in section 115 shall 
be reduced by an amount equal to the difference between the total of the outstanding guaranteed obligations 
and the balance in the Troubled Assets Insurance Financing Fund.”) 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 5
protection in the event of a default. There is no similar protection to the issuer of a naked 
guarantee; if the obligor of the guaranteed obligation fails to perform, the guarantor is liable. 
On  Sunday,  September  14,  with  an  acquisition  of  Lehman  no  longer  possible,  a  working 
group  of  market  participants  focused  on  the  best  way  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  a  Lehman 
bankruptcy. They concluded that a contingency plan developed by the SEC, the Treasury, 
and the New York Fed was the best option. Under this plan, Lehman’s parent would file a 
Chapter  11  petition,  but  the  broker-dealer  subsidiary  would  continue  to  operate.  It  would 
operate with intra-day credit from its clearing bank, J.P. Morgan Chase, and overnight credit 
from the Federal Reserve. 
The  Federal  Reserve  would  provide  credit  that  was  fully  secured  by  the  collateral  of  the 
broker-dealer and this would continue for a period of time to enable the broker-dealer to wind 
down its trading book in an orderly manner – thereby mitigating to some degree the impact of 
the  failure  on  financial  markets  and  the  economy.  At  the  point  in  time  when  an  orderly 
liquidation of the broker-dealer became practical, a petition would be filed for a receivership 
under the Securities Investor Protection Act. This became the contingency plan, although it 
was always subject to the Lehman board of directors deciding to file a Chapter 11 petition, a 
matter  that  was  their  responsibility  and  not  ours.  On  September  15,  Lehman’s  board  of 
directors elected to place the parent company in Chapter 11 while leaving Lehman’s broker-
dealer open for business so it could wind down its operations. 
A look at the hypothetical alternative of lending to the Lehman holding company itself reveals 
that  it  was  in  fact  not  viable.  By  Monday,  September  15,  Lehman  faced  a  total  erosion  of 
market confidence, and so the Federal Reserve would have been lending into a classic run. 
Had Lehman not filed for bankruptcy on September 15, but opened as if it were business as 
usual,  creditors  and  counterparties  would  have  rushed  to  protect  their  positions,  using  all 
legal remedies, causing the liquidity crisis to spread throughout Lehman’s organization. 
By contrast, the New York Fed affirmatively decided to continue extending credit to Lehman 
Brothers’  broker-dealer.  This  decision  was  made  to  facilitate  the  broker-dealer’s  orderly 
winddown.  Then,  when  Barclays 
table  on  Tuesday, 
September 16, with an offer to purchase substantially all of the assets of Lehman’s broker-
dealer, the New York Fed used this financing to facilitate a transition of certain broker-dealer 
operations from Lehman to Barclays. Once Judge Peck of the United States District Court for 
the Southern District of New York approved the arrangement at the end of the week, those 
operations were in Barclays’ hands. 
While there was nothing truly “orderly” about the Lehman bankruptcy, the New York Fed’s 
overnight  financing  of  the  Lehman  broker-dealer  avoided  further  market  disruption.  This 
piece  of  the  overall  Lehman  story  is  rarely  told,  and  yet  it  deserves  attention.  In  contrast, 
Lehman  Brothers  International  Europe  (LBIE),  the  U.K.  broker-dealer,  was  immediately 
placed into administration, its employees were sent home without paychecks, and the U.K. 
broker-dealer  had  no  opportunity  to  wind  down  its  positions.  As  such,  its  counterparties’ 
positions  were  likewise  frozen,  which  created  liquidity  problems  and  significant  market 
exposures as asset prices moved in the wake of Lehman’s failure. 
the  negotiating 
returned 
to 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, let me say a few words about regulatory reform and the tools we had to work 
with. I mentioned earlier the guarantee tool that the Congress added when the EESA was 
enacted. Another important development is the Dodd-Frank legislation, which promises more 
effective  comprehensive  consolidated  supervision  of  systemically  significant  organizations 
like Lehman. This supervision will demand higher levels of capital and liquidity, precisely the 
type  of  medicine  that  Lehman  needed.  Systemically  significant  non-banking  financial 
companies,  like  Lehman,  will  also  be  obliged  to  submit  resolution  plans  which  will  help  to 
avoid some of the problems experienced after Lehman filed its Chapter 11 petition. Further, if 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2010
a  systemically  significant  organization  like  Lehman  needs  to  be  resolved,  Dodd-Frank 
creates a new resolution procedure that should facilitate a more orderly winddown. 
Thank  you  again  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today,  and  I  look  forward  to 
answering your questions. 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 7
