Nout Wellink: Fundamentally strengthening the regulatory framework for 
banks 
Remarks by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Korea-FSB  Financial  Reform  Conference:  An 
Emerging Market Perspective, Seoul, 3 September 2010. 
 Introduction and background 
I. 
Let me start by thanking our Korean hosts and the Financial Stability Board for organising 
this conference. The timing could not have been better as the Basel Committee has entered 
the final phase of completing its reform programme. It is especially fitting that this meeting is 
hosted by the Republic of Korea, given the importance and continuing growth of the South 
Korean  economy,  its  membership  on  the  Basel  Committee,  and  of  course  its  key  role  as 
current  chair  of  the  G20.  As  you  know,  the  Basel  Committee’s  reform  programme  will  be 
presented to the G20 leaders for their endorsement when they meet here in November. 
A  number  of  commentators  have  questioned  whether  the  Basel  Committee’s  reforms  of 
global banking standards are really necessary for countries that neither “caused” the crisis 
nor were directly affected by it. However, I should point out that all were affected indirectly 
through the global economic downturn. This includes emerging market economies.  
To  me,  at  least,  it  is  clear  that  we  all  have  a  lot  to  learn  from  both  the  recent  and  past 
financial crises. History has shown that crises have emanated from all regions of the world 
and have a range of causes. None of us knows what will be the source of the next crisis. 
What we do know, however, is that in a dynamic, ever changing global economy, there will 
be future crises and that it will be hard to predict them in advance. Moreover, as banks are at 
the centre of the credit intermediation process, it comes as no surprise that the deepest and 
most prolonged downturns occur when the banking sector ceases to perform its central role 
in the economy. We therefore must increase the resilience of the banking system to financial 
and  economic  shocks,  in  particular  through  higher  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,  but  also 
through  a  more  resilient  infrastructure.  We  also  must  change  incentives  in  areas  such  as 
governance  practices,  compensation  and  the  moral  hazard  associated  with  too-big-to-fail 
institutions. This is the best form of preparation and will contribute to increasing our long term 
growth and welfare.  
The reforms of the Basel Committee are intended to address these identified shortcomings 
by promoting a more resilient banking sector that can support more sustainable growth over 
the long run. Let me elaborate on our reform programme, which is nearing its final stage of 
completion. My focus will be on strengthening the global capital framework and introducing a 
global standard for liquidity. 
II. 
Capital reform 
Quality of capital base 
I  will  start  with  capital  since  raising  the  level,  quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  the 
capital base is one of the Committee’s primary objectives. It is only through higher levels of 
loss  absorbing  capital  that  the  banking  sector  will  be  in  a  stronger  position  to  shield  the 
economy from future shocks. The thrust of our work is to improve the level and proportion of 
the core elements of Tier 1 capital, namely common equity and retained earnings. Under the 
existing standard, banks could hold as little as 2% of risk-weighted assets as common equity. 
It is even less if you consider the need for additional regulatory adjustments. This situation is 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 1
unacceptable  and  must  change.  At  its  meeting  on  July  26th,  the  Basel  Committee’s 
governing body – the Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision – reached 
broad agreement on a fundamental strengthening of the definition of capital, with a focus on 
the core elements of capital instead of debt-like substitutes that are of questionable quality. 
Moreover, virtually all deductions from capital will now occur at the level of common equity, 
instead of Tier 1 capital, as has been the case under the current standard. This will ensure 
that  banks cannot  show  strong  capital  ratios and,  at  the same  time,  recognise  assets  that 
diminish the quality of capital. 
Let me be clear: The change to the definition of capital represents – by itself – a substantial 
strengthening of the global capital regime. This is the case before we even begin to discuss 
an increase in the level of minimum capital requirements or the introduction of buffers.  
Capturing all the risks 
In  addition  to  raising  the  quality  of  the  capital  base,  we  need  to  ensure  that  all  risks  are 
captured. During the crisis, we learned that many risks were not covered in the risk-based 
regime. In particular, these include the complex, illiquid credit products which found their way 
into banks’ trading books without a commensurate increase in capital to support the risks. 
The  Committee  has  since  strengthened  substantially  the  rules  that  govern  capital 
requirements  for  trading  book  exposures  as  well  as  for  complex  securitisations  and 
exposures to off-balance sheet vehicles. The revised trading book framework, on average, 
requires banks to hold around three to four times the old capital requirements.   
Controlling leverage  
An additional and – as recent history has demonstrated – critical element to the regulatory 
capital framework is a backstop to the risk-based capital requirement. I am talking, of course, 
about the newly introduced leverage ratio. 
In the lead up to the last crisis, banks managed to comply with the risk-based regime: they 
reported  brilliant  Tier  1  risk-based  ratios,  while  building  up  massive  levels  of  on-  and  off-
balance-sheet leverage. In good times, the market did not seem to care about this, but when 
the crisis hit, market participants required banks to meet basic measures of leverage. The 
subsequent  process  of  deleveraging  resulted  in  a  downward  spiral  between  the  financial 
sector and real economy.  
To contain these cycles of boom and bust leverage and the gaming of the risk-based regime, 
the Basel Committee’s governing body agreed recently on the design of the leverage ratio 
and an indicative calibration of 3%. It is important to understand that the new leverage ratio 
not  only  includes  on-balance  sheet  positions  but  also  off-balance  sheet  items  and 
derivatives, like credit derivatives. For global banks with significant capital market activities, 
this 3% calibration is likely to be more conservative than the traditional measures of leverage 
that have been in place in some countries. The proposed minimum of 3% will serve as the 
basis  for  testing  during  a  parallel  run  period  that  will  begin  in  January  2013  with  full 
disclosure starting January 2015. The reason for the parallel run period is not to prolong the 
implementation.  Rather,  we  want  to  make  sure  that  the  risk-based  requirement  and  the 
leverage ratio floor interact in a manner that makes sense. And this can only be done when 
observed over different points of the economic cycle, taking into consideration the impact on 
different types of business models.  
Buffers 
The next essential element of the new regulatory capital framework is the build up of buffers 
in good times that can be drawn down in periods of stress. To achieve this, the Committee 
has proposed a capital conservation buffer. During the crisis, some banks that were under 
stress  –  in  an  attempt  to  signal  their  financial  strength  –  continued  to  pay  out  dividends 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2010
instead of retaining their profits, which would have replenished their capital. This behaviour 
was  partly  driven  by  a  collective  action  problem:  a  reduction  in  dividends,  it  was  feared, 
would be viewed as a sign of financial weakness. As a bank’s capital levels move closer to 
minimum  requirements,  the  conservation  buffer  would  impose  a  constraint  on  a  bank’s 
discretionary distributions. These include dividend payments, share buy-backs and bonuses. 
Retaining  a  greater  proportion  of  earnings  during  a  downturn  will  help  ensure  that  capital 
remains  available  to  support  the  bank’s  ongoing  business  operations  during  the  period  of 
stress.  
In addition, the Committee recently issued a proposal for a countercyclical buffer. This would 
be  imposed  when,  in  the  view  of  national  authorities,  excess  aggregate  credit  growth  is 
judged to be associated with a build-up of system-wide risk. The countercyclical buffer would 
extend  the  conservation  buffer  range  during  such  periods  of  excess  credit  growth. 
Conversely,  the  buffer  would  be  released  when,  in  the  judgement  of  the  authorities,  the 
released capital would help absorb losses in the banking system that pose a risk to financial 
stability.  This  would  help  reduce  the  risk  that  available  credit  is  constrained  by  regulatory 
capital requirements.  
Taken together, this framework of buffers will increase banking sector resilience and mitigate 
procyclicality.  
III.  A new liquidity framework 
The  reform  measures  I  just  described  will  radically  transform  the  regulatory  capital 
framework.  In  a  similar  way,  the  Committee  has  introduced  a  liquidity  framework  which  is 
even more far-reaching since a global standard does not currently exist. For the first time, 
banking supervisors around the world will have a common international standard which they 
can apply to their banks.  
The liquidity phase of the crisis was characterised by the speed with which funding dried up 
and the extended period of time during which banks suffered from that shortage of liquidity. 
In  response  the  Committee  proposed  global  minimum  liquidity  standards  that  include 
measures to promote both the short-term resilience of banks to potential liquidity disruptions 
and longer-term structural liquidity mismatches. The Liquidity Coverage Ratio – the LCR – 
will require banks to have sufficient high-quality liquid assets to withstand a stressed funding 
scenario that is specified by supervisors. This is complemented by the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio  –  the  NSFR  –  which  is  a  longer-term  structural  ratio  designed  to  address  liquidity 
mismatches.  It  covers  the  entire  balance  sheet  and  provides  incentives  for  banks  to  use 
stable sources of funding.  
Introducing a new set of standards is a complex process. Unlike the capital framework, for 
which there is extensive experience and data that help inform calibration, there is no similar 
track record for liquidity standards. The Committee is therefore taking a carefully considered 
approach to refine the design and calibration and we will review the impact of these changes 
to ensure that they deliver a rigorous overall liquidity standard. But let me be clear on this 
point:  the  Committee  is  committed  to  adopting  both  the  LCR  and  the  NSFR  as  the 
international standards for liquidity.  
IV.  Systemic risk and interconnectedness 
I  now  turn  to  systemic  risk  and  interconnectedness.  The  capital  reforms  and  new  liquidity 
standards  that  have  been  developed  by  the  Committee  will  help  improve  the  resilience  of 
individual firms to stress. While it logically follows that stronger individual banks will lead to a 
stronger banking system, this firm-specific approach by itself may not be sufficient. Broader 
measures  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  entire  banking  system  are  equally  important. 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 3
This will also help address excess interconnectedness and the perception that some banks 
are too big to fail.  
The  Committee  has  taken  several  measures  to  address  the  risks  arising  from  exposures 
among global financial institutions that include: 
 
Capital  incentives  for  banks  to  use  central  counterparties  for  over-the-counter 
derivatives;  
Higher capital for trading and derivative activities, as well as complex securitisations, 
which are associated with systemic risk and interconnectedness; 
Higher capital for inter-financial sector exposures as these are more correlated; and 
Cross-border  bank  resolution  recommendations  as  a  practical  way  to  begin 
addressing the systemic risk issue at global banks.  
  An additional way in which the Committee is addressing the too-big-to-fail problem relates to 
the  use  of  contingent  capital.  The  Committee  recently  published  a  proposal  based  on  a 
requirement that the contractual terms of capital instruments will allow them – at the option of 
the  regulatory  authority  –  to  be  written-off  or  converted  to  common  shares  if  the  bank  is 
judged to be non-viable by the relevant authority. We are also reviewing the potential role of 
“going  concern”  contingent  capital  in  the  capital  framework.  The  Committee  will  review  a 
fleshed-out proposal for the treatment of such going-concern contingent capital before year 
end.  
Finally, in collaboration with the FSB, the Committee is assessing the need for a systemic 
capital  surcharge  to  mitigate  the  risk  that  certain  banks  perceived  as  too-big-too  fail  could 
pose on the system as a whole. This is an area where contingent capital could play a future 
role. 
Next steps 
V. 
After  having  agreed  on  the  key  design  elements  of  the  new  capital  framework  and  the 
definition of capital, the final remaining issue is to determine the calibration of the minimum 
requirements and regulatory buffers. Next week, the Committee will meet to discuss concrete 
calibration proposals. The Committee’s oversight body, the Group of Central Bank Governors 
and  Heads  of  Supervision,  will  meet  shortly  after  that.  Our  goal  is  to  present  to  the 
G20 Leaders in Seoul a fully calibrated set of proposals for their endorsement. A final rules 
text  would  be  issued  at  the  end  of  this  year.  As  part  of  this  process,  we  also  will  make 
recommendations for a smooth transition to the new standard.  
Benefits and conclusion 
VI. 
I  think  an  appropriate  way  to  conclude  my  remarks  is  with  the  benefits  we  expect  these 
reforms to confer. A few weeks ago, the Committee and the FSB published a report on the 
macroeconomic  implications  of  the  proposed  higher  regulatory  standards  during  the 
transition  to  these  new  standards.  This  report  was  accompanied  by  an  additional  study 
conducted by the Committee on the long-term economic impact of the new standards.  
I will readily admit that existing macroeconomic models for understanding the links between 
the financial sector and the economy are not as well developed as they could be. In the face 
of  this  uncertainty,  we  have  drawn  on  a  wide  range  of  models  and  assessed  the  central 
tendency  and  the  variation  across  countries  and  methodologies.  Moreover,  we  have 
considered  factors  that  might  overstate  the  economic  impact  and  those  that  understate  it. 
Our bias was to be conservative.  
Our work concluded that the transition to stronger capital and liquidity standards is likely to 
have only a modest impact on economic growth. If higher requirements are phased in over 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2010
four  years,  we  estimated  that  the  level  of  GDP  would  decline  by  0.19%  for  each  one 
percentage point increase in a bank’s capital ratio once the new rules were in place. This 
means that the annual growth rate would be reduced by an average of just 0.04 percentage 
points  over  a  four  and  a  half  year  period.  With  respect  to  the  impact  of  stronger  liquidity 
standards, the study also found these are likely to have only mild transitional effects. In all of 
these estimates, GDP returns to just below its baseline path in subsequent years. 
With  regard  to  the  long-term  implications,  the  Basel  Committee’s  assessment  found  that 
there  are  clear  economic  benefits  from  increasing  the  minimum  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements  from  their  current  levels.  The  benefits  of  higher  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements  accrue  from  reducing  the  probability  of  financial  crisis  and  the  output  losses 
associated with such crises. The benefits substantially exceed the potential output costs for a 
range of higher capital and liquidity requirements. 
The balance of evidence suggests that there is substantial room to strengthen capital and 
liquidity standards in a way that does not jeopardise near term growth, but enhances long 
term stability and economic output. Moreover, we need to understand that we continue to live 
in an economic environment with downside risks. In such circumstances, we cannot afford to 
continue to operate with such thin minimum regulatory capital and liquidity requirements. The 
system does not have the capacity for another round of bail outs, nor does the public have 
the tolerance for it. 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 5
