European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
4 March 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Rehn.  
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into account all the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting 
on 4 February 2010, price developments are expected to remain subdued over the policy-
relevant horizon. The latest information has also confirmed that the economic recovery in the 
euro area is on track, although it is likely to remain uneven. Overall, the Governing Council 
expects  the  euro  area  economy  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace  in  2010,  in  an  environment 
marked  by  continued  uncertainty.  The  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the 
assessment of low inflationary pressures over the medium term. All in all, we expect price 
stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of 
euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term.  
At  today’s  meeting  we  also  discussed,  in  view  of  economic  and  financial  market 
developments, how to proceed with the gradual phasing-out of our non-standard operational 
measures.  In  this  respect,  we  decided  to  continue  conducting  both  the  main  refinancing 
operations  (MROs)  and  the  special-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  one 
maintenance  period  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  for  as  long  as 
necessary – and at least until the end of this year’s ninth maintenance period on 12 October 
2010. In the case of the special-term refinancing operations, the fixed rate will be the same 
as  the  rate  used  in  the  respective  MRO.  The  Governing  Council  also  decided  to  return  to 
variable rate tender procedures in the regular three-month longer-term refinancing operations 
(LTROs),  starting  with  the  operation  to  be  allotted  on  28  April  2010.  Allotment  amounts  in 
these operations will be set with the aim of ensuring smooth conditions in money markets 
and  avoiding  any  significant  spreads  between  bid  rates  and  the  prevailing  MRO  rate. 
Furthermore, the Governing Council decided, in line with its decision on the 12-month LTRO 
of 16 December 2009, to fix the rate in the six-month LTRO to be allotted on 31 March 2010 
at the average minimum bid rate of the MROs over the life of this operation. 
With today’s decisions, the Eurosystem continues to provide liquidity support to the banking 
system  of  the  euro  area  at  very  favourable  conditions,  thereby  facilitating  the  provision  of 
credit to the euro area. At the same time, these decisions help to avoid distortions associated 
with maintaining non-standard measures for longer than needed. The Governing Council will 
continue  to  implement  the  gradual  phasing-out  of  the  extraordinary  liquidity  measures.  In 
order to counter effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term, the 
liquidity provided will be absorbed when necessary. Accordingly, we will continue to monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Over  recent  quarters,  the  euro  area  has  continued  to  benefit  from  the  significant 
macroeconomic  stimulus  provided  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of 
the banking system, as well as from the ongoing recovery in the world economy. According 
to Eurostat’s first release, in quarter-on-quarter terms euro area real GDP increased by 0.1% 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 1
in the fourth quarter of 2009, after growing by 0.4% in the third quarter. Available indicators 
suggest that the economic recovery in the euro area is on track, although it is likely to remain 
uneven.  In  particular,  a  number  of  special  factors  are  at  play,  including  adverse  weather 
conditions in parts of the euro area in the first quarter of 2010. Given this uneven pattern, it is 
more appropriate to look through the quarterly volatility and to compare growth developments 
on a half-yearly basis. Looking ahead, the Governing Council expects real GDP growth to 
remain  moderate  in  2010,  owing  to  the  ongoing  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment  in 
various  sectors  and  the  expectation  that  the  low  capacity  utilisation  is  likely  to  dampen 
investment and that consumption is being dampened by weak labour market prospects. 
This assessment is also reflected in the March 2010 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP growth in a range between 0.4% and 1.2% 
for  2010  and  between  0.5%  and  2.5%  for  2011.  Compared  with  the  Eurosystem  staff 
projections published in December 2009, the range for real GDP growth in 2010 is slightly 
narrower,  while  for  2011  the  range  has  been  revised  slightly  upwards,  reflecting  notably 
stronger activity worldwide.  
The Governing Council continues to view the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced, in an 
environment marked by continued uncertainty. On the upside, confidence may improve more 
than expected, and both the global economy and foreign trade may recover more strongly 
than projected. Furthermore, there may be larger than anticipated effects stemming from the 
extensive  macroeconomic  stimulus  being  provided  and  from  other  policy  measures  taken. 
On the downside, concerns remain relating to a stronger or more protracted than expected 
negative  feedback  loop  between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector,  renewed 
increases in oil and other commodity prices, the intensification of protectionist pressures and 
renewed  tensions  in  some  financial  market  segments,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.9% in February 
2010, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, after 1.0% in January. Inflation is expected to 
be around 1% in the near term and to remain moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. In 
line  with  a  slow  recovery  in  domestic  and  foreign  demand,  overall  price,  cost  and  wage 
developments are expected to stay subdued. In this context, it is important to emphasise that 
inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in line with the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
This assessment is also reflected in the March 2010 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation in a range between 0.8% and 1.6% for 
2010 and between 0.9% and 2.1% for 2011. Compared with the Eurosystem staff projections 
published in December 2009, the range for 2010 has been adjusted marginally downwards, 
while the range for 2011 has been adjusted slightly upwards. 
Risks  to  this  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced.  They  relate,  in  particular,  to  further 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  greater  than  currently 
expected, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  turned  slightly  positive  in 
January 2010, rising to 0.1%. This reflects mainly a base effect and confirms the assessment 
of continued weak monetary growth. Together with the negative annual rate of growth in loans 
to the private sector (equal to –0.6% in January 2010), the latest data support the assessment 
that the underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that, in the medium term, the 
inflationary pressures associated with monetary developments are low. The growth of M3 and 
loans to the private sector is likely to remain weak also in the coming months.  
At the same time, actual monetary developments are likely to be weaker than the underlying 
pace of monetary expansion, on account of the downward impact of the steep yield curve. 
This  fosters  the  allocation  of  funds  away  from  M3  and  into  longer-term  deposits  and 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2010
securities. On the other hand, the narrow spreads between the interest rates paid on different 
M3 instruments imply a low opportunity cost of holding funds in the most liquid components 
included in M1, which continued to grow at a robust annual rate of 11.5% in January. 
The  negative  annual  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  conceals  ongoing  opposite 
developments: positive, strengthening annual growth in loans to households on the one hand 
and  negative,  declining  annual  growth  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  on  the  other 
hand. Such differences are consistent with historical patterns and cyclical regularities, which 
suggest that loans to non-financial corporations can be expected to remain weak for some 
time  after  economic  activity  has  picked  up.  At  the  same  time,  the  cost  of  financing  for 
enterprises has declined and the sector as a whole has continued to make extensive use of 
market-based financing as a substitute for bank financing. 
Banks have continued to reduce the size of their overall balance sheets over the past few 
months, but the challenge remains for them to manage this adjustment while ensuring the 
availability of credit to the non-financial sector. To address this challenge, banks should use 
the  improved  funding  conditions  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases  further  and,  where 
necessary, take full advantage of government support measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all the 
information and analyses that have become available since our meeting on 4 February 2010, 
price  developments  are  expected  to  remain  subdued  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  The 
latest information has also confirmed that the economic recovery in the euro area is on track, 
although it is likely to remain uneven. Overall, the Governing Council expects the euro area 
economy  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace  in  2010,  in  an  environment  marked  by  continued 
uncertainty.  A  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressures over the medium 
term.  All  in  all,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain 
firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term.  
As regards fiscal policies, high levels of public deficit and debt place an additional burden 
on monetary policy and undermine the Stability and Growth Pact as a key pillar of Economic 
and Monetary Union. It is of paramount importance that the stability programme of each euro 
area country clearly defines the fiscal exit and consolidation strategies for the period ahead. 
This requires determined efforts, notably on the side of countries with high deficit and debt 
levels. All countries will be required to meet their commitments under the excessive deficit 
procedures. Consolidation of public finances should start in 2011 at the latest and will have 
to exceed substantially the annual adjustment of 0.5% of GDP set as a minimum requirement 
by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  A  strong  focus  on  expenditure  reforms  is  needed.  The 
Governing  Council  issued,  on  3  March  2010,  a  statement  on  the  additional  fiscal 
consolidation measures announced by the Greek government. 
In all euro area countries, the key challenge in order to reinforce sustainable growth and job 
creation  is  to  accelerate  structural  reforms.  Policies  should  be  adopted  which  open  up 
market access and increase competition. Overall, it is essential to set the stage for long-term 
investment  in  innovation  so  as  to  create  new  business  opportunities.  Sectoral  support 
schemes implemented to cope with the immediate effects of the crisis should now be phased 
out.  In  labour  markets,  moderate  wage  setting  in  several  economies  and  sufficient  labour 
market  flexibility  are  required  in  order  to  avoid  higher  structural  unemployment  over  the 
coming years. These structural reforms should be supported by an appropriate restructuring 
of  the  banking  sector.  Sound  balance  sheets,  effective  risk  management  and  transparent, 
robust business models are key to strengthening banks’ resilience to shocks and to ensuring 
adequate  access  to  finance,  thereby  laying  the  foundations  for  sustainable  growth  and 
financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 3
