Zeti Akhtar Aziz: A more integrated and cohesive Asia in the global 
economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Foreign 
Bankers’ Association of the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 22 June 2010. 
 Asia is one of the more diverse regions in the global economy. Yet over the decade following 
the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, Asia has become a more integrated and cohesive 
region.  The  accelerated  economic  transformation  of  Asia  during  this  period  has  reinforced 
this trend to sustain Asia as a high growth centre in the global economy. Asia has also been 
distinctive  in  terms  of  the  resilience  of  its  financial  system  in  withstanding  the  recent 
international financial turmoil. This has allowed Asia to emerge with an early recovery in its 
economic growth process. 
It is my honour and great pleasure to be here on the occasion of the Annual General Meeting 
of the Foreign Bankers’ Association of the Netherlands to speak on the developments that 
are  taking  place  in  Asia  and  the  potential  role  of  Asia  in  the  global  economy  and  the 
international financial system. Greater interdependence in the world economy is particularly 
relevant to Asia, As highly open economies, Asia is highly connected to the rest of the world 
and  therefore  vulnerable  to  external  developments.  At  the  same  time,  with  its  growing 
significance in the world economy, developments in Asia will also have implications on other 
parts of the world. 
Accelerated transformation of Asia 
For  more  than  five  decades  Asia  has  sustained  high  economic  growth.  More  important, 
however,  is  the  significant  economic  transformation  that  has  occurred  during  this  recent 
decade, in response to the changing domestic and international environment. Asia now and 
Asia previously is therefore significantly different. Asia today contributes about one third of 
world output and 28% of world trade. Asia’s progress and development has lifted millions out 
of  poverty,  creating  extensive  employment  and  improving  living  conditions  with  better 
education and healthcare opportunities.  
The economic transformation has essentially resulted in more diversified sources of growth 
for  Asia.  From  being  export-led,  domestic  demand  has  now  become  an  increasingly 
important source of growth. This is also reinforced by the shift from the public sector to the 
private sector as the main driver of growth. While Asia is highly diverse, a common feature 
prevailing  is  the  tremendous  economic  flexibility  of  the  Asian  economies.  Institutional 
development,  the  large  skilled  workforce,  the  shift  to  greater  market  orientation  and  the 
general macroeconomic stability have allowed resources to continuously shift to new areas 
of comparative advantage and for the Asian economies to remain competitive. Being highly 
diverse,  Asia  has  also  been  able  to  leverage  on  the  complementarities  that  exist  in  the 
different economies. This has generated an expansion in intra-regional trade, intra-regional 
investment activities and an increase in financial linkages between the economies in Asia.  
The Asian financial crisis was a defining moment for Asia. While most economies were able 
to  recover  in  just  over  a  year,  in  the  decade  that  followed,  wide  ranging  financial  reforms 
were  implemented.  In  addition,  the  development  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  financial 
infrastructure were aggressively pursued to strengthen the capacity of the financial system. 
The  legal  framework  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  of  the  financial  sector 
were also strengthened. Several important lessons from the crisis were also addressed, in 
particular, avoiding the excessive accumulation of debt whether by the household, corporate, 
financial  sector  or  the  public  sector.  Measures  were  taken  to  avoid  the  build-up  of  such 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 1
leverage and excesses largely through prudential regulation. In addition, buffers were built 
during the good times.  
These  reforms  have  yielded  tremendous  payoffs  for  Asia.  With  more  developed  financial 
markets  and  with  better  capitalised  banking  institutions  equipped  with  strengthened  risk 
management and governance practices, Asia did not experience any disruptions in financial 
intermediation  during  the  2008–2009  global  financial  crisis.  The  continued  access  to 
financing has in fact been important in sustaining domestic demand and in supporting Asia’s 
rebound from the recent global crisis. 
The International Monetary Fund estimates that the emerging economies in Asia will grow by 
an average annual rate of 8.6% in the next five years. Asia is therefore very much part of the 
global  shift  that  is  taking  place  in  which  the  economic  power  in  the  world  will  become 
increasingly  more  dispersed  with  the  emergence  of  several  growth  centres  in  the  global 
economy. Should Asia continue to grow by an average annual rate of 7% over the next ten 
years, it is estimated that Asia’s share of the global GDP will increase to 40%.  
Let me further elaborate on these two developments, namely the strengthening of domestic 
demand in Asia and the intensification of regional economic and financial integration, that are 
mutually  reinforcing  in  sustaining  Asia’s  economic  growth  prospects.  A  more  recent 
phenomenon supporting this trend is the strengthening of regional financial cooperation not 
only to preserve regional financial stability but also to enhance the prospects of the region.  
Strengthening domestic demand 
The strengthening of domestic demand is part of the structural changes taking place in Asia 
to  diversify  its  sources  of  growth.  Growth  in  most  of  the  Asian  economies  was  previously 
export-led.  While  several  measures  have  been  taken  to  promote  domestic  demand,  the 
favourable demographic structure, the low levels of unemployment, the relatively low level of 
household debt and the policy flexibility to implement supporting monetary and fiscal policies 
have contributed to higher consumption. Other measures initiated are the social safety nets 
in the form of schemes and programmes for unemployment benefits, healthcare, education 
and  retirement  that  have  been  put  in  place  to  reduce  the  need  for  high  savings.  The 
consequent increase in consumption demand has not only resulted in a significant expansion 
of the retail trade sector but Asia is also increasingly becoming an important consumer in the 
global economy.  
Private investment activity is also beginning to pick up after a period of over capacity due to 
the excesses prior to the Asian financial crisis. There are also plans for massive investment 
in  infrastructure  development  to  sustain  the  economic  competitiveness  of  the  region.  The 
Asian Development Bank estimates that Asia will require about USD 8 trillion of infrastructure 
investment in the next decade. Most important is that Asia has the internal capacity from its 
high savings to finance these infrastructure requirements.  
The stronger domestic demand in Asia is also well supported by the strengthened financial 
systems  following  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  sector,  the  development  of  the  capital 
markets and the strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory systems in the post-Asian 
financial crisis period. The reforms implemented also included the progressive deregulation 
and the move to greater market orientation and increased liberalisation.  
Today, Asia’s capital markets are significantly deeper and more liquid. The bond market in 
emerging East Asia has increased by more than seven-fold since 1996, with a current value 
of USD 4.2 trillion dollars. Emerging East Asia accounts for 7.2% of the total worldwide bond 
market  at  end-2009  compared  to  2.5%  in  1996.  Asian  banks  have  stronger  fundamentals 
with improved risk management and governance practices, with capitalisation well above the 
regulatory requirements and with non-performing loans maintained at historical lows. Risk-
based  approaches  to  supervision  have  also  been  widely  adopted  across  Asia.  In addition, 
efforts  also  continue  to  be  directed  towards  building  institutions  to  protect  consumers,  to 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2010
promote  financial  inclusion,  enhance  market  discipline  and  to  augment  management 
capabilities. These efforts have ensured continued financial intermediation process and that 
this access to finance remains an important factor that supports the growth of the economies 
in the region.  
Intensification of regional economic and financial integration in Asia 
The  second  major  development  that  has  been taking  place  in  Asia  is  the  intensification  of 
regional economic and financial integration. While the individual economies in Asia continue 
to implement policies and reforms at the national level, greater attention is being placed on 
strengthening economic and financial linkages in the region. Intra-regional trade which has 
been a major contributor to the recent recovery in Asia, has risen from an average of 32% of 
total exports in 1995 to exceed an average of 50% in 2008. Of importance is the rising share 
of  intra-regional  trade  for  final  demand  in  Asia.  This  reflects  an  important  change  in  the 
pattern of trade amongst the Asian economies. The pace of intra-regional investment flows 
has also gained momentum. Businesses in the region are increasingly leveraging on regional 
complementarities as well as taking advantage of the opportunities created by the growing 
markets throughout the region. 
A more recent development is the strengthening financial integration within the Asian region. 
While  regional  financial  integration  will  further  facilitate  the  already  strong  trade  and 
investment  linkages  in  the  region,  a  more  important  aspect  of  the  increased  financial 
integration  in  Asia  is  the  more  efficient  intermediation  of  funds  in  Asia.  This  includes  the 
recycling of some part of the sizeable savings in Asia to productive investments in the region. 
The  average  savings  rate  in  Asia  is  35%  of  GDP  and  Asia  as  a  group  has  a  total  of 
USD 4.8 trillion in foreign reserves. With greater liberalisation of the financial sector and the 
capital account, and the increased linkage of the national payments systems in Asia, there 
are  increased  financial  flows  within  the  region.  This  trend  is  reinforced  by  the  increased 
presence  of  regional  institutions  in  the  individual  domestic  financial  systems  and  Asia’s 
favourable  economic  prospects  and  more  developed  financial  markets.  This  has  already 
resulted in volatile capital flows to the Asian region. Going forward, papers issued out of Asia 
will  also  likely  assume  greater  importance  as  an  asset  class.  It  will  serve  to  facilitate  the 
further  diversification  of  risks  and  thus,  contribute  to  stability  of  the  international  financial 
system.  It  will  also  expand  the  options  for investors  and  borrowers  and  thus, contribute  to 
more efficient allocation of financial resources across borders. 
Asia’s  economic  and  financial  integration,  however,  extends  beyond  its  own  region  to  the 
traditional  markets  in  the  developed  economies,  and  more  recently  to  other  emerging 
economies in other parts of the world. Today, the economic and financial linkages between 
the emerging economies have also gained significance. While world trade has, on average, 
expanded by 16% over the period 2004–2008, Asia’s trade with the Middle East and Latin 
America  has  increased  on  average  by  about  30%.  Asia’s  trade  with  other  emerging 
economies now stands at 13% of Asia’s total exports.  
A  further  recent  development  is  the  increasing  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance 
which  is  also  influencing  the  global  patterns  of  financial  and  trade  flows.  Islamic  finance 
today  has  contributed  to  increasing  the  financial  and  economic  ties  between  Asia  and  the 
Middle East. The emergence of new financial centres in Asia and the Middle East has seen 
stronger  investment  and  financial  flows  between  the  two  regions.  With  the  greater 
internationalisation  of  this  form  of  financial  intermediation,  it  has  also  opened  up  the 
prospects  for  the  developed  economies  to  forge  stronger  financial  linkages  with  these 
dynamic growth regions of Asia and the Middle East.  
The inherent features of Islamic finance require that financial transactions are supported by 
an underlying economic activity, thus ensuring that there is a close link between financial and 
productive flows. Islamic finance is also based on the principle of profit-sharing and therefore 
risk sharing. Islamic financial transactions clearly define the arrangements at the outset, and 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 3
provides  the  incentive  for  the  appropriate  due  diligence  to  be  undertaken  by  the  Islamic 
financial  institutions  to  ensure  that  the  profits  are  commensurate  with  the  risks  being 
assumed. Aspects of governance and risk management are therefore strongly emphasised in 
the  arrangements.  This  arrangement  also  demands  for  higher  standards  of  disclosure  and 
transparency which in turn, acts to strengthen market discipline. 
Regional monetary and financial cooperation 
The  Asian  financial  crisis  has  also  prompted  greater  regional  monetary  and  financial 
cooperation.  Earlier  regional  cooperation  had  focused  mainly  on  trade,  investment  and 
development.  This  decade  has  seen  the  cooperation  shift  to  efforts  to  address  financial 
stability  issues,  namely  surveillance,  crisis  management,  liquidity  support  arrangements, 
financial  supervision  and  financial  market  development.  Other  areas  include  the  payments 
and settlement system and capacity building in the financial sector. 
The route that Asia is taking to forge greater financial integration will therefore be different 
from  that  of  Europe.  Unlike  in  the  European  Union,  Asia  does  not  have  centralised 
institutions to coordinate financial integration but rather has leveraged on the existing intra-
regional groupings and networks to forge greater cooperation and collaboration in areas of 
common interest. This is mainly through the ASEAN+3 and EMEAP which comprise the East 
Asia  Pacific  central  banks.  Secondly,  a  common  currency  is  not  on  Asia’s  medium  term 
agenda.  To  minimise  exchange  rate  risks  and  to  facilitate  intra-regional  trade  and 
investment,  a  number  of  countries  have  initiated  bilateral  arrangements  to  use  domestic 
currencies  for  trade  settlement.  There  is  also  now  a  pooling  of  reserves  so  as  to  have  in 
place liquidity support facilities for the region. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my remarks. Asia is very much part of the changes that are taking place in 
the global economy and the international financial system. Going forward, the pace of Asian 
regional economic and financial integration will gain momentum, driven by structural factors, 
by the conscious policy to put in place the enabling environment and by the benefits derived 
that are mutually reinforcing. 
The  evidence  in  this  decade  has  demonstrated  that  a  more  integrated  and  cohesive  Asia 
contributes towards more balanced global growth, while a more resilient Asia contributes to 
greater  global  financial  stability.  While  a  more  connected  world  in  this  new  phase  of 
globalisation  will  bring  new  vulnerabilities,  it  also  brings  with  it  the  promise  of  new 
opportunities,  new  relationships  and  partnerships  in  the  world  economy,  and  thus,  new 
prospects for a greater shared prosperity. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2010
