Svein Gjedrem: Government intervention and moral hazard in the 
financial sector 
Opening address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the conference “Government intervention and moral hazard in the financial sector”, Oslo, 
2 September 2010. 
 It is my pleasure to wish the participants of this research conference welcome to Oslo and 
Norges Bank. I also welcome participants to our annual financial industry day. This year we 
have chosen to make that event an integrated part of the research conference. We believe 
the topic of this research conference should be of particular interest to practitioners. We have 
also put together the program for this first day of the conference with practitioners in mind.  
The topic that you will be discussing during the conference is very important for our work at 
the  Norges Bank.  Moral  hazard  in  the  financial  sector is  a  main  concern  for  the design  of 
government regulation and for the planning of government intervention in periods of financial 
distress. Norges Bank is not the bank supervisor in this country. The Financial Supervisory 
Authority is a separate institution. But Norges Bank does have a general responsibility for the 
smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system:  We  have  what  are  now  being  termed 
macroprudential responsibilities. 
We have been doing macroprudential supervision and published our findings in our Financial 
Stability  Reports  since  1997.  We  were  thus  one  of  the  first  central  banks  to  publish  such 
reports. Our semi-annual reports have been gradually improved over time. We believe that 
they  are  now  important  contributions  to  financial  supervisory  work  in  Norway.  We  are 
concentrating  our  analyses  on  the  macro  developments  of  the  financial  industry  and  the 
macro risks that the industry is facing. For this purpose we are using data bases with detailed 
information  on  banks,  non-financial  firms  and  households.  This  gives  us  an  intimate 
knowledge of the health of the banks and of their customers. 
Macroprudential policies have at least two components. The most important is arguably the 
long term design of the regulatory framework for the financial sector. Ideally we wish to build 
institutional stabilizers that will prevent financial boom and bust cycles, or at least make them 
less frequent. One example of such a stabilizer would be a capital buffer requirement above 
the  minimum.  A  buffer  requirement,  combined  with  automatic  dividend  restrictions  for 
institutions  that  do  not  meet  the  requirement,  will  most  likely  become  part  of  the  new 
international regulatory regime. Another example is leverage ratio limits that will reduce the 
scope  for  expanding  financial  activities  on  a  very  small  capital  base.  A  third  example  is 
Spanish style rule-based dynamic provisioning. This latter stabilizer seems unfortunately not 
likely to be included in the reform package.  
It is very important that these kind of automatic stabilizers are built into the new regulatory 
framework. It is important that they are rule-based. Leaving stabilization to the discretion of 
regulators  will  always  give  more  uncertain  results.  Rules  are  often  preferable  even  if  they 
have to be crude and suboptimal. 
Norway is part of the European Economic Area, and EU regulations are thus applicable in 
this country. Within the remaining national discretion, Norwegian regulations are laid down by 
the Ministry of Finance, and implemented by the Financial Supervisory Authority. But Norges 
Bank aims to be an active advisor on these issues. Our work on macroprudential supervision 
provides insights that we wish to share with other supervisory authorities. 
The  second  component  of  macroprudential  policies  consists  of  short  and  medium  term 
measures to alleviate the effects from the procyclical behaviour of financial institutions. There 
are two macroprudential aspect of procyclicality. It is the common exposures of a group of 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 1
financial institutions. And it is the interconnectivity of financial institutions through trading and 
credit  relationships.  Common  exposures  are  probably  the  most  important  of  these 
interdependencies for crisis generation. Individual institutions can look perfectly healthy even 
when  vulnerabilities  are  building  up  on  the  systemic  level.  The  prime  example  of  this 
phenomenon is naturally lending stimulating a price bubble in the property market. 
Developing  time-varying  macroprudential  policies  is  not  straightforward.  The  interest  rate 
policy targets the inflation rate, and cannot always be set as would be appropriate for asset 
prices. There might be conflicting targets. We should thus be looking for new instruments. 
As you are certainly aware, most of the macroprudential policy instruments that have been 
proposed are the same as those already being used for microprudential purposes. Examples 
are loan-to-value or loan-to-income limitations, and add-ons to the risk weights on relevant 
bank  exposures.  The  latter  instrument  is  being  used  in  New  Zealand,  where  supervisors 
have recently introduced a 15 percentage point risk weight add-on to property lending.  
Since these instruments are also microprudential, they are all in the domain of the Financial 
Supervisory  Authority  and  are  needed  there.  But  the  macroprudential  objective  is  different 
from  the  microprudential,  and  may  call  for  different  calibration  of  the  instruments.  The 
implementation may for practical reasons need to rest with the FSA. But Norges Bank can 
make strong recommendations on how these instruments shall be used for macroprudential 
purposes. We shall seek very close cooperation with the Financial Supervisory Authority to 
implement our macro prudential agenda. 
The Nordic region is currently close to being a separate banking market, where non-Nordic 
banks have small market shares. But branches with parents in other Nordic countries have 
substantial  market  shares  in  all  national  markets.  There  is  scope  for  fruitful  cooperation 
between the Nordic supervisory authorities.  
The countercyclical buffer proposal from the Basel committee includes a prescription to that 
effect. It stipulates that the time-varying capital buffer targets shall be applicable to all banks 
operating in a jurisdiction, including branches of foreign banks. The home supervisor shall 
impose  the  buffer  decision  of  the  host  supervisor.  This  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  but 
differences  in  risk  modeling  will  remain.  There  is  hardly  any  good  reason  for  different  risk 
weightings on similar loans given by a domestic bank and a branch of a foreign bank. 
With these thoughts on central banks and macroprudential policies, I would remind you that 
we organize this conference hoping that we shall be able to take something useful away for 
our further work on financial stability. I would like to thank the program committee for putting 
together what looks like an engaging program. I wish all of you good luck and hope you shall 
have fruitful discussions in the next two days. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2010
