Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ) 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  Germany,  conducted  by  Messrs  Gerald  Braunberger  and 
Stefan Ruhkamp on 19 May 2010 and published on 21 May 2010. 
 FAZ: Mr President, many Germans are asking themselves whether our money is still safe. 
What do you have to say to them? 
Trichet: The European Central Bank has a track record of successfully meeting its objective 
of keeping inflation below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. For over 11 years since its 
establishment  –  including  the  current  period  –  the  ECB  has  succeeded  in  doing  just  that. 
Over this entire period, we have achieved an average annual inflation rate of less than 2%, 
but close to 2%, in the euro area. And in Germany it is even significantly lower. The facts 
speak  for  themselves.  No  central bank  in  Europe  –  not  even  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank – 
has achieved such a low rate of inflation over such a long period of time. 
FAZ:  But  the  fear  is  that  the  ECB  is  getting  itself  into  a  situation  where  it  no  longer  has 
complete freedom to act. 
Trichet: We have full freedom to act, and we will never shy away from our responsibility for 
delivering medium-term price stability, also in difficult circumstances. In France I was at times 
called  the  “Ayatollah  of  Franc  fort”  (a  play  on  words  on  “strong  franc”)  or  a  “clone”  of  the 
President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  at  the  time,  Hans  Tietmeyer.  In  2004  the  German 
and French governments tried to pressure us into cutting interest rates. I said on behalf of 
the  Governing  Council  that  the  ECB  refused  to  do  this.  In  December  2005  we  increased 
rates  against  the  publicly  expressed  sentiment  of  ten  governments!  In  2008  we  did  not 
hesitate  to  raise  interest  rates,  even  in  a  period  of  financial  turbulence.  We  don’t  allow 
ourselves  to  be  influenced  by  any  government,  any  social  partner  or  any  kind  of  pressure 
group. We act always fully in line with our own responsibilities. And that is the reason why we 
have delivered price stability. 
FAZ: But by purchasing government bonds, you’ve crossed a red line. Has the credibility of 
the ECB suffered as a result? 
Trichet: There has been no crossing of any line. Our line is price stability, and our credibility 
is derived from achieving this objective over the medium term. The Governing Council of the 
ECB observed that the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism for our monetary policy 
was  being  severely  hampered.  We  are  not  increasing  the  money  supply.  By  contrast  with 
what  other  major  central  banks  have  done,  we  are  not  purchasing  government  bonds  in 
order  to  inject  liquidity  into  the  markets.  What  we  are  doing  is  fundamentally  different:  we 
sterilise.  We  ensure  an  unchanged  stance  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  why  the  liquidity 
supplied  is  immediately  being  absorbed  again  in  its  entirety.  We  have  to  do  whatever  we 
consider appropriate in order to ensure price stability. If we always listened to the criticism 
directed  at  us  by  politicians,  social  partners  and  financial  pressure  groups,  we  would  be 
unable to fulfil our mandate. 
FAZ: What does the functioning of the market for Greek government bonds have to do with 
the functioning of monetary policy? 
Trichet: Markets are strongly correlated with one another. A failure in the bond market would 
have raised doubts everywhere else. Moreover, government bond yields are benchmarks for 
the financing conditions in the real economy – i.e. for firms and households. The crisis that 
we’ve been facing since 2007 has been the worst since the Second World War. And had we 
not  acted,  it  could  have  been  the  worst  since  the  First  World  War.  There  are  doubts 
regarding the industrialised world’s ability to put its public finances in order. That being said, 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 1
the euro area as a whole is on a solid footing within the industrialised world. Unfortunately, 
however, the same cannot be said of all individual euro area countries at present. That is the 
problem, and it had to be – and is being – addressed. 
FAZ: The ECB is buying bonds that banks and investors want to get rid of. Do you risk taking 
on the role of a European “bad bank”? 
Trichet: No. We are only aiming to stabilise those markets that stopped functioning normally. 
But  the  first  –  and  absolutely  necessary  –  condition  for  success  is  that  governments 
accelerate  fiscal  consolidation  and  are  unwavering  in  their  implementation  of  the  tough 
measures that are indispensable.  
FAZ:  What  will  happen  if  the  market  failure  that  you  observed  continues  and  the  ECB  is 
forced  to  purchase  more  and  more  bonds?  Will  it  not  then  become  increasingly  difficult  to 
stop the process? 
Trichet: We don’t want to create an artificial situation. We just want the markets to function 
more  normally,  to  allow  our  monetary  policy  to  be  effective  throughout  the  euro  area. 
Otherwise, there would be instability, and that would have a negative effect on all member 
countries.  All  governments  have  committed  themselves  to  being  ready  to  accelerate  fiscal 
consolidation. We are following this very closely in liaison with the Commission.  
FAZ: What happens if, for example, the Greek people refuse and the government breaks its 
austerity promise? Do you not need a Plan B? 
Trichet: Let us look back. Since the euro was launched, the ECB has been preaching that 
the Stability and Growth Pact is a cornerstone of EMU. I repeat this at least once a month. 
The governments of Germany and France in particular wanted to get rid of its rigour in 2004 
and 2005. We rigorously defended the Pact and avoided its de jure dismantling, against the 
wishes of the Heads of State and Government of large euro area countries. Now, the ECB 
has  demanded  a  very  serious  adjustment  programme  from  Greece,  an  adjustment 
programme that is very much in the country’s own interests.  
FAZ: However, there is a risk that one of the countries whose bonds you are buying will not 
be able to service its debts. What then? 
Trichet:  We  are  in  the  field  of  governments.  There  are  three  levels  of  government 
responsibility. First, accelerate the necessary and indispensable fiscal consolidation. Second, 
exert strict surveillance of peers within the Eurogroup – i.e. euro area governments. Third, if 
tensions  emerge  despite  the  first  two  levels  of  responsibility,  stand  ready  to  intervene 
through the Financial Stability Mechanism.  
FAZ:  If  that  is  the  case,  why  is  the  ECB  propping  up  the  bond  markets?  Would  it  not  be 
better for an institution to be created which the governments finance and are responsible for? 
Trichet:  We  are  not  propping  up  the  bond  markets.  That  is  not  our  objective.  We  are 
ensuring the effectiveness of monetary policy. On 6 and 7 May, the days immediately prior to 
the  decision  to  purchase  bonds,  the  markets  were  massively  disrupted,  and  market 
participants all  over  the  euro  area  and  the  rest of  the  world  observed  this  situation,  which 
was  deteriorating  extremely  rapidly.  This  was  a  very  serious  situation,  in  which  we  had  to 
intervene  in  order  to  preserve,  as  I  said,  the  integrity  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. 
FAZ: So why has the President of the Bundesbank, Axel Weber, distanced himself from the 
purchase programme and voted with other members of the Governing Council against it? 
Trichet:  I  never  comment  on  the  statements  of  other  members  of  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council. I will only say this much: an overwhelming majority were convinced that the decision 
was right under the circumstances. 
FAZ: In comparison with almost every other major currency, the euro has fallen sharply this 
year. Is this a risk for price stability? 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2010
Trichet: The euro is a credible currency. The fact that it is a currency whose rate of inflation 
has been below 2% for over 11 years demonstrates its trustworthiness. Price stability is a 
key feature of the euro and a major asset for domestic and international investors.  
FAZ: So there is no need for intervention?  
Trichet: I never comment on interventions.  
FAZ: The crisis stems from excessive debts. We are now fighting the crisis with even more 
credit and even more money. How do we get out of this spiral? 
Trichet: We have a number of ways of providing the banks with additional liquidity support, 
which will automatically be discontinued when the situation improves. Owing to the serious 
tensions  observed  very  recently  in  the  markets,  we  have  now  reintroduced  some  of  these 
support measures. But you can be sure that we will exit those measures in a timely fashion in 
line  with  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  the  markets.  We  will  never  lose  sight  of  our 
primary  mandate  of  ensuring  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  with  the  right monetary 
policy  stance.  There  is  a  clear  separation  here.  By  the  way,  note  that  the  growth  of  the 
monetary aggregate “M3” is currently negative. I have been committed to price stability all my 
life. For me, inflation is a tax that would mainly hit the poorest and weakest in our society. 
FAZ:  The  purchase  programme  seems  like  a  second  major  bailout.  Are  we  rescuing  the 
banks again?  
Trichet: We are constantly urging the banks to live up to their responsibilities. All our support 
for the banking sector is geared to stabilising the real economy in the financial crisis in order 
for price stability to be ensured and, by way of consequence, for jobs to be retained. We are 
therefore calling on the banks to strengthen their balance sheets and lend. They should not 
use their profits for huge bonus payments or excessive remuneration packages, which are a 
disgrace  in  the  current  environment,  nor  to  massively  distribute  their  profits.  Instead,  the 
banks should do everything they can to strengthen their capital base in order to be able to 
better provide credit to businesses.  
FAZ:  The  fact  that  you  keep  repeating  this  gives  me  the  impression  that  banks  are  not 
sticking to it. Do we therefore need new and stricter rules for banks and the markets? 
Trichet: We need better regulations for banks. We also have important financial institutions 
that are not banks, for example highly leveraged institutions such as hedge funds, and they 
can also potentially be problematic in some circumstances. In the financial sector in general, 
not only in banks, certain types of behaviour have developed which are a long way from the 
values of our democratic societies. We need to change the dominant values in the financial 
sector.  Greed,  which  is  too  often  the  dominant  value,  must  be  replaced  by  a  sense  of 
responsibility vis-à-vis the real economy. That is one of the lessons learned from the financial 
crisis and is something that the ECB is taking to international fora.  
FAZ: Is it only a question of morals, or is it also a task for regulation? 
Trichet: It is a question of values and also a question of rules. The Financial Stability Board 
has developed principles for guiding recommendations, for instance. In any case, we cannot 
afford to save the financial system a second time at taxpayers’ expense. The system must 
become much more resilient.  
FAZ:  It  is  being  claimed  that  the  speculation  on  the  markets  is  also  responsible  for  the 
weakness of the euro. Is that right? 
Trichet: Let us be clear, it is not the euro that is in danger, but the fiscal policies of some 
countries, which have to be – and are being – addressed, and, by way of consequence, the 
financial  stability  of  the  euro  area,  which  has  to  be  –  and  is  being  –  consolidated.  In  any 
case,  market  developments  are  always  a  combination  of  the  mood  of  investors  and  the 
influence of speculative investors, such as hedge funds. 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 3
FAZ: In the ECB, there is talk of reducing the influence of rating agencies. Why do you think 
that a credit assessment by the ECB would lead to better results? 
Trichet: That must be discussed globally. The functioning of the credit assessment system is 
currently  highly  pro-cyclical.  It  is  certainly  not  necessarily  optimal  that  we  only  have  three 
major rating agencies for the entire world. But we have still not concluded our analyses.  
FAZ:  Is  there  any  chance  of  a  stable  financial  system  as  long  as  the  economy  and  the 
Member States are so heavily dependent on credit? 
Trichet: We must improve very significantly the functioning of the entire financial system. We 
definitely cannot afford to find ourselves in a situation like 2008 again. With your question, 
you seem to doubt that there is the political will. It is the task of independent institutions, such 
as the ECB, to tell politicians that they have to adopt a responsible financial policy. I do not 
underestimate  the  difficulties  that  democracies  face  in  taking  painful  decisions.  But  it  is 
obvious that several industrialised countries have been living on credit. The richest countries 
in the world have made the less rich and poorer ones finance them, which is not sustainable 
and, in the end, will not be sustained! That applies to a number of industrialised countries on 
both sides of the Atlantic. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2010
