Duvvuri Subbarao: Funding of deposit insurance systems 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International  Conference  “Funding  of  Deposit  Insurance  Systems”  hosted  by  the  Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC), Mumbai, 18 January 2010. 
 At the outset, on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I welcome you all to India and to this 
wonderful  state  of  Goa.  My  thanks  also  to  the  Asia  Regional  Committee  (ARC)  of  the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) for giving an opportunity to the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) to host this Conference. This event is 
particularly  important  for  us  because  it  is  being  hosted  as  a  part  of  the  Platinum  Jubilee 
celebrations of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
Evolution of deposit insurance 
2. 
Deposit  insurance  has  historically  been  a  reassuringly  stabilizing  force  in  a  financial 
system notoriously susceptible to instability. In fact panics were a regular feature of American 
economic  life  even  as  banking  was  taking  roots  –  most  spectacularly  during  the  Great 
Depression. It was the introduction of deposit insurance in 1933 that substantially reduced 
the vulnerability of American banks to runs. 
3.  Over the years deposit insurance has taken root all around the world. Collectively, we 
traversed  a  steep  learning  curve  and  learnt  a  number  of  lessons  about  the  systems  and 
processes of deposit insurance. The recent crisis has, however, thrown up a number of fresh 
questions about the financial sector, including about deposit insurance. Finding answers to 
these questions and addressing the consequent challenges is going to be the priority task for 
all of us in the financial sector. I want to talk about some of the issues, but first let me say a 
few words about deposit insurance in India. 
Historical perspective on deposit insurance in India 
4. 
DICGC,  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  RBI,  is  the  second  oldest  deposit  insurance 
system in the world. It was established in January 1962 initially only as a deposit insurance 
institution.  However,  in  1978  the  Corporation  was  also  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of 
credit  guarantee  and  was  rechristened  as  the  Deposit  Insurance  and  Credit  Guarantee 
Corporation (DICGC). The objective of extending guarantee cover to credit was to encourage 
commercial  banks  to  extend  credit  to  small  borrowers  belonging  to  weaker  sections  of 
society.  But  over  time,  it  was  felt  that  the  credit  guarantee  schemes  operated  by  the 
Corporation  had  outlived  their  utility  and  the  schemes  were  discontinued.  The  Corporation 
has now reverted to being an exclusive deposit insurance system. 
5.  Over nearly 50 years, the DICGC has evolved and moved up the value chain – learning 
by doing as it were – and met many challenges along the way. By far the biggest challenge 
came in 2001 when a large co-operative bank in the state of Gujarat was in trouble. Since 
several  banks,  particularly  many  small  co-operative  banks,  had  exposure  to  this  bank,  its 
failure had the potential to precipitate a crisis in the banking industry. The Government and 
the  Reserve  Bank  put  in  place  resolution  of  this  bank  through  a  restructuring  programme. 
The  key  element  of  this  programme  was  proactive  action  by  the  DICGC  towards  prompt 
payment of claims to the depositors of the bank. This action by DICGC ensured that panic 
did not spread.  
BIS Review 5/2010 
 1
Global crisis and deposit insurance 
6. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  recent  financial  crisis.  Though  the  crisis  impacted  the  entire 
world, it affected different countries in different ways. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
in mid-September 2008, there was an abrupt breakdown of trust, which spread rapidly from 
the United States to other advanced economies, causing financial markets in all advanced 
economies go into seizure. Suddenly, there was a great deal of uncertainty about the extent 
of  losses,  the  ability  of  banks  to  withstand  those  losses,  the  extent  of  risk  in  the  system, 
where it lay and how it might explode. This uncertainty triggered unprecedented panic and 
almost totally paralyzed the entire chain of financial intermediation. Banks hoarded liquidity. 
Credit, bond and equity markets nearly froze. Several venerable financial institutions came to 
the  brink  of  collapse.  Massive  deleveraging  drove  down  asset  prices  setting  off  a  vicious 
cycle. In such a situation, governments and regulators had to take extraordinary measures in 
a big way.  
7. 
Not  surprisingly,  deposit  insurance  emerged  as  the  most  visible  part  of  the  financial 
safety-net in arresting a panic reaction. Several deposit insurance systems increased their 
insurance  coverage  limits;  in  some  cases  the  governments  extended  blanket  deposit 
guarantee. These measures went a long way in restoring public confidence in the banking 
system in economies where it came under serious threat.  
Global crisis and India’s response 
8. 
That India was hit by the crisis dismayed many people. In the years before the crisis, 
the decoupling theory gained intellectual ascendancy. This theory held that even if advanced 
economies  went  into  a  downturn,  emerging  market  economies  would  not  be  affected 
because of their improved policy framework, robust foreign exchange reserves, and sound 
banking  systems.  The  crisis  ruptured  the  credibility  of  the  decoupling  theory  by  engulfing 
almost every part of the world. India was no exception. The crisis spread to India through 
finance and real channels. 
9. 
Importantly, the crisis also spread through the confidence channel. However, in sharp 
contrast to global financial markets which got paralyzed on account of a crisis of confidence, 
Indian financial markets continued to function in an orderly manner, even as the risk aversion 
of  the  financial  system  increased  and  banks  became  cautious  about  lending.  The  point  to 
note is that, the global financial crisis did not pose any major threat to the banking system in 
India at any point of time. As such, the need for any special measures pertaining to deposit 
insurance did not arise. However, in line with the global trend, there was also some demand 
here to increase the deposit insurance cover. If one looks even at broad data, it becomes 
quite  clear  that  this  demand  had  no  persuasive  force.  Under  the  existing  insurance  cover, 
number-wise  almost  90  per  cent  of  the  deposit  accounts  are  fully  covered.  Amount-wise, 
over 60 per cent of total insurable deposits are covered. We determined, therefore, that the 
cost-benefit calculus was not in favour of enhancing the deposit cover.  
10. 
In India, the contagion of the crisis was effectively contained by coordinated fiscal and 
monetary measures taken by the Government of India and the Reserve Bank respectively. 
The  results are  evident  from  the  marked  improvement  in  the  performance  of  the  industrial 
sector  in  recent  months  –  upturn  in  domestic  and  external  financing  conditions,  revival  of 
capital inflows, increased activity in the primary and secondary capital markets, softening of 
interest  rates  and  substantial  easing  of  liquidity  conditions.  GDP  growth  of  7.9  per  cent 
during the second quarter of this fiscal (2009–10) was robust – up from 6.1 per cent in the 
previous quarter. There are, however, several challenges on the way forward including the 
timing  and  sequencing  of  exit  from  the  expansionary  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  These 
issues are being debated all over the world and occupy the central place in our policy matrix 
too.  The  challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  support  the  recovery  process  without 
compromising on price stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2010
Financial stability 
11.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  also  underlined  the  critical  role  of  central  banks  in 
systemic oversight of the financial sector and in preserving financial stability. This calls for a 
paradigm  shift  not  sector.  Financial  stability  needs  to  be  understood  and  addressed  both 
from the micro and macro perspectives. At the micro level, we need to ensure that individual 
institutions  are  healthy,  safe  and  sound.  But  an  important  lesson  of  the  crisis  has  been  a 
reiteration  of  the  fallacy  of  composition  –  that  a  collection  of  safe  and  sound  financial 
institutions does not necessarily deliver a safe and sound financial sector. We need to take 
care  of  systemic  stability  as  a  separate  and  distinct  obligation.  This  calls  for  safeguarding 
financial  stability  at  the  macro  level  through  what  has  now  come  to  be  called  macro-
prudential regulation of the system as a whole. 
12.  Today,  RBI  is  an  active  participant  in  several  important  international  institutions  that 
seek to promote more effective regulatory structures, and financial and systemic stability. We 
have, for some time now, been shareholders of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
and member of the Committee on Global Financial System the Committee on Payment and 
Settlement  Systems  and  the  Markets  Committee.  Post-crisis,  we  have  also  become 
members of the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS). And of course, we have been an active participant in the G-20 deliberations. 
DICGC – challenges for the future 
13.  Let me now comment briefly on the challenges for DICGC on the way forward. One key 
challenge is reducing the time taken to settle claims. Though the Corporation has been able 
to  settle  all  claims  within  the  statutory  time  limit,  its  goal  is  to  go  beyond  the  statutory 
prescription, and ensure settlement of claims within a few days of liquidation of a bank as 
against a few months taken now. Towards this end, effort is required in two directions. First, 
DICGC must have a computerised depositors’ data base in respect of over 85,000 branches 
spread across the country. Second, the entire process of filing claims by the liquidator and 
their  processing  by  the  Corporation  should  be  computerized  with  appropriate  connectivity. 
The  Corporation  has  already  initiated  steps  to  move  in  this  direction  by  formulating  an 
ambitious project of Integrated Claims Management System (ICMS).  
14.  The  second  challenge  pertains  to  broadening  the  mandate  of  DICGC.  DICGC  is 
presently working as a pay box system. Going forward, we are examining the possibility of 
transforming it from a pay-box system to a system attending to all aspects of bank resolution. 
This  may,  however,  require  sweeping  reforms  including  a  thorough  change  in  the  DICGC 
Act,  1961.  However,  certain  features  of  the  financial  sector  supervision  and  regulation  as 
prevailing in India may have to be kept in view. For example, it may not be necessary to have 
a  separate  supervisory  machinery  in  DICGC  independent  of  the  Reserve  Bank  as  is  the 
practice in some other jurisdictions, notably the United States. 
Deposit insurance – post crisis 
15.  The global financial crisis has underscored the importance of a well designed explicit 
deposit insurance system in maintaining financial stability. By assuring depositors that they 
will get immediate payment to the extent of the insured amount, a deposit insurance scheme 
can contain financial contagion. Indeed, there are a number of contrarian examples to show 
that bank panics were exacerbated in situations where deposit guarantees were not explicit, 
not incentive compatible and did not have the resources to back their guarantee obligations. 
In order, therefore, to inspire the trust and confidence of stakeholders, a deposit insurance 
scheme must satisfy two criteria – first, it must be adequately funded, and second, it must 
have  robust  delivery  systems  in  place  to  effect  payments  within,  if  not  well  within,  the 
assured time. 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 3
This important lesson from the recent financial crisis has been clearly brought out in the Fifth 
Report (2007–08) of the Treasury Committee of the House of Commons, entitled “Run on the 
Rock”. After analyzing the reasons for the run on the Northern Rock, the report concluded: 1 
“All  banks  and  building  societies  should  be  covered  by  a  deposit  insurance 
scheme, such that, in cases such as Northern Rock, or an even larger bank, the 
Government would not be required to step in to protect depositors.”  
The Report further observed that  
“There should be a requirement in law that all insured deposits should have to 
be paid within a few days of a bank failing and calling on the deposit protection 
scheme.” 
17.  The  above  observations  are  clearly  self-evident.  But  every  crisis  has  demonstrated 
how  its  root  causes  can  be  traced  to  the  neglect  of  some  basic  tenets.  An  important 
preventive  going  forward  will  be  to  review  the  effectiveness  of  our  deposit  insurance 
schemes and repairing the deficiencies, if any, and strengthening the weak spots. 
Deposit insurance – global coordination 
18.  With  increasing  global  financial  integration,  consistency  in  the  basic  principles  that 
guide deposit insurance is essential to maintaining a level playing field internationally. In this 
context, information exchange among deposit insurers gains importance. Today there are a 
large  and  growing  number  of  cross  border  financial  institutions  functioning  across  multiple 
deposit  insurance  jurisdictions.  There  is  need  for  clarity  regarding  the  obligation  of  each 
deposit  insurer  in  respect  of  each  cross-border  institution.  While  the  “Core  Principles  for 
Effective Deposit Insurance Systems” state that the deposit insurance already provided by 
the home country system should be recognised in the determination of levies or premium, 
there is need for a firm and shared understanding on this. 
Relevance and value of the conference 
I  am  glad  to  note  that  “Funding  of  Deposit  Insurance  Systems”  is  the  theme  of  the 
19. 
Conference. This is extremely relevant in the context of the present emphasis on promoting 
financial  stability.  I  note  from  the  schedule  of  the  Conference  that  you  will  be  addressing 
several aspects of funding of deposit insurance systems, including funding mechanisms and 
the management of funds.  
20. 
I also note that there is an exclusive session for “Core Principles for Effective Deposit 
Insurance  Systems”  with  special  reference  to  guidance  on  funding.  It  is  indeed  a  rare 
privilege  that  we  have,  at  this  conference,  distinguished  speakers  on  the  subject,  not  only 
from Asia, but from other parts of the world as well.  
21. 
I would like to take this opportunity to flag for your consideration a few issues, which 
might  be  of  importance  to  DICGC  and  many  other  deposit  insurance  systems  around  the 
world: 
• 
In light of the recent experience which has challenged the concept of “too big to fail”, 
is there a need to review the manner of defining “risk” for the purpose of determining 
risk-based premium? How do we go about it?  
                                                 
1   Para  183  (Page  77)  of  the  said  Report  www.parliament.the-stationery-office.com/pa/cm200708/cmselect/ 
mtreasy/56/56i.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2010
    How  do  we  factor-in  the  risk  associated  with  all  the  non-banking  business  of  a 
financial  conglomerate  on  its  banking  business?  How  should  risk  based  premium 
factor in this risk?  
Should the entire income or the surplus of a deposit insurance system or any part of 
it be subject to taxes?  
Is  it  possible  to  define  an  international  benchmark  or  at  least  a  standard 
methodology for determining a bench-mark for the Reserve Ratio (Ratio of Deposit 
Insurance Fund to Insured Deposit), signifying the adequacy of Deposit Insurance 
Fund?  
What countercyclical measures should a deposit insurance system take to build up 
its funds for the rainy day?  
22.  Needless to say, this conference has come in at a very appropriate time. I do hope that 
your  deliberations  over  the  next  two  days  will  result  in  enhancing  our  collective 
understanding of deposit insurance and provide pointers for action. 
23. 
I wish the Conference all success. 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 5
