José De Gregorio: Workshop on financial markets and monetary policy 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the 
Workshop on Financial Markets and Monetary Policy, Santiago, 6 August 2010. 
 On behalf of the Central Bank of Chile I would like to welcome you all to this workshop on the 
interactions  between  financial  markets  and  monetary  policy.  We  have  put  together  a  very 
interesting group of papers that are surely at the forefront of research in this area. 
The episodes that started to unfold during the second half of 2008 reminded us once more of 
the central importance of financial markets for the functioning of the economy. As the crisis 
progressed and policy makers tried to mount a response that could mitigate the effects on 
the real economy, understanding which actions would have the bigger impact at the smallest 
possible  cost  become  a  key  priority.  At  the  same  time,  gauging  how  the  traditional  policy 
actions  would  affect  the  economy  in  a  scenario  of  deep  disarray  of  financial  markets  also 
become an important priority in Central Banks and Treasury Departments around the world. 
The collection of papers that will be presented here today try to illuminate different features 
of the policy dilemmas I just mentioned. They are then a very welcome contribution. 
To some extent economists lacked a clear theoretical framework to understand the role of 
financial markets as both an originator and propagator of shocks when the crisis started. The 
paper by Professor Nobuhiro Kiyotaki from Princeton University along with his coauthor Mark 
Gertler  builds  a  model  whose  aim  is  precisely  to  build  such  a  model  that  can  serve 
economists to describe the interactions between developments in financial markets and the 
rest of the economy. The framework proposed by Kiyotaki and Gertler is also used by them 
to estimate the likely effects that the set of actions undertaken by policy makers that have 
come to be known as unconventional monetary policy. Understanding the effect of these non 
traditional tools is surely an important issue and helps us to design better policies. The study 
of unconventional monetary policies is also the subject of the paper by Javier García-Cicco 
who analyses this issue estimating a model for the case of Chile.  
As  you  are  well  aware,  the  prominence  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  during  the  
2008–2009 crises was due to the fact that the interest rate that most central banks use as its 
main instrument were aggressively reduced towards levels very close to their effective lower 
bounds.  The  paper  by  Martin  Bodenstein  and  his  coauthors  from  the  Federal  Reserve 
studies how an economy reacts to foreign shocks when the interest rate is at its lower bound. 
This  question  is  of  particular  interest  to  a  country  like  Chile  which  is  subject  to  frequent 
changes in the international scenario. 
The  papers  to  be  presented  by  Luca  Dedola  from  the  European  Central  Bank  and  Óscar 
Jordá from the University of California-Davis are part of a very active literature that studies 
the  determination  of  nominal  exchange 
recent 
developments  in  the  theory  of  financial  markets.  On  line  with  developments  on  financial 
markets  theory,  the  paper  to  be  presented  by  Craig  Burnside  shed  lights  on  a  central 
discussion  on  the  exchange  rate  dynamics  theory.  Along  with  his  coauthors  they  offer  an 
explanation  for  the  forward  premium  puzzle  in  foreign  exchange  markets,  their  analysis  is 
also consistent with opportunities of profitable carry trade strategies. Given the importance of 
the  nominal  exchange  rate  for  an  open  economy  like  Chile,  these  papers  are  also  a  very 
important and relevant contribution. 
As you can see this promise to be a very interesting conference and I invite you to engage in 
the  discussion  and  seize  the  opportunity  to  learn  from  this  very  excellent  group  of 
researchers. 
 
incorporating 
insights 
rates 
from 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
Finally I would like to thank Miguel Fuentes, Diego Saravia and Felipe Labbé for organizing 
what promises to be a very interesting workshop. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
