 Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Maintaining stability and enhancing accessibility 
of financial markets – Japanese financial market infrastructure in the 
past and the future 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Euromoney 
Japan Capital Markets and Global Borrowers Congress, Tokyo, 15 September 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted and honored to have been invited to speak today at the Euromoney Japan 
Capital Markets and Global Borrowers Congress. 
In order to strengthen the Japanese financial markets amid globalization, it is important, first, 
to maintain market stability, and second, to ensure a high degree of accessibility. Today, I 
would like to talk about these two points. 
Maintaining market stability means securing market liquidity even during times of stress and 
is  crucial  to  the  support  of  the  economic  activities  of  financial  institutions  and  firms.  This 
relationship  is  often  compared  to  the  human  circulatory  system.  The  functioning  of  the 
circulatory system is often taken for granted. Likewise, financial institutions and firms may not 
pay much attention in normal times to funding liquidity and market liquidity that enhances the 
funding liquidity. They gain a painful appreciation of the vital importance of market liquidity, 
however, if – like the circulatory system – it stops functioning. 
Therefore, I would first like to talk about the current conditions of the increasingly important 
market  liquidity  in  the  Japanese  financial  markets.  Then  I  will  touch  on  the  measures  for 
enhancing  market  stability  in  Japan,  focusing  particularly  on  the  improvement  of  market 
infrastructure. Specifically, I will describe how, during the financial crisis in 2008, Japanese 
financial  markets  remained  relatively  stable  compared  to  the  United  States  and  Europe. 
Next, I will outline the efforts to stabilize the Japanese financial markets after the financial 
crisis, through comparison with those in the United States and Europe.  
Another  important  aspect  of  the  financial  markets  today  is  enhancing  accessibility  of  the 
markets.  International  funds  transactions  by  financial  institutions  and  investors  have  made 
financial  markets  increasingly  borderless.  Japanese  financial  markets  have  been  facing 
fierce  competition  with  financial  markets  in  Asian  emerging  economies  that  have  recently 
expanded their presence in the global economy, as well as those in the United States and 
Europe. Thus, the Japanese financial markets need to adapt to accelerating globalization by 
preparing market infrastructure with a high degree of accessibility. In this regard, I would like 
to  explain  the  measures  taken  to  improve  the  accessibility  of  infrastructure  in  Japanese 
financial markets amid global competition. 
Then, in closing my remarks, I will talk briefly about the importance of market participants’ 
initiatives and the role of the Bank of Japan in ensuring stability and enhancing accessibility 
of the Japanese financial markets. 
Financial crisis in 2008: the United States, Europe, and Japan 
I. 
In  the  past  quarter-century,  international  funds  transactions  have  expanded  considerably 
amid  economic  and  financial  globalization.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  turmoil  and 
dysfunction  in  the  U.S.  financial  markets  stemming  from  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers 
Holdings  Inc.  in  the  autumn  of  2008  spread  rapidly  around  the  world,  and  global  financial 
market conditions deteriorated significantly. Particularly in the United States and Europe, the 
concerns of market participants deepened over counterparty risk. Against this background, 
the money markets suffered markedly increased strain, with liquidity drying up particularly for 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 1
 term  funding  and  LIBOR  climbing  sharply.  For  example,  U.S.  dollar  and  euro  LIBOR-OIS 
spreads  –  which  represent  the  premium  for  liquidity  and  counterparty  risks  in  interbank 
markets – widened sharply after the financial crisis, showing a rapid heightening of tension in 
the  money  markets  that  deal  with  interbank  transactions  (see  “U.S.  dollar”  and  “euro”  in 
Chart 1). 
With regard to funding conditions for firms in the United States and Europe, downgradings of 
firms grew in number due to the significantly deteriorating environment for corporate profits 
after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  This  rapidly  heightened  uncertainty  about  the  firms’ 
ability  to  repay  their  debt.  Subsequently,  credit  spreads  on  U.S.  and  European  corporate 
bonds,  including  those  with  high  ratings,  widened  rapidly,  and  liquidity  in  corporate  bond 
markets decreased significantly (see “United States” and “Europe” in Chart 2).  
Following  the  market  turmoil,  global  financial  markets  generally  regained  stability  from 
around the spring of 2009 due to bold policy measures taken by governments and central 
banks  around  the  world.  From  January  2010,  however,  triggered  by  the  fiscal  problem  in 
Greece,  European  financial  markets  became  unstable,  as  seen  in  the  growing  concerns 
about  fiscal  conditions  in  peripheral  European  countries  and  the  financial  soundness  of 
European financial institutions. 
Turning to Japan, financial markets became unstable immediately after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers,  affected  by  the  turmoil  in  the  global  financial  markets.  Recent  developments  in 
Japanese financial markets, however, have been relatively stable. 
For example, in Japan’s money  markets, interest rates came under upward pressure after 
the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  but  concerns  over  counterparty  risk  were  limited  to  the 
transactions  mainly  with  foreign  financial  institutions.  Thus,  although  the  yen  LIBOR-OIS 
spread also widened, the rise was relatively marginal compared to the U.S. dollar and euro 
LIBOR-OIS spreads. Moreover, the effects of monetary easing by the Bank of Japan have 
recently  been  gradually  spreading  and  the  interest  rates  in  the  money  market,  including 
those of a longer term, have declined to extremely low levels (see “yen” in Chart 1). 
With  regard  to  funding  conditions  for  firms  in  Japan,  the  issuing  conditions  for  corporate 
bonds deteriorated, following those in the United States and Europe. Risk tolerance of major 
corporate  bond  investors,  such  as  banks  and  life  insurance  companies,  declined  due  to 
issuers’ worsening financial conditions after the failure of Lehman Brothers and a steep fall in 
stock  prices  at  that  time.  However,  looking  at  corporate  bonds  rated  AA  or  higher,  which 
accounted  for  the  majority  of  corporate  bonds  in  terms  of  the  total  amount  issued,  the 
widening of credit spreads was limited even after the financial crisis, compared with that of 
BBB-rated corporate bonds. This differed from the United States and Europe, where credit 
spreads  on  corporate  bonds  even  with  high  ratings  widened  significantly  (see  “Japan”  in 
Chart 2). 
Thus, it may be said that Japanese financial markets have shown – in relative terms – some 
stability against the shocks of the current financial crisis. 
Measures to stabilize financial markets after the crisis  
II. 
Based on the experience of the recent crisis, market participants strongly reconfirmed that 
ensuring  financial  market  stability  during  times  of  stress  was  important.  With  this  in  mind, 
market  participants  at  home  and  abroad  have  been  taking  measures  to  strengthen  the 
infrastructure for financial market stability. 
Measures to stabilize financial markets in the United States and Europe 
A. 
In the United States and Europe, market participants have recognized issues such as market 
transparency and risk assessment regarding over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions 
including  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  trading,  and  have  discussed  measures  to  strengthen 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 market infrastructure related to the settlement and clearing system, such as the wide use of 
the  central  counterparty  (CCP).  Two  of  the  most  notable  measures  are  review  of  the  fails 
practice and reform of the repo market in the United States. 
In the United States, after the failure of Lehman Brothers, an unprecedented number of fails 
occurred  in  Treasury  transactions.  In  response  to  this,  acting  jointly,  the  Treasury  Market 
Practices  Group  (TMPG)  and  the  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets  Association 
(SIFMA) swiftly discussed and reviewed the fails practice. In May 2009, fails charges were 
introduced in order to prevent frequent occurrence of fails under low interest rate conditions. 
As for tri-party repo transactions that are common in the U.S. general collateral (GC) repo 
market,  in  addition  to  Treasuries,  mortgage-backed  securities,  agency  debt,  and  corporate 
bonds had been accepted as collateral. As these three securities’ prices declined, however, 
margin  calls  arose  and  haircuts  were  raised.  As  a  result,  liquidity  in  the  repo  market 
decreased  significantly.  Based  on  this  experience,  in  September  2009  the  Payments  Risk 
Committee  (PRC),  a  private-sector  group  of  senior  U.S.  bank  officials  sponsored  by  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  that  identifies  and  analyzes  risk  in  payments  and 
settlement systems, formed the Tri-Party Repo Infrastructure Reform Task Force. The task 
force has been reviewing collateral management and settlement practices. 
Measures to stabilize financial markets in Japan  
B. 
As I mentioned earlier, at the time of the crisis, the Japanese government bond (JGB) and 
credit  markets  have  remained  relatively  stable.  This  was  because  the  Japanese  financial 
system,  which  had  experienced  a  financial  crisis  in  the  1990s,  showed  relative  resilience 
compared with the systems in the United States and Europe. 
In addition, the introduction of a delivery-versus-payment (DVP) mechanism for settlement of 
JGBs  eliminated  principal  risk.  Furthermore,  a  JGB  clearing  institution,  the  Japan 
Government Bond Clearing Corporation (JGBCC), accepted transactions between parties as 
a  CCP,  assumed  the  seller’s  obligation  to  every  buyer  and  the  buyer’s  obligation  to  every 
seller,  and  provided  guarantee  for  settlement  of  those  obligations.  This  reduced  the 
settlement risk in the secondary market for JGBs as a whole and prevented a chain reaction 
of default in JGB settlement. 
We should welcome the fact that a worst-case scenario was avoided in Japanese financial 
markets, as I have just described. This does not necessarily mean, however, that Japanese 
market infrastructure is sufficiently developed to ensure stability in times of crisis compared 
to  the  United  States  and  Europe.  Indeed,  the  current  financial  crisis  revealed  issues  that 
were unique to Japan and different from those in the United States and Europe. 
Specifically, the existing fails practice did not work as expected. As a result, the pace of JGB 
settlement was delayed significantly since fails occurred frequently in the secondary market 
for JGBs. In order to reduce the risk of fails, most market participants refrained from starting 
new repo transactions. Repo transactions are collateralized with government securities that 
command  high  creditworthiness.  As  a  safer  and  more  secure 
than 
uncollateralized transactions, they are expected to play an important role in ensuring liquidity 
in  emergency  situations.  In  reality,  however,  liquidity  in  the  JGB  repo  market  decreased, 
reflecting market turmoil mainly due to a steep increase in fails. 
Based on these experiences, market participants have started to review the fails practice in 
order  to  further  establish  it,  and  have  recognized,  for  example,  that  improving  risk 
management by shortening the JGB settlement cycle is a priority issue for examination. 
funding 
tool 
Reviewing the fails practice  
C. 
The working group of the Japan Securities Dealers Association (JSDA) has discussed and 
reviewed  specific  measures  to  further  establish  the  fails  practice.  Measures  such  as  the 
introduction  of  fails  charges  will  be  effective  from  November  1,  2010.  Some  end-investors 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 3
 have been cautious up to now about accepting the fails practice, and it is vital for the review 
to help them come to understand the fails practice and establish it by developing business 
operations  to  handle  fails.  I  hope  that  the  fails  practice  will  be  further  established  and  an 
environment  will  be  developed  in  which  market  liquidity  is  not  only  maintained  in  normal 
times  but  also  secured or  quickly  recovered  during  times  of  stress,  thus  strengthening  the 
stability in the Japanese repo market. 
Shortening the JGB settlement cycle and other measures 
D. 
As  I  mentioned,  materialization  of  principal  risk  was  avoided  in  the  settlement  of  JGBs. 
Market  participants,  however,  became  well  aware  of  the  liquidity  risk  that  they  could  not 
receive bonds and funds as scheduled, during times of stress where default and settlement 
fails were likely to occur frequently. 
Generally  in  the  JGB  markets,  outright  transactions  are  settled  three  days  after  the  trade 
date (a T+3 settlement cycle), whereas in the United States and United Kingdom they are 
settled one day after the trade date (a T+1 settlement cycle) and in Germany two days after 
the trade date (a T+2 settlement cycle). The settlement cycle in Japan is thus longer than 
that  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  the  same  applies  to  repo  transactions.  Market 
participants have accordingly been discussing measures to shorten the JGB settlement cycle 
in  order  to  decrease  the  amount  of  unsettled  outstanding  positions  of  outright  and  repo 
transactions of JGBs. 
It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  pace  of  intra-day  settlement  of  JGBs  by  the  JGBCC  was 
delayed after the failure of Lehman Brothers. In response to this, policies have been laid out 
to strengthen the JGBCC’s governance and enable it to take actions in order to enhance the 
funding arrangements in emergency situations such as defaults of the JGBCC participants 
and  to  improve  transparency  concerning  how  to  allocate  bonds  subject  to  settlement  fails. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  supporting  such  private-sector  initiatives.  I  hope  that  in  the 
process of further establishing the fails practice, the JGB settlement cycle will be shortened 
and the functions of the JGBCC will be further enhanced, so that the stability against market 
stress is further increased in the secondary market for JGBs. 
Challenges to improve accessibility under global competition 
III. 
In  the  corporate  bond  and  stock  markets,  market  participants  have  engaged  in  efforts  and 
discussions to improve the accessibility of market transactions, while ensuring market stability. 
Enhancing the corporate bond markets 
A. 
As  I  stated  earlier,  it  could  be  said  that  markets  for  corporate  bonds  rated  AA  or  higher 
maintained  a  certain  level  of  functionality  during  the  current  financial  crisis.  For  corporate 
bonds rated A or lower, however, firms faced increased difficulty in issuing these bonds, or 
issuance  conditions  deteriorated,  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Accordingly,  many 
large firms began to shift their funding to bank loans from corporate bond issuance during the 
crisis. Given these experiences, market participants became more aware of the fact that the 
Japanese  corporate  bond  markets  did  not  function  sufficiently  as  a  channel  for  funding  by 
firms and that it was necessary to make efforts to enhance market liquidity. 
Looking  at  the  financial  structure,  the  following  are  recognized  as  priority  issues  in  the 
Japanese corporate bond markets. First, Japanese firms depend heavily on bank loans as a 
means  of  funding,  and  the  size  of  the  corporate  bond  markets  is  smaller  than  that  in  the 
United States. Second, the range of market participants in the corporate bond markets does 
not have sufficient diversity – the “other side of the coin” of what I have just mentioned. In 
fact, issuers consist mainly of firms with high ratings and the major investors are domestic 
banks and life insurance companies. And third, as corporate bond issuance by firms is not 
active, the secondary market for corporate bonds has not been well developed. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 Accordingly,  a  JSDA  conference  for  enhancing  the  corporate  bond  markets  discussed 
measures  to  foster  a  favorable  environment  for  issuance  of  and  investment  in  corporate 
bonds, including those with low ratings, and to bring in a wider range of investors. A report on 
the matter was released in June 2010.  
The  report  listed  the  following  issues  for  consideration.  For  issues  related  to  the  primary 
markets,  first,  examination  to  accept  corporate  bonds  will  be  reviewed  to  enhance  the 
accessibility of issuers. Second, a provision and disclosure of covenants of corporate bonds 
and  corporate  bond  management  will  be  reviewed  to  promote  the  investors’  holdings  of 
corporate  bonds  with  low  ratings.  Moreover,  for  issues  related  to  the  secondary  markets, 
development of the infrastructure to provide information on market prices is currently under 
discussion  to  facilitate  appropriate  investment  decisions  by  investors  and  determination  of 
issuance  environment  by  issuers.  The  Bank  of  Japan  hopes  that  market  participants  will 
continue to take initiatives to strengthen market infrastructure, thereby improving stability and 
accessibility in the corporate bond markets. 
Strengthening infrastructure in the stock markets 
B. 
In  Japanese  stock  markets,  measures  have  been  taken  to  improve  the  accessibility  of 
transactions amid fierce competition with, for example, financial markets in Asian emerging 
economies. 
Specifically, in January 2010, the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) launched “arrowhead”, the 
next-generation  trading  system  for  cash  equity  products.  Due  to  developments  in  IT,  the 
environment  surrounding  the  stock  exchanges  has  changed  significantly,  and  a  trading 
system  called  algorithmic  trading,  which  automatically  enters  trading  orders  based  on  a 
certain  data  processing  mode,  has  become  popular  among  market  participants.  In  other 
countries,  as  order  placement  and  execution  processing  have  accelerated,  high-frequency 
trading  (HFT)  has  become  common.  Therefore,  the  introduction  of  arrowhead  meets  the 
needs  of  investors  at  home  and  abroad  to  automate  and  accelerate  the  transactions.  In 
addition,  the  TSE  has  been  exchanging  opinions  with  market  users  on  the  extension  of 
trading hours, such as abolishing noon recess, which is uncommon in other major countries.  
In  Japan,  the  share  of  stock  trading  through  a  proprietary  trading  system  (PTS),  a  trading 
system created by private firms, accounts for less than 1 percent of total listed stock trading, 
but  in  July  2010  one  of  the  major  companies  from  abroad  started  to  offer  a  PTS.  If  the 
polarization of stock trading between stock exchange and off-exchange transactions leads to 
competition among these transactions, the utilization of the PTS, together with the measures 
taken  by  the  TSE  that  I  mentioned,  is  likely  to  help  provide  investors  with  more  trading 
opportunities and activating transactions. 
In  the  United  States,  the  sudden  stock  market  plunge  in  May  2010  –  the  so-called  “flash 
crash”  –  increased  concern  among  market  participants  about  financial  market  instability 
resulting from active algorithmic trading and the polarization of trading due to widespread off-
exchange  transactions.  In  this  regard,  price  limits  set  for  each  stock  issue  may  have 
contributed  to  market  stability  in  Japan.  Market  participants,  however,  should  pay  careful 
attention to market stability given the trend of automation and acceleration of transactions in 
Japanese financial markets. 
IV. 
Toward more stable and accessible market infrastructure 
Strengthening market infrastructure 
A. 
The  experience  of  the  recent  crisis  has  reconfirmed  that  it  is  important  to  secure  a  stable 
source of liquidity in financial markets at all times. In strengthening market infrastructure, we 
should work toward reinforcing the financial market stability against stress, while at the same 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 5
 time  considering  measures  to  enhance  accessibility  with  the  aim  of  promoting  active 
transactions. 
In Japan, in order to address issues based on the experiences after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers,  trading  systems  and  market  practices  have  been  steadily  established,  in 
consideration  of  both  market  stability  and  accessibility.  I  hope  that  such  initiatives  and 
discussions will proceed further and Japanese financial markets will become stable markets 
that  are  credible  to  market  participants  and  accessible  markets  that  meet  the  needs  of 
various investors and in funding. 
Role of the central bank  
B. 
In  closing  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  in 
strengthening market infrastructure. The effects of the central bank’s monetary policy spread 
to the overall financial market and the real economy through various transactions by market 
participants  and  arbitrage  trading  between  markets.  The  money  market  is  where  a  central 
bank conducts daily money market operations that are essential to implement its monetary 
policy.  The  Bank  plays  a  role  in  providing  market  infrastructure  by  operating  the  Bank  of 
Japan  Financial  Network  System  (BOJ-NET),  which  is  a  settlement  system  for  funds  and 
Japanese government securities (JGSs), and by providing payment and settlement services. 
Thus, the Bank recognizes that it is also crucial to strengthen market infrastructure equipped 
with a high degree of accessibility while maintaining market stability. 
The Bank will continue to support market initiatives to strengthen infrastructure as much as 
possible  through  communication  with  the  market,  and  will  actively  contribute  to  such 
initiatives by improving settlement infrastructure through, for example, the construction of the 
new BOJ-NET. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
Tension in the interbank market: LIBOR-OIS spreads (3-month) 
Chart 1 
Notes:  1.  (1)  and  (2)  indicate  the  BNP  Paribas  shock  (on  August  9,  2007)  and  the 
failure of Lehman Brothers (on September 15, 2008), respectively.  
2.  Data up to September 10, 2010.  
 
Source: Bloomberg.  
 6 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 Chart 2 
Tension in the corporate financing market: 
corporate bond spreads (AA-rated)  
 Notes: 1.  Corporate  bond  yields  in  Japan  are  obtained  from  “Reference  Price 
(Yields)  Table  for  OTC  Bond  Transactions”,  and  those  in  the  United 
States and Europe are calculated by the Bank of America Merrill Lynch.  
2.  The indicated rating of corporate bonds in Japan is of R&I, and those in 
the United States and Europe are of Moody’s, S&P, and Fitch.  
3.  3- to 7-year maturity for Japan; 3- to 5-year maturity for the United States 
and Europe.  
4.  Data up to September 10, 2010.  
Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch; Japan Securities Dealers Association. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 7
