Lars Nyberg: Monetary policy and house prices 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish 
Investment Fund Association, Stockholm, 19 May 2010. 
 I  would  guess  that  all  of  us  here  have  at  least  two  things  in  common.  One  is  that  our 
professional  life  in  recent  years  has  largely  revolved  around  dealing  with  the  effects  of  a 
global financial crisis. The other is that we would rather not do it again. Most of you represent 
the investment fund branch or unit trust investors in one way or another. And a reasonable 
guess is that recent years have been turbulent for many of you. 
It is fairly natural that the Riksbank should have been in the eye of the storm during the crisis. 
Our main tasks are to safeguard financial stability and to keep inflation low and stable, at the 
same time as contributing to stabilising production and employment. Managing the effects of 
the crisis and carrying out our statutory tasks in the best possible way has required a number 
of creative and unusual solutions. 
And it is not all over yet. The financial markets have recently been shaken up once again. 
Now the problem is mainly due to Greece, but to some extent also other EU countries such 
as  Spain  and  Portugal,  having  serious  problems  with  their  government  finances.  The 
Swedish  banks  are  not  directly  exposed  to  the  countries  in  southern  Europe  to  any  great 
extent. However, this does not mean they will not suffer contagion effects via the financial 
markets.  Two  weeks  ago,  the  EU  member  states  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
presented  an  aid  package  worth  a  total  of  EUR  750  billion  to  bail  out  EU  countries  with 
serious  budget  problems.  At  the  same  time,  the  European  Central  Bank  decided  to  make 
support  purchases  of  government  bonds.  Hopefully,  this  will  be  sufficient  to  create  and 
maintain confidence that the countries which have been hardest hit will actually be able to 
get  their  public  finances  on  an  even  keel  again.  We  will  be  following  these  developments 
very closely. 
Now, however, I am not intending to talk about the most recent financial market turmoil. What 
I intend to spend the next half hour or so talking about is an old debate theme that has been 
given new life during the crisis; should central banks use the interest rate to try to influence 
asset prices and credit growth? Should they try to prevent or alleviate imbalances that begin 
to  grow,  or  wait  until  the  bubble  has  burst  and  it  is  time  to  clean  up  the  mess  it  has  left 
behind? The crisis has changed many people’s views on monetary policy in this respect. 
Asset prices and “bubbles”  
The question of how monetary policy should relate to asset prices has been discussed for 
many years, not least by central banks and academics. Nor could one claim that there has 
been a lack of opinion – views that have often been diametrically opposed. The core of the 
discussion  is  that  house  prices  and  lending  sometimes  develop  in  a  way  that  does  not 
appear sustainable – in a way that entails risks that are difficult to quantify or to even capture 
in  analyses  and  forecasts.  These  are  risks  of  events  that  often  have  a  low  probability  of 
occurring, but if they do occur could have very serious consequences for the economy. So 
what is so special about asset prices rising and why do “bubbles” arise? 
Rising asset prices are not necessarily a bubble… 
The  prices  of  many  assets,  such  as  houses  or  shares,  rise  and  fall  in  cycles.  And  asset 
prices can rise substantially without this entailing an over-estimation or a financial bubble. A 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 1
bubble is among other things based on speculation and a strongly over-optimistic view of the 
future. 
If,  for  instance,  property  prices  increase  substantially  this  may  actually  be  justified  on  the 
basis of fundamental driving forces and realistic views of the future. Factors such as growth, 
incomes, construction and housing costs may develop favourably. And if one does not, for 
instance, build new housing at the same rate as the demand for housing increases, then it is 
not exactly surprising that the price of the existing housing should rise. 
Even if prices soar during a brief period, grey reality usually catches up before a bubble has 
arisen. When this happens prices usually adjust without any great drama and do not have 
any  major  effects  on  the  rest  of  the  economy.  However,  if  unrealistic  expectations  of  the 
future push up prices on a more lasting basis it can lead to serious problems. 
…but if they are pushed up by unrealistic expectations and lending… 
Expectations of the future, “mood” and attitude to risk are very important factors with regard 
to the prices of most assets. During the course of history investors have from time to time 
behaved  as  though  prices  on  a  particular  market  would  keep  on  rising  for  ever. 
Exaggeratedly  optimistic  expectations  of  the  future  may  entice  investors  into  a  particular 
market, prices will then rise, which will attract even more investors in the belief that prices will 
go on rising. Unless the spiral is broken reasonably early, a bubble will arise. If exaggerated 
optimism and a high risk propensity over a long period of time have pushed up prices, there 
is also a considerable risk that the fall from the inflated price level will be very hard once the 
mood changes. And this will probably have a negative effect on the rest of the economy. 
It  is  probably  necessary  to  be  most  on  our  guard  regarding  what  developments  can  be 
considered sustainable when things appear to be going well. By this I mean times with a high 
level  of  growth  in  the  economy  and  in  household  incomes,  good  investment  opportunities 
and low loan losses in the banks. It has happened more than once that a normal economic 
upturn inspires excessively optimistic expectations of economic developments and the price 
of risk thus becomes unreasonably low. Afterwards it often appears fairly obvious that certain 
price  movements  were  not  rooted  in  reality.  However,  during  an  upturn  phase  in  the 
economic  cycle  it  is  obviously  easy  to  get  carried  along  on  a  tide  of  optimism  and  leave 
common sense on the shore. Many may be pulled in by others acting as though the trend of 
large profits will continue – assuming that “so many” investors surely can’t be wrong, even 
though the fundamental forces indicate otherwise. An investor may also consider it costly to 
go  against  the  tide  and  act  on  the  basis  of  a  view  that  does  not  appear  to  be  shared  by 
others.  In  this  situation,  being  the  one  who  points  out  that  current  developments  are  not 
sustainable  and  that  the  expectations  are  unrealistic  may  be  rather  like  trying  to  stop  a 
runaway train with your bare hands. At least, if one lacks the right tools. 
…the consequences can be severe when the bubble bursts. 
Not all bubbles that arise have serious consequences for the rest of the economy. So are 
there  any  common  denominators  in  the  worst  scenario  cases?  Yes,  these  cases  often 
involve  a  loan-financed  price  upswing  in  the  property  market  that  has  accelerated  at  an 
untenable  rate  over  a  long  period  of  time.  And  when  this  kind  of  bubble  bursts,  it  almost 
always does so with a bang rather than with a whimper. 
Compare, for instance, the IT bubble at the beginning of the 2000s with the current crisis, 
where a bubble in the US housing market played a key role. Although the IT bubble resulted 
in heavy stock market falls and hit many investors hard, the crash did not have major effects 
on the real economy, which stands in sharp contrast to the effects of today’s crisis. The same 
applies  in  a  comparison  with  the  Swedish  financial  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  A 
decisive difference between a stock market bubble and a property market bubble is that the 
latter is almost always linked to an untenable credit boom. When house prices rise, the value 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2010
of the underlying assets increases, which gives scope to borrow even more with this asset as 
collateral.  At  the  same  time,  increased  lending  provides  more  purchasing  power,  and  this 
contributes to prices rising even more. It becomes a self-reinforcing spiral that can be very 
powerful – both in the upward phase and the downward phase. 
When the upward spiral is broken, there is a turnaround and a rapid downward spiral, which 
is  probably  much  quicker  than  the  upturn.  Prices  fall,  the  mood  becomes  increasingly 
negative  and  lenders  and  borrowers  become  increasingly  unwilling  to  take  on  risk.  The 
banks’  loan  losses  increase.  The  result  may  be  a  long  period  when  households  and 
companies  hold  onto  their  money  more  firmly  to  reinforce  and  balance  their  finances. 
Consumption and investment are weak and lending is restricted. Fluctuations in house prices 
and lending can in this way reinforce fluctuations in production and employment. 
In short, rising property prices often go hand in hand with an increase in lending. This means 
that problems in the property market often have greater effects on the financial system and 
the  economy  as  a  whole  than  do  problems  in,  for  instance,  the  stock  market.  And  it  is 
therefore  important  to  be  particularly  vigilant  with  regard  to  the  property  market  when 
discussing monetary policy and asset prices. I should also add that it is mainly commercial 
property, and not residential property, that usually causes this type of problem. 
“Lean or clean” – act sooner rather than just later?  
Let  us  say  that  property  prices  and  credit  volumes  are  increasing  at  a  rate  that  does  not 
appear sustainable. How should a central bank react? This is an “old” debate that has been 
given new life by the recent crisis. And it mainly concerns how the central bank should act 
when asset prices rise. In these situations it is often difficult to assess whether the current 
developments are reasonable or whether they are the result of over-optimistic expectations 
and speculation. It is also difficult to estimate the effects on the real economy and inflation. 
Moreover, it is difficult to judge when a potential bubble might burst. When property prices fall 
heavily,  the  real  economy  is  often  weaker  and  inflation  lower.  In  this  type  of  situation  it  is 
more obvious how the central bank should react. It is also obvious that the central bank must 
react to be able to carry out its tasks. So the way a central bank should react afterwards, 
once the bubble has burst, has not been debated as much as the question of how to act prior 
to this. 
Leaning against the wind – act sooner, not just later… 
This  debate  has  previously  been  somewhat  “polarised”  between  two  stances  –  to  “lean 
against the wind” or to “clean up afterwards”. The former stance involves the central bank 
raising its policy rate if property prices and lending increase at an alarming rate, even if an 
interest  rate  increase  is  not  obviously  justified  on  the  basis  of  the  forecasts  for  the  real 
economy and inflation. One usually says that the central bank should “lean against the wind”. 
The  basic  idea  is  that  keeping  the  policy  rate  higher  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been 
contributes to holding back the rise in property prices and ensuring that the fall in prices that 
comes sooner or later is much milder. A more balanced development in property prices also 
leads to more stable developments in the real economy and inflation. Although growth may 
be slightly lower in the upturn phase, there is on the other hand less risk that property prices 
will fall dramatically later on, which could contribute to a severe downturn. This is in some 
ways similar to an insurance policy: By accepting slightly weaker growth in the short term, 
one reduces the risk of much more negative developments further ahead. 
However, the strategy of “leaning against the wind” is not entirely without problems, even if it 
may  sound  fairly  simple.  Many  economists  have  criticised  this  strategy.  The  main  critics 
considered, at least prior to the crisis, that although it may indeed involve an imbalance, the 
best strategy was for the central bank to confine itself to “cleaning up afterwards” once the 
bubble had actually burst. In their view, “leaning against the wind” often would not lead to 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 3
more stable developments, but instead risks amplifying fluctuations. Three main arguments 
have been raised by critics against the policy of “leaning against the wind”. 
Difficult to identify a bubble and to do so in time? 
To begin with, it must be possible to identify the imbalance or potential bubble and to do so 
at a sufficiently early stage. The critics claim that this is very difficult and they often use the 
term  “bursting  bubbles”  when  talking  about  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices.  The  idea  of 
bursting a bubble has much more dramatic associations than the expression “leaning against 
the wind”. If the developments that are judged to be unbalanced are actually justified by the 
fundamental  driving  forces,  then  a  higher  interest  rate  would  curb  growth  unnecessarily.  It 
could also cause problems if one fails to identify the imbalance sufficiently early and tries to 
remedy  it  too  late.  Then  there  is  a  risk  of  larger  fluctuations  in  both  asset  prices  and 
economic activity, completely contrary to the initial aim. 
Is this criticism justified? Yes, it is difficult to identify an imbalance at an early stage. The fact 
that exaggerated optimism and high risk propensity can push up property prices and lending 
does cause problems, for instance. It is difficult to capture this type of factor in the models 
used to analyse the economy, as they are often based on everyone acting rationally, at least 
on  average.  Moreover,  it  is  difficult  to  capture  the  risk  of  a  bubble  bursting  and  the 
consequences this might have. The idea behind “leaning against the wind” is that the actual 
probability of the shock occurring can be reduced by the policy the central bank is conducting 
today. It is difficult to incorporate this into the formal analysis. 
However, the scope for identifying an imbalance is probably better in the property market, 
which goes hand in hand with credit growth, than in other asset markets. The financial crisis 
has also contributed to central banks and other authorities now working even harder to better 
capture  financial  variables  in  their  models  and  other  analyses.  Constructing  early  warning 
systems that signal imbalances in, for instance, the property market is also part of this work. 
However, it is difficult to say today how much we will eventually achieve here. 
But  even  if  the  criticism  is  justified  –  is  it  sufficient  argument  for  not  “leaning  against  the 
wind”?  One  must  compare  what  the  central  bank  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  win  and 
lose by taking action with the possible effects of not doing anything until a potential bubble 
has burst. I will return to this in a moment. 
A too weak and blunt weapon? 
Another  argument  against  “leaning  against  the  wind”  concerns  the  effectiveness  of  the 
interest rate in this context. To “lean against the wind” one must be able to count on dealing 
with the imbalances by making reasonable increases to the policy rate. One hypothesis is 
that the optimistic mood often prevailing during a boom in the property market means that 
significant increases in the policy rate are required to have an effect. Otherwise it would be 
rather  like  trying  to  bring  down  an  elephant  with  a  pea-shooter.  The  critics  claim  that  the 
severe monetary policy tightening that would be needed could have serious effects on the 
rest of the economy. Here we also have the problem that the interest rate is a blunt weapon 
that affects the entire economy and cannot be aimed at an individual market. If you use a 
shotgun to take aim at a mosquito in a swarm you will probably also hit those around it, even 
if you weren’t aiming for them. From this aspect, there is a risk that the central bank could do 
more harm than good. 
I think the critics have a point here. As I mentioned earlier, trying to dampen a spiral of over-
optimism and rising prices may be like trying to stop a runaway train with one’s bare hands. I 
usually mention an example from the 1990s crisis when talking about this phenomenon; in 
1989 the requirement for direct return on the commercial property market was around 4 per 
cent.  A  risk-free  five-year  government  bond  provided  up  to  12  per  cent  interest.  But  the 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2010
market preferred to invest in an unsecured property asset to a covered bond with a return of 
8 per cent more! It takes a lot to defeat that kind of optimism. 
But the exact size of the increases in the policy rate that are necessary would probably vary 
from situation to situation. Under certain circumstances it may even be enough to make very 
small increases. In the world of theory, everyone tries to stay well-informed with regard to for 
example  the  most  probable  development  of  the  interest  rate.  But  this  does  not  mean  that 
things  always  work  out  this  way  in  reality.  Smaller  interest  rate  increases  combined  with 
successful communication can function as a clear signal that the central bank regards the 
current  situation  to  be  untenable.  It  can  contribute  to  correcting  or  at  least  dampening 
irrational behaviour. 
If  a  central  bank  were  to  judge  that  developments  in  property  prices  and  lending  were 
beginning  to  give  cause  for  concern,  it  would  also  be  rather  strange,  in  my  opinion,  if  the 
governor  or  governors  were  to  just  sit  there  and  not  do  anything  on  the  grounds  that  the 
policy rate would probably need to be raised a lot. The policy rate is probably not the most 
effective weapon in this context, but it is more powerful than a pea-shooter. 
However, the shotgun and the mosquito comparison holds up fairly well. The policy rate is 
not a precision instrument, it affects the entire economy. This is why the strategy of “leaning 
against the wind” can have some negative effects in parts of the economy that the central 
bank  does  not  wish  to  affect.  If  one  wants  to  tackle  an  excessive  growth  in  the  property 
market, there may well be instruments with better precision than the policy rate. I will return 
to this in a moment. 
Not “sufficiently” serious consequences? 
A third counter-argument was, at least earlier, that the negative effects of a bubble bursting 
need not be so dramatic. Rather, they could be managed fairly easily, for instance through 
more expansionary monetary policy. But as I recall, this argument was primarily put forward 
when the IT bubble was the crisis most fresh in our memories. Since then a global crisis has 
had dramatic effects – much more serious and more widespread than I believe anyone had 
actually predicted. And this latter point is a nuance in the debate that I would like to highlight. 
It is not just difficult to estimate the probability of a bubble arising and when it will burst, as I 
described recently. It is also very difficult to assess how serious the consequences might be 
after  a  bubble  has  burst.  Elements  of  “irrational  behaviour”  such  as  over-optimism  and 
speculation  are  not  just  difficult  to  capture  in  models  and  other  analyses  during  an  upturn 
phase. They are also hard to capture during a downturn phase. 
The Swedish crisis in the 1990s is a very good example of a self-reinforcing downward spiral, 
the effects of which had unforeseen serious consequences – with a drastic fall in property 
prices, large loan losses that threatened the financial system and a deep recession. In the 
most recent crisis, too, confidence and mood played an important role in developments. We 
probably  all  underestimated  the  force  in  the  mechanisms  that  were  able  to  drag  the  world 
economy down into the worst recession since the 1930s. 
This  has,  of  course,  also  had  an  impression  on  the  debate  on  monetary  policy  and  asset 
prices. It seems as though several advocates of the strategy of “cleaning up afterwards” have 
modified their view, primarily because the potential profits of limiting bubbles appear to be 
greater than they previously assumed. The well-known American professor Alan Blinder also 
notes  in  an  article  this  year  that  it  appears  as  though  even  the  advocates  of  “cleaning  up 
afterwards”  are  beginning  to  support  the  opinion  that  central  banks  should  at  least  do 
something when they suspect that a loan-driven imbalance is building up. However, this does 
not  necessarily  mean  raising  the  policy  rate,  even  if  there  now  appears  to  be  greater 
acceptance for this, too, if it is supplemented with other measures. My interpretation is that 
the advocates of “leaning against the wind” consider that the central issue is that something 
should  be  done  –  and  this  does  not  necessarily  mean  raising  the  policy  rate.  So  it  would 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 5
appear that we are approaching some form of consensus. At least to the extent that most 
people now seem to consider it more dangerous to do nothing than to do something. 
Given the proportions the debate on monetary policy and asset prices has taken on, it would 
be easy to believe that there are a whole number of practical examples of “leaning against 
the wind”. However, this is not the case – with regard to either successes or failures. One of 
the few examples usually taken up is the policy conducted by the Reserve Bank of Australia 
(RBA) 2002–2004. The RBA adjusted its policy rate to try to dampen house price rises that 
were fairly clearly of a speculative nature. The fact is that this type of strategy is relatively 
untested.  And  we  cannot  refer  to  practical  experiences  where  central  banks  have 
systematically and over a long period of time tried to apply the principle of “leaning against 
the wind”. 
Other and better weapons?  
Most people probably agree that the interest rate cannot do the whole job if we want to try to 
slow down developments in the property and credit markets that appear to be getting out of 
control. So, in brief – if the policy rate is not the only and best weapon, what else do we have 
available in our arsenal? And which authority should have its finger on the trigger? 
One of the problems the crisis has brought to light is that there was too little focus on overall 
risks that could threaten the financial system as a whole – systemic risks. In many parts of 
the world they are now working on introducing a framework aimed at preventing such risks. 
This could contribute to preventing imbalances that would have consequences “merely” from 
a monetary policy perspective, even if this is not the explicit aim. 
One means of preventing an exaggerated upturn in house prices and lending, for instance, is 
to cut the permitted loan-to-value ratio – how much it is possible to borrow in relation to the 
market value of the underlying collateral. Another means may be to introduce an amortisation 
requirement.  Two  weeks  ago,  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  financial  supervisory 
authority)  presented  a  proposal  for  a  recommended  ceiling  for  the  loan-to-value  ratio  for 
housing of 85 per cent of the property’s market value. 
Division of responsibility and other problems 
I asked earlier who should have their finger on the trigger. It is not entirely clear who should 
have the power of authority to introduce the type of measure I just mentioned. There may be 
good reasons to delegate this to the central bank, at least with regard to measures that affect 
the macro economy and are not aimed at individual banks. On the other hand, authorities like 
Finansinspektionen may need to take the same type of measure for their task of protecting 
the consumer. Their proposal for a ceiling for loan-to-value ratios, for instance, is based on 
consumer interests. The question of how responsibility and roles should be divided between 
the  different  authorities  will  probably  be  discussed  in  detail  in  Sweden  and  abroad  in  the 
coming period. And it is important to find a system that works efficiently. 
Some of the criticism of the strategy of “leaning against the wind” with the policy rate also 
applies  to  alternative  measures.  If  the  central  bank  or  another  authority  takes  such 
measures, one must have a good understanding, as with the policy rate, that the measures 
are  really  being  implemented  at  the  right  point  in  time.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk  that  the 
fluctuations in the banks’ credit granting will be greater rather than smaller. 
Monetary policy and house prices  
Credit volumes and house prices are not targets for monetary policy. They are indicators that 
should affect monetary policy if they are expected to affect inflation and resource utilisation in 
the economy. But my assessment is that there may also be occasions when indicators such 
6 
 BIS Review 70/2010
as house prices and credit growth contain information on future economic developments over 
and above what we can capture in our quantified forecasts. If we knew a very good way of 
calculating the probability of a bubble growing and bursting at some point in the future and of 
calculating how great an effect it would have, then we would of course have already put this 
calculation into our models. But unfortunately we have not got there yet, although intensive 
work is being carried out, not least by the Riksbank, to better capture financial variables in 
our  analyses  and  forecasts.  However,  there  is  a  long  and  difficult  road  ahead  before  we 
achieve what we want. 
Practical problems and important considerations 
Let us assume, for instance, that we were to find ourselves in a situation where there is a 
major risk that a loan-driven bubble in the property market  will collapse further ahead and 
that it will then contribute to a heavy fall in GDP. How should we react to this? If we knew 
with certainty that this would happen, then it is likely that most of the models we have now 
would  indicate  that  we  ought  to  cut  the  policy  rate  to  alleviate  the  effects  on  inflation, 
production and employment. But if we were to cut the rate in such a situation we would also 
risk  blowing  up  the  bubble  even  more  before  it  burst.  This  would  in  turn  contribute  to  the 
ensuing  fall  being  from  an  even  more  over-valued  level  and  the  consequences  would  be 
even more serious than if we had not cut the repo rate. It is no easy task to build this type of 
mechanism into our models, or even the part of the analysis based on assessments. 
Allow me to alter the time perspective somewhat and assume that a loan-driven bubble in the 
property market has burst and had serious consequences for the rest of the economy. There 
are some questions that I would like to be able to give the “right” answer to if I were standing 
in this situation looking back over the developments leading up to it, perhaps looking back a 
year.  Would  we  then  be  able  to  claim  with  certainty  that  our  interest  rate  policy  did  not 
contribute to developments becoming unbalanced and getting out of control? Would we be 
able to say with certainty that we did not suspect that these developments were untenable 
and that there would soon be a collapse? And would we be able to say with certainty that 
conducting  a  slightly  stricter  monetary  policy  than  was  justified  by  the  forecasts  had  not 
helped? I consider it essential for the credibility of every central bank to be able to provide 
good answers to these questions. And for me it is natural to also take into account the type of 
factor I have now spoken about – that is so difficult to quantify – when I assess what is the 
best-balanced monetary policy. 
Other weapons than the interest rate are probably more effective with regard to preventing 
loan-financed house price bubbles from building up. But I do not rule out the interest rate as 
a weapon in this context. And I do not believe that it is a small pea-shooter we are using if we 
try to dampen an untenable development. Not if the conditions are right. A small policy rate 
increase  combined  with  a  clear  message  that  the  Riksbank  regards  developments  as  a 
cause  for  concern  could  work  well  –  as  an  alarm  signal  for  those  with  overly  optimistic 
expectations.  The  interest  rate  increase  will  reinforce  the  message  that  something  is  not 
right. 
Obviously,  it  is  a  challenge  to  be  clear  in  our  communication  and  to  act  in  a  predictable 
manner with regard to these issues. The possibility to do so is to some extent linked to our 
analysis in this field improving – so that we can quantify more of the risks we are discussing 
here. But if those around us are to understand why we make our interest rate decisions, we 
must be able to explain clearly how we assess various risks. This also applies to the risks of 
a bubble arising and what consequences this may have, given that we choose a particular 
interest rate policy. If we succeed in communicating this it is also more likely that our actions 
will have the desired effects. 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 7
When should the central bank “lean against the wind”? 
In  my  opinion,  a  good  checklist  for  a  policy-maker  on  monetary  policy  issues  is  what 
Donald L. Kohn at the Federal Reserve has put forward on several occasions. He considers 
that three conditions I mentioned earlier must be met before central banks “lean against the 
wind”.  And  these  are  the  three  arguments  I  mentioned  earlier.  The  first  condition  is  that  it 
must be possible to identify a bubble sufficiently early and with sufficient certainty. Secondly, 
the assessment must be that there is a good chance that a slightly higher interest rate will 
really slow down the untenable developments. Finally, one must count on being able to gain 
“enough” by preventing a bubble in relation to what a tighter monetary policy might cost in 
the short term. I believe that most people will agree that these are sound conditions to use as 
a foundation. However, the views regarding when the conditions are actually met can vary. 
Professor  Kohn’s  first  condition  probably  entails  the  greatest  difficulty.  Although  we  are 
constantly  developing  our  forecasting  methods  and  models  and  they  are  becoming 
increasingly  sophisticated,  I  do  not  expect  that  we  will  be  able  to  reach  a  stage  in  the 
foreseeable future where we can be entirely sure that something we assess as an incipient 
bubble actually is a bubble. This is largely due to the nature of things, or rather the nature of 
the bubble. 
So when it comes to making assessments of what risks becoming a bubble, I believe that we 
must continue to make use of our experience combined with a dose of the sort of conclusion 
referred to in English-speaking circles as a “duck test”; if it looks like a duck, swims like a 
duck and quacks like a duck, then it probably is a duck. Of course what we are talking about 
here  is  much  more  difficult  to  identify  than  a  duck.  But  if  there  are  sufficiently  strong 
indications that developments are untenable, then there is a good probability that this is the 
case.  And  if  this  is  expected  to  affect  inflation  and  developments  in  the  real  economy,  I 
consider the interest rate to be a possible weapon if others are not available or not sufficient 
– if not to prevent a bubble, then at least to tone down the bubble and its consequences. 
House prices today and in the coming period  
So  what  does  this  reasoning  entail  for  my  views  on  developments  in  house  prices  and 
lending today? Firstly, the crisis has meant that the repo rate has long been adjusted to try to 
alleviate the effects of the financial crisis on inflation, production and employment and to give 
support  to  the  economic  recovery.  The  repo  rate  is  still  at  the  historically  low  figure  of 
0.25 per  cent,  but  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  is  assuming  that  it  will  be  time  to 
leave the crisis rate and to conduct a monetary policy that is adapted to a “normal” downturn 
when we reach the summer or the early autumn. 
The  low  interest  rates  have  probably  contributed  to  households  borrowing  and  investing 
more  in  housing  than  they  would  have  done  otherwise.  But  this  was  to  some  extent  the 
intention, and a means of maintaining economic demand. We have quite simply conducted, 
and are conducting, the policy we consider necessary to attain the inflation target and to give 
sufficient support to production and employment. 
Swedish house prices have developed surprisingly strongly 
Swedish house prices have grown surprisingly strongly during the crisis, and also during the 
years  prior  to  the  crisis.  House  prices  have  risen  fairly  quickly,  both  in  nominal  and  real 
terms. And it is not surprising that eyebrows may be raised when house prices are rising and 
bank  lending  to  households  is  increasing  fairly  substantially,  at  the  same  time  as 
unemployment is still high and growth has not yet begun to pick up. But in an international 
comparison things may not look quite so remarkable. During the years prior to the crisis real 
house prices in many other countries increased more than those in Sweden. During parts of 
2006  house  prices  in  Denmark,  for  example,  rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  more  than 
20 percentage points, which was way above the Swedish increase. In the countries where 
8 
 BIS Review 70/2010
real house prices had previously increased more rapidly than in Sweden, they have in most 
cases  experienced  fairly  large  price  falls  in  connection  with  the  crisis.  For  instance,  in 
Denmark real house prices have fallen by around 20 per cent since the peak levels in 2007. 
So are developments in the Swedish credit and housing market cause for concern? My view 
is – not in the short term. But nor do I believe that the growth we have seen in household 
borrowing and house prices over the past decade is sustainable in the long term. The reason 
I  do  not  believe  developments  to  be  a  problem  right  now  is  that  there  are  nevertheless 
reasonable explanations for the price increases. Recently it is probably the case that factors 
such as the fact that it is still cheap to borrow, and that households and companies according 
to  indicators  are  regaining  confidence,  have  contributed  to  the  nevertheless  strong 
development. 
There has also been relatively little new housing built in recent years, at least in relation to 
demand. The housing market is what one might call “regionally segregated” and migration to 
metropolitan  areas  has  put  upward  pressure  on  house  prices  in  these  areas.  Prices  have 
also increased by far the most in Stockholm, Göteborg and Malmö. And then we do not have 
the same element of speculation in the Swedish housing market as in, for instance, Australia 
and  to  some  extent  the  United  Kingdom.  What  I  mean  here  is  the  phenomenon  that 
households buy housing as a financial investment and then rent it out, which may contribute 
to imbalances building up. This type of activity is not profitable in Sweden in the same way. 
There are several reasons for this, but the most important ones are probably the tax system 
and rent legislation. In Sweden we usually buy a house to live in rather than as a financial 
asset. 
However, having said this I would nevertheless like to say a word of caution. It is quite right 
to wonder whether the developments in recent years are actually sustainable. Households’ 
debts in relation to incomes peaked at around 120 per cent in connection with the crisis in 
the 1990s. Today this figure is almost 170 per cent! Also at the beginning of the 1990s many 
models  and  fundamental  driving  forces  behind  house  price  developments  pointed  to  there 
not being a serious over-valuation in the property market. Nevertheless prices fell in many 
areas by around 30 per cent! Such a development could affect the real economy and thereby 
also the conditions for monetary policy. 
Untenable in the long run 
Although I cannot see any problems right now, I do not believe that nominal house prices can 
continue to increase by an average of well above 7 per cent a year as they have done since 
the start of the 2000s. This is not sustainable in the long term. And when we now consider 
when  is  the  best  time  to  begin  raising  the  repo  rate,  my  colleagues  and  I  will  be carefully 
examining  variables  such  as  house  prices  and  lending.  As  I  pointed  out,  for  instance,  in 
connection with the monetary policy meeting in February, I believe that during the interest 
rate  increase  phase  ahead  of  us  it  might  be  appropriate  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  –  to 
emphasise some concern by raising the repo rate slightly sooner than we might otherwise 
have done. But as I also said then, monetary policy is not the most effective means if one 
wishes to slow down, for instance, house price developments slightly. I then said I would like 
to see measures such as Finansinspektionen setting a limit for the loan-to-value ratio for new 
mortgages.  Now  they  have  presented  a  proposal  for  this  and  we  will  carefully  monitor  its 
effects. 
Leaning against the wind concerns, in my view, avoiding large fluctuations in inflation and the 
real economy – what provides the best-balanced monetary policy. It is thus about monetary 
policy, not financial stability. As shown in a survey made by Finansinspektionen earlier this 
year,  there  are  many  indications  that  the  households  taking  on  loans  are  those  that  can 
afford to borrow. The Riksbank has also drawn this conclusion so far in its Financial Stability 
Reports. I therefore find it difficult to believe that the developments in the housing and credit 
markets at present would constitute any danger to the banks and thus to financial stability. 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 9
Concluding remarks 
In  connection  with  dramatic  events  like  the  recent  financial  crisis,  proposals  for  radical 
changes tend to crop up in the general debate. But I do not see a radically-different monetary 
policy ahead of me. I am still convinced that flexible inflation targeting is the best monetary 
policy  solution  for  Sweden.  The  repo  rate  is  not  the  most  effective  weapon  for  trying  to 
prevent  or  alleviate  an  imbalance  in,  for  instance,  the  property  market,  but  this  does  not 
mean it is completely ineffective. 
We must become better at analysing financial conditions and not least at capturing variables 
such  as  house  prices  and  credit  growth  in  our  forecasts.  And  this  is  something  we  are 
working hard to achieve, both at the Riksbank and in many other areas. We must become 
better at clearly explaining how we assess the risks of a bubble given a particular repo rate 
policy, and what consequences a bubble may have if it bursts. And we need, and will most 
probably  also  obtain,  better  support  from  the  framework  for  financial  stability  that  we  and 
others  are  now  working  to  develop  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  When  this  project  is 
complete,  it  will  contribute  to  monetary  policy  more  rarely  needing  to  take  into  account 
untenable developments in the housing and credit markets. But I do not think we can achieve 
an entirely “bubble-free” world. 
10 
 BIS Review 70/2010
