Jean-Claude Trichet: What role for finance? 
University lecture by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, 6 May 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  Universidade  Nova  very  warmly  for  the  kind  invitation  and  the 
opportunity to deliver a lecture here. 
I have chosen the title “What role for finance?” because the past three years have taught us 
how important it is to reflect on this question. And I have chosen it for a university lecture 
because  I  believe  that  university  researchers  –  and  the  young  people  they  educate  –  will 
make a vital contribution to re-thinking the role of finance in our societies. 
Finance  touches  virtually  every  sphere  of  human  endeavour  –  from  individuals  and 
households  to  corporations  and  governments.  But  the  crisis  has  posed  a  provocative 
question to which many people would like an answer: why and to what extent does society 
need finance? 
In  recent  economic  history,  the  answer  has  always  been  dependent  on  circumstances.  In 
times of affluence, when finance makes lenders and borrowers alike rich and respected, the 
answer  is  resoundingly  positive.  In  contrast,  in  times  of  economic  regress,  disillusionment 
with markets suggests to an embittered public that financiers of all kinds are the same as 
short-term speculators motivated by greed. 
I will try to bring a timeless perspective to these vacillating public attitudes towards finance. 
To  anticipate  my  line  of  reasoning, I  think  that –  at  a  minimum  –  the  crisis  has  belied  the 
long-standing conviction in macroeconomics, that “where enterprise leads, finance follows”. 
Contrary to Joan Robinson’s 1952 dictum, I think that financial structures are part of the deep 
texture of an economy. They are relevant for trend growth and for shaping the business cycle 
around the trend. Here, I side more with Joseph Schumpeter, who in 1934 wrote: “He (the 
banker) stands between those who wish to form new combinations and the possessors of 
productive means… He is the ephor (the overseer) of the exchange economy”. 
At the same time, and again in contrast to Joan Robinson’s view of “finance as a veil”, I see 
financial structures as a prime source of aggregate uncertainty. The economic relevance of 
shocks that originate in the markets for lending and borrowing is incalculable. It cannot be 
measured in normal times. It is difficult to quantify even in times of crisis. But we all know that 
it is large, and that no society can afford to let finance sever its ties to the real economy. 
Yet,  over  the  past  two  decades,  financial  players  have  gradually  expanded  their  activities 
beyond  Schumpeter’s  idea  of  intermediation  between  savers  and  investors.  The  financial 
sector  has  gradually  and  quietly  decoupled  –  at  least  in  part  –  from  the  real  economy. 
Financial  innovations  and  the  trading  book  are  increasingly  seen  as  a  more  profitable 
business  line  than  extending  loans  to  businesses.  Credit  default  swaps,  asset-backed 
securities and collateralised debt obligations are the most illustrative examples of this change 
of focus. 
In my remarks today I will discuss this quiet shift in the paradigm of finance. I will explore 
how finance creates economic value, and why – at times – it can do more harm than good. I 
will conclude by proposing a way forward – a way that discourages business models oriented 
to  the  short  term,  that  promotes  healthy  financial  innovation  and  that  ensures  long-term 
financial stability. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 1
   Finance, economic growth and welfare 
I. 
Let  me  start  with  my  provocative  question:  why  and  to  what  extent  does  society  need 
finance? 
Beyond  the  sanctification  of  finance  in  booms  and  the  banker-bashing  in  crises  –  society 
does need finance. Society needs finance for five key reasons that give economic value to 
financial intermediation:1 
 
First,  external  finance  reduces  the  need  for  self-finance.  Self-finance  constrains 
investment.  
Second,  finance  provides  screening  and  monitoring  services  that  help  society  to 
evaluate and rank investment projects.  
Third,  finance  facilitates  the  management  and  diversification  of  risk.  Otherwise, 
entrepreneurs would find many sources of risk unbearable.  
Fourth, finance promotes the transformation of liquidity. Savers place high value on 
liquidity while investors need the opportunity to invest long-term.  
And fifth, finance facilitates the process of price discovery. 
 
The  first  function,  the  provision  of  external  funds,  is  most  apparent  in  the  economics  of 
industrial revolutions. What drove the industrial revolution in England in the 18th century? 
True,  in  those  days  the  initial  outlays  for  setting  up  a  business  were  relatively  modest: 
production  facilities  were  small  and  machinery  was  cheap.  So  retained  earnings  from 
craftsmanship,  family  equity  or  loans  from  relatives  or  friends  were  the  dominant  form  of 
finance.2 
But  the  true  inflection  point  in  the  economic  fortunes  of  nations  –  the  point  at  which  the 
pattern of growth turned definitively upwards – did not come until heavy capital investments 
could lengthen the life of the production cycle. A steady rise in the wealth of nations required 
a large injection of capital.3 
Without access to credit, such large upfront payments of production resources simply would 
not  have  been  possible.  Without  credit,  production  processes  are  constrained  to  an 
economically  inefficient  scale.4  The  opportunity  to  borrow  against  future  income  streams 
reduced  the  constraints  on  the  ability  of  entrepreneurs  to  invest  in  bigger  machines  and 
larger premises. 
Today, access to external funding is no less important. It has the potential to spur economic 
innovation and allows production facilities to be operated efficiently through standing credit 
lines. 
Access  to  credit  is  not  only  important  for  businesses.  Students  can  receive  a  loan  in 
expectation of the higher income that they are likely to earn later in their lives. Student loans 
permit the enjoyment of the benefits of a higher education at a time in life when income is 
low. 
Credit makes promising projects possible – whether they are embodied in physical capital or 
in better education. 
                                                 
1   For a similar classification of functions see Levine (2005). 
2   See Pollins (1954) or Hudson (2002). 
3   See Hicks (1969). 
4   See e.g. Sirri and Tufano (1995). 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2010
The  provision  of  screening  and  monitoring  services  is  the  second  key  function  of  finance. 
Specialised screening of the quality of borrowers is an effective remedy against the problem 
of  adverse  selection  in  credit  markets.  Financial  intermediaries  acquire,  process  and 
evaluate information about potential borrowers. In doing so, they help reduce the large costs 
that we – as individuals – would face if lending of savings were not intermediated. 
Likewise, banks are more effective at monitoring the behaviour of borrowers after funds have 
been  allocated.  They  can  thereby  reduce  the  costs  associated  with  moral  hazard  –  a 
situation in which asymmetric information can lead borrowers to take action that erodes the 
value of the loan. 
Stock  markets  can  also  perform  this  duty.  Influential  research  literature  claims  that  liquid 
stock markets help foster corporate governance and hence reduce moral hazard.5 The basic 
intuition  is  straightforward.  If  managerial  compensation  is  directly  linked  to  stock  market 
performance,  either  through  contracts  or  stock  ownership,  managers  have  an  incentive  to 
select and implement actions that increase shareholder wealth. 
The transformation and management of risk – the third key function of financial institutions in 
modern societies – became the focus of attention during the recent financial crisis. I will turn 
to  the  dark  side  of  this  function  later.  For  now,  let  me  stress  the  potential  value  of  risk 
management. Financial markets provide savers with a large array of instruments that allow 
them  to  diversify  the  risks  associated  with  their  investments  along  two  broad  dimensions: 
across  firms,  industries  and  nations;  and  over  time.6  Financial  markets  also  allow 
entrepreneurs  to  manage  risks  from  sources  such  as  movements  of  interest  rates  or 
currencies. 
Financial  institutions  are  able  to  hedge  another  type  of  risk  –  liquidity  risk.  Liquidity 
transformation – the fourth function in my list – helps control liquidity risk for the aggregate 
economy.  Individuals  generally  express  a  high  preference  for  liquidity  in  anticipation  of 
uncertain future disbursements. So, there is a tendency – on the lenders’ side – for a large 
share  of  savings  to  be  held  in  cash,  or  in  very  short-term  debt  instruments.  Borrowers, 
however, typically require loans with a long maturity. The more potentially lucrative a project, 
the  more  deferred  its  economic  payoffs.  We  can  see  here  the  emergence  of  a  trade-off 
between the social value of a long-term investment and the private value of liquidity. 
Financial  intermediaries  –  in  particular  depository  institutions  –  reconcile  the  trade-off.  By 
engaging  in  maturity  transformation,  they  make  it  possible  for  socially-valued  long-term 
projects to be funded by privately-desirable liquidity. Likewise, well-developed equity markets 
constitute a permanent source of funding for companies while savers are able quickly and 
easily to convert their shares back into cash. 
The  final  key  function  of  finance  is  “price  discovery.”  In  textbook  financial  markets,  asset 
prices on average reflect all economically relevant information. The market force that moves 
the trading system close to this ideal – in which prices are “correct” given the current state of 
knowledge  –  is  arbitrage,  the  simultaneous  purchase  and  sale  of  the  same  asset  in  two 
different markets at advantageously different prices. 
By engaging in arbitrage, financial players eliminate price discrimination. By removing price 
differences that are not motivated by differences in payoffs or underlying risk characteristics, 
arbitrage eliminates the potential for rents in the economy. 
In summary, financial intermediation – if well-designed and properly administered – has the 
capacity to allocate financial funds more efficiently in the economy. By doing so, it has the 
power to raise the level of savings and investment. 
                                                 
5   See e.g. Diamond and Verrecchia (1982) or Jensen and Murphy (1990) for an empirical examination. 
6   See Levine (2005). 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 3
This  is  not  just  theory.  A  growing  body  of  empirical  evidence  using  very  different 
methodologies  and  datasets  for  various  countries  has  established  that  finance  –  and  by 
finance  I  mean  both  banks  and  markets  –  can  exert  a  positive  influence  on  capital 
accumulation and economic growth.7 The findings also suggest that there is no institutional 
structure – the mix between banks and markets – that is optimal for fostering growth. 
What  matters  is  that  people  have  access  to  financial  instruments;  the  exact  type  and 
composition is of secondary importance. 
Financial developments, innovations and excesses 
II. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  darker  side  of  finance.  Robert  Merton  –  one  of  the  architects  of 
modern  financial  theory  –  once  said:  “Any  virtue  can  readily  become  a  vice  if  taken  to 
excess, and just so with innovations”.8 When – and how – can finance turn into a source of 
instability and economic regress? 
My answer is simple. When function 2 is ignored, and functions 3, 4 and 5 are abused. In 
other  words,  when  screening  and  monitoring  services  are  neglected,  and  when  risk 
management, liquidity transformation and price discovery are flawed. 
There is unlikely to be a better case study of the functional degradation of finance than the 
events that led up to the crisis that started in 2007. I am convinced that if banks neglect their 
primary activity of due diligence, and if they come to abuse risk control techniques, liquidity 
creation and arbitrage opportunities, finance will do more harm than good to the economy. 
And crises of the magnitude that we have witnessed become unavoidable. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  financial  markets  are solely  to  blame  for  the  financial crisis.  Policy-
makers, regulators and supervisors also bear some responsibility for the incidents that led to 
the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression. But understanding the impact of 
the paradigm shift of private finance in recent years demands a deep introspection into the 
inner mechanisms of financial economics. 
The neglect of screening and monitoring activities 
1. 
Let  me  recall  the  essence  of  the  screening  duty  of  banks.  Banks  acquire  and  evaluate 
information about potential borrowers. At the heart of this duty is a thorough due diligence at 
the start of the contract and continual monitoring of the creditworthiness of the borrower and 
the  quality  of  investment,  as  the  project  progresses.  A  precondition  for  due  diligence  and 
monitoring is that the creditor-borrower relationship is continued. 
Securitisation of loans made loan discontinuation possible. The bank would extend a loan but 
immediately  pool  it  together  with  loans  of  similar  scope  and  characteristics,  so  that  the 
idiosyncratic  risk  inherent  in  each  individual  contract  would  find  compensation  in  the 
idiosyncratic risk of other contracts. The law of large numbers would take care of cross-loan 
return compensation within the pool. So, the return to the pool would be less risky and more 
predictable than the return to any of its constituent components. In fact, the pool would turn a 
heterogeneous collection of assets into a standardised financial object that could be placed 
in the market. 
The traditional banking model, in which banks would issue loans and hold them until they are 
repaid, was replaced by “originate and distribute”. In this new model, banks would not hold 
the loans they originated. They would pass the loans onto other financial investors by slicing 
and repackaging the claims attached to them. In other words, by securitising the loans. 
                                                 
7   See Levine (2005) for a brilliant summary of the literature. 
8   See Merton (1992). 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2010
The prevalence of this model led to significant growth in the market for structured finance in 
the United States and, to a lesser extent, in Europe. For instance, the volume of residential 
mortgage-backed  securities  issued  in  the  United  States  was  around  EUR  200  billion  in 
2006.9 Ten years before, this kind of security hardly existed. 
Sub-prime lending, which was the outgrowth of securitisation, is not bad per se. It extends 
credit to people who, for various reasons would otherwise be denied credit. But by definition, 
sub-prime loans are inherently riskier for lenders as the probability of delinquency is inversely 
related to the creditworthiness of the borrower. But delinquency risk is less of a concern if 
there is an expectation that the loan can be readily sold off and somebody else will have to 
face the consequence of non-performance. 
This  expectation  was  a  powerful  trigger  of  sub-prime  loan  growth.  Sub-prime  mortgage 
lending in the United States grew from USD 33 billion in 1993 to around USD 700 billion in 
2006, the year preceding the beginning of the crisis10, when nearly one in four US mortgages 
was sub-prime. At the same time, these borrowers were responsible for around 50% of all 
US  foreclosures.  These  numbers  provide  a  good  idea  about  the  quantum  of  risk  that  was 
inherent in the balance sheets of the US financial system. 
Fatally,  securitisation  had  lessened  lenders’  incentives  for  prudent  screening  and  steady 
monitoring.  A  recent  study  finds  that  the  opportunity  to  securitise  sub-prime  mortgages 
reduces  the  incentives  for  financial  intermediaries  to  carefully  screen  and  monitor 
borrowers.11 The intuition is straightforward. If banks are allowed to put the large risk that a 
sub-prime  mortgage  loan  poses  off-balance  sheet  by  securitising  it,  they  will  concentrate 
their  business  efforts  in  expanding  the  originations.  This  seems  consistent  with  the  facts. 
After all, the share of securitised sub-prime mortgages in the US reached 75% in 2006, up 
from  54%  in  2001.12  Hence,  only  a  small  share  of  sub-prime  mortgages  remained  on  the 
balance sheet of the originating institution. 
The abuse of risk management duties 
2. 
Conducting  a  fully-fledged  risk  analysis  requires  full  information.  The  ultimate  investors  in 
securitised  loans  could  in  principle  have  exercised  the  due  diligence  that  banks  were  no 
longer  providing.  But  risk  management  was  difficult,  paradoxically,  because  information 
became  unavailable  to  investors.  It  was  buried  in  financial  structures  that  were  not 
transparent. Paradoxically, securitisation – a new technique to control risk – had made risk 
control practically impossible. 
The “originate and distribute” business strategy had turned risk into a commodity. Risk could 
be  bundled,  sliced  and  re-bundled  for  further  sale.  Securitisation  and  financial  derivatives 
were  the  vehicles  through  which  risk  became  marketable,  passed  between  participants, 
spread across the system and – in this way – it became difficult to localise and quantify. 
Individually,  diversified  strategies  all  looked  like  rational  attempts  to  unload  risk  to  those 
parties in the system that were more willing and able to bear it. In the aggregate, however, 
strategies all looked alike! 
Viewed across the system, diversification was subject to a fallacy of composition. Individual 
strategies were diversified. But the aggregation of a complex web of identical strategies – all 
                                                 
9   Source: Dealogic/DCM Analytics. Original USD amounts converted into euro. 
10   Data  sources  are:  Center  for  Responsible  Lending,  Inside  Mortgage  Finance  and  Mortgage  Bankers 
Association (MBA). Data for foreclosures refer to the sum of sub-prime AMR and FMR. 
11   Keys et al (2010). 
12   Source: Mortgage Market Statistical Annual (2007). 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 5
designed to shed risk individually – generated a lack of diversity for the financial system as a 
whole. In the end, it turned out that the system could not diversify risk away. 
Flawed liquidity transformation 
3. 
Through  the  use  of  short-term  repurchase  agreements  banks  increasingly  financed  their 
longer-term  asset  holdings  with  shorter  maturity  market  instruments.  Off-balance  sheet 
structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  became  popular  as  a  result  of  wholesale  financing. 
Rather  than  relying  on  deposits  from  private  savers,  as  was  the  norm  in  the  traditional 
banking model, the banking system started to borrow funds off-balance sheet in the money 
market  by  selling  short-term  commercial  papers  and  engaging  in  repurchase  agreements. 
This shift in funding was a by-product of securitisation as much as a source of its potentially 
unlimited expansion. 
This self-referential circuit of finance – where  asset acquisition created funding needs and 
funding mechanisms expanded asset acquisition even further – is evident in the data. The 
share  of  total  investment  bank  assets  that  were  financed  by  overnight  repurchase 
agreements roughly doubled from 2000 to 2007.13 
While  deposits  provide  a  rather  stable  and  dependable  source  of  funding  for  financing 
longer-term investments, the market for commercial papers and repurchase agreements can 
be  prone  to  sudden  shifts  in  confidence.  Indeed,  in  the  summer  of  2007,  with  investors 
pulling  back  from  asset-backed  securities,  banks  saw  the  value  of  their  assets  and  hence 
their capital base declining dramatically. 
Financial excesses  
4. 
In  the  end,  the  social  costs  of  negligence  and  abuse  were  devastating.  Even  more  so, 
because  finance  had  expanded  at  an  unsustainable  pace  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the 
2007/2008 crisis. A number of economies had come to pin their national fortunes on a sector 
that is potentially very profitable, but also ruinously risky. 
The  financial  industry  has  grown  substantially  during  the  past  three  decades.  In  1977  the 
share of financial intermediation in total US gross value added was around 5%. In 2007 this 
share  was  over  8%.  It  was  also  a  highly  profitable  business  for  years.  Financial  sector 
compensation as a share of total US compensation doubled during the last thirty years. In 
the euro area this share rose by roughly 25%. 
High  earnings  attracted  many  bright  young  people  into  the  industry.  Although  the  total 
number of employees in the financial sector remained relatively stable, higher than average 
wages  in  the  finance  industry  led  to  a  diversion  of  highly-skilled  individuals  from  the  real 
economy to the financial sector.14 For instance, in 2006 a financial industry employee earned 
35% more than an engineer with a similar level of education. 
These numbers speak a clear language. Financial creativity had its price. Banks increased 
their demand for highly-skilled talents, bidding up the market clearing wage in this industry. 
Whether or not financial employees have been overcompensated is a difficult question. But 
they have certainly been given the wrong incentives. 
A  less  difficult  question  is  whether  talent  was  always  and  everywhere  employed  in  a 
productive  way.  Here  my  answer  is  no.  Many  financial  instruments  were  not  invented  to 
finance the ownership of additional homes, to finance productive investments or education or 
                                                 
13   See Brunnermeier (2009). 
14   See Philippon and Reshef (2009). 
6 
 BIS Review 63/2010
to  help  firms  hedge  the  uncertainties  of  currency  or  interest  rate  risk.  Some  of  these 
instruments were invented to generate fees without creating social value. 
The way forward 
Looking ahead, what can be done to ensure that financial institutions return to the path of 
virtue?  The  extent  of  the  financial  crisis  leaves  no  doubt  that  tighter  regulations  and 
supervision are required to overhaul the financial system. But a fine line needs to be drawn 
between ensuring financial efficiency – and financial innovation is an important ingredient of 
efficiency  –  and  financial  stability.  Excessive,  ill-designed  regulation  may  counteract  our 
intentions. 
To  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  we  need  first  to  identify  the  sources  of 
instability  and  fragility.  Not  all  financial  institutions  have  been  equally  involved  in 
developments that led to the 2007/2008 financial crisis. It seems that the current predicament 
originated  mainly  in  institutions  that  had  moved  away  from  traditional  retail  banking,  from 
institutions that increasingly relied on non-interest income and non-deposit-funding.15 
These  insights  should  serve  as  a  starting  point  for  shaping  the  contours  of  the  post-crisis 
financial system. Reforms should be designed in a way that ensures that those segments of 
finance,  which  remain  faithful  to  the  mission  of  providing  functional  services  to  the  real 
economy, are not put at an economic disadvantage. Profit maximisation sets the incentives 
in  a  market  economy  to  achieve  first-best  outcomes.  But  just  as  employers  bear  a  social 
responsibility  for  their  employees,  banks  bear  a  social  responsibility  for  savers  and  for 
society  as  a  whole.  Reforms  must  be  targeted  at  internalising  this  social  responsibility  in 
business  strategies  so  that  what  is  collectively  optimal  is  selected  by  profit-maximising 
business units. 
I see three elements at the core of efforts to reform the international financial system: 
 
The  first  ingredient  is  a  mechanism  that  enforces  transparency  in  financial 
structures. This is essential for the financial industry to return to its prime mission of 
assessing the quality of investment. The trend towards more sophisticated financial 
instruments has not been matched by increasing disclosure requirements. Sellers of 
securitised  products  must  disclose  all  information  about  the  underlying  loan 
structure  so  that  both  investors  and  rating  agencies  can  correctly  price  the  risks 
embedded  in  these  products.  More  transparency  can  also  be  achieved  by  central 
counterparty clearing of bilateral over-the-counter trading arrangements.  
Second,  the  progressive  mutation  of  arbitrage  into  speculation  needs  to  be 
reversed. Financial players that take large speculative positions in certain segments 
of the market can exert a non-negligible bearing on the future pricing of an asset or 
bond  by  affecting  market  sentiment.  Current  market  structures  can  aggravate  this 
effect.  For  instance,  investors  are  currently  allowed  to  buy  credit  defaults  swaps 
without  holding  the  underlying  asset,  typically  a  bond.  By  first  buying  the  credit 
default  swaps  and  then  trying  to  affect  market  sentiment  by  going  short  on  the 
underlying  bond,  investors  can  make  large  profits  without  a  change  in  the 
fundamental value of the reference entity and, worse, to its detriment.  
Third,  credit  and  liquidity  risk  management  should  not  become  a  force  of  pro-
cyclicality for the financial system as a whole. Limited liability in economic contracts 
introduces an asymmetry that is potentially fatal in the financial sphere. Owners and 
managers of financial companies are given a distinct incentive to expand risk-taking 
in  anticipation  of  high  returns  (if  there  is  a  favourable  pay-off),  while  remaining 
                                                   
15   See Beltratti and Stulz (2009). 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 7
confident  of  a  limited  loss  in  the  event  of  failure.  The  perception  that  public 
authorities  will  always  socialise  the  costs  of  financial  crisis  reinforces  private 
investors’ expectation that they will harvest more of the upside and shift more of the 
downside. Regulation should attempt to limit  the risks banks assume by imposing 
higher,  countercyclical  capital  requirements,  thus  limiting  leverage.  Financial 
institutions  will  be  asked  to  raise  the  quality  and  quantity  of  their  capital  base  to 
ensure  they  have  adequate  funding  in  place  as  a  buffer  against  future  market 
disruptions. A correction of compensation practices for financial employees is also 
warranted. Compensation should put emphasis on rewarding longer-term business 
performance. These objectives are currently examined within the framework of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
Implementing  these  measures  will  lead  the  return  to  a  more  sustainable,  longer-term 
business model for banks. At the global level, the G20 and the Financial Stability Board have 
become  the  main  forum  for  international  cooperation  on  these  reforms.  Complemented  by 
macroprudential  supervision  that  takes  due  account  of  the  interconnectedness  of  financial 
institutions and systemic risk, these reforms will pave the way for lower market volatility and 
hence greater financial stability. 
A courageous overhaul of the financial system will also help to bridge the rising gap that has 
emerged  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy.  We  cannot  afford  financial 
activities that neglect the interest of the real economy. Indeed, the financial industry and the 
real  economy  must  share  a  common  goal.  Only  united  will  they  contribute  to  strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth and to future economic prosperity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Allen,  F.  and  D.  Gale  (1997),  “Financial  Markets,  Intermediaries,  and  Intertemporal 
Smoothing”, Journal of Political Economy, 105: 523–546. 
Beltratti, A. and R. M. Stulz (2009), “Why Did Some Banks Perform Better During the Credit 
Crisis?  A  Cross-Country  Study  of  the  Impact  of  Governance  and  Regulation”,  Charles  A. 
Dice Center Working Paper No 2009–12, July. 
Brunnermeier, M. (2009), “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–08”, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 23(1), 77–100. 
Diamond, D. W. and R. E. Verrecchia (1982), “Optimal Managerial Contracts and Equilibrium 
Security Prices”, Journal of Finance, 37: 275–287. 
Hicks, J. (1969), “A Theory of Economic History”, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Hudson,  P.  (2002),  “The  Genesis  of  Industrial  Capital:  A  Study  of  the  West  Riding  Wool 
Textile Industry”, Cambridge University Press. 
Jensen,  M.  and  K.  Murphy  (1990),  “Performance  Pay  and  Top  Management  Incentives”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 98: 225–263. 
Keys,  B.,  T.  K.  Mukherjee,  A.  Seru,  and  V.  Vig  (2010),  “Did  Securitization  Lead  to  Lax 
Screening? Evidence from Sub-prime Loans”, Quarterly Journal of Economics. 
Levine, R. (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence”, in: Aghion, P. and Durlauf, 
S. (ed.), Handbook of Economic Growth, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 12, pages 865–934. 
Merton, R. C. (1992), “Financial Innovation and Economic Performance”, Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance, 4: 12–22. 
Philippon, T. and A. Reshef (2009), “Wages and human capital in the US financial industry: 
1909–2006”, NBER working paper 14644. 
8 
 BIS Review 63/2010
Robinson, J. (1952), “The Rate of Interest and Other Essays”, chapter “The Generalization of 
The General Theory”. MacMillan. 
Schumpeter,  J.  A.  (1934),  “The  Theory  of  Economic  Development:  An  Inquiry  into  Profits, 
Capital, Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle”, Harvard University Press. 
Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1995), “The Economics of Pooling”, in Crane, D. B. et al (eds.), 
“The  Global  Financial  System:  A  Functional  Approach”,  Boston,  MA:  Harvard  Business 
School Press: 81–128. 
Pollins,  H.  (1954),  “The  Marketing  of  Railway  Shares  in  the  First  Half  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century”, The Economic History Review, 7(2):230–9. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 9
