Ben S Bernanke: Lessons from the failure of Lehman Brothers 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 20 April 2010. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate 
the opportunity to testify about the failure of Lehman Brothers and the lessons of that failure. In 
these opening remarks I will address several key issues relating to that episode.  
The Federal Reserve was not Lehman’s supervisor. Lehman was exempt from supervision 
by the Federal Reserve because the company did not own a commercial bank and because 
it  was  allowed  by  federal  law  to  own  a  federally  insured  savings  association  without 
becoming  subject  to  Federal  Reserve  supervision.  The  core  subsidiaries  of  Lehman  were 
securities broker-dealers under the supervisory jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission  (SEC),  which  also  supervised  the  Lehman  parent  company  under  the  SEC’s 
Consolidated  Supervised  Entity  (CSE)  program.  Importantly,  the  CSE  program  was 
voluntary,  established  by  the  SEC  in  agreement  with  the  supervised  firms,  without  the 
benefits of statutory authorization.  
Although the Federal Reserve had no supervisory responsibilities or authorities with respect 
to  Lehman,  it  began  monitoring  the  financial  condition  of  Lehman  and  the  other  primary 
dealers during the period of financial stress that led to the sale of Bear Stearns to JPMorgan 
Chase.1  In  March  2008,  responding  to  the  escalating  pressures  on  primary  dealers,  the 
Federal  Reserve  used  its  statutory  emergency  lending  powers  to  establish  the  Primary 
Dealer  Credit  Facility  and  the  Term  Securities  Lending  Facility  as  sources  of  backstop 
liquidity  for  those  firms.  To  monitor  the  ability  of  borrowing  firms  to  repay,  the  Federal 
Reserve, in its role as creditor, required all participants in these programs, including Lehman, 
to  provide  financial  information  about  their  companies  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Two  Federal 
Reserve employees were placed onsite at Lehman to monitor the firm’s liquidity position and 
its  financial  condition  generally.  Beyond  gathering  information,  however,  these  employees 
had  no  authority  to  regulate  Lehman’s  disclosures,  capital,  risk  management,  or  other 
business activities.  
During  this  period,  Federal  Reserve  employees  were  in  regular  contact  with  their 
counterparts  at  the  SEC,  and  in  July  2008,  then-Chairman  Cox  and  I  negotiated  an 
agreement  that  formalized  procedures  for  information-sharing  between  our  two  agencies. 
Cooperation between the Federal Reserve and the SEC was generally quite good, especially 
considering the stress and turmoil of the period. In particular, the Federal Reserve, with the 
SEC’s participation, developed and conducted several stress tests of the liquidity position of 
Lehman  and  the  other  major  primary  dealers  during  the  spring  and  summer  of  2008.  The 
results of these stress tests were presented jointly by the Federal Reserve and the SEC to 
the  managements  of  Lehman  and  the  other  firms.  Lehman’s  results  showed  significant 
deficiencies in available liquidity, which the management was strongly urged to correct.  
The  Federal  Reserve  was  not  aware 
that  Lehman  was  using  so-called  Repo 
105 transactions  to  manage  its  balance  sheet.  Indeed,  according  to  the  bankruptcy 
examiner,  Lehman  staff  did  not  report  these  transactions  even  to  the  company’s  board. 
However,  knowledge  of  Lehman’s  accounting  for  these  transactions  would  not  have 
materially altered the Federal Reserve’s view of the condition of the firm; the information we 
                                                 
1   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. 
BIS Review 52/2010 
 1
obtained suggested that the capital and liquidity of the firm were seriously deficient, a view 
that  we  conveyed  to  the  company  and  that  I  believe  was  shared  by  the  SEC  and  the 
Treasury Department.  
Lehman did succeed at raising about $6 billion in capital in June 2008, took steps to improve 
its  liquidity  position  in  July,  and  was  attempting  to  raise  additional  capital  in  the  weeks 
leading  up  to  its  failure.  However,  its  efforts  proved  inadequate.  During  August  and  early 
September 2008, increasingly panicky conditions in markets put Lehman and other financial 
firms under severe pressure. In an attempt to devise a private-sector solution for Lehman’s 
plight,  the  Federal  Reserve,  Treasury,  and  SEC  brought  together  leaders  of  the  major 
financial firms in a series of meetings at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York during the 
weekend of September 13–15. Despite the best efforts of all involved, a solution could not be 
crafted,  nor  could  an  acquisition  by  another  company  be  arranged.  With  no  other  option 
available, Lehman declared bankruptcy.  
The Federal Reserve fully understood that the failure of Lehman would shake the financial 
system and the economy. However, the only tool available to the Federal Reserve to address 
the situation was its ability to provide short-term liquidity against adequate collateral; and, as 
I noted, Lehman already had access to our emergency credit facilities. It was clear, though, 
that Lehman needed both substantial capital and an open-ended guarantee of its obligations 
to open for business on Monday, September 15. At that time, neither the Federal Reserve 
nor any other agency had the authority to provide capital or an unsecured guarantee, and 
thus no means of preventing Lehman’s failure existed.  
The  Lehman  failure  provides  at  least  two  important  lessons.  First,  we  must  eliminate  the 
gaps in our financial regulatory framework that allow large, complex, interconnected firms like 
Lehman  to  operate  without  robust  consolidated  supervision.  In  September  2008,  no 
government  agency  had  sufficient  authority  to  compel  Lehman  to  operate  in  a  safe  and 
sound  manner  and  in  a  way  that  did  not  pose  dangers  to  the  broader  financial  system. 
Second, to avoid having to choose in the future between bailing out a failing, systemically 
critical  firm  or  allowing  its  disorderly  bankruptcy,  we  need  a  new  resolution  regime, 
analogous to that already established for failing banks. Such a regime would both protect our 
economy and improve market discipline by ensuring that the failing firm’s shareholders and 
creditors take losses and its management is replaced.  
Thank you. I would be glad to respond to your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2010
