Jean-Claude Trichet: Central banking in uncertain times – conviction and 
responsibility 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
symposium  on  “Macroeconomic  challenges:  the  decade  ahead”,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming, 
27 August 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
As always, it is a great pleasure to be here in Jackson Hole – and to take the opportunity that 
this gathering offers each year to reflect on the longer-term prospects for our economies. Let 
me mention at the start of my exposition that nothing of what I will say can be interpreted in 
terms  of  the  future  monetary  policy  decision  of  the  Governing  Council  next  Thursday.  My 
colleagues and myself are in our purdah period. 
During the financial crisis of the past three years, without ever forgetting their medium and 
long term goals of price stability, central bankers have often had to focus on very short-term 
developments. At times, we have had to ask what will happen in the next week; in the next 
day; or even in the next few hours. Now, as the dust settles somewhat and market conditions 
tend to improve, though not without occasional setbacks, it is appropriate – and necessary – 
to  look  again  at  the  more  fundamental  challenges  we  face.  The  chosen  topic  for  this 
conference – with its focus on “the decade ahead” – is thus particularly timely. 
The  financial  crisis  required  prompt,  decisive  and  innovative  actions  by  central  banks  and 
governments around the world. We at the European Central Bank (ECB) have pursued what 
I have previously labelled at this symposium a policy of “credible alertness”:1 solid anchoring 
of  inflation expectations  combined  with  bold  and  resolute action  when  price  stability  in  the 
medium term is threatened and financial developments hamper the transmission of monetary 
policy to the real economy.  
Looking forward, the advanced economies now face another, related challenge: how to deal 
with the legacy of the excesses and imbalances accumulated over the previous decades by 
households, firms and financial institutions – notably the expansion of debt, the build-up of 
risk and the increase in leverage. 
The financial crisis was a symptom of these imbalances. Treating symptoms can relieve the 
immediate  pain.  But  such  an  approach  neither  cures  the  underlying  chronic  problems  nor 
reduces  vulnerability  to  recurrence.  Indeed,  the  crisis  has  led  to  the  emergence  of  yet 
another imbalance: a large and rapid growth in public debt. 
Treating these more fundamental imbalances is a key challenge for the coming decade, a 
challenge that can be expressed in various ways: reducing the debt overhang; establishing 
more  sustainable  levels  of  leverage;  re-absorbing  excess  liquidity;  and  restructuring  and 
strengthening  the  balance  sheets  of  banks,  households,  firms,  governments  and  central 
banks.  
Just as we showed courage in facing the pressing demands of the crisis itself, now policy-
makers must be equally courageous in dealing with these longer-term threats to stability and 
growth. 
That  is  the  topic  of  my  remarks  today.  I  will  briefly  review  the  origins  and  extent  of  the 
imbalances  that  have  accumulated  over  the  past  three  decades.  I  will  then  examine  the 
                                                 
1   Trichet (2009). 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 1
implications  of  the  need  to  deal  with  these  imbalances  for  today’s  macroeconomic  policy-
makers.  
Finally,  I  shall  reflect  more  broadly  on  the  challenges  for  central  bankers  in  periods 
characterised by elevated uncertainty and the need for preventive action. It is in this context 
that  I  will  discuss  the  relationship  between  the  standard  and  non-standard  measures  of 
monetary policy-making. This is more than a mere technical matter. It goes to the very heart 
of our role in uncertain times. Deeply, our decisions on such measures are a reflection of our 
fundamental conviction and fundamental responsibility.  
Debt accumulation in advanced economies 
I. 
The current debt problems in advanced economies did not start yesterday. They have had a 
long  gestation  over  the  past  few  decades,  originating  in  the  financial  deregulation  and 
innovation of the 1980s and 1990s. In many advanced countries, new financial products and 
institutions emerged, which changed the economic behaviour and balance sheet structure of 
the private sector.  
On the one hand, financial innovation promised to be welfare-enhancing for society: some 
consumers  could  smooth  their  spending  over  time  more  easily;  and  access  to  mortgage 
financing  became  much  more  widely  available,  including  to  segments  of  the  population 
previously excluded from the market.2 The benefits of deregulation and innovation appeared 
particularly pronounced in the exceptionally benign pre-crisis macroeconomic environment, 
which became known as the “Great Moderation”.  
On the other hand, and with the benefit of hindsight, we can say that the Great Moderation 
was  the  calm  before  the  storm.  The  easier  access  to  finance  permitted  by  financial 
innovation  was  also  leading  to  higher  leverage  in  the  private  sector, especially  in  financial 
institutions, to a seemingly inexorable increase in house prices, and to a surge in risk-taking. 
Rajan’s  (2010)  analysis  of  the  “fault  lines”  in  our  economies  reveals  some  of  the  deeper 
drivers of excessive credit growth, in particular as a way of addressing the macroeconomic 
consequences of inequality in societies.  
Household indebtedness rose substantially – in some cases, doubling relative to the 1980s – 
reaching  historically  unprecedented  levels  and  exceeding  100%  of  disposable  income  in 
many  advanced  economies. 
that  households  were 
increasingly  stretched  to  cover  their  commitments  and  therefore  less  resilient  to  adverse 
shocks.  
Leverage  also  increased  for  non-financial  corporations  leading  to  an  overall  expansion  of 
balance  sheets  and  a  change  in  their  structure.  As  a  result,  debt-to-GDP  ratios  for  non-
financial  corporations  in  the  euro  area  and  the  US  increased  in  the  past  ten  years  from 
roughly 65% to 75–80%.3 
And  of  course,  leverage  also  increased  in  the  financial  sector.  This  development  was 
particularly evident here in the US, where it was compounded with structural transformation, 
including  the  rise  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  the  spread  of  the  “originate  to  distribute” 
model and the greater interconnectedness between institutions.  
But the key trends – an accumulation of risk (despite its apparent off-loading to off-balance 
sheet  vehicles)  and  an  expansion  in  the  size  of  balance  sheets  –  were  common  across 
countries. Compared with the rest of the private sector, moreover, the financial sector also 
indebtedness  meant 
Increased 
                                                 
2   This  has  been  labelled  the  “democratisation”  of  access  to  credit.  See  e.g.  Green  and  Wachter  (2007)  and 
Dynan (2009) for a discussion of the developments in the US and Blake and Muellbauer (2009) for analysis of 
a number of European countries. 
3   See, e.g., ECB (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2010
became  increasingly  dependent  on  instruments  of  shorter  maturity,  thus  leaving  banks 
exposed to liquidity shocks and disruptions in the money market.4 
The crisis suddenly brought to a halt the progressive accumulation of private debt. Partly as 
a  result  of  large-scale  stimulus  measures,  but  also  reflecting  the  impact  of  the  automatic 
stabilizers and, to a more limited extent, the cost of supporting the financial system and the 
implicit liabilities of guarantees to the banking sector, leverage has started increasing in the 
public sector.  
Fiscal deficits have shot up to peacetime highs. By the end of this year, government debt in 
the euro area will have grown by more than 20 percentage points over a period of only four 
years, from 2007 to 2011. The equivalent figures for the US and Japan are between 35 and 
45 percentage points. And the response to the crisis has led to a considerable increase in 
the balance sheets of central banks. 
The key challenge for stability and growth over the coming decade is to ensure a progressive 
reduction  in  the  debt  overhang  and  strengthening  of  the  balance  sheets  of  banks, 
households, firms, governments and central banks. 
The debt overhang bears the ultimate responsibility for slowing down the economic recovery. 
Left  with  the  need  to  reduce  their  debts  and  accumulate  more  assets,  households  have 
significantly increased their saving rates, leading to protracted sluggishness in the growth of 
private consumption. The key lesson of history is that sustainable, longer-term growth can 
only be ensured once fundamental economic imbalances are treated.  
Options for reducing the debt overhang 
II. 
Several  ways  of  dealing  with  the  legacy  of  excesses  and  imbalances  accumulated  over 
previous decades have been tried in the past. Let me discuss them in turn to assess whether 
they are viable options now. You will not be surprised to know that I exclude any kind of debt 
repudiation in the industrialized countries from these options.  
Inflation? 
1. 
A recurrent suggestion for solving a debt overhang is the creation of surprise inflation. Again, 
let me clearly dismiss this type of action. The history of the debasement of money through 
hyperinflation has been disastrous everywhere. Even before reaching extremely high levels, 
surprise inflation produces an arbitrary redistribution of wealth and creates a burden for the 
unprepared, especially the weakest. 
In  addition,  surprise  inflation  would  destroy  the  hard-won  credibility  of  central  banks 
worldwide.  After  a  short  period,  the  loss  of  credibility,  and  increased  inflation  uncertainty 
would lead to a world with higher volatility, higher risk premia and higher nominal and real 
interest rates. We would be left with no alleviation of outstanding debt, and ultimately with 
lower growth as we witnessed during the Great Inflation of the 1970s. The now classic work 
on  time  inconsistency  clearly  points  to  the  permanent  and  substantial  costs  of  the  loss  of 
credibility once inflation and inflation expectations cease to be anchored. 
Living with the debt? 
2. 
What  about  the  option  of  “living  with  the  debt”?  Some  have  suggested  to  ignore  existing 
financial  imbalances  “for  the  time  being”  and  focus  only  on  the  short  term.  Rather  than 
pressing on with the deleveraging process, more spending could be encouraged to sustain 
growth in the short term. 
                                                 
4   See Brunnermeier (2009). 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 3
I believe that adopting this view would be very dangerous for our economies. There is a very 
clear example of the consequences of choosing to live with the debt: Japan in the 1990s. 
The  “lost  decade”  in  that  country  was  the  result  of  allowing  the  banking  system  to  remain 
fragile over many years.  
Banks  appear  to  have  contributed to  economic  weakness  by  rolling  over  the  bad  debts  of 
inefficient  firms.5  Banks’  inadequate  capitalisation  implied  that  they  were  unwilling  to  take 
losses.  Low  productivity  growth  in  those  inefficient  firms  and  the  locking  in  of  capital  and 
labour  put  a  drag  on  potential  output.6  Only  a  healthy  financial  system  is  able  to  provide 
funding for good projects that spur productivity and innovation.7  
The lesson from past history is that dealing with the legacy of accumulated imbalances is not 
simply a duty to be fulfilled after the economic recovery, but rather an important precondition 
for  sustaining  a  durable  recovery.  The  primary  macroeconomic  challenge  for  the  next 
10 years is to ensure that they do not turn into another “lost decade”.  
This lesson is consistent with economic theory and evidence. Since the time of Irving Fisher, 
economists  have  explored  the  impact  of  a  legacy  of  indebtedness  for  growth.  In  various 
ways, these analyses suggest that an excessive debt burden – whether emanating from the 
corporate, household or public sector – constitute a drag on spending, thereby dampening 
growth. 
For firms, for example, high indebtedness reduces their net worth and the ability to borrow for 
new  projects.  Consequently,  firms  will  postpone  investments  until  they  are  able  to  restore 
sound  balance  sheets.  Similarly,  households’  precautionary  saving  could  remain  high  until 
their  wealth-to-income  ratios  return  to  more  normal  levels,  following  the  collapse  in  asset 
values at the peak of the crisis.8 
Economic  growth  can  also  be  threatened  by  high  public  indebtedness,  which,  without  a 
credible 
fiscal  retrenchment  plan,  can  generate  substantial  uncertainty.  Firms  and 
households  know  that  ultimately  they  will  have  to  bear  the  consequences  of  the  painful 
measures needed to reduce debt. As long as it is unclear when the adjustment will occur and 
who will bear what fraction of the costs of adjustment, firms and households may delay their 
investment  and  consumption  decisions,  slowing  down  the  economic  recovery.  In  the  data, 
evidence points to the existence of a negative association between the level of public debt 
and subsequent GDP growth, which is particularly marked at high debt levels.9 
Finally,  the  debt  overhang  can  make  it  attractive  for  governments  to  adopt  regulatory 
measures that compel the financial and/or household sectors to hold government debt at low 
or even negative real interest rates – measures referred to as “financial repression”. Forced 
investment  in  government  bonds  distorts  the  role  of  the  financial  system  in  channelling 
resources to the most efficient firms and slows down economic growth. While the effects of 
                                                 
5   Caballero et al. (2008). 
6   Ahearne and Shinada (2005). 
7   Popov  (2009)  investigates  how  venture  capital  and  bank  finance  affect  large  manufacturing  firms  in  local 
US markets. Popov and Roosenboom (2009) study how private equity affects the rate of entry of European 
firms. 
8   Carroll and Slacalek (2009) suggest that a simple buffer-stock saving model can be used to think through the 
developments  of  households  saving  and  consumption  after  the  crisis.  When  asset  values  collapsed,  the 
saving  rate  jumped  up  as  household  began  rebuilding  their  wealth.  This  process  has  taken  time  and,  as  a 
consequence, household spending has been depressed. The tightening of credit availability and the increase 
in  unemployment  risk  also  dampened  household  spending.  Both  induced  more  precautionary  saving,  as 
households  have  worried  about  losing  a  job  and  being  unable  to  borrow  to  finance  consumption  after 
experiencing adverse income shocks. 
9   See Reinhart and Rogoff (2010). Similar evidence is found by Kumar and Woo (2010), who also report that an 
increase in the initial debt-to-GDP ratio is associated with a slowdown in per capita GDP growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2010
financial repression on growth are particularly severe, these effects may also occur through 
excessive financial regulation.10 
So the option of “living with the debt” indefinitely is not a solution to the challenges currently 
facing policy-makers, nor is it a means to ensure sustainable economic recovery. We must 
focus on policies to address the debt overhang. 
Growing out of the debt 
3. 
The  most  appealing  solution  to  the  debt  overhang  is  clearly  to  achieve  strong  economic 
growth. Strong growth produces higher income and wealth, thus increasing the net worth of 
households  and  firms  and  reducing  their  leverage.  Robust  economic  growth  also  boosts 
government revenues and reduces expenditure, especially when large automatic stabilizers 
are in place, thus leading to a rapid reduction of the government debt-to-GDP ratio.  
A spectacular example of the effect of growth on public finances is provided by the UK, which 
managed to reduce the government’s debt-to-GDP ratio from close to 240% at the end of the 
Second World War to 60% in the early 1970s. How did this turnaround come about?  
 
First, real interest rates on government debt were kept relatively low. This reflected 
an  environment  of  “financial  repression”  –  including  severe  restrictions  on  the 
activities  of  financial  institutions  combined  with  controls  on  international  capital 
movements.  
Second, economic growth was relatively strong during this period (averaging 2.4% a 
year), reflecting both increased productivity and labour force growth.  
Third, fiscal policy was overall disciplined and, indeed, in a number of years, fiscal 
surpluses were recorded.11  
  Of course, such processes may well be linked and reinforce one another. For example, fiscal 
discipline may yield additional benefits due to favourable confidence effects on interest rates 
and growth. 
Although  the  UK’s  post-war  experience  is  encouraging,  it  should  not  lead  us  to  be  too 
sanguine  about  future  prospects  for  the  advanced  economies.  First,  a  return  to  an 
environment  of  financial  repression  is  neither  desirable  nor  feasible.  It  would  represent  a 
reversal of the trend in policy over the last 40 years towards freer capital markets.  
Second, we should probably not expect the real growth rates in the developed world to go 
back to the levels of the 1950s or 1960s, an era now characterised by economic historians 
as a “Golden Age”.12 That being said, one should never underestimate the room for higher 
growth  potential  through  resolute  structural  reforms,  particularly  in  Europe,  which  is  still 
marked by numerous rigidities. And given that population growth rates will differ significantly 
among economies in the decade ahead, we have to focus more on per-capita growth rates in 
our international comparisons.  
Policy challenges 
III. 
To  summarise,  the  crisis  and  the  legacy  of  decades  of  debt  accumulation  have  left  the 
advanced economies with high private sector indebtedness and public sectors that must be 
trimmed.  Reducing  the  debt  overhang  and  obtaining  sustainable  levels  of  leverage  for  all 
                                                 
10   See, e.g. Levine (1997). 
11   Clark and Dilnot (2002). 
12   Temin (1997). 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 5
actors  in  the  economy  is  the  only  option  for  achieving  the  goal  of  the  Toronto  summit 
declaration in June: to “create strong, sustainable and balanced global growth”. At the same 
time, creating an environment for strong and sustainable growth will facilitate the adjustment 
process needed to address the debt overhang.  
The  enormous  challenge  for  policy-makers  in  the  advanced  economies  is  thus  to  set  in 
motion this mutually reinforcing positive scenario of deleveraging and strong and sustainable 
growth. For those governments that are faced with high debt-to-GDP ratios, this implies that 
merely stabilising those ratios is not sufficient: efforts to accelerate the pace of consolidation 
are needed.  
Ageing  populations  and  associated  increases  in  spending  on  health  and  pensions  require 
that all fiscal authorities allow budgetary room to respond to those substantial future costs. In 
the  euro  area,  for  example,  ageing-related  spending  is  expected  to  rise  by  around 
4 percentage points of GDP over the period from 2004 to 2050.13 For governments that face 
a  sluggish  growth  rate,  that  implies  a  continuation  along  the  path  of  structural  reform  in 
product markets, labour markets and financial markets. At the same time, central banks face 
the challenge of maintaining price stability.  
Let  me  say  here,  in  front  of  many  colleagues  who  are  participating  actively  in  the  global 
endeavour  to  accelerate  financial  repair  and  reform  –  particularly  through  the  remarkable 
work  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  of  many  workshops  that  have  been  established 
including the Basel Committee – that I consider their work decisive. We are now at a crucial 
moment in this process. In all what follows I am making the working assumption that we will 
rely in the next decade on very solid ground as regards financial rules and regulations and 
micro as well as macro prudentials.  
I will concentrate now on fiscal policies of governments and on the role of central banks in 
the years to come in this context of debt overhang. 
The role of governments 
1. 
First, governments. Given the size of the accumulated public debt, fiscal consolidation will 
have to be ambitious. In the euro area, to reach the reference value of a debt-to-GDP ratio of 
60%, a cumulative drop of almost 30 percentage points will be needed. Such reductions are 
not uncommon. Beside the post-war UK experience, sizeable debt consolidations have been 
implemented in Belgium, which over a period of 14 years from 1994 to 2007 reduced its ratio 
from 134% to 84%; in Ireland, which reduced its debt ratio over a 13-year period starting in 
1994 by 69 percentage points; and, starting in the mid-1990s, in Spain, the Netherlands and 
Finland, which saw their debt-to-GDP ratios drop in the range of 20 to 30 percentage points.  
What we can learn from these historical experiences is that large reductions in debt-to-GDP 
ratios  are  not  uncommon  and  quite  feasible.  In  all  cases,  the  fiscal  adjustments  mainly 
occurred  through  expenditure  cuts,14  but  they  were  also  supported  by  lower  interest 
payments due to falling interest rates. It is clear that given the currently low interest rates, 
governments cannot count on a similar channel, although in some countries with very high 
debt levels there may be scope for considerable reductions in yields on government bonds.  
Once it becomes clear that policy-makers should not count on artificially low interest rates or 
high  growth  alone  to  reduce  government  debt  ratios,  fiscal  consolidation  –  an  increase  in 
taxation  and/or  a  reduction  of  expenditure  –  becomes  essential.  The  concern  is, however, 
that  in  the  short  run  the  deficit  reductions  –  although  unavoidable  in  the  long  run  –  have 
negative effects on aggregate demand. The economy, it is sometimes argued, is at present 
                                                 
13   See Economic Policy Committee and the European Commission (2006); Balassone et al. (2004). 
14   ECB (2010). 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2010
too  fragile  and  thus  consolidation  efforts  should  be  postponed  or  even  new  fiscal stimulus 
measures added. 
As  I  pointed  out  recently,15  I  am  sceptical  about  this  line  of  argument.  Indeed,  the  strict 
Ricardian  view  may  provide  a  more  reasonable  central  estimate  of  the  likely  effects  of 
consolidation. For a given expenditure, a shift from borrowing to taxation should have no real 
demand effects as it simply replaces future tax burden with current one.16  
There  is  the  additional  argument  positing  that  credible  fiscal  deficit  reductions  through 
expenditure cuts lead the private sector to expect a lower future tax burden, especially when 
the  nature  of  the  cuts  make  future  tax  reductions  more  likely.  This  can  generate  higher 
consumption  expenditures  and  more  investment.  In  countries  with  healthy  household 
balance  sheets,  a  virtuous  effect  can  take  place  when  governments  announce  and 
implement a reduction of the deficit. Expansionary fiscal contractions arise when the virtuous 
effects are large enough to offset the negative government demand effects.17 There is some 
evidence suggesting that this outcome is not just a theoretical curiosity.18  
The size and likelihood of such positive confidence and expectation effects in the short run 
will depend on a number of clearly identified characteristics of deficit consolidation. One such 
characteristic is timeliness. As all experiences have demonstrated, postponing a necessary 
fiscal consolidation is costly. The confidence of markets in government can show sudden and 
large  swings,  which 
increase  risk  premia  on  government  bonds  and  complicate 
consolidation.  
Indeed, deteriorating fiscal situations go hand in hand with higher risk premia.19 In addition, 
empirical evidence suggests that risk premia rise in a non-linear and disproportionate fashion 
with debt ratios.20 Finally the period after the Lehman default in September 2008, illustrates 
that markets can react with larger increases in risk premia on government bonds when the 
fiscal situation is not deemed credible in the long run.21  
Timeliness  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  all  measures  are  implemented  immediately. 
Rather,  it  implies  that  a  credible  long-term  plan  is  announced  in  time.  Although  fiscal 
adjustment itself may be gradual, it is important to announce a credible road-map for fiscal 
consolidation as soon as possible. With a credible road-map, and a consistent step-by-step 
implementation of the consolidation measures that it involves, the uncertainty diminishes or 
perhaps  even  vanishes  completely.  As  a  consequence,  fiscal  consolidation  pushes  the 
economy towards a durable recovery.  
In addition, fiscal consolidation must be well-targeted. Permanent measures are preferable to 
temporary ones. Often one-off actions take the form of asset sales or sale and lease-back 
operations  that  temporarily  improve  budget  deficits.  Although  such  measures  temporarily 
reduce the official deficit numbers, their one-off nature suggests unwillingness to change the 
fiscal  stance  structurally  and  to  support  them  through  a  credible  longer-term  policy.  In 
contrast, permanent measures can be expected to lead to positive expectation effects.  
                                                 
15   See Trichet (2010). 
16   Barro (1979) and Barro (1989). 
17   On overview of empirical evidence on non-Keynesian effects is given in Briotti (2005). 
18   Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) and Blanchard (1990) investigate experience of Ireland (1987–89) and Denmark 
(1983–86), and argue that a reduction in public spending, through positive confidence and expectation effects 
led to expansion in the private sector also in the short term. 
19   See Table 1 on page 8 in Haugh et al. (2009) for an overview of the literature on the estimated impact of fiscal 
variables on interest rates. 
20   See among other, Alesina et al. (1992), Ardagna et al. (2007), Bernoth et al. (2006). 
21   Schuknecht et al. (2010). 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 7
Research  suggests  that  fiscal  consolidations  targeted  at  reductions  in  spending  and 
government  wage  bill  are  likely  to  be  more  successful  than  consolidations  based  on  tax 
increases.  One  of  the  possible  reasons  why  increases  in  taxes  can  hamper  consolidation 
efforts is that they raise unit labour costs if unions do not accept real income cuts.22 Indeed, 
often fiscal imbalances and a loss of competitiveness are intertwined. More generally, fiscal 
consolidation  measures  that  support  structural  reform  and  productivity  growth  will  tend  to 
have more positive effects. 
The role of central banks 
2. 
Let me now turn to central banks. Their role as anchors of stability is all the more important in 
times  of  deleveraging.  A  credible,  medium-term  orientation  on  price  stability  is  the  best 
contribution  that  central  banks  can  make  toward  sustainable,  stable  growth.  A  credible 
commitment to price stability anchors inflation expectations, depresses inflation risk premia 
and contributes to keeping longer-term interest rates low, thus helping to contain the costs of 
servicing public and private debts. Such a commitment to price stability must be symmetric, 
ruling out both inflation and deflation. 
Maintaining inflation expectations anchored at levels consistent with price stability remains of 
the essence. Central banks have learnt over the past 30 years that this requires acting in a 
predictable manner, within a framework that is understood by price setters as consistent with 
the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  At  the  same  time,  the  framework 
needs  to  strike  a  balance  between  fostering  predictability  through  steady-handedness  and 
the need for flexibility when facing unforeseen circumstances.  
In the exceptional times of the past three years, the response to the crisis by central banks 
around the world has led to the adoption of non-standard measures, which by their nature 
are  less  predictable  in  their  special  features.  It  would  be  hard  to  argue  that  their  precise 
implementation could be foreseen ex ante as the obvious and necessary reaction implied by 
their monetary policy strategy to a “financial crisis event”. Such degree of predictability would 
only  be  attained  if  central  banks  could  foresee  all  possible  future  contingencies,  and  thus 
provide  an  exhaustive  list  of  their  reactions  to  all  of  them.  Naturally,  this  is  impossible  in 
response to a crisis, which is likely to emerge in a way that could not be anticipated in its 
details.  
Nevertheless, in the case of the ECB, the non-standard measures adopted during the crisis 
are  ultimately  embedded  within  the  same  medium  term-oriented  framework  and  their 
effectiveness depends on the credibility of this framework. Both our programme of enhanced 
credit  support,  the  main  aim  of  which  was  to  facilitate  banks’  liquidity  management  and 
access  to  funding  at  a  time  when money  markets  in  particular  started  to  be dysfunctional, 
and  the  more  recent  Securities  Market  Programme,  under  which  the  ECB  intervenes  to 
ensure depth and liquidity in dysfunctional securities market segments, are ultimately aimed 
at reducing the risks to medium-term price stability arising from the possibility of “disorderly 
deleveraging”  and  the  associated  disruption  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
policy.  
There  is  therefore  a  certain  parallel  and  a  common  motivation  in  these  programmes.  The 
common  motivation  is  the  need  to  ensure  as  much  as  possible  a  proper  transmission 
channel for monetary policy, even in difficult circumstances. A central bank cannot permit its 
chosen monetary policy stance not to be transmitted to the real economy. The parallel is that 
the  first  programme  designed  in  the  crisis  in  2008  focused  on  the  turmoil  in  the  money 
market that at the time was dysfunctional and prevented a proper transmission of the chosen 
monetary  policy  stance  to  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  The  second 
                                                 
22   Alesina and Perotti (1997). 
8 
 BIS Review 111/2010
programme,  set  up  this  year,  focused  on  the  turmoil  in  the  sovereign  bond  market.  This 
market is of significant importance in the transmission of monetary policy because interest 
rates on government paper are important reference rates, and because government paper is 
widely used as collateral and represents an important asset on balance sheets of financial 
institutions.  
Reflecting on the decisions taken in the crisis so far and the challenges in the decade ahead, 
I would like to share with you some reflexions on three issues that are in my view of great 
importance for public authorities, particularly central bankers. First, the issue of uncertainty. 
Second,  the  issue  of  crisis  prevention.  And  third,  the  issue  of  the  relationship  between 
standard  and  non-standard  measures  taken  by  central  banks.  It  seems  to  me  that  these 
three issues could very well characterise the next decade. 
Uncertainty 
(i) 
First, uncertainty. Today, central bankers have to take decisions in an environment marked 
by a degree of uncertainty in the economic and financial sphere that seems to me largely 
unprecedented. This uncertainty does not have a single cause. Rather, it is the outcome of a 
combination of factors. The acceleration of major advances in science and technology (not 
only  information  technology),  the  ensuing  structural  transformations  of  our  economies,  the 
ever-growing complexity of global finance and the overall process of globalisation are itself 
creating a multidimensional acceleration of change.  
These  phenomena  contribute  not  only  to  a  wider  degree  of  uncertainty  in  underlying 
probability distributions, including fat tails. They also entail a much more significant element 
of  Knightian  uncertainty  –  that  is,  the  type  of  uncertainty  in  which  there  is  no  underlying 
probability distribution.  
The  inherent  and  multidimensional  phenomenon  of  uncertainty  represents  an  additional 
difficulty for all economic agents. And it is undoubtedly a major challenge for public decision-
makers and particularly for central banks.  
As decision-makers in such demanding circumstances, I would stress several attitudes that 
seem to me more important than in the past: 
 
First, the need to be humble – to have a greater degree of humility in the face of 
facts that are not only surprising or “abnormal” but sometimes close to incredible. 
Several  times  in  the  past  three  years  I  have  been  reminded  of  Thomas  Huxley’s 
famous  assessment  of  many  scientific  “beautiful  theories”  being  killed  by  “ugly 
facts”! 
Second,  the  need  to  be  alert:  even  before  the  crisis,  I  proposed  a  posture  of 
“credible alertness”, suggesting that it was the best approach for a central bank to 
anchor inflation expectations firmly, while being ready to take action at any point in 
time. What is recommended in normal times seems to be even more advisable in 
times of accelerated and unpredictable change: a central bank has to be even more 
prepared to act without being the prisoner of previous commitments – not, of course, 
on goals – which must always be clear and immutable – but on policy actions. This 
is  true  for  decisions  on  “standard  measures”  as  well  as  for  decisions  on  “non-
standard measures”. 
Third, the need for swift action: In periods of accelerated change, the sequence of 
unfolding  events  means  that  even  small  changes  in  initial  conditions  can  make  a 
huge difference over time. This is naturally the case in a crisis. It has been noted 
that crises are “Lorenzian” in the sense that “the flap of a butterfly’s wings can cause 
tornadoes”.23 But it seems to me that the necessity to stand ready to take decisions 
                                                   
23   See Lorenz, E. N. (1972). 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 9
swiftly goes beyond the unfolding of a crisis: in periods of accelerated change, swift 
action  might  be  essential  to  prevent  loss  of  control  of  the  situation.  Again,  this 
seems to me to be true both for standard and non-standard measures.  
Crisis prevention  
(ii) 
The second major issue for the next decade is crisis prevention. It is generally accepted that 
prevention  is  better  than  cure.  Nevertheless,  I  have  been  struck  by  the  fact  that,  in  very 
difficult periods, when, unfortunately, the long-term ex ante prevention of turbulence has not 
been effective, the immediate decisions that appear necessary to avoid the crisis might not 
be fully understood by external observers, including the general public.  
This  creates  a  challenging  communication  issue  when  public  authorities  have  to  act  pre-
emptively to prevent a crisis when people do not see the drama having occurred. There is a 
paradox characterising the decision-making of public policy, whether decisions are taken by 
governments  or  by  central  bankers.  When  a  crisis  happens,  with  all  its  dramatic 
consequences, external observers, public opinion and, when and where needed, Parliaments 
will  understand  the  situation  and  be  inclined  to  support  appropriate  measures,  which  has 
been the case several times over the last three years on both sides of the Atlantic. But when 
measures are wisely taken ex ante, precisely to avoid the unfolding of an acute crisis, then 
decision-makers’  actions  might  not  be  fully  understood.  It  is  very  difficult  for  external 
observers, the general public and Parliaments to calculate the counterfactuals – what would 
have happened if action had not been taken.  
For  governments,  this  is  a  very  sensitive  aspect  of  the  “political  economy”  of  decisions 
aiming at prevention in times of looming crisis. Over the last three years we have observed a 
number of illustrations of such difficulties in Europe as well as in the US.  
As  regards  central  banks,  I  would  insist  on  the  fact  that  their  independence  from 
governments  and  from  political  authorities  –  as  well  as  from  any  pressure  groups  –  is,  in 
such  circumstances,  absolutely  key  to  permitting  them  to  take  the  appropriate  preventive 
decisions. In sum, what I would call the “apolitical economy” of central banks’ decisions in 
these demanding times is more important than ever.  
Standard and non-standard measures 
(iii) 
Finally, let me turn to the third issue – the standard and non-standard measures. Reflecting 
on the exceptional situation that characterises central banking in the developed world since 
2007, I believe that the qualities that are expected from central banks are analogous with the 
two sets of ethical virtues suggested by Max Weber: the ethic of conviction and the ethic of 
responsibility. 
The “ethic of conviction” makes the decision-maker find his essence in the constancy of his 
inner relation to certain ultimate value, to paraphrase Max Weber.24 There must be therefore 
a  full  integrity  between  intention  and  action.  In  “normal  times”  central  banks’  governing 
councils seem to me very much guided by such an ethic of conviction. Their intention, their 
ultimate value is crystal clear: it is the delivery of price stability in the medium and long run, 
as  the  primary  goal  and  as  a  necessary  condition  for  the  highly  desirable  objectives  of 
sustainable and balanced growth and sustainable job creation.  
A  solid  accumulation  of  theoretical  and  empirical  work  has  confirmed  the  pertinence  of 
monetary  policy  strategies  that  ensure  “full  integrity  between  intention  and  action”.  The 
counter example of the Great Inflation, an episode marked by lack of conviction from the part 
of the central bankers, confirms the decisive importance of the “ethic of conviction”.  
                                                 
24   Weber (1903-06/1975), p.192. 
10 
 BIS Review 111/2010
According  to  the  “ethic  of  responsibility”,  actions  have  to  be  analysed  in  terms  of  their 
consequences, taking account of their causal relationship to the empirical world. The stress 
is put therefore on the integrity between action and consequences and not between action 
and intention. While underlining the distance separating the two types of ethic, Max Weber 
says: “This is not to say that an ethic of ultimate ends is identical with irresponsibility or that 
an ethic of responsibility is identical with unprincipled opportunism”.25 He insisted that they 
should  be  brought  together:  “The  ethic  of  conviction  and  the  ethic  of  responsibility  are  not 
absolute opposites. They are complementary to one another (…)”.26 
It  seems  to  me  that  precisely  in  the  demanding  times  we  are  presently  experiencing,  a 
combination of the two ethics is appropriate – with an equal role being played by both. The 
call to scrutinise very closely the consequences of our decisions is justified by the fact that 
the monetary and financial environment presents unusual and rapidly changing features so 
that the normal functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism is at stake.  
The “non-standard measures” – which I would associate perhaps more closely with the ethic 
of  responsibility  –  are  precisely  designed  to  help  restore  a  more  normal  functioning  of  the 
transmission  mechanism  and  contribute  to  recreating  an  environment  where  the  “standard 
measures” – which I would see associated more  closely with the ethic of conviction – can 
operate effectively.  
This puts in perspective the separation that central banks are making between their policy 
interest  rates  and  monetary  policy  stance  –  namely  the  standard  measures  –  and,  in 
particular,  the  full  allotment  mode  in  the  supply  of  liquidity,  the  longer  term  refinancing  of 
commercial  banks  by  the  Central  Bank  or  the purchases of  securities  –  namely  the  set  of 
non-standard  measures.  The  monetary  policy  stance  is  always  designed  to  deliver  price 
stability in a medium and longer term perspective. The non-standard measures have a clear 
purpose: ensuring that the standard measures themselves are transmitted as effectively as 
possible despite the otherwise abnormal functioning of some markets. All the non-standard 
measures  taken  during  the  period  of  acute  financial  market  tensions,  referred  to  as 
“enhanced credit support” and the Securities Markets Programme, are fully consistent with 
our mandate and, by construction, temporary in nature. 
Seen through this lens, it is easily understandable that most central banks have been keen to 
stress  that  they  will  take  their  decisions  on  standard  measures  independently  of  their 
decisions on non-standard measures. For example, the ECB and other central banks have 
indicated clearly that interest rate increases could perfectly well take place independently of 
the phasing out of the non-standard measures if those non-standard measures continue to 
be fully justified by the situation. Equally, the total phasing out of the non-standard measures 
would not mechanistically be associated with interest rate increases. 
Conclusions 
IV. 
Let me conclude. With our focus here in Jackson Hole on the decade ahead, I believe that 
one  of  the most  important  questions  for central  bankers  is  to  distinguish  what is  structural 
and what is conjunctional in the new environment in which we have to take our decisions. 
I  am  convinced  that,  together,  we  will  surmount  the  difficulties  our  economies  are 
experiencing and that the G20 strategy for strong, sustainable and balanced growth will be 
successful. The central banks will continue to prove their capacity to preserve price stability 
in the next ten years as they have done in a remarkable way over the past ten years, despite 
                                                 
25   Weber (1918). 
26   Weber (1919/1994), p. 368. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 11
all difficulties. That being said, I am equally convinced that the next ten years will continue to 
present many new and unexpected challenges.  
Unprecedented uncertainty, in all its dimensions, will make our task more complex, if not less 
inspiring.  What  I  have  called  the  “apolitical  economy”  of  our  decisions,  including  the  most 
difficult ones, will be more important than ever in an environment where counterfactuals are 
almost impossible to communicate.  
We  will  have  to  rely  on  our  responsibility  to  take  account  of  the  “ugly  facts”  which,  under 
special  circumstances,  might  hamper  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  and  on  our 
conviction  to  ensure  the  very  solid  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  –  something  that  is 
more important than ever in turbulent times.  
I would like to reiterate that nothing in what I have said should be interpreted in terms of the 
future monetary policy decisions next Thursday. 
References  
Ahearne, A. G. and N. Shinada (2005). “Zombie Firms and Economic Stagnation in Japan,” 
International Economic and Economic Policy, 2(4), pp. 363–381.  
Alesina, A., A. Prati and G. Tabellini (1990). “Public Confidence and Debt Management: A 
Model  and  a  Case  Study  of  Italy”  in  R.  Dornbusch  and  M.  Draghi  (eds.)  Public  Debt 
Management: Theory and History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
Alesina,  A.,  M.  De  Broeck,  A.  Prati  and  G.  Tabellini  (1992).  “Default  Risk  on  Government 
Debt in OECD Countries,” Economic Policy 15, pp. 427–463.  
Alesina, A. and R. Perotti (1997). “Fiscal Adjustment in OECD Countries: Composition and 
Macroeconomic Effects,” IMF Staff Papers, 44(2) June, pp. 210–248.  
Ardagna, S., F. Caselli and T. Lane (2007). “Fiscal Discipline and the Cost of Public Debt 
Services: Some Estimates for OECD Countries,” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 7(1).  
Balassone, F., C. Jorge, G. Langenus, B. Manzke, J. Pavot, D. Prammer and P. Tommasino 
(2004). “Fiscal Sustainability and Policy Implications for the Euro Area,” ECB working paper 
no. 994.  
Barro  R.  J.  (1979).  “Are  Government  Bonds  Net  Wealth?,”  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
November/December, 82, pp. 1095–117.  
Barro  R.  J.  (1989).  “The  Ricardian  Approach  to  Budget  Deficits,”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 3(2), Spring, pp. 37–54. 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2009).  “Strengthening  the  Resilience  of  the 
Banking Sector,” Consultative Document, Bank for International Settlements.  
Bernoth,  K.,  J.  von  Hagen  and  L.  Schuknecht  (2006).  “Sovereign  Risk  Premiums  in  the 
European Government Bond Market,” GESY Discussion Paper No 151. 
Blake, N. and J. Muellbauer (2009). “Developing Analytical Methods for the Identification of 
Imbalance  and  Risks  in  the  EU  Housing  Markets,”  report  commissioned  by  the  European 
Commission, Oxford Economics. 
Blanchard,  O.  J.  (1990).  Comment  on  Giavazzi  and  Pagano  (1990),  in  Blanchard,  O.  and 
Fischer (eds). NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, pp. 111–115. 
Briotti, M.G. (2005). “Economic Reactions to Public Finance Consolidation: A Survey of the 
Literature,” ECB Occasional paper, No 38.  
Brunnermeier, M. (2009). “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008,” Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 23(1), pp. 77–100. 
12 
 BIS Review 111/2010
and 
ECB, 
available 
Johns  Hopkins  University 
Caballero,  R.  J.,  T.  Hoshi  and  A.  K.  Kashyap  (2008).  “Zombie  Lending  and  Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan,” American Economic Review, 98:5, pp. 1943–1977.  
Carroll,  C.  D.  and  J.  Slacalek  (2009).  “The  American  Consumer:  Reforming,  Or  Just 
Resting?,”  mimeo, 
at: 
http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/ReformingOrResting.pdf 
Clark  T.  and  A.  Dilnot  (2002).  “Measuring  the  UK  Fiscal  Stance  since  the  Second  World 
War,” IFS Briefing note 26.  
Dynan,  K.  (2009),  “Changing  Household  Financial  Conditions  and  Economic  Security,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(4), pp. 49–68. 
Economic Policy Committee and the European Commission (2006). “The Impact of Ageing 
on Public Expenditure: Projections for the EU25 Member States on Pensions, Health Care, 
Long-Term  Care,  Education  and  Unemployment  Transfers  (2004–2050),”  special  report, 
European economy. 
European  Central  Bank  (2009).  “The  External  Financing  of  Households  and  Non-financial 
Corporations: A Comparison of the Euro Area and the United States,” monthly bulletin, April, 
pp. 69–84. 
European  Central  Bank  (2010).  “Box  6:  The  Greek  Economic  and  Financial  Adjustment 
Programme,” monthly bulletin (May), pp. 44–46.  
Giavazzi,  F  and  M.  Pagano  (1990).  “Can  Severe  Fiscal  Contractions  Be  Expansionary? 
Tales  of  Two  Small  European  Countries,”  in  Blanchard,  O.  and  Fischer  (eds).  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 1990, MIT Press. 
Green, R. K. and S. M. Wachter (2007). “The Housing Finance Revolution,” in Symposium 
on Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, Kansas City Fed, Jackson Hole. 
Haugh, D., P. Ollivaud and D. Turner (2009). “What Drives Sovereign Risk Premiums? An 
Analysis  of  Recent  Evidence  from  the  Euro  Area,”  OECD  Economics  Department  working 
paper 718.  
Kumar, M. S. and J. Woo (2010). “Public Debt and Growth,” working paper 174, International 
Monetary Fund. 
Levine,  R.  (1997).  “Financial  Development  and  Economic  Growth,”  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature 35(2), pp. 688–726. 
Lorenz,  E.  N.  (1972).  “Does  the  Flat  of  a  Butterfly’s  Wings  in  Brazil  Set  off  a  Tornado  in 
Texas?”  speech  before 
the  Advancement  of  Science, 
29 December. 
Popov, A. (2009). “Does Finance Bolster Superstar Companies? Banks, Venture Capital, and 
Firm Size in Local U.S. Markets,” working paper 1121, European Central Bank. 
Popov,  A.  and  P.  Roosenboom  (2009).  “On  Real  Effects  of  Private  Investment:  Evidence 
from New Business Creation,” working paper 1078, European Central Bank. 
Rajan,  R.  (2010).  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World  Economy, 
Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  K.  S.  Rogoff  (2010).  “Growth  in  a  Time  of  Debt,”  discussion  paper, 
University of Maryland and Harvard University. 
Schuknecht, L., J. von Hagen and G. Wolswijk (2010). “Government Bond Risk Premiums in 
the EU Revisited: The Impact of the Financial Crisis,” working paper 1152, European Central 
Bank.  
Temin,  P.,  (1997).  “The  Golden  Age  of  European  Growth:  A  Review  Essay,”  European 
Review of Economic History 1(1), pp 127–149. 
the  American  Academy 
for 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 13
Trichet,  J.-C.,  (2009).  “Credible  Alertness  Revisited”.  Intervention  at  the  symposium  on 
“Financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  policy”  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August.  
Trichet,  J.-C.,  (2010).  “Stimulate  No  More  –  It  Is  Now  Time  for  All  to  Tighten,”  Financial 
Times, 22 July, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1b3ae97e-95c6-11df-b5ad-00144feab49a.html. 
Weber, M., (1903-06/1975), The Logical Problems of Historical Economics, trans. G. Oakes. 
New York: Free Press. 
Weber,  M.,  (1918),  Politics  as  a  Vocation,  Speech  at  Munich  University  (German  original, 
Politik als Beruf, published in: Gesammelte Politische Schriften, München 1921, pp. 396–450.  
Weber,  M.,  (1919/1994)  The  Profession  and  Vocation  of  Politics”  in  Max  Weber:  Political 
Writing”, trans. R. Spears, Cambridge University Press. 
14 
 BIS Review 111/2010
