K C Chakrabarty: Infrastructure finance – experiences and the road 
ahead 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
13th Financial  Services  Convention  of  Bombay  Management  Association,  Mumbai, 
5 February 2010. 
 Respected  Dr  Rangarajan,  Chairman  of  the  Economic  Advisory  Council  of  PM,  Padma 
Vibhushan Dr Y V Reddy, Shri G Pinto, Executive Director, BMA, distinguished guests and 
representatives from the print and electronic media. 
1. 
Getting an award is always an exciting and motivating event particularly when you 
are getting it in the presence of the doyens or giants of the sector like Dr Rangarajan and 
Padma  Vibhushan  Dr  Y  V  Reddy.  I  am  extremely  grateful  to  Bombay  Management 
Association  (BMA)  for  honouring  me  with  the  BMA  Finance  Man  of  the  Year  Award  and 
would like to sincerely thank them. I accept this award with full humility and understanding 
that  the  award  belongs  to  all  the  employees  and  customers  of  the  institutions  that  I  have 
served during the last 30 years. In fact, it is an award to all stakeholders of those institutions. 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  have  been  presented  this  award  by  
Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  our  ex-governor,  who  has  himself  been  awarded  the  Finance  Man  of  the 
Decade Award. It is a matter of great jubilation that, in the past, eminent personalities like 
Shri  A.  K.  Purwar,  Shri  M.  Damodaran,  Dr  Y.  V.  Reddy,  Dr  Bimal  Jalan,  etc.  have  been 
conferred this award and it is indeed a matter of great pride for me that I have been included 
in  this  pantheon  of  awardees.  I  congratulate  the  BMA  for  organising  the  13th  Financial 
Services Convention on the theme “Infrastructure Finance: Experiences and The Road 
Ahead”. I would now like to take this opportunity and share my thoughts on the theme of the 
Convention before the distinguished dignitaries. 
Introduction 
As you know, the Indian economy has enormous growth potential, a fact that is 
2. 
equally acknowledged by the analysts in-house as well as abroad. India can be one of the 
economic powerhouses in the current millennium following the success of China this decade. 
The economic dominance of India along with China looks all the more likely in view of the 
expected  change  in  the  epicentre  of  growth  to  emerging  Asia  after  the  crisis.  The  8.8  per 
cent  average  growth  clocked  by  the  Indian  economy  during  2003–08  is  the  highest  ever 
recorded  after  independence  second  only  to  China  in  the  contemporary  world.  This  has 
emanated  from  an  upsurge  in  the  domestic  savings  rate  (23.5  per  cent  in  2001–02  to 
37.7 per cent in 2007–08) supported by the step up in investment rate (from 22.8 per cent to 
39.1  per  cent)  in  an  environment  of  moderate  inflation  and  macro-economic  stability. 
Although  the  contagion  from  the  global  economic  crisis  had  brought  the  growth  down  to 
6.7 per cent in 2008–09, large fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary policy ensured 
that the economy performed better than expected in 2009–10. The Planning Commission in 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan Document (2007–12) identified a number of priorities to hasten 
an inclusive growth process so that the economy can grow at a rate of around 9 per cent 
during  the  plan  period.  While  the  success  of  the  same  revolves  around  a  number  of  wide 
ranging issues adequately flagged in the Plan Document, certain basic problems need to be 
addressed  first.  These  are  agriculture  reforms,  governance  reforms  and  infrastructure 
reforms. In today’s address, I would confine myself to the third issue – that is infrastructure – 
finance as well as the beyond. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 1
Role of infrastructure and the traditional constraints as regards finance 
3. 
If we have to maintain high growth rate, we require better infrastructure; as simple 
as that. Infrastructure is also a key driver of inclusive growth. It is already identified as one of 
the  serious  impediments  to  high  growth  in  India  in  the  coming  years.  With  fast  pace  of 
economic growth and urbanisation, availability of adequate facilities as well as upgrading the 
quality  of  existing  infrastructure  would  assume  paramount  importance.  Infrastructure 
development  in  new  townships  is  a  priority  to  redistribute  the  influx  of  growing  population. 
Attention is to be paid to the rural infrastructure provision such as irrigation, electrification, 
roads,  drinking  water,  sanitation,  housing,  community  IT  service,  etc.  Financial  issues  are 
often cited as the key constraint to the availability of provisions in an emerging economy like 
India. 
The infrastructure projects are characterised by non-recourse or limited recourse 
4. 
financing,  i.e.,  lender  can  only  be  repaid  from  the  revenues  generated  by  the  projects 
requiring to the large scale of investments. The share of high initial capital and low operating 
cost in infrastructure projects explains why financing infrastructure involves a mix of complex 
and varied contractual arrangements. Wrong projections, collection risks of the payables and 
reneging  of  the  contract  are  commonly  cited  as  the  major  risks  associated  with  an 
infrastructure projects. As returns from the projects are uncertain and low in the risk adjusted 
terms, it also necessitated additional incentives to be created to attract private investment. 
Infrastructure developments in India 
5. 
Despite its critical role in the development process in India, most of the state and 
local  governments  in  India  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  undertake  such  investments  and 
resultantly our various flagship programs had to depend on central assistance. While funding 
is understandably a key issue, it is needless to say that much of the success in creating the 
provision  would  depend  upon  some  related  non-financial  factors  like  project  viability, 
realisation of user costs, avoiding time and costs overrun, contract enforcement and efficient 
utilisation of funds. Traditionally the government bore the burden of building up infrastructure 
in India. However, the strategy of development has been revisited with economic reforms in 
the 1990s. Accordingly, the infrastructure industry has been opening up to the private players 
in various sectors. The Electricity (Supply) Act of 1948 was amended in 1991 to promote the 
entry  of  Independent  Power  Producers.  Similarly,  the  National  Highways  Act  of  1956  was 
amended  in  June  1995  to  allow  and  attract  private  investment  in  road  development, 
maintenance  and  operation.  The  telecommunications  sector  was  deregulated  and  the 
Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  (TRAI)  was  established  in  1997  to  oversee  the 
industry.  
Overall, there has been some notable progress in attracting private investment in 
6. 
the  infrastructure  industries.  Usually  investments  from  private  sources  are  high  in  those 
sectors where user cost is well defined and easily recoverable. For the remaining segment, it 
is  primarily  the  public  investments  that  have  to  supplement  infrastructure  provisions  given 
their importance in the economy. Irrigation, water supply, electricity and gas are the specific 
cases in point where user charges need to be defined and contract enforcement mechanism 
need to be strengthened further to ensure an uninterrupted flow of investments from private 
sources.  Overall,  the  financing  requirement  from  the  private  sectors  during  Eleventh  Five 
Year Plan is estimated to be over 30 per cent from a little less than 20 per cent during the 
Tenth  Plan  period.  The  flagship  Bharat  Nirman  programme  of  the  Government  of  India 
focuses  on  the  provision  of  key  rural  infrastructure  like  irrigation,  electrification,  roads, 
drinking water supply and sanitation, affordable housing, and connectivity via community IT 
service centres.  
7. 
At the macro-level, the Eleventh Five Year Plan envisages stepping up of the gross 
capital  formation  in  infrastructure  from  5  per  cent  in  2006–07  to  9  per  cent  of  GDP.  It 
envisaged  an  investment  requirement  of  over  US$  500  billion  (Rs.20,11,521  crore).  It  is 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 2
estimated that traditional sources of infrastructure financing can raise a little more than half of 
the requirement (McKinsey, 2009). Financial shortfall is one of the reasons for the slow pace 
of  transition  towards  creating  world  class  infrastructure  facilities  in  India  through  private 
initiatives. There is an urgent need to create enabling conditions, e.g., a vibrant debt market, 
easy  exit  rout  for  equity  capital  and  appropriate  instruments  for  credit  institutions  to  lend 
infrastructure while hedging the associated risks, etc. Estimated investment flow in various 
infrastructure sectors during the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plan is outlined in Table 1. It 
can be seen from the table that the investment requirements in various sectors had gone up 
substantially in the Eleventh Plan. 
Table 1 
Estimated investment flows to various sectors 
 8. 
Apart from the direct investment route, public private partnerships (PPPs) models 
have  grown  in  popularity  around  the  world  in  recent  years,  with  governments  around  the 
world  finding  it  difficult  to  finance  infrastructure  investments  through  conventional  route. 
Despite the emphasis placed on PPP in the Plan Documents, the private sector response to 
infrastructure  development  in  India  has  been  lukewarm  for  a  number  of  reasons,  e.g., 
overlapping regulatory jurisdiction, improper design, appraisal and risk allocation mechanism 
under PPP, bidding transparency issues, project costs and time overruns considerations, etc. 
Probably a centralised PPP mechanism and a single window clearance of the project under 
direct  investment  route  is  called  for  at  this  juncture.  With  inadequate  financial  market 
developments, PPPs in India typically rely on commercial banks for funding exposing them to 
risk concentration, maturity mismatches and related exposures to the rising interest rates and 
tightening credit conditions over the life of the project. 
Issues relating to the financing of infrastructure investments in India 
9. 
The importance of long-term debt financing can hardly be overstated owing to the 
longer  pay-back  period  of  infrastructure  projects  and  delays  due  to  complexities  in  the 
design,  safety  and  environmental  aspects,  etc.  The  development  of  a  mature  and  vibrant 
corporate  debt  market  is  eminently  suited  for  long-term  committed  funding  to  match  the 
investment requirements of a long term risk-averse investors seeking regular returns after a 
lock-in period. Greater deepening in the non-government debt market with sound financial, 
legal,  and  regulatory  framework  would  enhance  the  benefit  of  price  discovery  and  risk 
diversification.  The  PPP  model  pioneered  in  Europe  in  the  late  1960s  has  benefited 
immensely from the financial flexibility offered by the debt market by reducing over-reliance 
on the banking system. However, the European economy has also got the advantage of an 
enabling investment environment before the reliance on banking system could be lowered. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 3
The current state of financial market in India does not support an optimal capital 
10. 
structure  in  financing  infrastructure.  While  the  public-sector  debt  market  is  fairly  liquid, 
constituting approximately 35 per cent of GDP, the stock of listed non-public sector debt is an 
abysmal 2 per cent of the GDP (Goldman Sachs, 2007). This is far below the depth of the 
equity market capitalisation placed almost at 100 per cent of GDP. Even emerging countries 
such as Malaysia, Korea, and China have a higher percentage of corporate bonds to GDP. 
Further, segmentation in gilt securities failed to create a credible benchmark to price other 
long-term securities in India despite an intensive effort by the RBI to consolidate the issuance 
of gilt securities. Accordingly, there is a tendency to adopt lopsided structures in the form of 
over-reliance on equity. While the government uses tax revenues and PSUs surplus to fund 
infrastructure,  a  large  percentage  of  capital  requirements  in  the  private  sector  too  are  met 
through equity. Of the total expenditure of the Eleventh Plan, nearly 52 per cent is likely to be 
financed  through  internal  accrual/equity  primarily  appropriating  the  internal  and  extra-
budgetary resources of the PSUs. For private sector, the share of debt is relatively less at 
30 per cent. 
11. 
Of the total debt requirement at Rs. 9,88,035 crore (USD 247.01 billion), the actual 
availability  during  the  Eleventh  Plan  period  is  estimated  to  be  around  83.5  per  cent.  More 
than half of the total estimated resource flows are likely to come from bank credit, while close 
to 15 per cent is estimated to come from external commercial borrowings. The resource flow 
from pension/insurance companies, which is potentially a high source of long term debt, is 
expected  to  provide  resources  by  less  than  7  per  cent.  Understandably,  these  institutions 
have been restricted by their respective regulatory authorities from exposing them too highly 
to the infrastructure sector on prudential considerations.  
12. 
The  credit  extended  by  commercial  banks  is  also  restricted  through  exposure 
norms  besides  a  cash  reserve  and  statutory  liquidity  ratio  requirements.  Although  often 
argued for more flexibility, it needs to be appreciated that for credit institutions, it would be 
difficult  to  assume  bulk  of  the  project  risk  and  capital  costs  indefinitely  without  a 
commensurate  development  of  the  corporate  debt  market.  Infrastructure  financing  brings 
additional risks in view of their long term nature and is not good for the banks from an ALM 
perspective  to  increase  their  exposure  excessively.  Though  prudential  norms  have  been 
relaxed  by  RBI  for  infrastructure  projects,  RBI  is  not  in  favour  of  further  relaxations  in 
exposure norms. The infrastructure finance requirements cannot be filled by banks alone but 
would  have  to  be  met  by  financing  from  long  term  finance  agencies  like  insurance  and 
pension funds. 
The  High  Level  Expert  Committee  on  Corporate  Bonds  and  Securitisation 
13. 
(Chairman: Dr. R H Patil) comprehensively examined the issues concerning corporate bond 
market  in  India  and  made  recommendations  to  activate  the  market,  some  of  which  have 
already  been  implemented.  As  per  the  regulatory  jurisdiction,  SEBI  is  responsible  for  the 
primary (public issues and private placement by listed companies) and secondary (OTC and 
exchange)  markets  in  corporate  bonds.  The  various  pre-conditions  for  allowing  repos  in 
corporate bonds, e.g., an efficient and safe clearing and settlement system based on DvP 
and availability of fair prices is gradually settling in. The draft guidelines for allowing repos in 
corporate bonds are also due for finalisation. 
Foreign  sources  are  supplementing  the  domestic  financial  market  in  financing 
14. 
infrastructure during recent years. The inflows through External Commercial Borrowing are 
rising even though such inflows have end-use restrictions besides having a cap on borrowing 
cost in most of the time. Further, India is receiving a sizeable amount of foreign investment 
through foreign direct investment (FDI) in the current decade. The cumulative amount of FDI 
inflows since 2000 is at a staggering US$100 billion. While the highest share of FDI has been 
received by the services sector followed by the ICT, the telecom sector too received success 
in attracting foreign capital. Besides a sizeable and almost continuous investment support is 
received from Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) to the domestic financial market albeit with 
high volatility.  
BIS Review 14/2010 
 4
Further,  the  banks  in  India  had  developed  the  appraisal  skills  to  enter  into  long-
15. 
term  lending  including  infrastructure  finance  in  a  big  way.  Bank  credit  to  the  infrastructure 
sector  increased  steadily  from  Rs.  7,243  crore  in  1999–2000  to  Rs.  2,69,972  crore  in  
2008–09, a compound annual growth of 43.6 per cent during the last ten years (Table 2). 
The share of bank finance to infrastructure in gross bank credit increased from 1.8 per cent 
in 2001 to 10.2 per cent in 2009. The banks’ exposure to infrastructure lending has grown by 
over 3.7 times between March 2005 and 2009. Still a large part of the gap in demand over 
the  supply  of  bank  credit  is  explained  by  the  inadequate  commercialisation  of  projects  for 
regulatory, political and legal constraints and total absence or insufficiency of user charges in 
many sectors. Therefore, the current issue to meet the demand for infrastructure finance by 
the banks arise from the bankable and commercially viable projects.  
 Measures taken by the Reserve Bank of India 
Several  new  initiatives  have  been  initiated  by  the  central  government  and  the 
16. 
Reserve  Bank  in  the  recent  years.  RBI  initiated  a  number  of  regulatory  concessions  for 
infrastructure  finance,  such  as  a)  allowing  banks  to  enter  into  take  out  financing 
arrangement,  b)  freedom  to  issue  long  term  bonds  by  banks  for  financing  infrastructure, 
c) relaxation  of  single  and  group  borrower  limit  for  additional  credit  exposure  in  the 
infrastructure  sector,  d)  flexibility  to  invest  in  unrated  bonds  of  companies  engaged  in 
infrastructure  activities  within  the  overall  ceiling  of  10  percent,  e)  excluding  the  promoters’ 
shares  in  the  SPV  of  an  infrastructure  project  to  be  pledged  to  the  lending  bank  from  the 
banks’  capital  market  exposure  and  f)  permitting  banks  to  extend  finance  for  funding 
promoter’s equity where the proposal involves acquisition of share in an existing company 
engaged in implementing or operating an infrastructure project in India. Let me make some 
additional remarks on two of these areas. 
17. 
To stimulate public investment in infrastructure, a special purpose vehicle – India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) was set up for providing long-term financial 
assistance to infrastructure projects. The Union Budget for 2009–10 announced that IIFCL in 
consultation  with  banks  will  evolve  “take  out  financing”  scheme  to  facilitate  lending  to  the 
infrastructure sector. To ease the financing constraints for infrastructure projects under the 
PPP  mode,  the  Government  has  decided  that  IIFCL  would  refinance  60  per  cent  of 
commercial  bank  loans  for  PPP  projects  in  critical  areas  over  the  next  fifteen  to  eighteen 
months. The IIFCL was authorised to raise Rs.10,000 crore through Government guaranteed 
tax free bonds by the end of 2008–09 and an additional Rs.30,000 crore on the same basis 
as  per  the  requirement  in  2009–10.  The  refinancing  option  is  expected  to  leverage  bank 
financing for PPP programmes to the extent of about Rs.1,00,000 crore. As the experience 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 5
suggests, the take out financing failed to become popular as the cost of borrowing turn out to 
be  high.  As  IIFCL  sources  banks  substantially  for  its  funding  requirement  as  well  as 
refinances  banks  for  their  infrastructure  lending,  the  cost  of  finance  goes  up  through  the 
layers  of  intermediation.  In  view  of  the  limited  availability  of  resources,  there  is  a  limit  to 
which IIFCL will be able to deliver a favourable leverage effect by extending equity support 
and credit enhancement.  
18. 
Single and group exposure limits turn out to be binding for lending banks in view of 
the  huge  funds  requirement.  There  is  not  much  scope  to  increase  them  from  prudential 
viewpoints going by the internationally accepted norms. The capital funds of Indian banks are 
small in size. The exposure limits of banks are fixed in relation to their capital funds. Even 
though  we  have  allowed  relaxation  of  5  percent  in  case  of  single  borrower  limit  and 
10 percent  in  case  of  group  borrower  limits,  banks  find  it  difficult  to  lend  to  infrastructure 
projects set up by big industrial houses as they have already reached the maximum group 
exposure  limit  to  such borrowers.  Also,  there is  a  tendency  among  borrowers  to  limit  their 
borrowing to a few large banks which compounds the exposure limit constraints. As not all 
banks  are  active  in  infrastructure  financing,  the  consolidation  of  banks  could  potentially 
provide higher exposure limits. However, such mergers and acquisitions may not serve the 
purpose as risk remains the same for the sector. Typically a bank may not like to take upon 
itself  the  entire  financing  risks  but  try  to  attract  co-financer  by  syndication  of  loans,  which 
would entail multiple lenders discouraging the borrowers. 
Some possible measures and solutions to bridge the gap 
19.  
extending the funding base for infrastructure projects. 
a)  
Some specific measures are being talked about to bridge the gap in financing by 
One such measure is the participation of pension funds and insurance companies 
in  funding  the  long  term  infrastructure  projects.  Pension  funds  are  increasingly 
moving into new asset classes in a search for yield. Infrastructure is one type of 
investment  being  frequently  discussed,  given  its  potential  to  match  long-term 
pension  assets  and  provide  diversification.  Some  larger  funds  globally  are 
beginning to invest in infrastructure via private-equity funds, or, occasionally, even 
directly.  Australian,  Canadian  and  Dutch  pension  funds  may  be  considered  as 
leaders in this field. 
The development of domestic long-term capital markets will be critical for private 
sector  investment  in  infrastructure,  but  these  markets  must  have  much  better 
regulation as well. In India, there is a need to improve the depth and liquidity of the 
corporate  bond  market  to  provide  an  additional  source  of  funds  for  infrastructure 
companies.  Limited  investor  base,  limited  number  of  issuers  and  preference  for 
bank finance over bond finance are the main macro barriers for development of a 
deep and liquid corporate bond market. RBI has issued the guidelines on repo in 
corporate bonds, which would be effective from March 2010. Further, syndication 
of  loans  would  diversify  the  risk  in  infrastructure  financing,  given  the  fact  that  a 
bank would not like to take upon itself the entire financing given the risks involved 
and the capital and consequent exposure constraints. 
Also credit enhancement to infrastructure by way of risk transfer and risk reduction 
could  help  bridge  the  gap  in  the  Indian  context.  Lenders  tend  to  look  for  credit 
enhancement  from  government  like  policy  guarantees,  refinancing  and  maturity 
extension guarantees, grants/viability gap funding, etc. Similarly, non-government 
mechanisms  like  bond  insurance,  credit  rating,  etc.  provide  risk  mitigation  to  the 
lenders.  Providing  credit  enhancement  by  way  of  insuring  the  debt  payment  by 
insurance  companies 
towards 
infrastructure projects is a concept considered in the North American infrastructure 
market. 
loans  extended  by 
to  banks 
them 
the 
for 
b)  
c)  
BIS Review 14/2010 
 6
d)  
e)  
Comprehensive infrastructure development calls for simultaneous improvement of 
all  infrastructure  sectors,  like  power,  telecommunications,  irrigation,  transport, 
housing,  commercial  complexes,  water  supply,  sanitation  and  other  urban 
amenities.  In  the  current  situation,  it  may  no  longer  be  possible  for  the 
Governments to develop, upgrade and maintain infrastructure and provide all civic 
amenities  on  their  own.  It  is  in  this  context  that  governments  are  involving  the 
private sector in the area of infrastructure development to bridge the gap between 
demand  and  supply.  The  Public-Private  Partnership  is  being  actively  pursued  in 
India to meet the gaps in the provision of basic infrastructure services. The PPP 
model, where the state shares the risks and responsibilities with private firms while 
retaining  the  control  of  assets  is  generally  expected  to  improve  services  while 
avoiding some of the pitfalls of privatization such as higher prices and corruption. 
However, for such partnerships to be successful, the framework of PPP including 
pricing  has  to  be  transparent.  The  development  finance  model  has  to  be 
characterized  by  good  planning,  strong  commitment  of  both  the  parties,  effective 
monitoring, regulation and enforcement by the government. A separate Ministry for 
Infrastructure  Development  could  help  immensely  in  channelising  government’s 
efforts. The issue of pricing is crucial in view of the political sensitivities, while also 
simultaneously ensuring the viability of the project. If we are looking at world class 
infrastructure, then we will have to pay for it. Managing the transition from state-
subsidised services to market based pricing is crucial as a fine balance has to be 
maintained between allowing companies to raise prices rapidly on existing, cheap 
public  utility  services  and  suppressing  price  hikes  by  ignoring  market  forces. 
Whenever PPP with proper pricing is not possible, then Government has to chip in. 
Rural areas and hinterland infrastructure development could be the responsibility of 
the government. So pricing on commercial consideration is a key issue and I hope 
the convention will discuss these key issues. 
Additional  flexibility  for  long  term  bonds  issued  by  banks  as  regards  the  tenor  of 
bond issuance or allowing Zero Coupon Bonds for infrastructure with income tax 
benefits  are  some  of  the  other  incentives  that  can  be  thought  off  in  the  years 
ahead.  Another  option  is  to  treat  the  advances  as  unsecured  so  long  as 
receivables  from  the  project  is  the  only  basis  of  tangible  primary  security,  as  is 
normally the case for road project, provided cash flows generated are adequate for 
repayment of the advance. 
Concluding remarks 
20. 
I would like to conclude this address by saying that there is no dearth of finance for 
infrastructure  development.  Currently,  there  is  adequate  liquidity  in  the  system  that  can 
support financial requirements in the next two to three year for any bankable infrastructure 
project. From a medium term perspective, while finance is surely a pertinent issue, it cannot 
be  addressed  independently.  Addressing  other  concerns  in  infrastructure  industries  like 
defining  user  cost  and  a  mechanism  for  their  recovery,  strengthening  the  contractual 
framework  to  speedup  project  implementations,  plugging  the  loopholes  behind  the  current 
PPP designs, a simplified project clearance mechanism by a centralized authority, etc. are 
perhaps of more importance than financial issues. In the long term, participation of pension 
funds,  insurance  companies  and  other  long  term  finance  institutions  would  be  essential. 
Progress  in  these  directions  could  activate  infrastructure  provisions  at  a  much  faster  pace 
than  is  seen  now.  I  hope  this  convention  will  deliberate  on  some  of  these  key  issues.  As 
growth  takes  place  with  the  improvement  in  infrastructure  provisions,  a  number  of  funding 
issues  could  be  self-correcting.  High  growth  will  generate  resources  for  infrastructure 
investment  besides  pushing  for  the  necessary  reforms  at  the  longer  end  of  the  financial 
market  and  products.  On  the  contrary,  relying  heavily  on  the  banking  system  without 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 7
commensurate reforms in the real economy may not facilitate finance, while running the risks 
from prudential viewpoint. 
21. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 8
