Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Contemporary issues in Islamic finance and 
equity-based financing 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the Conference on Contemporary Issues in Islamic Home, Personal and Auto 
Financing, jointly organised by the International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM) Institute of 
Islamic Banking and Finance (IIiBF), the Bar Council Syariah Law Committee (SLC) and the 
Consumers Association of Penang (CAP), Kuala Lumpur, 2 April 2010. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  seminar  and  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  on 
contemporary issues in Islamic finance. I shall attempt to touch on some issues that, to my 
mind is important. I will also touch on the subject of equity-based financing, a topic that has 
attracted a lot of discussion lately. But I must remind you that I’m not a scholar, nor am I an 
expert on Islamic finance.  
What I will offer is my experience in dealing with the promotion and development of Islamic 
finance in Malaysia over the last 10 years and the general experience of over 25 years with 
the conventional financial system. Therefore, my focus and emphasis would be purely from a 
practitioner point of view, experience that comes from the need for pragmatism in translating 
shariah  principles  and  rulings  into  public  policy,  development  initiatives  and  formulation  of 
framework on regulation and supervision for the Islamic finance industry. 
I would try to provoke some questions on some issues that have attracted attention lately. 
While the issues would not be exhaustion but I will attempt to give a different dimension on 
the matters raised.  
Development of Islamic finance 
Islamic  finance  is  now  the  fastest  growing  segment  in  the  global  financial  industry. 
Notwithstanding the global financial crisis, Islamic finance has shown strong growth. The size 
of  assets  under  management  may  very  well  exceeded  USD1  trillion.  Islamic  finance  has 
maintained an average growth rate of 15–20% per annum. New areas of business continue 
to  show  encouraging  progress.  Islamic  Mutual  Funds  is  growing  at  average  of  23%  per 
annum. The Takaful industry is growing at 13% per annum. Islamic finance has attracted a 
lot of attention. It is no more peripheral to the conventional banking system but has grown 
from  being  a  novelty  to  be  a  viable  and  attractive  alternative  to  the  conventional  banking 
system. 
Giant banking and insurance groups are now very much interested in Islamic finance as a 
way to growth their business. Five years from now, the data that I am showing you could very 
well change in terms of numbers and structures.  
Interest in Islamic finance is no longer limited to Muslim nations and Muslim communities. 
The  world  realizes  the  economic  clout  of  1.5  billion  people  is  a  market  that  cannot  be 
ignored.  The  Islamic  finance  market  offers  an  enormous  potential  for  future  growth.  Long 
established  financial  centers  such  as  London,  Hong  Kong,  Tokyo  and  Singapore  have 
already begun the first steps to enhance their respective centers into vibrant Islamic financial 
centers.  
Opportunities in Islamic finance 
This  would  raise  several  implications  and  opportunities  for  the  development  of  Islamic 
finance.  The  increased  competition  where  non-traditional  players  will  enter  the  industry 
bringing  with  them  superior  system,  management  skills,  established  R  &  D  and  risk 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 1
management system with proven track record globally will spur growth or at least maintained 
at an already phenomenal growth in Islamic finance.  
There  will  be  more  innovative  products,  new  concepts  and  new  structures,  as  the  new 
players bring with them new value proposition to attract or entice their customers. Demand 
will grow for services related to Islamic finance in the areas of consultancy, accounting, trust, 
shariah, legal advice and IT services.  
New  shariah  concepts  will  emerge  and  this  will  require  scholars  to  rethink  some  of  the 
structures that had been well established. In addition, new demand for standardization and 
harmonization of shariah standards would intensify as cross border transactions increases. 
This will also result in an increase in demand for financial products that can be sold between 
markets.  
Malaysia’s Islamic financial industry  
Malaysia  is  well  positioned  to  take  on  this  competition.  The  path  for  the  development  of 
Islamic  finance  started  as  far  back  as  1983.  From  the  building  of  the  foundation  of  legal, 
regulatory and shariah framework, the Islamic Banking Act (1983) to the formation of the first 
Islamic  bank  and  Takaful  Company  to  instituting  Islamic  windows  concept  for  banking 
institutions  and  encouraging  competition  amongst  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  the 
nineties (1990s), to establishing key infrastructures and institutional arrangements such as 
the Shariah Advisory Council and the Islamic Money Market, we are on a mission to be the 
center for Islamic finance. 
Today  we  have  a  comprehensive  system  for  Islamic  finance  but  as  you  would  expect, 
because  of  competition  and  the  fast  changing  pace  of  the  banking  industry,  we  must 
continue  to  strive  to  maintain  the  lead  in  this  industry.  There  are  a  few  pre  requisite  to 
maintain  this  competitive  edge.  It  is  the  ability  of  the  industry  to  meet  the  evolving  and 
discerning  needs  of  the  users  of  Islamic  finance  and  the  ability  to  meet  those  needs  in  a 
timely and comprehensive manner. The solutions to customer needs must be as innovative 
and competitive as any other alternatives offered by the financial market.  
The  shariah  aspect  of  the  products  must  be  recognized  and  accepted  by  the  majority  of 
players practicing Islamic finance. The supply and ability to attract and retain talent, not only 
in  shariah  area  and  Islamic  finance,  but  also  those  who  are  conversant  in  IT,  legal, 
accounting, risk management and communication.  
The  next  level  of  development  will  probably  entail  the  enhancement  of  linkages  between 
various  centers,  be  it  in  the  financial  markets,  credits  or  investment  of  funds.  The  various 
Islamic finance centers operating around the globe must operate as one! We should allow a 
diversified number of players to operate in our market. Recognising the benefits of foreign 
competition and presence, we have announced a further opening of the Malaysian financial 
system to new players.  
Islamic banking market share in terms of asset vis-à-vis total banking asset as at the end of 
2009 is 19.6% (2000: 6.9%) including DFIs. This data is very close to our target of 20% by 
the end of 2010. Domestic Islamic banks accounted for about 85% of market share in Islamic 
banking sector. Annual growth rate of Islamic banking assets was 20.8% per annum for the 
years  2000  to  2009.  For  takaful,  the  market  share,  although  still  small,  it  has  shown 
significant progress of 7.9% and 11.09% in terms of asset & contribution respectively. Annual 
growth rate of takaful assets was 24.2% per annum (2000–2009). Total financial assets had 
also increase significantly. The Islamic sukuk is larger than the conventional PDS. 
What are the factors that contributed to the development of Islamic finance in Malaysia? One 
of  the  factors  is  a  comprehensive  legal,  tax,  accounting,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework and this are well articulated and generally known. Let me attempt a few additional 
factors  that  might  not  be  that  well  appreciated.  It  is  the  willingness  of  the  players  and  the 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2010
developers of Islamic finance to explore new initiatives. When we embark into this journey 
during the early 1980s there was no precedent to follow. We did not wait until we were 100% 
sure  or  until  we  were  sure  we  could  tackle  all  the  possible  issues  that  might  arise.  Some 
might say that this is a “trial and error” method. But history has taught us that many break 
through ideas and solutions originated from this approach. The willingness to try new things 
and the ability to move on should an idea doesn’t work is an important attribute. It pays over 
the long run. 
The willingness to use existing resources that had served the financial system well is another 
contributing  factor.  Malaysia  has  already  in  place  an  efficient  custodian,  payment  and 
settlement  system,  the  principal  dealership  system,  the  real  time  gross  settlement  system 
and the process of tendering of government securities. All this has a proven track record of 
being  effective  and  efficient.  We  avoid  “reinventing  the  wheel”  because  it  is  costly,  time 
consuming and risky if we create an entirely new approach. We adopt and adapt with the 
existing system so long it does not contravene any shariah principle or requirement. 
Willingness of shariah scholars to practice ijtihad is another contributing factor. The courage 
to  set  a  precedent  and  the  resolve  to  agree  to  a  new  concept  never  done  before.  For 
example, in the establishment of shariah parameters and centralization of shariah rulings and 
the creation of financial instruments that the Central Bank used to mop up liquidity from the 
financial market on a daily basis. 
The  forward  looking  plan  of  our  various  institutions  of  higher  learning  to  offer  courses  in 
Islamic finance related subjects that have enable a steady supply of talent and workforce to 
the industry. 
Equity-based financing 
Let  me  touch  on  the  subject  of  equity-based  financing.  This  subject  has  captured  the 
imagination of many especially within the academic circles. Some even went to the extent of 
saying equity-based financing is the heart and soul of Islamic finance. This is a point that will 
invite  a  lot  of  comments  and  a  subject  of  endless  conversation.  In  practice,  somehow, 
bankers are not into this. 
In Malaysia and in the Middle East, however, more than 70% are debt-based financing. Why 
is this so? Let me discuss this point with greater detail. 
For the benefit of those who are less familiar, in a nutshell Mudharaba is a profit sharing and 
loss bearing concept where the Financier provides financial investment in a business and the 
Entrepreneur provides expertise in running the business. The financier gets to share profits 
and absorb loses and the entrepreneur have a share of the profit 
Musharaka  is  where  both  Financier  and  Entrepreneur  commit  to  invest  financially  in  a 
business.  In  both  cases,  the  profits  and  losses  are  shared  according  to  ratios  that  both 
Financier and Entrepreneur agrees prior to the venture. 
In practice, these financing concepts can cover several aspects. Banks invest in a business 
venture  with  an  entrepreneur  and  receive  profit/loss  sharing  (e.g.  in  a  corporate  banking 
transaction). Depositors invest in a Bank and earn profit/loss sharing (e.g. when consumers 
want to open a mudharabah account).  
Banks invest in a business venture with an Entrepreneur and then finance the product of the 
business venture to consumers (e.g. Bank enters into partnership with Entrepreneur to build 
houses and sells the house to consumer thru a financing package). The structure seem quite 
established  and  generally  accepted.  Yet  since  2006,  despite  equity-based  transaction  has 
become more popular, it only constituted only 2% of total financing. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 3
In  fact,  in  our  effort  to  motivate  the  industry  to  engage  in  more  equity-based  financing,  a 
specific guideline dealing with mudharabah and musyarakah was issued on 21 September 
2007. From our observation, we need a lot of room for improvement in this particular area. 
Sales  based  contract  remains  significant  portion  of  financing  –  around  50%,  30%  being 
Ijarah.  A  large  proportion  of  Islamic  finance  domestically  is  therefore  debt  or  asset  based 
financing. 
Why the industry did not focus more on equity based financing? Should Islamic banks which 
are  relatively  small  in  size  take  this  major  shift  in  direction?  A  new  direction  not  just  for 
Islamic banks, but a new direction in the way Islamic finance should develop forward. Is there 
an impediment? If so – what is the impediment and is it something that we can solve? Or is it 
a natural phenomena?  
Are  players  in  the  industry  not  aware  of  the  benefits?  Or  are  they  aware  of  the  benefits, 
weighed  it  against  the  potential  risks  and  decided  not  to  pursue  this  strategy  because  of 
business and operational reasons? 
First let’s analyze the potential benefit. For example, a Bank enters into a joint venture with a 
housing  developer.  The  financing  of  the  project  in  the  form  of  equity  can  yield  a  lucrative 
return when the development is completed and then sold. Margin for profit upon sale can be 
high, as Bank enters into the development at the earliest chain of production. 
The Bank can still provide financing for the home purchasers, the difference this time – the 
homes are the Bank’s own asset. Those are direct impact; there are positive impacts in other 
key areas as well. 
What happens to the profit from sales and financing? It gets channeled back to Depositors 
(giving them higher returns on the deposits). This concept would, completely, according to 
equity-based  financing  proponent,  move  Islamic  banks  away  from  mimicking  conventional 
products  and  would  truly  operate  as  the  shariah  had  wanted  it.  Is  this  true,  are  there  any 
other factors to be considered?  
In  terms  of  risk  assessment,  such  a  transaction  will  necessarily  inject  greater  market 
discipline  among  industry  players.  This  business  model  is  premise  on  a  few  fundamental 
assumptions. The Bank and its staff will have to be good at risk assessment, due diligence, 
assets  valuation,  good  at  project  financing  and  management,  a  good  landlord,  skillful  in 
project monitoring and have the necessary expertise on specific areas such as construction, 
agriculture, manufacturing, fishing and other industries. Under this model, the banks created 
are  very  specialized  with  a  set  of  expertise  that  they  are  not  trained  and  possess.  Its  an 
entirely new “ball game”. 
Currently 71%, the bulk of financing in Islamic finance is fixed, only 29% is on a floating rate. 
In conventional, only 26% is fixed. This gives rise to the issue of mismatching. For as long as 
source of funds for Banks is floating and its asset gives fixed return, the risk of funding cost 
being more expensive than income is a very real possibility. Rate of Return Risk and DCR 
will become a challenge to overcome. 
Would an equity based approach significantly remove such risk? Most likely, it is an area of 
where  the  practitioners  can  develop  and  explore.  Or  whether  the  benefits  of  equity-based 
financing would outweigh the risks associated with the obviously higher risks posed by the 
structure. 
The shift from asset based financing to equity based financing does not mean that Islamic 
banks  will  operate  without  any  risks.  Whilst  the  risk  of  mismatching  between  floating  and 
fixed  will  be  greatly  reduced,  it  does  also  mean  that  Islamic  banks  will  be  taking  the 
unprecedented step of actually owning the assets for which they are financing. 
So  the  question  then  is  –  should  Islamic  banking  be  the  conduit  for  this  sort  of  financing 
model? When the business climate is good then the answer is yes – but in an environment 
where  certain  sectors  decline  significantly  such  as  the  property  market,  it  could  adversely 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2010
impact Islamic finance institutions, that could that suddenly finds itself saddled with assets 
that it cannot sell. There are ways to minimize such inventory risk – but we are making a big 
assumption here that ALL Islamic banks will behave rationally at all times. 
Although  clearly  Mudharaba  and  Musharaka  should  be  in  the  Islamic  Bank’s  toolbox,  in 
taking a wholesale view to move towards asset based financing – it is imperative to look at 
the overall implication of such a shift. For the  purpose of discussion, let’s consider for the 
moment  that  the  entire  economy  is  premised  on  asset  based  financing.  We  must  ask 
ourselves,  in  that  scenario  –  would  a  financial  system  purely  based  on  profit  from  equity 
based  financing  be  necessarily  more  efficient  than  one  based  on  asset  financing  or  debt? 
Does  it  benefit  the  entire  Ummah?  Consider  this  possibility  –  who  would  have  better 
information on business climate – the Entrepreneur, the Bank or the Client? Remember the 
asymmetry of information? 
A shift from the debt based financing to equity based financial system does not, necessarily 
lead to a better equitable outcome to society; instead, if not properly implemented it could 
cause  uneven  benefits  to  various  stakeholders.  The  reason  is  that  in  the  new  system  the 
risk-averse Clients will be crowded out of the market, allowing the risk-taking individuals to 
gain the most from a profit-sharing system because they have better access to information. 
The costs may outweigh the benefits.  
Let us now analyze the Business and Bank’s perspective and the client’s perspective. Here 
we  are  talking  about  the  potentially  real  issues  –  the  practical  aspects  that  Banks, 
Entrepreneurs  and  Clients  will  face.  Firstly,  in  terms  of  information  asymmetry,  banks  will 
need to have perfect information on the Entrepreneur. This cuts both ways – Clients of the 
Banks will need to have perfect information on the Banks as well. Banks will need to keep 
detailed records and then reveal such information to their Client and Entrepreneur. Of course 
we need transparency – but when transparency requirement start to conflict with giving out 
information  to  your  competitors  (perhaps  in  conventional  banking),  then  this  could  have  a 
serious impact on competitiveness.  
Requirement  for  information  will  certainly  result  in  an  increase  in  costs  –  which  is  then 
passed on to customers, potentially causing services to be more expensive. This could result 
in Islamic Banks losing its competitive edge. We should also question what is the expertise of 
the Bank? Would the Bank possess sufficient expertise to invest in a business venture? If it 
does not have the expertise or take an active role – then the Bank is merely financing the 
business venture. That is no different from debt based financing. 
Now let’s take a closer look at the Client’s perspective. Firstly, if the Bank is operating on 
purely equity based financing – return on deposits will be based on the Bank’s performance. 
Now  how  many  of  us  here  invest  our  life  savings  in  the  stock  market?  Because  that  is 
essentially  a  rather  crude  way  of  presenting  an  example  of  what  a  pure  equity  based 
financing  system  may  bring.  It  is  of  course  possible  for  the  authorities  to  guarantee  your 
deposit in the Islamic Bank a depositor choose to “invest” – but this would no longer be in the 
spirit of Musharaka and Mudharaba.  
But another point that needs to be considered is this. Are banks the best entity to provide 
equity-based financing. Would it be more suitable for a joint venture company, a partnership 
or  a  private  equity  funds  to  undertake  this  venture?  Shouldn’t  we  develop  these  market-
based institutions to be the conduit for such an endeavour. Since market-based institutions 
do not have the fiduciary responsibility to depositors. 
Should we leave the banks which were created to play an intermediary role to continue to 
perform  the  function  which  they  are  good  at.  Wouldn’t  the  financial  stability  aspect  be  a 
consideration  on  whether  banks  are  allowed  to  venture  into  equity-based  financing? 
Shouldn’t we expand an entirely new Islamic finance industry that specialises in equity-based 
financing? 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 5
I asked plenty of questions that I don’t have ready answers but I hope enough to force you to 
ponder  into  thinking  this  issue  from  a  multiple  dimensions.  The  good  news  is  we  are  at  a 
stage of growth in terms of product and service in Islamic finance. That means innovation is 
still the driving force behind the industry progress. The questions posed today is not meant to 
deter nor to direct in which direction we ought to be moving – but to provoke new thoughts in 
moving forward.  
The fact of the matter is that debt based financing is generally accepted and approved by 
Shariah  scholars  and  currently  forms  an  integral  part  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  structured 
was tested in our legal system. These instruments have been adopted by the IDB and many 
Sovereigns  to  finance  infrastructure  investments,  to  promote  trade  and  to  meet  liquidity 
needs  in  Muslim  countries.  In  other  words,  debt-based  financing  has  been  successfully 
deployed to bring economic benefit to fellow Muslims. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  Equity  based  financing  needs  to  be  considered  and  its  usage 
encouraged. At the same time we must do so with the full knowledge of its full consequence 
on  the  entire  financial  system  stability  as  it  currently  stands.  Perhaps  splitting  hairs  on 
whether we should focus more on asset based or equity based financing pales in comparison 
to other issues, such as encouraging mutual recognition on diversity of thoughts and ideas in 
Islamic  finance,  enhance  the  inter  linkages  between  Islamic  financial  centers,  so  that 
economies that have surplus funds could be channel to economies that are short of funding 
and that those excess funds could be invested in productive manner. 
Perhaps, we should be patient in developing Islamic finance, moving forward. Patience does 
have its own virtue. I remember the days when the financing for purchases of houses are 
purely  based  on  murabahah  concept,  but  now  we  have  musyarakah  mutanaqisah,  a 
structure that is very close to equity-based type of financing structure. 
Conclusion 
Malaysia  since  1983  has  established  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system.  We  have 
suitable  legal,  tax,  shariah,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  institutions  and  the  right 
talent to bring Islamic finance to the next level of development. If there is a gap – we are in a 
position to fix that gap. 
But the world as you know it has never remained static, the agility and the commitment to 
change  would  determine  the  ability  of  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  system  to  remain 
competitive and relevant. On that note, I wish you all the best and I am confident this forum 
will make a tremendous contribution to the overall growth in Islamic finance.  
6 
 BIS Review 49/2010
