José Manuel González-Páramo: The challenges of credit risk 
management – lessons learned from the crisis 
Speech by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European Central Bank, at Risk Europe 2010, Frankfurt am Main, 26 May 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  address  again  this  year,  for  the  second  time  in  a  row,  the 
annual Risk Europe conference here in Frankfurt. I would have liked to say that this simply 
shows the great importance that the ECB places in the development of sound and effective 
risk  management  practices  in  the  financial  industry.  However,  I  must  admit  that  my 
eagerness  to  address  this  forum  is  also  a  result  of  the  great  challenges  that  we,  central 
banks and private financial institutions alike, continue to face collectively in managing risk. 
These challenges seem to persist, although they have been changing face. The high levels 
of uncertainty manifested in unprecedented levels of asset volatility in the years 2007-2009 
emanated originally from liquidity shortages in the off-balance sheet management of highly 
complex assets. In late 2009 and 2010 we have seen again high levels of volatility, this time 
associated with concerns about the large fiscal imbalances in some EU Member States. 
In both phases of the crisis, financial markets have reacted to the increasing fear that some 
market participants may fail to honour their obligations; they have in other words experienced 
an increase in credit risk. Under the general concept of credit risk I would include both the 
risk of default of issuers of securities held in portfolios as well the counterparty risk faced in 
over-the-counter  transactions.  Today  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  the 
management of such risks in general and in central banks in particular. 
General principles in the management of credit risk  
It is widely accepted (but not appropriately emphasised) that one of the causes of the deep 
financial  crisis  witnessed  since  mid  2007  has  been  the  deviation  from  well  established 
principles  in  the  management  of  risk  (in  particular  credit  risk)  by  financial  institutions. 
Common sense risk management practices such as “know your counterparties”, “invest only 
in products you understand”, “do not outsource credit risk management by relying exclusively 
on  external  credit  assessments”,  “do  not  rely  exclusively  on  quantitative  models,  however 
sophisticated”  had  been  abandoned.  It  is  interesting  to  recall  at  this stage  the  work  of  the 
original Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group1 co-chaired by E. Gerald Corrigan and 
Stephen  G.  Thieke  which  already  in  1999  stressed  that  “better  knowledge  of  one’s 
counterparty  represents  the  foundation  upon  which  the  other  pillars  of  risk  management 
rest”.  Re-establishing  these  principles  in  risk  management  practice  is  essential  for  the 
resilience of the financial system.  
I  would  like  to  highlight  in  particular  the  trend  witnessed  in  recent  years  for  many  market 
participants to exclusively rely on external assessments for the management of their credit 
risk.  These assessments  have  been  often  provided  by  only  a  small  number  of  specialised 
institutions  (rating  agencies).  The  critique  on  the  role  of  rating  agencies  has  become  a 
recurring theme in all analysis of the current crisis. In addition to potential conflicts of interest 
embedded  in  their  business  models,  rating  agencies  have  faced  questions  on  their 
methodology, in particular in the area of structured finance, and the lack of transparency in 
their  activities.  The  ex-post  assessment  of  the  performance  of  their  ratings  in  the  last  two 
                                                 
1   Counterparty Risk Management Group: “Improving Counterparty Risk Management Practices”, June 1999. 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 1
years has raised serious concerns. At the same time the use of credit rating in legislation, 
regulations,  and  other  supervisory  policies  is  so  widespread2  that  I  would  agree  with  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  which  has  questioned  whether  it  is  not  these  policies  that 
unintentionally give credit ratings an official seal of approval and discourage investors from 
performing  their  own  due  diligence.  This  should  certainly  be  one  of  the  main  concerns  of 
regulatory authorities in the immediate future. 
How central banks address credit risk  
Central  banks  are  unique  as  market  participants  because  they  do  not  face  liquidity  risk  in 
their own currency. However, they are not immune to credit risk. Losses occurred because of 
a default of one of their counterparties or an issuer of a security they hold in their portfolio 
can deplete their financial buffers. Although their financial survival does not depend in any 
vital  way  on  such  buffers,  their  perceived  lack  of  financial  resources  could  irrevocably 
damage their credibility in the market and thus their ability to implement monetary policy and 
safeguard  financial  stability.  Furthermore,  if  a  recapitalisation  of  the  central  bank  by  the 
government  becomes  ultimately  necessary,  it  could  jeopardise  the  independence  of  the 
monetary authority. 
In general central bank risk management is considered conservative, so that overall it could 
be perceived that the development of an elaborate risk management framework is not really 
necessary.  However,  the  central  bank  becomes  an  above  average  risk  taker  in  a  crisis 
situation  –  first  of  all  by  showing  inertia  in  its  risk  management  framework.  There  is  thus 
some  fundamental  transformation  taking  place  in  the  risk  tolerance  of  the  central  as  it 
continues operating in a financial crisis when other market participants have long adopted a 
very  conservative  approach.  At  a  time  when  all  risk  measures  (probabilities  of  default  of 
collateral issuers and counterparties, correlations, expected loss, VaR-measures) have gone 
up  dramatically  and  financial  institutions  are  cutting  credit  lines  and  are  increasing  margin 
requirements in the interbank market, the central bank becomes the lender of last resort. In 
such a situation its risk taking increases considerably. This suggests that the management of 
the  central  bank’s  risk  exposures  is  even  more  important  in  a  crisis  and  requires,  at  least 
then, a very carefully designed risk management framework. 
Credit assessment in the Eurosystem 
The experience of the financial crisis has led the Eurosystem to solidify the already elaborate 
credit risk assessment framework it uses in its credit operations. Let me now give you some 
more information on the way the Eurosystem handles credit risk assessment in the context of 
its own credit operations. As you are probably aware, Article 18.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
requires  that  all  credit  operations  conducted  by  the  ECB  and  the  National  Central  Banks 
(NCBs) should be based on adequate collateral. In particular all such collateral must meet 
high credit standards.  
The  Eurosystem  has  defined  an  elaborate  framework  of  credit  assessment  (the  European 
Credit  Assessment  Framework  –  ECAF)  to  ensure  that  such  standards  are  met.  In  the 
assessment  of  the  credit  standard  of  eligible  assets,  the  Eurosystem  takes  into  account 
credit  assessment  information  from  credit  assessment  systems  belonging  to  different 
sources. Some of them are private, namely external credit assessment institutions (ECAIs), 
counterparties’  internal  ratings  based  (IRB)  systems  and  third-party  providers’  rating  tools 
(RTs).  Others  are  public,  namely  the  national  central  banks’  in-house  credit  assessment 
systems  (ICASs),  Additionally,  in  the  assessment  of  the  credit  standard,  the  Eurosystem 
                                                 
2   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: The Joint Forum: Stocktaking on the use of credit ratings. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2010
takes  into  account  institutional  criteria  and  features  guaranteeing  similar  protection  for  the 
instrument holder such as guarantees. 
The performance of all credit assessment systems that are accepted by the Eurosystem is 
closely  monitored.  On  an  annual  basis  the  observed  default  rate  for  the  set  of  all  eligible 
debtors assessed by a particular system is compared to the credit quality threshold set by 
the  Eurosystem.  This  way,  the  results  from  credit  assessments  are  comparable  across 
systems and sources.  
With  regard  to  the  ECAI  source,  the  Eurosystem  does  not  automatically  follow  the 
assessments provided by a rating agency. First, any such assessment must be based on a 
public rating. Even then, the Eurosystem reserves the right to request any clarification that it 
considers  necessary.  In  particular  when  it  comes  to  asset-backed  securities,  a  number  of 
transparency  requirements  are  imposed.  Ratings  must  be explained  in  a  publicly  available 
credit  rating  report,  namely  a  detailed  pre-sale  or  new  issue  report,  including,  inter  alia,  a 
comprehensive  analysis  of  structural  and 
legal  aspects,  a  detailed  collateral  pool 
assessment, an analysis of the transaction participants, as well as an analysis of any other 
relevant  particularities  of  a  transaction.  Moreover  ECAIs  must  publish  regular  surveillance 
reports for asset-backed containing an update of the key transaction data (e.g. composition 
of the collateral pool, transaction participants, capital structure), as well as performance data. 
The need for better understanding of the underlying assets in securitised transactions was 
emphasised by the ECB when it launched a public consultation on loan-by-loan information 
requirements  for  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  in  the  Eurosystem  collateral  framework. 
With  this  initiative,  the  ECB  strives  to  promote  an  improvement  of  disclosure  standards  in 
securitisation  markets  from  current  levels.  Such  higher  standards  would  contribute  to 
avoiding  the  inadequate  assessment  of  risks  in  the  underlying  asset  pools  of  ABSs  by 
investors and the exclusive dependence on third-party assessments that was at the core of 
the current crisis.  
Finally, I would like to emphasise one important element of our framework. Despite the fact 
that the Eurosystem uses ECAI ratings as one of its credit assessments it still reserves the 
right to determine whether an asset fulfils the requirement for high credit standards on the 
basis  of  any  information  it  may  consider  relevant  from  a  risk  management  perspective. 
Therefore it should not come as a surprise that on 3 May 2010 the ECB decided to suspend 
the application of the minimum credit rating threshold in the collateral eligibility requirements 
for  the  purposes  of  the  Eurosystem’s  credit  operations  in  the  case  of  marketable  debt 
instruments issued or guaranteed by the Greek government. This suspension was based on 
the positive assessment on the side of the Governing Council of the ECB, in liaison with the 
European  Commission  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  of  the  Greek  government’s 
economic  and  financial  adjustment  programme.  The  measure  acknowledged  therefore  the 
strong commitment of the Greek government to fully implement the programme and was an 
example of the ability and will of the ECB to make an independent credit assessment.  
The connection between credit and liquidity risk 
While I have emphasised so far credit risk management, I would also like to touch upon the 
more elusive concept of liquidity risk. The current financial crisis has been triggered by the 
inability of some financial institutions to fund some complex assets. It has been traditionally 
thought  that  while  such  a  situation  may  put  the  institution  at  strain,  it  should  be  clearly 
distinguished from that of an insolvency. However, the experience of the last three years has 
showed that the distinction is far from simple. A prolonged period of liquidity difficulties may 
easily leave no other choice to the institution than an emergency sale of assets at significant 
losses and a subsequent depletion of its capital position. Therefore a liquidity problem, if it 
cannot be properly addressed – possibly by the intervention of the central bank- can easily 
lead to insolvency.  
BIS Review 73/2010 
 3
In  recognising  the  importance  of  liquidity  risk  and  the  systemic  implications  of  a  liquidity 
crisis, the Basel Committee issued a consultative document on an international framework 
for liquidity risk management, standards and monitoring in December 2010. The document 
put forward two liquidity risk standards and a set of tools for ongoing monitoring of liquidity 
risk exposures and information exchange among supervisors. The two standards, namely (i) 
a global minimum “liquidity coverage ratio” which aims at capturing liquidity risk in the short 
term by ensuring that banks hold sufficient high quality liquid assets to withstand an acute 
stress  lasting  one  month;  and  (ii)  the  longer  term  “net  stable  funding  ratio”  which  aims  at 
incentivising banks to fund themselves using more stable sources on a structural basis by 
establishing  a  minimum  acceptable  amount  of  stable  funding  based  on  the  liquidity 
characteristics of the financial institution’s assets and activities over a one year time horizon. 
A discussion has been triggered and various concerns were voiced on the calibration of the 
standards, which in the view of some could generate significant negative repercussions for 
the real economy, for certain markets (such as the money market and interbank market) and 
for the business models of some banks. Central in this discussion is the question on the set 
of assets considered eligible for the short-term liquidity standard. It has been claimed that the 
proposal is not in line with the severe stress scenario that is assumed and that it could lead 
to concentration risk as well as higher cost for the assets that are not included. Furthermore, 
the design of the longer-term standard was questioned, as it was argued that a higher level 
of mismatch between assets and liabilities is necessary for banks to fulfil their intermediation 
role in the economy.  
The  ECB  has  a  particular  interest  on  the  Basel  Committee  proposal  on  liquidity  risk  as  it 
relates  to  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  has  an  impact  on  the  money  market,  as 
well  as  possible  consequences  on  the  financial  integration  in  the  Euro  area.  Clearly  the 
proposed liquidity standards address the major shortcomings identified by the financial crisis 
in the area of liquidity risk by requiring banks to increase their holdings of liquid assets and to 
reduce  their  reliance  on  short-term  volatile  funding  sources.  Furthermore,  enhancing  the 
liquidity  risk  management  of  banks  could  have  a  positive  impact  on  market  confidence, 
reducing thus the volatility in money and capital markets.  
Still  the  calibration  of  the  proposed  liquidity  standards  needs  to  be  revisited  to  take  into 
account  the  comments  received  during  the  public  consultation  and  their  impact  on  the 
banking sector, financial markets and the overall economy. Finally, the establishment of an 
appropriate phase-in  period  that  will  allow  banks  to  adjust  their  balance  sheets  without  an 
undue impact on their operations or an increase in their reliance on central bank funding is 
warranted. 
Conclusions  
I would like to close my remarks by the rather pessimistic conclusion that, unfortunately, it 
appears  that  periods  of  “irrational  exuberance”  can  lead  us  to  forget  well  established 
practices on how to prudently manage risks. Financial crises like the current one remind us 
of  their  importance.  Also  central  banks  have  learned  valuable  lessons  in  their  own  risk 
management and have made steps in solidifying their defences, while remaining faithful to 
their objectives of ensuring price stability while also safeguarding financial stability. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2010
