Linah K Mohohlo: Governance beyond the financial crisis 
Keynote  address  by  Mrs  Linah  K  Mohohlo,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana,  at  the 
Botswana  Institute  of  Accountants  6th  Biennial  International  Conference,  Gabarone, 
3 June 2010. 
 President of the Botswana Institute of Accountants, Mr Dixon-Warren, 
Deputy President of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, England & Wales, Mr Parrit  
CEO of the Eastern, Central and Southern African Federation of Accountants, Mr Ncube,  
Chief Executive Officer, BIA, Mr Majinda  
Heads of Private and Parastatal Organisations,  
Distinguished Men & Women of the Accounting Fraternity, Ladies and Gentlemen 
I wish to thank the Botswana Institute of Accountants for the honour bestowed on me as I 
officiate  at  the  opening  of  this  6th  Biennial  International  Conference.  I  extend  a  warm 
welcome to all the guests and delegates and, for those from places afar, I implore you to feel 
at home in the City of Gaborone.  
I am informed that this Conference coincides with the 20th Anniversary of the Institute, which 
will be celebrated tomorrow. Allow me, therefore, to take this opportunity to congratulate the 
Institute for almost coming of age at 20. You need not be reminded that with the maturity that 
goes with a two decade lifespan, comes increased responsibility for the greater good of all 
concerned and for the country.  
As  I  share  some  thoughts  with  you  on  the  Conference  theme  of  “Governance  beyond  the 
Financial Crisis”, I will highlight the importance of good governance, using as a backdrop, the 
recent  experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  which  was  a  prelude  to  the  economic 
recession  from  which  the  world  is cautiously  recovering.  I  will  point  to  the  lessons  derived 
from the crises and highlight some remedial reforms, and the expected role of the accounting 
profession in this endeavour. I will then make reference to the governance framework that 
has continued to stand the country in good stead.  
Before I delve into the conference theme, I wish to hazard some notable observations about 
the accountancy profession. As you are aware, accountants can be the butt of many a joke 
and often disparagingly referred to as “bean counters” or “number crunchers”. In my view, 
which  I  believe  is  shared  by  many,  accountants  are  a  lot  more  than  that.  Accounting 
professionals  are  increasingly  taking  on  responsibilities  beyond  their  traditional  role.  As 
technology  continues  to  make  accounting  procedures  more  efficient,  these  responsibilities 
include  line  management,  business  strategy,  workplace  productivity,  revenue  and  profit 
maximization, and related others.  
This means accountants need a far wider set of skills. This evolution comes as demand for 
professionals with broad based business skills and industry knowledge is rising. On top of 
this, interpersonal and communication skills are becoming a key advantage as businesses 
rely  more  on  interdepartmental  cooperation  that  involves  all  business  competencies  to  be 
strategically aligned to maximise output. In many instances, an accountant has to manage 
these processes with senior and middle management.  
Therefore,  although  the  appointment  of  an  accounting  professional  is  possibly  the  single 
most  important  decision  towards  ensuring  business  sustainability,  increasingly,  recruitment 
agencies tend to look beyond accounting qualifications.  
Those who have invested in their careers, developed critical business, communication and 
strategic  skills,  will  stand  tall  in  what  is  becoming  a  highly  competitive  environment. 
Accountants can no longer be grey people who remain behind closed doors lacking in social 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 1
skills.  They  are  going  to  have  to  be  seen  and  heard  as  they  earn  their  keep  along  with 
professionals of other disciplines.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  theme  of  the  Conference  –  Governance  beyond  the  Financial  Crisis  –  is  timely  since 
most  countries,  Botswana  included,  are  recovering  from  the  effects  of  the  global  financial 
crisis,  which  precipitated  the  deepest  recession  in  a  generation.  The  theme  speaks  to  the 
need  for  introspection;  more  importantly,  it  calls  for  exchange  of  views  on  the  lapses  in 
governance that originated from a few market players, particularly in the US.  
It  is  now  well  known  that  the  first  sign  of  a  progressive  buildup  of  gross  disregard  of  the 
basics  of  good  governance  in  the  US  was  the  asset  bubble  that  was  fueled  by  the  virtual 
absence  of  risk  management  and  personal  financial  prudence.  There  was  also  lack  of 
transparency, accountability and supervisory oversight standards. It was forgotten that what 
is legal is not necessarily ethical. The asset bubble gave rise to high commodity prices with 
consequences for global inflation in the first half of 2008. When the bubble burst, it resulted 
in  the  financial  collapse  of  major  multinational  financial  institutions;  then  came  the  credit 
crunch and a crush in share prices; economic recession was upon us; and there was a sharp 
drop in international trade, that was followed by a deterioration of government finances and 
job losses.  
The consequent painful experience has given rise to an opportunity to seek remedies and 
avoid the possibility of a double dip recession.  
I am encouraged that the accounting fraternity, which had a fair share of the blame for the 
recent global financial and economic misery, is also alive to the need for corrective action. I 
have no doubt that your deliberations at this conference will advance the debate on the role 
that your noble profession can play in enhancing good governance in the period ahead.  
Work on the redesign of the global financial architecture and inclusive governance of world 
affairs  is  in  progress  at  various  fora,  including  at  the  World  Economic  Forum,  G20  and  at 
specialised professional bodies such as the Botswana Institute of Accountants.  
A  common  theme  running  through  the  various  efforts  that  are  expected  to  eventually 
coalesce is that “Governance beyond the Financial Crisis” should, at a minimum, enhance 
transparency  of  institutional  functioning  at  Board  and  management  levels,  as  well  as  at 
operational and technical levels. Furthermore, accountability should be the order of the day 
and, in particular, the hierarchy of responsibilities and roles of institutional structures should 
be  clearly  defined.  This  arrangement  should  eventually  reinforce  checks  and  balances  as 
part  of  risk  mitigation;  it  should  prevent  a  potential  conflict  of  interests,  while  ensuring 
fulfillment of fiduciary responsibilities and avoiding dereliction of duty. In the end, however, 
transparency  and  accountability  must  be  buttressed  by  a  set  of  institutional  values  and 
ethical codes of conduct, such as honesty, selflessness and integrity of the highest order.  
The importance of this Conference and its theme lie in the fact that they are part of the bigger 
picture of national and international efforts towards putting in place a new and more robust 
global financial architecture.  
I have no doubt that you will share views on how you can become agents of transformation. 
At national and international levels, each one of you is called upon to meet high standards of 
technical competence. You are called upon to adhere to strict and uncompromising ethical 
standards, adopt a broad institutional and/or corporate perspective in your work, advise on 
policy  and  operational issues,  and  play  custodial  and  trusteeship  roles  that  demand  moral 
courage.  
You  are  challenged  to  be  world  class  technical  experts  in  financial  analysis  and  to 
communicate your findings and their implications. You are also challenged to keep abreast 
with changes in your profession, such as the international accounting and financial reporting 
standards, and advise your principals in a timely manner.  
2 
 BIS Review 92/2010
The benchmarks for excellence in all these areas are set by international technical standards 
and  evolving  best  practices.  Of  all  the  professions,  yours  is  no  stranger  to  the  need  for 
lifelong  learning  as  you  update  your  professional  skills.  You  are  more  keenly  aware  than 
most of yesterday’s expertise and knowledge is today’s ignorance. Going forward, you are 
called upon to get more involved in cross-cutting issues of good governance and economic 
development.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen;  
Now that I have dwelt on the desirability and virtues of good governance, and the expanded 
role of the accounting profession in strengthening good governance, let’s examine how the 
domestic  governance  framework  benefited  the  country  and  the  domestic  banking  sector 
generally at the time of the global recession.  
Without fear of being contradicted, I can confirm that the domestic banking system escaped 
the first round of the direct adverse effects on asset quality at the time of the international 
financial  crisis.  The  reason  for  this  can  be  found  in  the  robustness  of  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework.  For  instance,  Board  and  senior  management  of  banks  are  vetted 
before appointment, and care is taken to ensure that appropriate decision-making structures 
and  related  committees  are  in  place,  including  adequate  risk  management  and  mitigation 
strategies.  The  regulatory  framework  also  ensures  that  lending  practices  are  devoid  of 
conflict  of  interests;  and  consultations  are  undertaken  with  external  auditors  in  a  bid  to 
ascertain  operational  and  financial  propriety.  Without  the  rigorous  enforcement  of  strict 
regulatory  requirements,  the  banking  sector  would  have  been  saddled  with  unbearable 
problems of, among others, nonperforming assets.  
The less-than-severe impact of the global recession on the country’s economy vindicated the 
importance of good economic and financial governance over the years. Without the careful 
and prudent budgetary and overall management of the country’s resources, it would not have 
been  possible  to  implement  the  fiscal  stimulus  that  moderated  the  severity  of  job  losses. 
Over  time,  Botswana  has  been  able  to  avoid  the  so-called  “resource-curse”;  this  is  the 
inverse relationship between the vastness of resource endowments and a country’s level of 
socio-economic prosperity. Inflation has, by and large, been relatively low and well managed; 
thanks to the benign inflationary environment at a global level.  
Honoured Guests, I conclude by underscoring the importance of the need to redouble efforts 
in  strengthening  the  existing  governance  infrastructure  and  redressing  the  inadequacies. 
History  must  not  be  allowed  to  repeat  itself  so  far  as  the  ravages  of  the  financial  and 
economic crises are concerned. Needless to add, the accounting profession has a lot to offer 
in this endeavour. Indeed government entities and the corporate world need accounting skills 
more  and  more  each  passing  day.  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  will  respond  with  added 
enthusiasm and renewed sense of duty.  
It  is  now  my  honour  to  declare  the  6th  Biennial  International  Conference  of  the  Botswana 
Institute of Accountants officially open.  
I wish you fruitful deliberations, and I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 3
