Glenn Stevens: Recent developments 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Western 
Sydney Business Connection, Sydney, 9 June 2010. 
 Thank you for the invitation to be here today in western Sydney, a region which accounts for 
about one in every 15 people employed in Australia.  
Of  course  events  far  from  western  Sydney  can  affect  all  of  us  here,  through  various 
channels.  In  view  of  the  developments  in  recent  weeks  in  Europe,  it  seems  sensible  to 
devote some time to what has occurred, and to what it may mean for Europe itself, for the 
global  economy  and  of  course  for  Australia.  I  should  stress  at  the  outset  though  that  any 
assessment is very much preliminary at this stage.  
To begin, let me sketch some background on the global economy.  
We  estimate  that  world  GDP  grew  by  around  1  per  cent,  or  perhaps  a  little  more,  in  the 
March  quarter  of  this  year.  This  was  the  third  consecutive  quarter  of  growth  of  about  that 
pace  after  the  contraction  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  Note  that  this  occurred  with  very  little 
contribution from the euro area, a region in which domestic demand contracted over the past 
two quarters.  
Many respectable forecasters have pencilled in a growth rate for 2010 as a whole of 4 per 
cent or a bit more – that is, they have expected that the sort of the growth already seen for 
the past nine months or so would continue for the rest of this year. This would be close to, or 
slightly above, the average pace of growth for the global economy over the ten years up to 
2008.  
This is not just the Reserve Bank’s forecast – though we broadly concur with it at this stage. 
The IMF, the OECD and various private forecasters have numbers like this. There are some 
who are more pessimistic, though there have also been others somewhat more optimistic. It 
is  worth  noting,  by  the  way,  that  this  outcome  would  be  noticeably  better  than  what  was 
expected a year ago. For most of the intervening period the bulk of commentators seem to 
have  been  worried  by  “downside  risks”  –  that  is  the  possibility  that  things  could  turn  out 
worse than expected. But it was the “upside” risks that, in fact, materialised over that period.  
One  reason  for  that  may  be  that  all  countries  responded  to  the  events  of  late  2008  by 
moving their macroeconomic policies in an expansionary direction. Just as the downturn in 
October 2008 was highly synchronised, so was the policy reaction. In countries that have not 
had  an  impaired  banking  system,  those  policy  reactions  have  had  a  considerable  effect. 
They were, amplified by the spill-overs that occurred because the stimulus took place in all 
countries more or less at the same time.  
Yet the upswing is uneven. It has been very strong in Asia and Latin America, moderate so 
far in the US and weak overall in Europe (which itself has quite a mix of growth performances 
across countries).  
Of importance to Australia is that the strongest growth in demand has been nearby. Apart 
from Japan most of the economies in the east Asian region have experienced a “v-shaped 
recovery”. While some of this recovery reflects the process of re-stocking of durable goods 
around the world, it also reflects strong demand within the region.  
Commodity  prices  generally  rose  somewhat  after  the  very  large  falls  in  late  2008.  But  of 
significance  for  Australia,  prices  for  those  resources  which  serve  as  the  raw  materials  for 
steel  production  in  particular  have  been  exceptionally  strong.  Prices  for  iron  ore  and  coal 
rebounded  very  sharply  during  2009  and  early  2010.  Contract  prices  for  iron  ore  in  the 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 1
current period are double those of a year ago; until recently spot prices were well above even 
that level though they have retreated somewhat of late.  
In short, global growth, while uneven, has been recovering in the places and in the form that 
was most likely to deliver a boost to Australia’s terms of trade. It looks like our terms of trade 
this year will again reach the 50-year high seen two years ago.  
It  could,  of  course,  be  that  some  of  this  recent  increase  in  prices  turns  out  not  to  be 
permanent.  Some  economies  in  Asia  will  probably,  one  way  or  another,  experience  a 
moderation in the pace of expansion over the coming year, because the pace of growth over 
the  past  year  can’t  be  sustained  without  problems  arising.  The  Chinese  authorities  have 
been  seeking  for  some  months  to  take  the  steam  out  of  certain  sectors  of  their  economy, 
particularly housing prices. They may be having some success. For this and other reasons, 
we  and  other  forecasters  are  assuming  that  this  peak  in  the  terms  of  trade  won’t  be 
sustained.  
But  to  reach  that  50-year  high  twice  in  three  years  would  appear  to  signal  that  something 
pretty important has been going on – something more than just temporary cyclical events. It 
is increasingly apparent that the Asian region is becoming large enough that it has a tangible 
independent  impact  on  the  global  economy  and  on  Australia  in  particular.  China  and  non-
Japan east Asia together accounted for around 9 per cent of the world economy in 1990. By 
2000, their share was around 14 per cent. In 2010, it is likely to be about 20 per cent. China 
is  already  the  world’s  largest  steel  producer  and  the  second  largest  user  of  oil  after  the 
United  States.  China’s  share  of  global  GDP1  could  exceed  that  of  the  euro  area  within 
another five years.  
This confluence of events is likely to see an acceleration in the shift in perceptions about the 
shape of the global economy and financial system. The prominence of Asian views, and the 
weight accorded to them, are likely to grow accordingly. What Asian policy makers do and 
say increasingly matters.  
Turning  then  to  the  recent  events  in  Europe,  it  is  worth  asking  at  the  outset  how  these 
countries  arrived  at  their  current  position.  The  story  has  many  nuances  by  country  but 
broadly, the public debt relative to GDP has long tended to be on the high side in Europe. It 
generally  ratcheted  up  in  successive  economic  downturns  over  the  past  three  or  four 
decades and efforts to get it down in the good times had only modest success. For some 
countries  that  joined  the  euro  area  the  substantial  fall  in  borrowing  costs  they  enjoyed 
masked a degree of vulnerability, in that their fiscal sustainability depended partly on being 
able to continue borrowing cheaply. Demographic trends – pronounced in Europe, with some 
countries already experiencing declining populations – further highlight the problem. A high 
debt  burden  is  much  more  easily  managed  in  countries  with  higher  potential  growth 
prospects, one driver of which is population growth.  
This problem was slowly but steadily accumulating over many years. Then the financial crisis 
occurred. There was a deep recession from which recovery is not yet entrenched. Budget 
deficits rose sharply as a result – reaching 10 per cent of annual GDP or more in a number of 
instances. The prospect of adding that much to the debt stock each year for even just a few 
years can make a difference to assessments of sustainability even for strong countries. For 
the  not-quite-so-strong  cases,  markets  began  to  signal  unease.  Borrowing  costs  rose  for 
those countries, which of course makes the fiscal situation worse. And so on.  
Initially  the  effect  of  these  developments  on  financial  markets  was  very  much  confined  to 
Europe.  Wider  effects  were  observed  in  May  as  global  investors  became  more  cautious. 
Uncertainty over the nature of the policy response, and fears that it could be un-coordinated 
                                                 
1   Measured on a Purchasing-Power-Parity basis. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2010
across countries, saw a marked increase in volatility in share prices and exchange rates. Our 
own markets have been affected along with everyone else’s.  
Qualitatively,  some  of  the  market  events  had  a  little  of  the  flavour  of  September  and 
October 2008 about them. Quantitatively, however, they have, at this point, been nothing like 
as pronounced. Indicators of stress in markets have not, to date, signalled anything like the 
problems  of  late  2008  when  interbank  and  capital  markets  seized  up.  But  of  course  the 
episode  is  not  yet  over,  and  the  issues  will  continue  to  need  careful  handling  by  all 
concerned and close monitoring by the rest of us.  
European authorities have responded by assembling a large support package, which covers 
Greece  but,  if  needed,  other  countries  too.  It  has  several  elements.  It  provides  European 
level  financing  for  individual  governments  –  so  relieving  them  of  the  need  to  go  to  private 
capital markets – for a period of time, subject to conditions. The European Central Bank is 
undertaking  some  operations  to  stabilise  dysfunctional  bond  markets  and  is  ensuring 
abundant liquidity in money markets. The IMF has also committed to make funds available 
and will play a role in ensuring conditionality requirements are met. The final element is that 
governments are committing to reduce budget deficits and thus control the future rise of debt, 
though debt will keep increasing for a few years. Of course much detail remains to be set out 
as to how the mechanics of the package will work.  
At this stage any assessment about the impact of these events on the economies of Europe 
and on those further afield is very preliminary. One might  expect some effect on business 
and household confidence, but it is too early to see much evidence of that yet.  
Looking  ahead,  we  would  have  to  expect  that  the  planned  fiscal  contractions  will  dampen 
European demand as they occur, which in some cases will be over a number of years. Now 
some  such  effects  should  already  have  been  embodied  in  existing  projections  since  fiscal 
consolidation has been planned all along. But with some euro area countries now intending 
to  do  more  consolidation  in  the  near  term  than  they  had  earlier  planned,  the  dampening 
effects  will  occur  sooner  than  earlier  assumed  (though  this  presumably  improves  growth 
prospects  in  a  few  years’  time  compared  with  the  earlier  forecast).  The  alternative path  of 
less  fiscal  action  would  carry  less  risk  of  near-term  weakness  in  demand.  However  in  the 
current  climate  it  could  also  have  an  attendant  risk  of  loss  of  fiscal  credibility.  If  the  latter 
occurred, it could be followed in short order by a serious crisis that would push up borrowing 
costs sharply for both governments and private borrowers, so damaging growth.  
So a path involving a credible fiscal consolidation has to be found that steers between these 
two  possible  bad  outcomes.  That  task  has  become  more  difficult.  Over  the  horizon  of  a 
couple of years it is hard to see how euro area demand won’t be weakened. All other things 
equal, that would lessen global growth in 2011 compared with earlier projections (although it 
must be said that those projections have not relied all that much on growth in the euro area).  
Of course, all other things won’t be equal. Financial markets and, perhaps, policymakers will 
respond  to  these  events.  The  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  core  European 
countries  and  many  other  countries  around  the  world  that  has  occurred  may  work,  if  it  is 
sustained, to lessen the adverse impact on growth in those countries. If policymakers in other 
regions responded to the potential euro area weakness by leaving policies easier than they 
would otherwise have been, this too would have some offsetting impact, though possibly at 
the cost of more unbalanced growth.  
As  to  the  effects  on  Australia,  the  euro  area  takes  only  about  5  per  cent  of  Australia’s 
exports.  Those  exports  have  been  declining  over  the  past  few  years  anyway  because  the 
euro area has been weak for a while. So that direct effect doesn’t seem likely to be all that 
large. It is usually the case, however, that the most important impacts on Australia from these 
sorts  of  events  are  not  the  direct  export  effects  but  those  that  come  through  the  broader 
global channels – the impact on world and Asian growth, on resource prices and on the cost 
and availability of global capital.  
BIS Review 78/2010 
 3
How big those effects may turn out to be remains to be seen. But one thing we can say is 
that one of the most important advantages in coping with episodes such as this is a good 
starting  point.  There  is  an  old  joke  about  the  best  way  to  get  somewhere  involving  “not 
starting  from  here”.  We  are  not  starting  from  the  same  place  as  Europe.  In  particular, 
Australia’s budgetary position is very different from those in Europe and, for that matter, most 
countries. Public debt is low and budget deficits are under control and already scheduled to 
decline.  The  banking  system  is  in  good  shape  with  little  exposure  to  the  European 
sovereigns having the biggest problems, and asset quality is generally better than had been 
expected.  The  flexibility  afforded  by  our  floating  currency,  coupled  with  credible  monetary 
and  fiscal  policies,  are  all  advantages  in  periods  of  global  uncertainty.  This  doesn’t  mean 
there  will  be  no  effects.  But  these  factors  put  us  in  the  best  position  to  ride  through  this 
particular event, even if it does get worse.  
Stepping  back  from  the  immediate  issues,  a  final  question  worth  posing  is:  what  lessons 
might we take away from watching the travails in Europe?  
One  is  that  vulnerabilities  can  remain  latent  for  a  long  time,  then  materialise  very  rapidly. 
Markets can happily tolerate something for an extended period without much reaction, then 
suddenly react very strongly as some trigger brings the issue into clearer focus. There were 
certainly  significant  revelations  about  the  true  financial  position  in  Greece  that  occasioned 
additional concern, but more generally in Europe it can’t really have been news that the state 
of public finances was an issue: it had been so for years. But governments didn’t come under 
gradually  increasing  market  pressure  to  fix  the  problem  –  the  pressure  was  minimal  for  a 
long time, then it suddenly became intense after a trigger event, in this case an economic 
downturn.  
It  follows  that  potential  vulnerabilities  need  to  be  addressed  in  good  times,  even  when 
markets  are  not  signalling  unease,  because  by  the  time  markets  take  notice  and  start 
responding seriously – which will usually be in bad times – the problem may have become 
pretty big.  
How is this relevant to Australia?  
Australia does not have a problem with public debt, as I have already said. Nor do we have a 
problem with corporate debt. Some highly leveraged entities foundered over the past couple 
of  years  but  most  of  the  corporate  sector  had  pretty  strong  balance  sheets  going  into  the 
downturn and they are even stronger now.  
The big rise in debt in the past couple of decades has been in the household sector. There 
have been many reasons for that and, overwhelmingly, households have serviced the higher 
debt levels very well. The arrears rates on mortgages, for example, remain very low by global 
standards. As a result the asset quality of financial institutions has remained very good. So, 
to be clear, my message is not that this has been a terrible thing.  
But that doesn’t mean it would be wise for that build-up in household leverage to continue 
unabated  over  the  years  ahead.  One  would  have  to  think  that,  however  well  households 
have  coped  with  the  events  of  recent  years,  further  big  increases  in  indebtedness  could 
increase their vulnerability to shocks – such as a fall in income – to a greater extent than 
would be prudent.  
It may be that many households have sensed this. We see at present a certain caution in 
their behaviour: even though unemployment is low, and measures of confidence have been 
quite high, consumer spending has seen only modest growth. This may be partly attributable 
to  the  fact  that  the  stimulus  measures  of  late  2008  and  early  2009  resulted  in  a  bringing 
forward of spending on durables into that period from the current period (though purchases 
of motor vehicles by households – a different kind of durable – have increased strongly over 
recent months). But the long downward trend in the saving rate seems to have turned around 
and  I  think  we  are  witnessing,  at  least  just  now,  more  caution  in  borrowing  behaviour.  Of 
course this will have been affected by the recent increase in interest rates but the level of 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2010
rates  is  not  actually  high  by  the  standards  of  the  past  decade  or  two.  We  can’t  rule  out 
something more fundamental at work.  
We can’t know whether this apparent change will turn out to be durable. But if it did persist, 
and if that meant that we avoided a further significant increase in household leverage in this 
business cycle, it might be no bad thing. Moreover if a period of modest growth in consumer 
spending  helped  to  make  room  for  the  build-up  in  investment  activity  that  seems  likely, 
perhaps that would be no bad thing either.  
These  sorts  of  trends  would  surely  increase  the  medium-term  resilience  of  household 
finances and accommodate the resource boom and the rise in other forms of investment with 
less pressure on labour markets and prices than otherwise.  
The world economy has to date staged a stronger recovery than most thought likely a year 
ago, albeit one that is uneven across regions. Looking ahead, it has to be expected that the 
unfolding  situation  in  Europe,  which  is  going  to  result  in  earlier  fiscal  tightening  than  had 
been assumed by forecasters until now, will weigh somewhat on global growth in 2011. But 
the overall outcome will depend on what else happens and judgements about all that at this 
stage  can  only  be  preliminary.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  potential  for  further  financial 
turmoil exists, but to date the stresses have not been of the order of magnitude we saw a 
year and a half ago. Much still hinges, however, on the way European policy makers craft 
their ongoing response to a complex problem.  
We in Australia must naturally keep a careful watch on all this. It will be just as important, 
though, to keep a close watch on developments in the Asian region. Asia will be affected by 
events in Europe, but also by domestic forces. The experience of the past few years is that 
those domestic factors – good or bad – can loom just as large as ones further afield when it 
comes  to  Asia’s  economic  performance  and,  therefore,  our  own.  In  the  final  analysis, 
sensible  and  credible  policies  at  home,  the  strength  of  our  financial  institutions  and  the 
resilience  and  adaptability  of  the  businesses  and  employees  that  make  up  the  Australian 
economy, will continue to be our greatest assets. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 5
