Muhammad Bin Ibrahim: Convergence and sustainable growth of Islamic 
finance in a dynamic environment 
Keynote address by Mr Mohammad Bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Malaysia, 
at  the  Asia  Islamic  Banking  Conference:  “Convergence  and  sustainable  growth  of  Islamic 
finance in a dynamic environment”, Kuala Lumpur, 5 July 2010. 
 I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me here today to give the opening address at 
this  inaugural  Asia  Islamic  Banking  Conference  themed  “Convergence  and  sustainable 
growth  of  Islamic  finance  in  a  dynamic  environment”.  This  event  is  timely  as  the  Islamic 
finance industry continues to grow and expand in several financial centres around the world. 
Since  the  first  Islamic  financial  institution  was  established  over  four  decades  ago,  Islamic 
finance has evolved into an industry that has now gained global recognition, transforming its 
role  from  an  enabler  to  a  driver  of  economic  growth,  offering  consumers  with  diversity  of 
financial solutions to meet not only the Shariah requirements but also financial needs. This 
evolution  has  been  evidenced  in  many  parts  of  the  globe, originating  in  Asia  and the  Gulf 
Corporation Council (GCC) countries, and spreading to the centers in Europe and Africa. 
In  Malaysia  when  Islamic  finance  started  three  decades  ago,  the  initiative  offered  simple 
banking solutions that encourage savings and financing. The products were structured in a 
manner that is in line with Shariah principles and easily understood by the public at large. 
Today,  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  is  a  dynamic  industry  that  is  widely  regarded  as  a 
competitive alternative to conventional financing solutions. There are now diverse local and 
foreign  players  in  the  market,  showcasing  their  dynamism  with  a  wide  array  of  innovative 
financial  products  and  services  on  offer.  Islamic  banking  now  comprises  20%  of  the  total 
banking sector, complemented by a vibrant Islamic capital market, where 55% of outstanding 
domestic private debt papers are sukuk, representing the largest volume of sukuk issuances 
globally. 
Dynamism is most evident in the Islamic capital market where now there are many varieties 
of sukuk being structured and issued, including exchangeable, convertible and hybrid sukuk. 
Recent  developments  have  also  seen  Shariah  compliant  hedging  instruments  such  as  the 
Islamic profit rate swap being introduced in the market. These products are able to compete 
with conventional bonds by offering superior value proposition to their issuers and investors. 
At  the  international  level,  we  are  also  seeing  significant  progress  being  made  in  the 
development of Islamic finance. There are more and more institutions offering Shariah-based 
financial  services  being  established  today  to  tap  on  the  opportunities  in  this  fast-growing 
industry.  This  includes  the  participation  from  global  conventional  banking  giants.  The 
participation  of  established  financial  centers  such  as  London  and  Hong  Kong  has  further 
reinforced  the  trend  of  internationalisation  in  Islamic  finance.  Similarly,  emerging  new 
markets, from both Muslim and non-Muslim countries, have also identified Islamic finance as 
a  key  growth  sector  with  the  potential  to  contribute  significantly  to  their  respective 
economies,  with  some  positioning  to  become  established  as  new  financial  centres  of  the 
industry in their own right. All these developments are creating a dynamic environment for 
the global Islamic finance industry. 
Despite  the  fact  that  there  are  now  greater  appreciation  of  Islamic  finance  leading  to  the 
heightening  of  global  interest  in  the  industry,  owing  to  the  strength  of  its  embedded  value 
proposition  as  demonstrated  by  the  relatively  resilient  performance  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions during the recent financial crisis, we must continue to take steps to reinforce the 
prospects  for  sustainability  of  the  industry  in  this  new  development  phase  of  global 
expansion  and  cross-border  inter-linkages.  Today,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  two  key 
imperatives, firstly in promoting convergence and harmonisation, and secondly, the transition 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 1
to  a  more  industry-led  development,  and  how  these  can  be  major  drivers  pushing  the 
industry towards greater internationalisation and achieving sustainable growth and continued 
development of Islamic finance. 
In offering Islamic financial services, institutions are bound by a common thread in Islamic 
finance, where all transactions must be in congruence with Shariah. However, differences in 
opinion on the application of Shariah in financial products across markets have often been 
pointed  out  to  be  a  major  issue  which  could  hinder  a  more  robust  expansion  of  Islamic 
finance  internationally.  Notwithstanding  the  desire  for  more  standardisation,  we  should  be 
mindful not to suppress the generation of alternative point of views which could be the seeds 
to innovation and breakthroughs in the marketplace. We need to transform the differences of 
Shariah views into competitive strengths for the industry. History had shown that diversity in 
opinion had led to the great Islamic civilisation. We should take recognition of this lesson in 
history. I therefore would like to suggest that the international Islamic financial community to 
subscribe  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  unity  in  diversity.  Healthy  debate  and  dialogues 
amongst  Shariah  scholars  must  continue  and  prosper.  However,  we  must  always  make  a 
conscious effort to keep an open mind, a tradition that was even espoused and practised by 
the Prophet (s.a.w.), so that generation of good ideas would emerge from vigorous, even at 
times  heated  intellectual  debates.  Over  and  above  this  requirement  for  openness  and 
dialogue, we should not lose sight of the greater themes that will unite rather than divide. We 
should be open enough to amplify agreements rather than divergences. 
We can agree that complete convergence is neither practicable nor achievable, as Shariah 
also  recognises  differences  in  customs  and  cultural  practices  between  various  societies. 
Also,  the  use  of  ‘urf,  the  methodology  through  which  customary  practices  are  recognized, 
enables  different  societies  to  function  smoothly  and  efficiently,  provided  they  are  not 
antithetical  to  the  principles  of  Islamic  law  of  transactions.  ‘Urf  in  Islamic  law  refers  to  the 
general  opinion  or  customs  of  a  community,  and  forms  the  basis  for  rulings  issued  by  a 
mujtahid or a group of mujtahids, who has attained the right to exercise ijtihad, which is an 
important part of the process of making a Shariah ruling. 
Historically, ‘urf played a crucial part in business development in Islam during the time of the 
Prophet (s.a.w.). I shall briefly summarise the story on salam contract to illustrate this point. 
In the Islamic law of transactions, the general rule is that parties are not allowed to contract 
with  each  other  where  subject  matter  is  non-existent  to  avoid  anything  that  can  lead  to 
gharar, or uncertainty, which can result in one party benefiting at the expense of the other 
unfairly. This rule is based on a sunnah of the Prophet (s.a.w.) that states “Do not sell things 
that you do not own.” 
This  was  the  practice  adopted  in  Mecca,  a  city  of  trade  where  such  contracts  were  not 
difficult to construct and physically tangible goods were plentiful in supply. Medina, though, 
was  a  city  of  agriculture  where  typically  the  produce  would  not  always  be  available  at  the 
time  of  the  contract.  The  practice  called  salam,  a  forward  sales  contract,  was  customarily 
used  so  that  farmers  could  sell  their  produce  to  be  delivered  at  an  agreed  later  date  in 
exchange for advanced payment which would be used as capital to cultivate land and grow 
crops. The Prophet (s.a.w.) recognised the need for this practice in the economy of Medina, 
and  allowed  the  people  to  continue  practising  salam  transactions.  Today,  salam,  and  by 
extension istisna’, are important contracts in modern Islamic financial transactions and are 
now widely used in the structuring of financial products such as sukuk. 
Clearly, there is wisdom in recognising ‘urf to accept the permissibility of various practices 
that may not be commonplace between different societies, but which are required to ensure 
that  the  livelihood  of  communities  is  not  disrupted.  Greater  engagement  and  dialogues 
among  Shariah  scholars  are  therefore  indispensible  as  platforms  through  which  Shariah 
scholars  can  discuss  differences  in  financial  practices,  legal  frameworks,  operational 
requirements, taxation, cultural differences and other issues pertinent in other jurisdictions. 
Through this process, scholars shall become more appreciative of the many differences in 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2010
business and economic environments that might lead to different Shariah interpretations. A 
more thorough understanding of such matters will also lead to better co-operation between 
the  scholars  and  industry  practitioners  and  preserve  the  sanctity  of  the  Shariah  principles, 
resulting in more well-informed opinions and better quality financial products and services. 
However, as the market continues to evolve, the need for market harmonisation will continue 
to  grow.  This  is  understandable  as  markets  desire  certainty  and  simplicity  in  engaging 
business.  It  is  therefore  encouraging  to  see  that,  based  on  recent  developments,  there 
appears  to  be  an  increasing  movements  towards  combining  efforts  in  establishing 
internationally  acceptable  standards.  A  commendable  example  of  this  concerted  effort 
towards  standardisation  is  the  recent  global  master  agreement  on  Islamic  hedging,  also 
known  as  the  tahawwut  agreement,  launched  in  March  2010  by  the  International  Islamic 
Financial Market (IIFM) and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA). To 
pave  the  way  towards  greater  standardisation  in  the  marketplace,  the  Master  Wakala 
Agreement  For  Deposit  was  recently  signed  by  the  Malaysian  and  UK  Islamic  banks  in 
November 2009 to provide alternative tool for deposit placements and provide the industry 
with  an  increased  choice  in  risk  management  instruments.  Malaysia  had  also  earlier 
launched  the  first  global  Islamic  derivatives  master  agreement  (IDMA)  in  2007  to  develop 
hedging tools for the Islamic financial markets to manage investment risks. This was followed 
by the Interbank Murabahah Master Agreement (IMMA), which was signed in August 2009 
by  Malaysian  Islamic  banks,  designed  to  facilitate  effective  risk  and  liquidity  management 
through Shariah-compliant deposit placements using the commodity murabaha concept. 
Moving  forward,  recognising  the  need  to  introduce  standards  which  are  acceptable  and 
applicable to the Islamic finance industry, Bank Negara Malaysia is committed to undertake 
research  to  develop  Shariah  Parameter  References,  which  are  aimed  at  achieving 
convergence  and  harmonisation  of  Islamic  financial  practices.  These  references  are  being 
developed  together  with  local  and  international  Shariah  boards,  industry  practitioners, 
academicians and other relevant parties to ensure the completeness in the documentation. 
The first Shariah Parameter Reference on Murabahah contract was released in 2009, while 
several  concept  papers  have  been  issued  on  Mudharabah,  Ijarah  and  Musharakah  before 
the final release of these references in the foreseeable future. 
Such  important  efforts  to  generate  greater  harmonisation  in  Islamic  finance  will  enhance 
market  efficiency  particularly  in  terms  of  accelerating  the  product  development  cycle  and 
improving time to market, as well as to produce acceptable benchmarks of quality in terms of 
products, services, processes and practices against which Islamic financial institutions must 
aim  to  match  or  exceed.  With  this  objective  in  mind,  the  overall  Islamic  finance  industry 
stands  to  benefit  from  commonality  of  practices  leading  to  lower  operating  costs  and  the 
potential set up of shared industry wide platforms, all of which are important considerations 
for Islamic financial institutions to achieve economies of scale and interoperabilities across 
institutions and national economies. 
This brings me to my next point. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the development of Islamic finance industry in many jurisdictions has 
thus far been largely led by governments and regulators. Whilst this is expected in the earlier 
phases  of  Islamic  finance  development,  a  pragmatic  transition  into  the  next  phase  of 
development  in  an  increasingly  globalised  environment  would  require  more  corporate  or 
private-led  efforts  amongst  industry  players,  particularly  in  leading  initiatives  of  promoting 
convergence  and  harmonisation  of  Islamic  financial  practices.  In  the  case  of  Malaysia, 
initiatives  by  the  government  and  regulators  through  more  than  three  decades  of 
development have already provided a comprehensive enabling environment for the Islamic 
financial  institutions  to  now  take  the  lead.  In  this  time  of  globalization  and  greater 
liberalisation,  Islamic  financial  institutions  must  be  forward-thinking  and  leverage  on  their 
extensive  experience  to  secure  first-mover  advantage  in  tapping  into  opportunities  across 
borders,  particularly  in  new  markets  seeking  to  develop  Islamic  finance.  I  believe  that  the 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 3
future holds better prospects for Islamic finance with greater internationalisation of business 
beyond domestic centric operation. 
Going  forward,  we  can  expect  for  more  leadership  from  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  in 
making the  paradigm shift to promote industry development initiatives and to become less 
government led and more market driven. This calls for more efforts among industry players 
to  increase  cooperation,  establish  more  strategic  alliances  and  build  closer  relationships 
across  borders  in  various  fields.  For  instance,  Islamic  financial  institutions  must  come 
together and drive the initiative to develop the industry’s own internationally acceptable code 
of  conduct  and  standards  of  Islamic  financial  practices  that  should  work  to  complement 
efforts by Bank Negara Malaysia in developing the Shariah Parameters References. 
As  Malaysia’s  Islamic  finance  industry  continues  to  grow  and  expand  beyond  domestic 
boundaries, our Islamic financial institutions are well positioned to initiate and lead efforts in 
converging  different  organizations’  financial  practices  to  establish  uniform  standards  or 
instruments that may be applied across borders. These areas span from accounting, legal 
and operational practices. Cross-border alliances by Islamic financial institutions in setting-up 
new  business  ventures  would  also  facilitate  knowledge  sharing  and  the  globalisation  of 
Islamic  business  products  and  services.  In  this  aspect  financial  market  instruments  that 
enable better allocation of resources in the international Islamic financial system need to be 
further enhanced and developed. This certainly needs to be supported by more international 
collaborative efforts in the area of research and development to provide the impetus for more 
innovation  to  take  place  and  address  global  and  contemporary  issues  of  market  and  risk 
management  practices.  These  initiatives  are  important  for  the  industry  to  develop  as  it 
becomes more internationally integrated. 
Conclusion 
On  that  note,  let  me  now  conclude.  Moving  forward,  converging  Shariah  views,  where 
appropriate,  and  building  greater  linkages  between  industry  players  that  are  collectively 
driven  by  the  private  institutions  are  important  to  build  on  the  momentum  of  industry 
development achieved thus far. The involvement of the private sector to drive development 
will lead to enhance the efficiency of Islamic finance and greater cross-border transactions. 
This  would  serve  the  aim  to  enhance  international  financial  interlinkages  and  market 
participation  between  institutions  and  nations  practising  Islamic  finance.  In  this  endeavour, 
there is no doubt that it takes nothing less than steadfast commitment and collective will of all 
industry  stakeholders.  The  time  is  now  for  us  to  take  the  leap  to  the  next  level  of 
development. I hope that this conference will focus on specific initiatives that could lead to 
inter-market activities. Only when the various jurisdictions are linked as one, could we propel 
ourselves to the next phase of accelerated level of growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2010
