Jean-Claude Trichet: New ECB premises – ceremony of the laying of the 
foundation stone  
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  
at the ceremony to lay the foundation stone of the new ECB premises, Frankfurt am Main,  
19 May 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Fellow members of the Governing and General Council, 
Sehr geehrte Frau Oberbürgermeisterin Roth, 
Sehr geehrter Herr Professor Prix, 
Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
Today’s ceremony marks the transition from planning to reality.  
A number of us have been involved in the project since its very beginning when we, the ECB, 
started to look for a suitable site. Others – like the architect and the planners – have spent 
years on the planning of our new building from the concept for the international architectural 
competition to the details of the execution planning. And now, a new party has joined in: the 
construction companies and their workers, a warm welcome to you.  
I am very confident that we will continue the very good cooperation between all parties that 
has  characterised  this project  so  far.  Our  common  goal  is  to  ensure  that  the  new  building 
complex  will  become  reality  as  planned  to  provide  the  ECB  with  healthy  and  functional 
headquarters  while  keeping  the  building  costs  within  the  foreseen  budget  and  using  our 
resources  responsibly.  Our  new  premises  will  be  functional  and  will  meet  the  complex 
requirements of a European institution that works very closely together with our colleagues of 
the national central banks, thus playing the central role for the Eurosystem and the European 
System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  with  respect  to  analysis  and  decision-making,  and  as 
effective  and  efficient  captain  of  the  European  monetary  team  mandated  with  the  primary 
goal of maintaining price stability. Price stability is not only the primary objective set out in the 
Treaty, but also what our democracies, the people of Europe are asking us. 
Our  new  premises  will  allow  for  the  necessary  flexibility  to  foster  interaction  and 
communications both among our staff, the Eurosystem and the ESCB. At the same time, our 
new premises will reflect the values – integrity, excellence, efficiency and transparency – that 
are essential to our activities. We are also committed to ecological sustainability: to this end, 
our new premises will also be environmentally friendly and energy-efficient. 
I am delighted to stand here with all of you today to celebrate the laying of the foundation 
stone and to wish our new building and all of us good luck and a smooth construction phase. 
The laying of the foundation stone marks the start of the main construction works for the new 
headquarters of the European Central Bank. Let me reiterate the different steps so far and 
take the opportunity to point out some of our main partners in this process so far.  
The  project  was  initiated  by  the  Governing  Council  under  the  Presidency  of  my  honoured 
colleague Wim Duisenberg in 1998 – and it is very sad that he cannot be here today. Back 
then,  when  the  ECB  had  barely  been  founded,  none  of  us  could  really  imagine  just  how 
much time and effort such a project would call for.  
The decision in favour of the chosen site was taken on the basis of a variety of criteria, such 
as the size of the site and its location on the banks of river Main, as well as the fact that the 
Ostend is a lively and well-functioning district close to the centre of the City of Frankfurt. The 
size  of  the  site  –  and  of  the  building  to  come  –  has  been  chosen  in  view  to  possible 
extensions  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  European  Union,  the  former  today  encompassing 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 1
look 
like.  And  how 
institution  and  a  modern  central  bank  should 
16 countries and around 330 million citizens, so as to be able to fit all ECB staff in the new 
premises on the site. 
I can remember the presentation of all the designs of the international (urban planning and 
architectural) design competition, the great variety of ideas from all over the world of how a 
European 
the 
Grossmarkthalle,  a  remarkable  monument,  would  be  integrated  and  become  part  of  this 
institution. When deciding on the site in 2001, we aimed at preserving a building that was 
remarkable in its own time. 
I  would  like  to  thank  ANP,  the  consultants  who  prepared  and  organised  the  international 
architectural  competition  that  generated  so  many  ideas.  The  international  jury,  which  was 
chaired  by  the  ECB’s  Vice-President,  Lucas  Papademos,  was  the  first  body  to  face  the 
challenge for awarding the prices to the most suitable designs. I would also like to thank the 
jury for their work and express my appreciation of their endeavours to find the right design for 
the task and the site at hand.  
Deciding on the building that is required to serve the purposes of a modern central bank is a 
difficult task. I remember how my colleagues in the Governing Council and I became deeply 
involved in details when deciding on the final design at the end of the revision phase. 
It was only then that the real work for the architect, and for the engineers and planners, really 
began, the work of optimising and reviewing the design, while at the same time moving step-
by-step ever-deeper into detail with each new phase and passing month. I would like to thank 
the  architect,  Professor  Wolf  Prix,  his  staff  of  Coop  Himmelb(l)au  and  all  planners  and 
engineers for never giving up, for always fighting passionately for their design and for always 
finding a way to improve on the different aspects of the building.  
My thanks also go to Drees & Sommer, the external project managers, who supported our 
project team within the ECB in the coordination of all the major and minor details that need to 
be taken care of and resolved. A crucial situation occurred when the initial tender strategy 
failed  and  a  new  one,  more  fitting  to  the  changing  markets,  had  to  be  developed  and 
implemented.  As  of  today,  with  the  start  of  the  actual  construction  works,  the  main 
responsibility  for  the  construction  site  has  passed  into  the  hands  of  our  construction 
management company, Gassmann + Grossmann. 
Throughout  the  last  few  years,  all  the  parties  involved  have  worked  closely  together  with 
unfailing energy, determination and conviction to finally make this event possible today. 
The  Grossmarkthalle  in  itself  has  been  yet  another  challenge:  together  with  the  historic 
preservation authorities of both the City of Frankfurt and the State of Hesse, our project team 
and the architect and planners, the structural engineers and restoration experts worked hard 
on every millimetre of the market hall to gain an insight into its current state, to discuss all 
details and aspects of its desperately needed restoration and how to convert such a building 
into an integral part of our institution’s premises. I remember one visit by my colleagues and 
myself to the site when Thomas Rinderspacher, the ECB’s Project Manager, showed me the 
new  windows  that  had  been  developed  to  improve  the  insulation  of  the  façade,  while 
preserving the appearance of the old window frames. 
I am proud of all the work carried out. My fellow-members of the Governing Council and I 
were  and  are  being  informed  regularly  about  the  development  and  the  progress  of  the 
project. We are aware of our being a demanding task-master, asking for a perfect building, 
as  well  as  for  sound  and  transparent  processes  on  the  way  towards  attaining  it.  We  are 
simply aiming for the best possible building for providing a healthy and safe environment for 
our staff and visitors, while at the same time ensuring an efficient and effective functioning of 
the institution. I am happy that we have come so far today. 
Such a project can only become reality if the City authorities, too, prove their commitment. 
So,  I  would  also  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Lord  Mayor  Petra  Roth  and  the  different 
departments  of  the  City  of  Frankfurt,  especially  the  Urban  Planning  Department,  for  the 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2010
unstinting work and support they provided from the time of the purchase of the site to the 
architectural competition and the urban development plan, which was developed in parallel to 
our own planning, and also with the issuance of the building permit in May 2008.  
This  is  no  time  for  complacency.  We  still  have  many  challenges  to  face,  and  we  have  to 
make sure that the construction work proceeds smoothly. I am looking forward to seeing the 
restoration of the market hall and the rise of the office towers. I have full trust in all of you 
who are involved in the project working for our new headquarters, and in your expertise and 
knowledge to ensure the successful finalisation of our building – within schedule and budget, 
of  course,  as  we  are  responsible  for  using  our  resources  effectively  and  efficiently.  I  have 
advised our team, the New ECB Premises Project Office, to monitor the works carefully and 
to keep a close eye on the quality, on the scheduling and on the costs of the project – the 
budget has to be respected. This is essential.  
Today, I want to thank my dear colleague on the Executive Board, Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, who 
has overseen the project remarkably well for the Executive Board over the past few years, as 
well  as  Gerald  Grisse  and  Thomas  Rinderspacher  in  their  capacity  of  Project  Coordinator 
and Project Manager – also as representatives for the entire team – for the excellent work 
achieved thus far, the development of the project within the expected and required quality 
and costs estimate and for the successful tendering of the construction works. 
I wish all of those who will either be continuing to work or who are just starting to work for our 
new building all the best and good endeavours! 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 3
