Duvvuri Subbarao: Challenges for central banks in the context of the 
crisis 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International Research Conference on “Challenges for Central Banks in the Context of the 
Crisis”, Mumbai, 12 February 2010. 
 Central banks and central bankers have been at the heart of the global financial crisis. We 
have been blamed for policies and actions that got the world into the crisis; we are also being 
praised for leading from the front in getting the world out of the crisis. I believe this is fair 
critique – central banks have been a part of the problem and a part of the solution.  
2. 
As we emerge out of the crisis, central banks have their task cut out for them: to 
distil the lessons of the crisis, translate them into concrete reform measures and get cracking 
on implementing them. I believe this involves central banks changing in important ways both 
in terms of what they do and how they do it. It is against this backdrop that the Reserve Bank 
of India thought it fit to organize this conference on the challenges for central banks in the 
context  of  the  crisis  as  a  flagship  event  of  our  Platinum  Jubilee  celebrations.  I  have  great 
pleasure  in  welcoming  all  our  invitees  –  colleague  governors  of  central  banks,  leading 
international  and  domestic  policy  makers  and  experts  –  to  this  conference,  the  first 
international  conference  being  organized  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  I  want  to  specially 
acknowledge  noted  economist  and  Nobel  Laureate  Prof.  Michael  Spence  who  will  be 
delivering the keynote address in a short while.  
3. 
I struggled quite a lot in defining what I should say in this opening address. Given 
the  breadth  and  depth of  expertise  that  you  all  collectively  bring  to this  forum,  it would  be 
presumptuous on my part to lay out the agenda of deliberations over the next two days. I will 
attempt something much less ambitious – just by way of a curtain raiser, I will set out the 
major challenges to central banks in the wake of the crisis. In particular, I will put forward five 
challenges. My effort, as you will notice, will be to flag the issues rather than argue them out 
extensively. 
First challenge: Managing monetary policy in a globalizing environment 
4. 
The crisis has clearly demonstrated the challenges of macroeconomic management 
in a globalizing world. Even as governments and central banks acted with unusual show of 
policy force, they found that they were not able to get the situation under control because of 
the  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  system  and  the  positive  and  negative  cross-border 
externalities  to  domestic  policy  actions.  Most  importantly,  they  found  that  sentiment  and 
confidence were remarkably correlated across countries around the world. When the history 
of  this  crisis  is  written,  the  London  G-20  summit  in  April  2009  will  be  marked  as  a  clear 
turning point, showing that in the age of globalization, a financial crisis cannot be managed 
without global cooperation and global response.  
5. 
The question is, with the benefit of that hindsight, how are central banks going to 
manage  the  challenges  from  globalization  to  their  macroeconomic  policies.  Experience 
shows  that  external  developments  interact  with  domestic  macro  variables  in  complex, 
uncertain and even capricious ways, and central banks need to deepen their understanding 
of these interactions. Some of the channels through which cross border transmission occurs 
are quite familiar – global prices including commodity price movements, synchronization of 
business  cycles,  capital  flows,  strong  co-movement  of  asset  prices,  not  necessarily 
correlated  with  the  degree  of  a  country’s  financial  integration,  exchange  rates  of  key 
international  currencies  and  interest  rate  policies  of  major  central  banks.  Some  of  the 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 1
transmission channels are not so familiar. For example, we now know that even differences 
in regulatory regimes can trigger arbitrage based action and dilute the efficiency of domestic 
policies.  
6. 
Is the challenge posed by globalization similar for all central banks? Obviously, the 
more  open  the  economy,  the  greater  the  impact  of  globalization  on  domestic  policies. 
Beyond that, it seems logical to conjecture that the broader the mandate of a central bank, 
the larger the influence of globalization on the effectiveness of its policies. There is a view 
that open economies can retain strong control over the medium and long term inflation trends 
even in the face of globalization. This is a debatable proposition, and at best true only in the 
case  of  pure  inflation  targeting  central  banks.  Central  banks  with  wider  mandates  need 
necessarily to factor in external developments into their domestic policy calculus.  
Let  me  illustrate  the  challenge  of  globalization  with  the  issue  of  managing  capital 
7. 
flows.  Emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  saw  “sudden  stop”  capital  outflows  during  the 
crisis as a result of global deleveraging. Now the trend has reversed once again and many 
EMEs are seeing net inflows – a consequence of a global system awash with liquidity, the 
assurance of a low interest rate regime in advanced countries over an “extended period” and 
the promise of growth in EMEs.  
8. 
One  little  known  aspect  of  capital  flows,  what  could  perhaps  be  called  the  law  of 
capital flows, is that they never come in at the precise time or in the exact quantity you want 
them. Managing these flows, especially if they are volatile, is going to test the effectiveness 
of central bank policies of semi-open EMEs. If central banks do not intervene in the foreign 
exchange market, they incur the cost of currency appreciation unrelated to fundamentals. If 
they intervene in the forex market to prevent appreciation, they will have additional systemic 
liquidity  and  potential  inflationary  pressures  to  contend  with.  If  they  sterilize  the  resultant 
liquidity,  they  will  run  the  risk  of  pushing  up  interest  rates  which  will  hurt  the  growth 
prospects. Capital flows can also potentially impair financial stability. How EMEs manage the 
impossible trinity – the impossibility of having an open capital account, a fixed exchange rate 
and independent monetary policy – is going to have an impact on their prospects for growth, 
price stability and financial stability. 
9. 
Globalization is not new; its risks and rewards are also not new. What is new, and 
what the crisis has revealed, is the ferocity with which the forces of globalization can strike 
and the diversity of channels through which they can transmit across borders. The challenge 
for  central  banks  is  to  better  understand  the  interplay  of  global  factors  and  domestic 
variables, and factor that into their policy calculus.  
Second challenge: Redefining the mandate of central banks 
Let me now move on to the second issue which is the challenge of redefining the 
10. 
mandate of central banks. The crisis has triggered a vigorous and wide ranging debate on 
the  role  and  responsibilities  of  central  banks.  Let  me  focus  on  three  main,  and  largely 
interrelated issues: 
Should central banks persist with pure inflation targetting? 
i. 
What is the role of central banks in preventing asset price bubbles? 
ii. 
Should central banks also be doing regulation and supervision of banks? 
iii. 
Let me take them up one by one. 
11. 
Should central banks persist with pure inflation targetting? 
(i) 
The first question is, should central banks persist with inflation targetting. The years 
12. 
before the crisis saw a powerful intellectual consensus building around inflation targeting. A 
growing number of central banks, starting with New Zealand in the late 1980s and currently 
numbering over 20, geared monetary policy almost exclusively to stabilizing inflation. Even 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2010
where  central  banks  did  not  target  a  precise  inflation  rate,  their  policy  objectives  were 
informed, if not dominated, by price stability. This approach seemed successful. There was 
an extended period of price stability accompanied by stable growth and low unemployment. 
In the world that existed before the crisis, central bankers were a triumphant lot. They had 
discovered the holy grail. 
13. 
The  unravelling  of  the  Great  Moderation  during  the  crisis  has  diluted,  if  not 
dissolved,  the  consensus  around  the  minimalist  formula  of  inflation  targetting.  The 
mainstream view before the crisis was that price stability and financial stability reinforce each 
other.  The  crisis  has  proved  that  wrong.  We  have  seen  that  price  stability  does  not 
necessarily ensure financial stability. Indeed there is an even stronger assertion – that there 
is  a  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  and  that  the  more  successful  a 
central bank is with price stability, the more likely it is to imperil financial stability. 
14. 
All in all, the crisis has given fresh impetus to the “new environment hypothesis” that 
pure inflation targetting is inadvisable and that the mandate of central banks should extend 
beyond just price stability. Let me therefore turn to what the mandate should extend to. 
What is the role of central banks in preventing asset price bubbles? 
(ii) 
15. 
A  dominant  issue  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  has  been  the  role  of  central  banks  in 
preventing asset price bubbles. The monetary stance of studied indifference to asset price 
inflation  stemmed  from  the  famous  Greenspan  orthodoxy  which  can  be  summarized  as 
follows.  First,  asset  price  bubbles  are  hard  to  identify  on  a  real  time  basis,  and  the 
fundamental factors that drive asset prices are not directly observable. A central bank should 
not therefore second guess the market. Second, monetary policy is too blunt an instrument to 
counteract  asset  price  booms.  And  third,  central  banks  can  “clean  up  the  mess”  after  the 
bubble  bursts.  The  surmise  therefore  was  that  the  cost-benefit  calculus  of  a  more  activist 
monetary stance of “leaning against the wind” was clearly negative. In other words, it is not 
the job of central bankers to remove the punch bowl no matter that the party is getting wild.  
16. 
The crisis has dented the credibility of the Greenspan orthodoxy. The emerging view 
post-crisis is that preventing an asset price build up should be within the remit of a central 
bank. Opinion is divided, however, on whether central banks should prevent asset bubbles 
through monetary policy action or through regulatory action. On one side, there is a purist 
view  that  the  case  for  monetary  tightening  to  check  speculative  bubbles  is  questionable. 
Opposed  to  this  is  the  argument  that  a  necessary  condition  for  speculative  excesses  is 
abundant  liquidity,  and  that  controlling  liquidity  should  be  the  first  line  of  defence  against 
“irrational exuberance”.  
17. 
Some economists take a more granular position on this, and the argument goes as 
follows. It is important to differentiate between speculative excesses fuelled by bank lending 
and  those  that  are  not  such  as,  for  example,  the  IT  bubble.  Central  banks  have  a  role  in 
preventing  “bank  centred”  bubbles,  but  the  instrument  for  this  is  not  monetary  policy  but 
regulatory intervention.  
18. 
No  matter  how  this  debate  settles,  if  it  will  at  all,  what  is  beyond  debate  is  that 
central banks’ efforts to check asset price bubbles demand not just analytical capability but 
mature judgement of the nature of the risk. 
Should central banks also be doing bank regulation and supervision? 
(iii) 
The third issue that I want to address in regard to the mandate of central banks is 
19. 
the question of whether central banks should also be doing bank regulation and supervision. 
20. 
This is yet another issue on which the crisis has triggered a vigorous debate. There 
is  a  variety  of  regulatory  models  around  including  those  where  the  central  bank  is  a  pure 
monetary authority with bank regulation and supervision vested with another agency. Post-
crisis,  the  emerging  view  is  that  the  crisis  was  caused,  at  least  in  part,  by  the  lack  of 
coordination and communication between the separate bodies and that it is optimal, in the 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 3
interest  of  financial  stability,  to  entrust  the  function  of  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks 
also to central banks.  
21. 
The  case  for  this  is  made  mainly  on  two  arguments.  The  first  argument  is  that 
regardless  of  the  regulatory  architecture,  there  is  no  dispute  that  the  central  bank  has  to 
remain the lender of last resort (LOLR) for the financial system. A central bank can discharge 
its LOLR function more efficiently if its mandate extends beyond merely monitoring financial 
institutions to taking preventive action. This becomes possible if the central bank also has 
responsibility for bank supervision. 
22. 
The  second  and  broader  argument  is  that  there  is  a  natural  synergy  between 
monetary policy which is macro-prudential and bank supervision which is micro-prudential. 
The  micro-level  information  coming  from  supervision  of  individual  institutions  can  be  a 
valuable  input  for  shaping  the  macro  perspective.  Vice  versa,  a  broad  macro  level 
understanding  of  trends  can  be  effective  in  instituting  prudential  safeguards  at  the  micro 
institutional level. 
23. 
Admittedly, there are strong arguments to the contrary, in support of keeping bank 
regulation and supervision away from central  banks. By far the most persuasive argument 
stems  from  the  moral  hazard  perspective.  There  is  a  risk  that  a  central  bank  may  extend 
regulatory forbearance to a weak bank instead of allowing it to fail since a failed bank could 
aggravate instability. Such action becomes more likely if the overall macroeconomic situation 
is weak. In an extreme case, it is possible that the monetary stance of the central bank may 
be  dominated  by  concerns  about  protecting  weak  banks  since  central  banks  may  view  a 
“failed bank” as a blot on their reputation. 
24. 
Whether central banks should also be regulating and supervising banks is an issue 
that  has  frowned  on  moderation.  Evidently,  there  is  no  one  size  fits  all  answer  as  indeed 
evidenced  by  the  variety  of  regulatory  models  around.  Going  forward,  every  country  and 
every  central  bank  has  to  confront  and  resolve  this  issue  in  light  of  their  specific 
circumstances. 
Third challenge: Responsibility of central banks towards financial stability 
25. 
Let me move on to the third challenge on my list concerning what responsibility, if 
any, should central banks have towards financial stability. Although this question belongs to 
the  mandate  of  central  banks  that  I  have  just  spoken  about,  I  have  decided  to  address 
financial stability as a separate and distinct challenge because post-crisis, financial stability 
has become the elephant in the room. 
26. 
While  there  is  broad  agreement  that  financial  stability  is  neither  automatic  nor 
inevitable, there is less agreement on whether it should be explicitly included in the mandate 
of  central  banks.  There  is  an  argument  that  explicit  inclusion  would  be  redundant  since 
financial  stability  is  a  necessary,  although  not  sufficient,  condition  for  achieving  the 
conventional  central  bank  objectives  relating  to  inflation,  output  and  employment.  On  the 
other  hand,  post-crisis,  there  is  a  growing  view  that  unless  financial  stability  is  explicitly 
included in the mandate of central banks, it is likely to fall through the cracks. 
27. 
But  how  does  one  define  financial  stability  in  a  precise,  comprehensive  and 
measurable manner? This is something that is proving to be quite intractable. Be that as it 
may,  we  now  know  that  two  attributes  of  financial  instability  are:  (i)  excessive  volatility  of 
macro variables such as interest rates and exchange rates which have a direct impact on the 
real economy; and (ii) financial institutions and markets threatened by illiquidity to the extent 
of jeopardizing systemic stability. 
28. 
One  clear  instrument  available  to  central  banks  for  preserving  financial  stability  is 
the  lender  of  last  resort  or  LOLR  function.  Over  the  years  we  have  come  to  believe  that 
LOLR  is  a  fairly  robust  instrument  for  combating  threats  of  illiquidity.  Note  that  one  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2010
important ways in which this crisis has been different from past financial crises is that this 
one arose from the asset side of banks’ balance sheets whereas past crises had all arisen 
from the liability side. This crisis hence has shown that the LOLR instrument loses much of 
its potency in a “bank run” from the asset side.  
29. 
Let  me  explain.  During  the  crisis,  central  banks  pumped  in  enormous  amounts  of 
liquidity  to  defreeze  the  system  through  the  LOLR  window.  While  this  made  individual 
institutions liquid, the market still remained illiquid, thereby showing up the limitation of the 
LOLR instrument in combating illiquidity. Much like taking a horse to water, a central bank 
can infuse liquidity, but how can it ensure that the cheap and abundant money thus available 
is used to purchase assets whose value is rapidly eroding? The only option then is for the 
central bank itself to buy the assets. This means that in addition to being the Lender of Last 
Resort, a central bank also has to be the Market Maker of Last Resort (MMLR).  
30. 
are the following.  
 
 
 
 
 
How does one define financial stability?  
Should central bank mandates include financial stability as an explicit objective?  
Should this be an exclusive or shared responsibility?  
Do central banks have the instruments to address the mandate of financial stability?  
In what ways does responsibility for financial stability encroach on the independence 
of central banks?  
31. 
All of these issues are yet to be clearly defined, let alone resolved. Given that the 
lessons  of  the  crisis  relating  to  financial  stability  have  been  forceful,  it  is  important  that 
governments and central banks resolve these questions soon. 
To sum up, the main issues surrounding the role of central banks in financial stability 
Fourth challenge: Managing the costs and benefits of regulation 
32. 
Nearly  everyone  now  has  her  or  his  own  list  of  causes  for  the  crisis;  and  almost 
every list includes the failure of regulation as a leading cause. Quite unsurprisingly, the post-
crisis  reform  agenda  is  dominated  by  regulatory  reforms  at  macro  and  micro  levels. 
Admittedly,  these  reforms  are  being  thought  through  carefully  through  international 
consultative  processes.  Even  so,  there  is  a  risk  of  going  overboard  on  the  rebound  and 
getting the balance between costs and benefits wrong.  
33. 
In order to safeguard financial stability, in the Reserve Bank, we have traditionally 
used a variety of prudential measures such as specifying exposure norms and pre-emptive 
tightening of risk weights and provisioning requirements. But these measures are not always 
costless. For instance, tightening of risk weights arguably tempers the flow of credit to certain 
sectors,  but  excessive,  premature  or  unnecessary  tightening  could  blunt  growth.  Similarly, 
exposure  norms  offer  protection  against  concentration  risks;  however,  such  limits  could 
restrict  the  availability  of  credit  for  important  growth  sectors.  Thus,  as  in  the  case  of  price 
stability,  central  banks  face  the  challenge  of  managing  the  trade  off  between  financial 
stability and growth.  
34. 
It  needs  to  be  recognized  that  after  a  crisis,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  all 
conservative  policies  appear  safe.  But  is  there  a  risk  of  throwing  away  the  baby  with  the 
bathwater? Excessive conservatism in order to be prepared to ride out a potential crisis could 
thwart growth and stifle innovation. The question is what price are we willing to pay, or put 
another way, what potential benefits are we willing to give up, in order to cope with a black 
swan event? Experience shows that managing this challenge, that is balancing the costs and 
benefits of regulation, is more a question of good judgement rather than analytical skill. This 
judgement skill is the one that central banks, especially those of developing countries such 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 5
as India, need to hone as they simultaneously pursue the objectives of growth and financial 
stability.  
Fifth challenge: Managing the balance between the autonomy and accountability of 
central banks 
35. 
Finally, let me turn to the fifth challenge, as I see, which is to do with managing the 
balance between the autonomy and accountability of central banks. This is a broad spectrum 
topic that draws from several issues that I have touched upon earlier. 
36. 
The seventy odd years since the Great Depression saw a famous rivalry between 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies  for  influence.  Historically  central  banks  suffered  from  fiscal 
dominance since they had to acquiesce in governments “borrowing as much as required at 
as low a cost as possible”. This state of affairs started changing in the 1980s with a wave of 
support for central bank independence. The support was largely in response to the damage 
inflicted by the stagflation of the 1970s and the clear lesson that high inflation is detrimental 
to sustainable growth. So, fiscal dominance gradually yielded to independent central banks 
targetting largely, and in some cases exclusively, price stability, free of short term political 
imperatives.  Empirical  work  shows  that  in  the  two  decades  during  which  central  bank 
independence  gained  ascendancy,  there  was  a  negative  correlation  between  inflation  and 
the  degree  of  independence  of  the  central  bank  across  both  developed  and  developing 
economies. In some cases though, reverse causality – low inflation performance leading to 
central bank independence – cannot be ruled out. 
37. 
Notwithstanding their record on price stability, the crisis has dented the credibility of 
central banks. The blame on central banks is wide ranging – loose monetary policies coupled 
with  neglect  of  asset  price  developments,  exclusive  focus  on  inflation  to  the  detriment  of 
financial stability and lax and inept regulation that failed to keep pace with innovation. There 
is resentment, if not outrage, against the famed independence of central banks; and there is 
an outcry for clipping their mandates and tightening the accountability mechanisms.  
38.  Beyond the short-term, the threat to the independence of central banks emanates from 
factors apart from public anger. Notably, the crisis saw unprecedented expansionary fiscal 
and  monetary  policies  launched  by  governments  and  central  banks  in  coordination.  As 
countries contemplate exit from these expansionary policies, the familiar tensions between 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are  showing  up  again.  Many  believe  that  these  tensions  are 
temporary, and will melt away once recovery takes root.  
39. 
That  may  not  well  be  the  case.  There  is  wide  spread  apprehension  that  many 
advanced  country  governments  will  not  be  able  to  wind  down  borrowing  because  of 
demographic factors and consequent growing social security payments. IMF studies estimate 
that  even  if  the  governments  in  the  advanced  economies  reverse  the  crisis  induced  fiscal 
stimulus, these economies will still end up with a structural primary deficit of 2 per cent of 
GDP. Government debt in the advanced economies is projected to jump from the pre-crisis 
level of 78 per cent of GDP in 2007 to 118 per cent by 2014 assuming some discretionary 
tightening  beginning  this  year.  In  such  a  scenario,  what  are  now  seen  as  cyclical  fiscal 
deficits may, in fact, morph into structural fiscal deficits. We may then see the return of fiscal 
dominance and undermining of the independence of central banks. 
40. 
I spoke earlier about the role of central banks in preserving financial stability, and in 
particular, about how the responsibility for financial stability may be delineated. By its very 
nature,  the  responsibility  for  financial  stability  has  to  be  shared  by  the  government,  the 
central bank and other regulators. In and of itself, that sharing is no problem. But there are 
two related concerns. The first is that rescuing financial institutions is an inherently political 
act and getting involved in such decisions may compromise the technocratic credentials of 
central banks. The second concern is the risk that coordination with governments in the area 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2010
of  financial  stability  may  spill  over  into  other  areas  within  central  bank  purview  thereby 
undermining their independence. 
41. 
All in all, the case for central bank independence is coming under increasing assault 
as a result of crisis led developments. The challenge for central banks is to make the case 
for independence not through weighty arguments but through more vigorous and voluntary 
efforts to be transparent, responsive and accountable.  
Let  me  now  conclude.  I  have  raised,  what  are  in  my  view,  five  challenges  that 
Conclusion 
42. 
central banks will have to address. They are the following: 
Managing monetary policy in a globalizing environment 
i. 
Redefining the mandate of central banks 
ii. 
Responsibility of central banks towards financial stability 
iii. 
Managing the costs and benefits of regulation 
iv. 
Managing the balance between the autonomy and accountability of central banks 
v. 
This listing of challenges is by no means exhaustive. And many different nuances 
43. 
are possible. I hope that our deliberations over the next two days will give us greater clarity 
on  the  challenges  that  we  face  collectively  and  individually,  and  a  better  understanding  of 
how to begin addressing them.  
44. 
A final thought. In his recent best seller, “The Ascent of Money”, Niall Ferguson says 
that sometimes the most important historical events are the non-events: the things that did 
not occur. The spectacular non-event of this crisis is that the Great Recession did not turn 
into the second Great Depression as we had feared. For this central banks should get a part 
of the credit. But they cannot rest on their laurels – they have big challenges ahead as the 
crisis winds down. Their biggest challenge by far is to regain their credibility. 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 7
