Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Naigai Josei Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 29 January 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to have the opportunity to speak before such a large audience today. 
Thinking  back,  this  time  last  year,  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets  were  in  the 
midst of a rapid and large decline, and I think many business managers were seized by the 
fear that no bottom was in sight. Policy makers at home and abroad also tackled the situation 
with a sense of nervousness that one wrong policy step might result in a 1930s-style Great 
Depression. Fortunately, one year on, today, as a result of the intense efforts of private firms 
and the prompt implementation of various unconventional policy measures by governments 
and  central  banks  around  the  globe,  the  downturn  of  the  global  and  Japanese  economies 
has been brought to a halt and activity has started to pick up. While economic conditions are 
improving, this improvement to a great extent owes to the support provided by the various 
policy  measures,  and  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  advanced  economies  still  remains 
below  that  prior  to  the  Lehman  shock.  I  imagine  that,  from  the  perspective  of  business 
managers, the “fear of no bottom in sight” may have gone, but the “anxiety of no future in 
sight” may remain significant. Today, I would like to talk about recent financial and economic 
developments  at  home  and  abroad,  the  thinking  behind  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary 
policy, and medium- to long-term challenges for Japan’s economy. 
I. 
Developments in the global economy 
The mechanisms underlying the downturn and the recovery 
While  the  main  topic  of  today’s  speech  is  Japan’s  economy,  in  the  short-term,  economic 
conditions in Japan will greatly depend on developments in the global economy, as has been 
the case in the past year. 
As you are well aware, the global economy, sparked by the failure of Lehman Brothers in the 
autumn of 2008, faced a panicked contraction of financial and economic activity stemming 
from a liquidity crisis. As we all know, the most basic premise for economic transactions to 
take  place  is  the  confidence  that  counterparties  will  honor  their  obligations.  However, 
following the failure of Lehman Brothers, confidence among financial market participants in 
counterparties  collapsed  and  fund  providers  such  as  financial  institutions  and  institutional 
investors became extremely cautious regarding the creditworthiness of their counterparties. 
Nagging suspicions spread in many financial markets, and the funds necessary for economic 
activity  did  not  circulate  easily.  The  effect,  as  it  were,  was  like  an  unintended  sudden 
financial tightening on a global scale. Firms and consumers were not able to raise funds and 
thus were forced to cut back on their spending. Moreover, due to heightened anxiety, many 
started  to  restrain  their  spending.  As  a  result,  the  global  economy  experienced  the  acute 
symptoms  of  what  could  be  described  as  an  instantaneous  evaporation  of  demand. 
Reflecting the characteristics of this crisis, what was affected the most were capital goods 
and durable consumer goods. Since Japan’s strength lies in exactly these kinds of goods, 
that  is,  automobiles,  electrical  machinery,  general  machinery,  etc.,  Japan’s  economy  was 
severely affected. And for the same reason, despite the fact that they were not the epicenter 
of the financial crisis, not only Japan but also many other East Asian economies, including 
South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore, were among those that experienced the most severe 
downturn in economic activity immediately after the crisis. 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 1
The global economy bottomed out around the spring of last year and is now in a stage of 
recovery. The growth forecast for the global economy for 2010 by the International Monetary 
Fund  has  been  edging  up  over  time,  from  1.9  percent  in  April  2009,  to  3.1  percent  in 
October, and to 3.9 percent in the forecast released this week. Underlying these revisions 
are the progress made in inventory adjustments and the effects of various policy measures 
by governments and central banks. Let us take a look at the recovery process in more detail. 
The major driving force of the current recovery are emerging and developing economies, and 
the share of these economies in global growth is forecasted to reach 70 percent in 2010. In 
contrast, although the United States, Europe, and other advanced economies have emerged 
from the sharp recession, there has not yet been sufficient momentum for a self-sustaining 
recovery.  At  the  root  of  the  panic  sparked  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  was  the 
structural  problem  of  balance-sheet  adjustments.  Toward  the  mid-2000s,  households  and 
firms  especially  in  the  U.S.  and  several  European  economies  borrowed  excessively  from 
financial  institutions  based  on  the  optimistic  assumption  that  asset  prices,  such  as  home 
prices,  would  keep  on  rising,  boosting  consumption  and  investment.  Financial  institutions 
provided funds to support such behavior of households and firms and continued to increase 
lending. However, once asset prices started to decline, such developments reversed almost 
instantaneously.  In  order  to  reduce  debts  that  had  increased  excessively  during  the  asset 
price bubble, firms and households were forced to cut back on consumption and investment. 
Efforts  to  reduce  debts  led  to  a  decrease  in  aggregate  demand  and  a  fall  in  asset  prices. 
Financial institutions also had to restore balance between bloated assets and excessive risks 
on the one hand and capital bases on the other. In this process, it inevitably became difficult 
for financial institutions to engage in active risk-taking such as the extension of new loans. 
While  the  repair  of  balance  sheets  is  an  unavoidable  process  to  return  economies  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  process  in  the  meantime  exerts 
continuous downward pressure on economies. If the plunge in economic activity following the 
Lehman  shock  can  be  described  as  the  “acute  symptoms”  of  the  financial  crisis,  then  the 
balance sheet adjustments are a “chronic illness” that will continue to affect economies. 
In contrast, emerging and commodity-exporting economies have recently been recovering at 
a more rapid pace than expected. The rapid recovery of emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies is mainly attributable to three factors.  
First, with their populations growing, potential domestic demand in these countries is strong 
to start with, driven by buoyant consumption associated with rising living standards and the 
need  for  expanding  social  infrastructures.  A  typical  example  is  China,  where  demand  for 
durable consumer goods such as televisions and automobiles is extremely strong. Moreover, 
in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  social  infrastructure,  such  as  roads  and 
electric power plants, is still underdeveloped relative to the population. If such infrastructure 
improves, there is the potential for further increases in demand for automobiles and home 
electronics.  
Second, 
themselves  have  also 
implemented aggressive economic stimulus measures in response to the recent crisis. Unlike 
the advanced countries, the emerging and commodity-exporting economies were not facing 
a problem of balance sheet adjustments, and potential demand was strong to start with, so 
that the multiplier effects of fiscal stimulus measures are likely to have been significant.  
And third, there have been massive flows to emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
of funds for risk-taking that could not find sufficient investment opportunities within advanced 
economies.  Therefore,  in  the  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  economic 
recovery has been underpinned by an increase in domestic bank lending and a rise in real 
estate  prices.  This  trend  has  also  been  accelerated  by  the  fact  that  many  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  have  adopted  inflexible  exchange  rate  regimes  tying  their 
currencies to the U.S. dollar. However, if accommodative monetary conditions continue too 
long, this could lead to an overheating of emerging and commodity-exporting economies or 
the  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  countries 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2010
turmoil in financial markets, or, in the future, to an economic downturn due to a reversal of 
capital flows. Therefore, some countries have already started taking policy measures on the 
monetary policy front such as raising policy interest rates. 
The outlook 
This was a quick review of the mechanisms underlying the plunge and recovery of the global 
economy following the failure of Lehman Brothers. One of the important issues in forecasting 
future developments is how to assess the monetary and fiscal policies that have played such 
a major role in the current recovery process.  
During the current economic recovery, the various policy measures taken by central banks 
have exerted substantial effects. Although policy rates in the major economies had reached 
virtually  zero  at  the  end  of  2008  and  there  remained  no  room  for  further  rate  reductions, 
credit spreads, which had jumped during the crisis, nevertheless narrowed significantly and 
credit availability recovered as a result of various unconventional measures. In other words, 
even though the policy rates at which central banks provide funds to financial markets had 
reached the lower bound, monetary easing was substantially enhanced through measures to 
promote financial market stability.  
Another thing I would like to add with regard to monetary easing is that, in contrast with the 
past, the effects of monetary easing in the advanced economies have been greater in other 
economies,  especially  emerging  economies,  than  in  the  advanced  economies  themselves. 
With  respect  to  the  transmission  mechanisms  of  the  effects  of  monetary  easing,  textbook 
examples include increased bank lending and capital investment due to a decline in interest 
rates  and  rising  exports  owing  to  exchange  rate  depreciation.  However,  the  transmission 
mechanisms  of  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  are  also  changing  in  tandem  with  the 
globalization  of  financial  markets.  In  the  current  situation,  in  part  because  advanced 
economies  face  the  problem  of  balance  sheet  adjustments,  one  mechanism  that  might 
become  important  is  the  stimulus  provided  to  advanced  economies’  exports  and  domestic 
capital investment through the recovery in emerging markets. 
In terms of macroeconomic policy, the role of fiscal policy has also been important. Since the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  governments  have,  in  response  to  the  rapid  economic  and 
financial contraction, injected public capital into financial institutions and have implemented 
large-scale 
interventions  were 
indispensable to maintain financial system stability and stem the plunge in economic activity. 
Yet, while these measures have been achieving their intended purposes, at the same time, 
fiscal  deficits  have  increased  and  government  debt  has  risen  markedly.  It  can  be  said 
metaphorically that, in the recent crisis, the governments assumed the risks and debt that the 
private sector could not shoulder. However, as economic and financial market stability has 
returned, participants in global financial markets have started to pay greater attention to the 
risks the governments shouldered and the associated problems, namely the issues of fiscal 
deficits and fiscal discipline. What is interesting in relation to this is the Fed’s purchases of 
Treasury  securities  during  March  to  October  last  year.  In  conducting  such  purchases,  the 
Fed repeatedly emphasized that the purchases were neither public financing by the central 
bank nor aimed at guiding long-term interest rates to specific levels. The emphasis, despite 
the fact that the Fed’s purchases of Treasury securities were much smaller than the Bank’s 
purchases of government bonds relative to the size of the economy, could be seen as part of 
its determination to maintain confidence in its monetary policy. 
Under these difficult circumstances, what kind of monetary and fiscal policies are desirable is 
something that ultimately each country needs to decide for itself based on its own economic 
and financial conditions. In terms of the basic stance of policy conduct, advanced economies 
at  present  are  placing  priority  on  economic  recovery,  while  emerging  economies  are 
beginning to pay greater attention to the potential overheating of their economies. What is 
important in the end is that the global economy as a whole is brought back to a sustainable 
fiscal  stimulus  measures.  Such 
large-scale  policy 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 3
growth  path.  With  this  goal  in  mind,  it  is  necessary  for  policy  authorities  to  carry  out  the 
appropriate policies while firmly maintaining confidence in their policies.  
Economic and price developments in Japan 
II. 
Based on the developments in the global economy just described, I would now like to discuss 
economic and price developments in Japan.  
Let  us  first  consider  the  situation  Japan’s  economy  finds  itself  in  at  the  moment.  The 
fluctuations  in  the  economy  are  shown  most  vividly  in  the  index  of  industrial  production. 
Taking as the period immediately before the Lehman shock the July–September quarter of 
2008 and setting the index of industrial production to 100, the level of activity dropped to 66 
in  February  2009.  The  drop  was  particularly  pronounced  in  the  automobile  and  electronic 
parts industries. Thereafter, production started to increase from  March  and recovered to a 
level  of  86  in  December.  Since  the  index  of  industrial  production  essentially  covers 
manufacturing industry, which accounts for only 20 percent of Japan’s economy overall, to 
gauge overall economic activity, it is necessary to look at developments in real GDP. After 
falling sharply in the October–December quarter of 2008 and the January–March quarter of 
2009 at annualized quarter-on-quarter rates of 10 percent, average real GDP growth in the 
next two quarters was about 2 percent. For the October–December quarter of 2009, private-
sector forecasts put growth at a similar rate. The level of real GDP in the October–December 
2009  quarter  is  expected  to  be  about  95  when  taking  the  level  immediately  before  the 
Lehman shock as 100. 
Looking at the pick-up of the economy in terms of final demand items shows that exports, on 
a  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  expanded  by  over  10  percent  both  in  the  April–June  and  the 
July–September  quarters  of  2009  and  continued  to  expand  by  about  9  percent  in  the 
October–December quarter, with exports to East Asian economies accounting for more than 
half  of  that  increase.  Private  consumption  has  been  picking  up,  particularly  of  durable 
consumer goods such as automobiles and electronic appliances, due to the effects of various 
policy  measures,  although  the  employment  and  income  situation  remains  severe,  as 
illustrated  by  decreasing  bonus  payments.  Business  fixed  investment,  too,  following  a 
continuous slide from the April–June quarter of 2008, is bottoming out. Not a few firms have 
been  considering  shifting  investment  to  emerging  markets,  where  expansion  in  demand  is 
expected.  However,  since  the  level  of  business  fixed  investment  has  already  declined 
considerably, if exports and production continue to increase, the capacity utilization rate will 
increase  and  business  fixed  investment  will  bottom  out  and  start  to  increase.  Housing 
investment has recently been showing signs of bottoming out. In contrast, public investment 
has started to level off. Based on this assessment, the Bank judges that Japan’s economy is 
picking  up.  However,  this  pick-up  reflects  various  policy  measures  taken  at  home  and 
abroad, and there is not yet sufficient momentum for a self-sustaining recovery in domestic 
private  demand.  Moreover,  given  that  the  recent  pick-up  of  the  economy  centers  on  the 
manufacturing  sector,  there  are  disparities  in  the  degree  of  improvement  between  regions 
where manufacturing firms are concentrated and other regions. Furthermore, there are also 
disparities  among  firms,  with  the  situation  differing  between  large  firms,  small  firms,  and 
micro businesses. 
The question is how the economy will develop. The baseline scenario is that the economy is 
likely to continue picking up on the back of improvements in overseas economies and the 
effects  of  economic  policy  measures.  However,  the  pace  of  improvement  in  Japan’s 
economy is likely to be moderate until around the middle of fiscal 2010, since the pace of 
recovery  in  the  global  economy  is  likely  to  remain  moderate  and,  in  Japan,  pressure  for 
adjusting  employment  and  wages  is  likely  to  remain.  Going  forward,  as  balance-sheet 
adjustments in the United States and Europe make fair progress, in Japan the improvements 
in the corporate sector originating from exports are likely to spill over to the household sector. 
Therefore, in fiscal 2011, Japan’s economic growth is likely to clearly accelerate. In terms of 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2010
figures,  the  economic  growth  rate  is  projected  to  be  around  1  percent  for  fiscal  2010  and 
around 2 percent for fiscal 2011. However, the Bank is fully aware that the baseline scenario 
is  accompanied  by  various  uncertainties,  and  thus  will  continue  to  examine  economic 
developments without having any prejudgment. 
I will now turn to price developments in Japan. Since I will discuss the so-called “deflation 
issue”  in  a  moment,  let  me,  for  the  time  being,  simply  look  at  the  figures.  Since  2008, 
consumer  prices  have  been  swinging  widely  due  mainly  to  the  fluctuations  of  prices  of 
petroleum  products  and  other  commodities.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  excluding  fresh  food  peaked  at  2.4  percent  in  the  summer  of 
2008, followed a downward trend thereafter, and posted the largest decline on record, minus 
2.4 percent, in August 2009, mainly because of the base effect of the previous year’s surge 
in  oil  prices.  Subsequently,  with  the  fading  of  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  the  price  of 
petroleum products, the rate of decline in the CPI in December moderated to a year-on-year 
rate of change of minus 1.3 percent. 
Looking  ahead,  the  pace  of  the  year-on-year  decline  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  continue 
moderating  due  mainly  to  the  gradual  improvement  of  the  supply  and  demand  balance 
associated with the pick-up of the economy. However, given that the recovery started from a 
level  of  unprecedented  weakness  in  demand  and  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  going 
forward is expected to be moderate, downward pressure on prices is likely to remain for a 
considerable period. The Policy Board members’ forecasts of the year-on-year change in the 
CPI released early this week is around minus 0.5 percent for fiscal 2010 and around minus 
0.2 percent for fiscal 2011. 
The thinking behind monetary policy 
III. 
Let me now explain the thinking behind the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Earlier,  I  pointed  out  the  two  causes  of  the  global  economic  slump:  the  acute  symptoms 
sparked directly by the financial crisis and chronic illness due to balance sheet adjustments. 
The policy responses of Japan and other countries were taken to address these two causes.  
Regarding the acute symptoms, many central banks took measures such as the purchase of 
particular financial assets in markets that had ceased functioning to prevent a worsening of 
the financial crisis and to ensure the flow of funds necessary for private economic activity, 
working  to  restore  the  functioning  of  markets.  The  Bank  also  took  policy  steps  that  are 
unconventional for a central bank such as the outright purchase of CP and corporate bonds. 
In this regard, there has been some criticism that the Bank has not implemented sufficient 
monetary  easing,  which  is  based  on  the  argument  that  the  relative  increase  in  the  Fed’s 
balance  sheet  has  been  greater  than  that  in  the  Bank’s.  Such  criticism  shows  a  complete 
misunderstanding of the facts. The significant expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet simply 
reflects the unfortunate situation that the functioning of U.S. capital markets, which account 
for  about  70  percent  of  firms’  fund  raising,  had  seriously  declined  and  there  was  no 
alternative  but  for  the  Fed,  as  the  central  bank,  to  completely  take  over  the  role  of  the 
markets. Although the functioning of corporate bond and CP markets in Japan declined, the 
financial system, when compared with those of the United States and Europe, nevertheless 
remained relatively stable. This is partly the result of the various efforts made based on the 
bitter  experience  since  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s.  It  is  for  these  reasons  that  the  Bank’s 
balance sheet has not expanded as much as that of the Fed. Rather, the size of the Bank’s 
balance sheet already expanded significantly before the crisis. Global financial markets have 
been regaining stability thanks to the extraordinary measures implemented by central banks 
around the world. Therefore, reflecting the improvements in financial markets, central banks 
overseas have been winding up various crisis measures in a sequenced manner since last 
summer.  In  Japan,  too,  since  the  functioning  of  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets  has 
recovered, the Bank wound up its outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds at the end 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 5
of December 2009. Nevertheless, as I always stress, the Bank is prepared to act swiftly and 
decisively should concerns that financial market stability might be hampered re-emerge.  
With the response phase to the financial crisis behind us, the key policy challenge now is to 
how  to  guide  the  economy  onto  a  sustainable  growth  path.  While  the  Bank  lowered  the 
interest rate level to virtually zero by reducing the policy interest rate to 0.1 percent at the 
end of 2008, given the outlook for economic activity and prices described earlier, the Bank 
considers  it  necessary  to  maintain  the  extremely  accommodative  financial  environment.  At 
the beginning of December 2009, the Bank introduced a new funds-supplying operation so 
as  to  further  enhance  easy  monetary  conditions.  With  this  operation,  the  Bank  provides 
ample longer-term funds to the money market at an extremely low interest rate of 0.1, which 
is  equivalent  to  the  policy  rate,  by  employing  the  existing  framework  of  funds-supplying 
operations  against  pooled  collateral,  which  accept  a  wider  range  of  collateral  such  as 
Japanese government securities and corporate bonds.  
The Bank recognizes that it is a critical challenge for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation 
and  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  As  the  central  bank,  we  will 
continue to make every effort to contribute to achieving this goal. 
The “deflation issue” and achieving sustainable growth 
IV. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  so-called  “deflation  issue.”  Recently,  in  discussions  of 
various  economic  phenomenon,  they  have  increasingly  been  argued  in  association  with 
deflation. Therefore, it is all the more important to correctly understand the cause of deflation. 
Since the 1990s, inflation has been falling worldwide. Reasons for this include the success of 
central banks’ monetary policies aimed at price stability and the substantial decline in costs 
as planned economies made the transition to the market. However, the arguments frequently 
heard today are not about this general decline in inflation but about why the inflation rate in 
Japan is lower than in other advanced economies. In fact, Japan’s inflation rate as measured 
by  the  CPI  has  been  about  2–3  percentage  points  lower  than  that  of  other  advanced 
economies  even  in  the  bubble  period  in  the  late  1980s.  There  are  three  possible  reasons 
why inflation in Japan has been low for a protracted period.  
First,  rationalization  of  the  distribution  system  and  deregulation.  While  one  rarely  hears  it 
mentioned today, from the 1980s to the mid-1990s, high prices in Japan, that is, the need to 
address the difference between domestic and foreign prices, were frequently identified as a 
major issue with regard to Japan’s economy. Rationalization of the distribution system and 
deregulation  were  implemented  to  address  the  issue.  Rationalization  of  the  distribution 
system,  together  with  globalization,  led  to  an  increase  in  low-priced  imports.  Moreover, 
deregulation exerted downward pressure on prices by reducing margins in industries and of 
firms that were protected by regulation in the past. While this was an extremely challenging 
situation for firms that were subject to such competitive pressures, it also meant an increase 
in real purchasing power for consumers and a rise in productivity for Japan’s economy as a 
whole. 
The second potential reason is the continuous decline in wages since the latter half of the 
1990s. Since the bursting of the bubble economy, Japan’s economy has undergone a severe 
and  unavoidable  adjustment  process.  Looking  at  the  labor  market  from  a  macroeconomic 
perspective,  since  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  managers  and  workers  in  Japan  have  put 
priority  on  maintaining  employment,  and  to  do  so,  workers  accepted  reductions  in  wages. 
Comparing consumer prices in Japan with those in other advanced economies, what stands 
out is the decline in service prices, implying that while flexible wage adjustments have been 
effective  in  terms  of  preventing  an  increase  in  unemployment,  in  return,  they  have  put 
consistent downward pressure on the prices of labor-intensive services. 
The third potential reason, which I believe is the most important one, is that expectations for 
future economic growth have declined. This decline in growth expectations has been further 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2010
spurred by the aging and shrinking of Japan’s population. The decline in growth expectations 
appears to have dampened investment in the corporate sector and heightened anxiety over 
future  income  in  the  household  sector  and  thereby  restrained  private  consumption.  This 
contraction in spending by firms and households seems to have induced a vicious cycle in 
that  it  led  to  a  further  deterioration  in  aggregate  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the 
economy,  which  in  turn  further  reduced  growth  expectations.  Ultimately,  at  the  root  of  the 
aforementioned  decline  in  wages,  there  is  a  lack  of  demand  due  to  the  decline  in  growth 
expectations.  
In any case, the root cause of deflation is a lack of demand. Then, what should be done to 
resolve this lack of demand? In this regard, some point out the need for demand-boosting 
measures large enough to close the output gap. However, the output gap after all compares 
the demand for goods and services based on existing needs and supply capacity for goods 
and services that meet such needs. With the unprecedented global bubble having burst, it is 
unlikely  that  there  will  be  sufficient demand  for  the  existing  supply  capacity  for  goods  and 
services. On the other hand, potential needs such as with regard to nursing and caring are 
substantial. The challenge, therefore, is to make efforts to convert potential needs into actual 
demand,  and  turning  this  into  reality  requires  entrepreneurs  and  innovators.  Concerning 
policies  to  counter  deflation,  some  argued  that  “if  the  central  bank  were  to  increase  its 
balance sheet, then deflation would come to an end.” However, both the Bank in the first half 
of  the  2000s,  in  implementing  quantitative  easing,  and  the  Fed  since  2007  significantly 
expanded their balance sheets; yet, there have been no corresponding price rises. Based on 
such experience, the argument that “if the central bank were to increase its balance sheet, 
then deflation would come to an end” is rarely discussed in the United States and Europe. 
What is clear is that, when the stability of the financial system is in danger, expansion of the 
central  bank’s  balance  sheet,  that  is,  the  provision  of  liquidity,  is  extremely  effective  in 
preventing a downward price spiral by ensuring the stability of the financial system. And that 
is  exactly  what  the  Bank  of  Japan  did.  However,  once  financial  system  instability  is 
overcome, an increase in liquidity alone cannot resolve deflation. We need to look squarely 
at the root causes underlying the deflation issue. 
Prices are often considered as the temperature of the economy. It is not possible to artificially 
raise  only  the  temperature  for  a  prolonged  period.  Rather,  in  order  for  the  temperature  to 
follow  an  upward  trend,  it  must  be  based  on  genuine  health-promoting  measures  and,  in 
some cases, an appropriate cure. The same applies with regard to the response to deflation. 
The important thing in order to apply the brakes to a moderate downward trend in prices is to 
raise trend growth expectations. Put differently, with the recognition that it is indispensable to 
make steady efforts to raise productivity, we need to tackle this challenge. 
In this regard, there is no “magic wand.” Here, I would like to point out two basic elements 
that are important in overcoming deflation and achieving sustainable economic growth.  
The first is the importance of making the most of global demand, especially from emerging 
and  developing  economies,  which  are  expected  to  enjoy  high  growth.  At  present,  the 
penetration rate of automobiles in China is about 4 percent. This more or less matches the 
level in Japan in the first half of the 1960s when motorization started in earnest. In Japan, it 
took 30 years for the penetration rate of automobiles to reach 50 percent. While the road of 
growth for emerging economies may not be even, the potential opportunities provided by the 
growth  of  these  markets  are  vast,  as  many  people  recognize.  Given  that  globalization  is 
steadily  progressing,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  see  external  demand  and  domestic 
demand  as  opposing  concepts.  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  for  Japan’s  economy  it  is 
important  to  both  reap  the  fruits  of  global  economic  growth  and  to  lay  the  groundwork  for 
expanding domestic demand.  
The second point that I think is important in overcoming deflation is the need to establish a 
supply system that corresponds to potential demand and thereby raise productivity. In order 
to make the most of the demand from expanding new markets in emerging and developing 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 7
economies,  we  need  to  change  the  goods  supplied  and  the  supply  system  by  taking  into 
account  the  characteristics  of  individual  markets.  If  we  are  able  to  provide  goods  and 
services that meet potential demand, sales will increase and consequently productivity will 
rise.  While  discussions  of  “productivity”  typically  refer  to  producing  existing  products 
efficiently,  unlocking  potential  demand  and  establishing  the  necessary  supply  system  also 
raises productivity. What is important, therefore, are efforts by firms to adapt existing human 
and  management  resources  to  new  markets  in  order  to  link  potential  needs  with  actual 
demand.  Moreover,  in  order  to  support  such  efforts  at  the  firm  level,  it  is  critical  to  review 
systems  and  mechanisms  so  as  to  ensure  the  flexibility  of  Japan’s  economic  structure  in 
response to changes in the economic environment at home and abroad. For example, both 
firm entry rates and firm exit rates in Japan are about 5 percent, which is roughly half of the 
corresponding rates in the United States, suggesting that Japan’s economic metabolism is 
low. While there is not enough time today to go into this in detail, to improve this situation 
and  create  a  mechanism  in  which  productive  resources  are  smoothly  transferred  to  areas 
where  there  is  a  strong  need  for  them,  the  role  of  financial  markets  is  also  important.  In 
addition, the necessary social safety net should be put in place to deal with adverse effects 
arising during the process. 
These are two of the issues I think are important to raise the potential growth rate of Japan’s 
economy.  Looking  back  at  Japan’s economy  in  the  past,  we  have  a  record  of  overcoming 
difficulties  and  achieving  prosperity  through  people’s  wisdom  and  efforts.  To  truly  bring 
Japan’s economy back onto a sustainable growth path, proactive efforts such as the ones I 
just mentioned are essential. While the process of putting such efforts into practice will not be 
without pain, it is unavoidable given the drastic economic changes taking place on a global 
basis. In this regard, what somewhat worries me is the recent mood of pessimism that fails to 
recognize  the  strengths  of  Japan’s  economy.  For  example,  while  Japan’s  financial  system 
has  remained  relatively  stable  during 
to  be 
underappreciated. Similarly, regarding the growth of emerging economies only as a threat is 
not  a  very  well-balanced  view.  For  instance,  it  has  been  estimated  that  if  motorization  in 
China and India were to progress at the same pace as in Japan when it was about to enter 
the era of high-speed growth, more automobiles than those now existing in the world will be 
produced. If this does indeed occur, the burden on the global environment will be extremely 
large,  but,  by  the  same  token,  this  suggests  that  demand  for  environmental  technology, 
which Japan is good at, will also increase. Of course, Japan should not be complacent about 
its environmental technology, but I think it is important to remember to perceive the growth of 
emerging economies as a positive challenge.  
the  recent  crisis, 
fact  seems 
this 
Closing remarks 
I have talked about the various challenges Japan’s economy faces, and the Bank will do its 
utmost  as  the  central  bank  to  support  your  efforts.  While  a  central  bank  carries  out  many 
functions, if you ask me what its most fundamental role is, I would say it is to contribute to 
economic development by maintaining confidence in the currency. Such confidence, I would 
like to stress once again, provides a vitally important anchor. In order to fulfill this role, the 
Bank  must  be  an  organization  that  assesses  the  situation  accurately,  explains  its 
assessment to the public, and acts decisively. I would like to conclude my speech today by 
emphasizing that the Bank is acutely aware of the important role it has to play. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 11/2010
