Andrew Haldane: The contribution of the financial sector – miracle or 
mirage? 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Haldane,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at the Future of Finance conference, London, 14 July 2010. 
This text is taken from  a co-authored chapter by Andrew Haldane, Simon Brennan  and Vasileios Madouros in 
“The Future of Finance: The LSE Report” published today by The London School of Economics. 
 We would like to thank Stephen Burgess, Melissa Davey, Rob Elder, Perry Francis, Jen Han, Sam Knott, Nick 
Oulton, Peter Richardson, Jeremy Rowe, Chris Shadforth, Sally Srinivasan and Iain de Weymarn for comments 
and  discussion  on  earlier  drafts,  and  Alexander  Haywood  and  Laura  Wightman  for  research  assistance.  The 
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bank of England. 
Introduction 
1.  
The financial crisis of the past three years has, on any measure, been extremely costly. As in 
past financial crises, public sector debt seems set to double relative to national income in a 
number of countries (Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)). And measures of foregone output, now 
and in the future, put the net present value cost of the crisis at anywhere between one and 
five times annual world GDP (Haldane (2010)). Either way, the scars from the current crisis 
seem likely to be felt for a generation. 
It is against this backdrop that an intense debate is underway internationally about reform of 
finance  (Goodhart  (2010)).  Many  of  the  key  planks  of  that  debate  are  covered  in  other 
chapters in this volume. Some of these reform measures are extensions or elaborations of 
existing  regulatory  initiatives  –  for  example,  higher  buffers  of  higher  quality  capital  and 
liquidity.  Others  propose  a  reorientation  of  existing  regulatory  apparatus  –  for  example, 
through  counter-cyclical  adjustments  in  prudential  policy  (Bank  of  England  (2009b),  Large 
(2010)).  Others  still  suggest  a  root-and-branch  restructuring  of  finance  –  for  example,  by 
limiting the size and/or scope of banking (Kay (2009), Kotlikoff (2010)). 
In  evaluating  these  reform  proposals,  it  is  clearly  important  that  the  on-going  benefits  of 
finance  are  properly  weighed  alongside  the  costs  of  crisis.  Doing  so  requires  an 
understanding  and  measurement  of  the  contribution  made  by  the  financial  sector  to 
economic well-being. This is important both for making sense of the past (during which time 
the role of finance has grown) and for shaping the future (during which it is possible the role 
of finance may shrink). 
While simple in principle, this measurement exercise is far from straightforward in practice. 
Recent experience makes clear the extent of the problem. In September 2008, the collapse 
of  Lehman  Brothers  precipitated  a  chain  reaction  in  financial  markets.  This  brought  the 
financial system, and many of the world’s largest institutions, close to the point of collapse. 
During the fourth quarter of 2008, equity prices of the major global banks fell by around 50% 
on average, a loss of market value of around $640 billion. As a consequence, world GDP 
and  world  trade  are  estimated  to  have  fallen  at  an  annualised  rate  of  about  6%  and  25% 
respectively in 2008Q4. Banking contributed to a Great Recession on a scale last seen at the 
time of the Great Depression. 
Yet  the  official  statistics  on  the  contribution  of  the  financial  sector  paint  a  rather  different 
picture.  According  to  the  National  Accounts,  the  nominal  gross  value-added  (GVA)  of  the 
financial sector in the UK grew at the fastest pace on record in 2008Q4. As a share of whole-
economy  output,  the  direct  contribution  of  the  UK  financial  sector  rose  to  9%  in  the  last 
quarter of 2008. Financial corporations’ gross operating surplus (GVA less compensation for 
employees  and  other  taxes  on  production)  increased  by  £5.0bn  to  £20bn,  also  the  largest 
quarterly  increase  on  record.  At  a  time  when  people  believed  banks  were  contributing  the 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 1
least to the economy since the 1930s, the National Accounts indicated the financial sector 
was contributing the most since the mid-1980s. How do we begin to square this circle? 
That  is  the  purpose  of  this  chapter.  It  is  planned  as  follows.  In  Section  2,  we  consider 
conventional  measures  of  financial  sector  value  added  and  how  these  have  evolved  over 
time.  In  Section  3,  we consider  a  growth  accounting  breakdown  of  the  factor inputs  which 
have driven growth – quantities of labour and capital and the returns to these factors. This 
suggests  banking  has  undergone,  at  least  arithmetically,  a  “productivity  miracle”  over  the 
past few decades. Section 4 explores in greater detail some of the quantitative drivers of high 
aggregate returns to banking, while Section 5 explores some of banks’ business activities. 
Risk  illusion,  rather  than  a  productivity  miracle,  appears  to  have  driven  high  returns  to 
finance. The recent history of banking appears to be as much mirage as miracle. Section 6 
concludes with some policy implications. 
2.  
Measuring financial sector output 
Historical trends in GVA 
(a)  
The standard way of measuring the contribution of a sector to output in the economy is GVA. 
This is defined as the value of gross output that a sector or industry produces less the value 
of intermediate consumption (that is, goods and services used in the process of production). 
GVA only measures the sector’s direct contribution to the economy. The indirect contribution 
of finance – for example, on productivity growth through the provision of funds for start-up 
businesses and new investment projects – may also be important. But looking at historical 
trends in value added is a useful starting point. 
Chart 1 plots an index of real GVA of the financial intermediation sector in the UK from the 
middle of the 19th century, alongside an index of whole-economy output. Both series are in 
constant prices and indexed to 1975=100. Table 1 breaks down the growth rates of finance 
and  whole  economy  output  into  three  sub-samples  –  pre-First  World  War,  from  the  First 
World  War  to  the  early  1970s,  and  thence  to  date.  The  historical  trends  in  GVA  for  the 
financial sector are striking. 
Over the past 160 years, growth in financial intermediation has outstripped whole economy 
growth  by  over  2  percentage  points  per  year.  Or  put  differently,  growth  in  financial  sector 
value added has been more than double that of the economy as a whole since 1850. This is 
unsurprising  in  some  respects.  It  reflects  a  trend  towards  financial  deepening  which  is 
evident  across  most  developed  and  developing  economies  over  the  past  century.  This 
structural  trend  in  finance  has  been  shown  to  have  contributed  positively  to  growth  in  the 
whole-economy (Wadhwani (2010)). 
The  sub-sample  evidence  suggests,  however,  that  this  has  not  been  a  straight  line  trend. 
The pre-First World War period marked a period of very rapid financial deepening, with the 
emergence  of  joint  stock  banks  to  service  the  needs  of  a  rapidly  growing  non-financial 
economy. Finance grew at almost four times the pace of the real economy during this rapid-
growth period (Table 1). 
The period which followed, from the First World War right through until the start of the 1970s, 
reversed  this  trend.  The  growth  in  finance  fell  somewhat  short  of  that  in  the  rest  of  the 
economy.  This  in  part  reflected  the  effects  of  tight  quantitative  constraints  on,  and 
government regulation of, the financial sector. 
The  period  from  the  early  1970s  up  until  2007  marked  another  watershed.  Financial 
liberalisation took hold in successive waves. Since then, finance has comfortably outpaced 
growth in the non-financial economy, by around 1.5 percentage points per year. If anything, 
this  trend  accelerated  from  the  early  1980s  onwards.  Measured  real  value  added  of  the 
financial  intermediation  sector  more  than  trebled  between  1980  and  2008,  while  whole 
economy output doubled over the same period. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2010
In 2007, financial intermediation accounted for more than 8% of total GVA, compared with 
5% in 1970. The gross operating surpluses of financial intermediaries show an even more 
dramatic  trend.  Between  1948  and  1978,  intermediation  accounted  on  average  for  around 
1.5% of whole economy profits. By 2008, that ratio had risen tenfold to about 15% (Chart 2). 
Internationally,  a  broadly  similar  pattern  is  evident.  In  the  US,  following  a  major  decline 
during the Great Depression, the value added of the financial sector has risen steadily since 
the end of the Second World War. As a fraction of whole economy GVA, it has quadrupled 
over  the  period,  from  about  2%  of  total  GDP  in  the  1950s  to  about  8%  today  (Chart  3). 
Similar trends are evident in Europe and Asia. According to data from the Banker, the largest 
1000  banks  in  the  world  reported  aggregate  pre-tax  profits  of  almost  $800  billion  in  fiscal 
year  2007/08  (Chart  4),  almost  150%  higher  than  in  2000/01.  This  equates  to  annualised 
returns to banking of almost 15%. 
Some of these trends in the value added and profits of the financial sector, and in particular 
their explosive growth recently, are also discernible in the market valuations of financial firms 
relative to non-financial firms. Total returns to holders of major banks’ equity in the UK, US 
and euro area rose a cumulative 150% between 2002 and 2007 (Chart 5). This comfortably 
exceeded  the  returns  to  the  non-financial  economy  and  even  to  some  of  the  more  risk-
seeking parts of the financial sector, such as hedge funds. 
To illustrate this rather starkly, consider a hedged bet placed back in 1900, which involved 
going long by £100 in financial sector equities and short in non-financial equities by the same 
amount. Chart 6 shows cumulative returns to following this hedged strategy. From 1900 up 
until  the  end  of  the  1970s,  this  bet  yielded  pretty  much  nothing,  with  financial  and 
non-financial  returns  rising  and  falling  roughly  in  lockstep.  But  from  then  until  2007, 
cumulative  returns  to  finance  took  off  and  exploded  in  a  bubble-like  fashion.  Only  latterly, 
with the onset of the crisis, has that bubble burst and returned to earth. 
Measuring GVA in the financial sector 
(b)  
To begin to understand these trends, it is important first to assess how financial sector value-
added  is  currently  measured  and  the  problems  this  poses  when  gauging  the  sector’s 
contribution to the broader economy. 
Most  sectors  charge  explicitly  for  the  products  or  services  they  provide  and  are  charged 
explicitly  for  the  inputs  they  purchase.  This  allows  the  value-added  of  each  sector  to  be 
measured more or less directly. For example, gross output of a second-hand car dealer can 
be calculated as the cash value of all cars sold. The value added of that dealer would then 
be  estimated  by  subtracting  its  intermediate  consumption  (the  value  of  cars  bought)  from 
gross output. 
This is also the case for some of the services provided by the financial sector.1 For example, 
investment banks charge explicit fees when they advise clients on a merger or acquisition. 
Fees or commissions are also levied on underwriting the issuance of securities and for the 
market-making activities undertaken for clients. But such direct charges account for only part 
of the financial system’s total revenues. Finance – and commercial banking in particular – 
relies heavily on interest flows as a means of payment for the services they provide. Banks 
charge an interest rate margin to capture these intermediation services. 
To measure the value of financial services embedded in interest rate margins, the concept of 
FISIM  –  Financial  Intermediation  Services  Indirectly  Measured  –  has  been  developed 
internationally. The concept itself was introduced in the 1993 update of the United Nations 
System  of  National  Accounts  (SNA).  The  SNA  recognises  that  financial  intermediaries 
                                                 
1   For further details refer to, for example, Akritidis L (2007). 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 3
provide services to consumers, businesses, governments and the rest of the world for which 
explicit  charges  are  not  made.  In  associated  guidelines,  a  number  of  such  services  are 
identified including: 
 
 
 
 
FISIM is estimated for loans and deposits only. The calculation is based on the difference 
Taking, managing and transferring deposits; 
Providing flexible payment mechanisms such as debit cards; 
Making loans or other investments; and 
Offering financial advice or other business services. 
between  the  effective  rates  of  interest  (payable  and  receivable)  and  a  “reference”  rate  of 
interest, multiplied by the stock of outstanding balances. According to SNA guidelines, “this 
reference rate represents the pure cost of borrowing funds – that is, a rate from which the 
risk premium has been eliminated to the greatest extent possible, and that does not include 
any intermediation services”.2 For example, a £1,000 loan with a 9% interest receivable and 
a 4% reference rate gives current price FISIM on the loan = £1,000 x (9%–4%) = £50. And 
for a £1,000 deposit with a 3% interest payable and a 4% reference rate, this gives current 
price  FISIM  on  the  deposit  =  £1,000  x  (4%–3%)  =  £10.  Overall,  estimated  current  price 
FISIM accounts for a significant share of gross output of the banking sector (Chart 7). 
Estimating  a  real  measure  of  FISIM  is  fraught  with  both  conceptual  and  computational 
difficulties.  In  the  earlier  example  of  the  second-hand  car  dealer,  statisticians  can  use  the 
number  of  cars  sold  as  an  indicator  of  the  volume  of  gross  output.  But  the  conceptual 
equivalent for financial intermediation is not clear. Would two loans of £50 each to the same 
customer represent a higher level of activity than one loan of £100? Methods for measuring 
FISIM at constant prices are based on conventions. In the UK, real FISIM is calculated by 
applying  the  base-year  interest  margins  to  an  appropriate  volume  indicator  of  loans  and 
deposits. The latter is estimated by deflating the corresponding stocks of loans and deposits 
using the GDP deflator. This method means that any volatility in the current price measure of 
FISIM caused by changes in interest margins does not feed into the real measure. 
Refining the measurement of FISIM 
(c)  
While the introduction of FISIM into the national accounts was an important step forward, it is 
not  difficult  to  construct  scenarios  where  the  contribution  of  the  financial  sector  to  the 
economy  could  be  mis-measured  under  this  approach.  A  key  issue  is  the  extent  to  which 
bearing risk should be measured as a productive service provided by the banking system. 
Adjusting FISIM for risk 
(i)  
Under  current  FISIM  guidelines,  which  use  risk-free  policy  rates  to  measure  the  reference 
rate, banks’ compensation for bearing risk constitutes part of their measured nominal output. 
                                                 
2   1993 System of National Accounts, paragraph 6.128: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/toctop2.asp. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2010
This can lead to some surprising outcomes. For example, assume there is an economy-wide 
increase in the expected level of defaults on loans or in liquidity risk, as occurred in October 
2008. Banks will rationally respond by increasing interest rates to cover the rise in expected 
losses.  FISIM  will  score  this  increased  compensation  for  expected  losses  on  lending  as  a 
rise  in  output.  In  other  words,  at  times  when  risk  is  rising,  the  contribution  of  the  financial 
sector to the real economy may be overestimated. This goes some way towards explaining 
the  2008Q4  National  Accounts  paradox  of  a  rapidly  rising  financial  sector  contribution  to 
nominal GDP. 
Of course, the financial sector does bear the risk of other agents in the economy. Banks take 
on  maturity  mismatch  or  liquidity  risk  on  behalf  of  households  and  companies.  And  banks 
also make risky loans funded by debt, which exposes them to default or solvency risk. But it 
is  not  clear  that  bearing  risk  is,  in  itself,  a  productive  activity.  Any  household  or  corporate 
investing  in  a  risky  debt  security  also  bears  credit  and  liquidity  risk.  The  act  of  investing 
capital in a risky asset is a fundamental feature of capital markets and is not specific to the 
activities of banks. Conceptually, therefore, it is not clear that risk-based income flows should 
represent bank output. 
The productive activity provided by an effectively functioning banking system might be better 
thought  of  as  measuring  and  pricing  credit  and  liquidity  risk.  For  example,  banks  screen 
borrowers’ creditworthiness when extending loans, thereby acting as delegated monitor. And 
they  manage  liquidity  risk  through  their  treasury  operations,  thereby  acting  as  delegated 
treasurer.  These  risk-pricing  services  are  remunerated  implicitly  through  the  interest  rates 
banks charge to their customers. 
Stripping out the compensation for bearing risk to better reflect the service component of the 
financial sector could be achieved in different ways. One possibility would be to adjust FISIM 
using provisions as an indicator of expected losses. A broader adjustment for risk, as has 
been suggested by several commentators, would be to move away from the risk-free rate as 
the  reference  rate  within  FISIM.3  For  example,  a  paper  prepared  for  the  OECD  Working 
Party on National Accounts (Mink (2008)) suggested that the FISIM calculation should use 
reference rates that match the maturity and credit risk of loans and deposits. This would also 
eliminate  an  inconsistency  within  the  current  National  Accounts  framework.  Measured 
financial intermediation output increases if a bank bears the risk of lending to a company. But 
gross output is unchanged if a household holds a bond issued by the same company and 
thus bears the same risk. 
To see how such a mechanism would work, consider the following simple example. A bank 
lends £100 to a corporate borrower at 7% per annum for one-year. The risk-free rate is 5%. 
The bank correctly assesses the credit risk of the corporate to be A-rated. The market spread 
for  A-rated  credits  at  a  maturity  of  one-year  is  1%  over  the  risk-free  rate.  Current  FISIM 
would  estimate  bank  output  as  £2  (Table  2).  Risk-adjusted  FISIM,  though,  would  estimate 
banks’ output as £1. 
An  adjustment  of  FISIM  along  these  lines  could  potentially  be  material.  According  to 
simulations on the impact of such an approach for the Euro-area countries, aggregate risk-
adjusted  FISIM  would  stand  at  about  60%  of  current  aggregate  FISIM  for  the  Euro-area 
countries over the period 2003–7 (Mink (2008)). 
Measuring risk 
(ii)  
Adjusting  FISIM  for  risk  would  better  capture  the  contribution  of  the  financial  sector  to  the 
economy. The fundamental problem is, however, that risk itself is unobservable ex-ante. The 
methodology described above measures risk in a relative way; it effectively assumes that if 
                                                 
3   Wang et al (2004), Wang (2003), Mink (2008), Colangelo and Inklaar (2010). 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 5
banks  deviate  from  prevailing  market  rates,  this  is  to  compensate  for  the  services  they 
provide to borrowers and depositors. But at no point is there an assessment of the ability of 
the  financial  system  to  price  risk  correctly  in  an  absolute  sense.  This  might  not  be  the 
objective  of  statisticians  when  measuring  output.  But  it  is  essential  when  gauging  the 
contribution of finance to economic well-being. 
To see this more clearly, consider an alternative example (Table 3). A bank lends £100 to a 
corporate borrower. But the bank incorrectly assesses the credit risk of the corporate to be 
A-rated,  when  the  true  credit  risk  is  BB-rated.  Assume  for  simplicity  that  the  corporate, 
knowing that its credit risk is greater than A, is prepared to pay a spread higher than that on 
an A-rated credit risk (say 2%). The market spreads for A-rated and BB-rated credits are 1% 
and  2%  respectively.  “Measured”  risk-adjusted  FISIM  is  still  an  improvement  on  current 
FISIM. But the value of bank output is still overstated relative to “true” risk-adjusted FISIM. 
This  would  be  equivalent  to  second-car  hand  dealers  consistently  selling  lemons.  But  a 
dodgy  car-seller  would  be  quickly  found  out.  Mechanical  risk  is  observable.  Dealers  that 
persistently  mis-price  cars  would  be  driven  from  the  market.  Buyers  might  instead  then 
choose to meet online. 
A banking system that does not accurately assess and price risk is not adding much value to 
the  economy.  Buyers  and  sellers  of  risk  could  meet  instead  in  capital  markets  –  as  they 
have,  to  some  extent,  following  the  crisis.  But  unlike  the  condition  of  a  car,  risk  is 
unobservable. So mis-pricing of risk, and mis-measurement of the services banks provide to 
the real economy, may persist. This echoes events in the run-up to crisis when market prices 
systematically under-priced risk for a number of years. Using the market price of risk would 
have  led  statisticians  systematically  to  overstate  the  potential  contribution  of  the  financial 
sector over this period. 
Attempting to adjust the measurement of bank output for risk by changing the reference rate 
in  FISIM  is  an  improvement  on  current  practices.  But  it  would  still  fall  short  of  assessing 
whether the financial sector is pricing risk correctly and hence assessing the true value of the 
services banks provides to the wider economy. Unless the price of risk can be evaluated, it 
seems unlikely the contribution of the financial sector to the economy can be measured with 
accuracy. 
3.  
Decomposing the contribution of the financial sector – the productivity 
“miracle” 
To that end, an alternative way of looking at the contribution of the financial sector is through 
inputs  to  the  production  process.  This  might  shed  more  light  on  the  sources  of  the  rapid 
growth in finance. Was this expansion accompanied by a rising share of resources employed 
by finance relative to the rest of the economy? Or did it instead reflect unusually high returns 
to these factors of production? This section considers these questions in turn. 
Growth accounting decomposition 
(a)  
The basic growth accounting framework breaks down the sources of economic growth into 
the contributions from increases in the inputs to production, capital and labour. This amounts 
to  relating  growth  in  GDP  to  growth  in  labour  input  and  in  various  capital  services  (from 
buildings,  vehicles,  computers  and  other  resources).  When  these  factors  have  all  been 
accounted  for,  the  remainder  is  often  attributed  to  technical  change  –  the  so-called  Solow 
residual (Solow (1957)). 
The growth accounting framework assumes an underlying aggregate production function. In 
its most basic form, the aggregate production function can be written as: 
 6 
 BIS Review 95/2010
where Q is output, K and L represent capital and labour units and t appears in f to allow for 
technical change. 
Assuming  constant  returns  to  scale,  perfect  competition  (so  that  factors  of  production  are 
paid  their  marginal  products)  and  Hicks-neutral  technical  change  (so  that  shifts  in  the 
production  function  do  not  affect  marginal  rates  of  substitution  between  inputs),  output 
growth can be expressed as a weighted sum of the growth rates of inputs and an additional 
term  that  captures  shifts  over  time  in  the  production  technology.  The  weights  for  the  input 
growth  rates  are  the  respective  shares  in  total  input  payments  –  the  labour  and  capital 
shares. More specifically: 
 L
 represent respectively the capital and labour shares of income. 
where  A(t)  is  a  multiplicative  factor  in  the  production  function  capturing  technical  change. 
K  ,
Charts 8 and 9 look at the proportion of labour and physical capital employed by the financial 
intermediation sector in the UK relative to the whole economy over the past forty years. They 
follow a not dissimilar path, with both labour and capital inputs rising as a share of the whole 
economy  for  much  of  the  period.  The  proportion  of  labour  employed  by  finance  rises  by 
around 50% between 1977 and 1990, while the proportion of capital almost trebles from 4% 
to  12%  over  the  same  period.  Financial  liberalisation  over  the  period  drew  factors  of 
production into finance, both labour and capital, on a fairly dramatic scale. 
Perhaps the most striking development, however, is what happens next. These trends have 
not persisted during this century. If anything, the labour and capital shares of the financial 
sector  have  been  on  a  gently  declining  path  over  this  period.  Growth  in  both  labour  and 
capital  employed  in  the  financial  sector  has  been  modest  and  has  been  lower  than  in  the 
economy  as  a  whole.  Since  this  fall  in  factor  input  shares  coincides  with  a  period  when 
measured  value-added  of  the  financial  sector  was  rising  sharply,  this  suggests  something 
dramatic must have been happening to productivity in finance – the Solow residual. 
The  measured  residual,  in  a  growth  accounting  sense,  reflects  improvements  in  the  total 
factor  productivity  (TFP)  of  the  inputs.  A  growth  accounting  decomposition  suggests  that 
measured TFP growth in the financial sector averaged about 2.2% per year between 1995 
and  2007  (Chart  10).  This  comfortably  exceeds  TFP  growth  at  the  whole-economy  level, 
estimated at an average of about 0.5–1.0% over the same period. In other words, on the face 
of  it  at  least,  there  is  evidence  of  the  financial  sector  having  undergone  something  of  a 
“productivity  miracle”  during  this  century.  This  pattern  has  not  been  specific  to  the  UK. 
Measured  TFP  growth  in  the  financial  sector  exceeded  that  of  the  whole  economy  across 
many  developed  countries  between  1995–2007,  a  trend  that  accelerated  in  the  “bubble” 
years of 2003–2007 (Chart 11). 
Returns to factors of production 
(b)  
TFP  in  a  growth  framework  is  no  more  than  an  accounting  residual.  It  provides  no 
explanation of the measured productivity “miracle” in finance. A related question is whether 
the  observed  productivity  miracle  was  reflected  in  returns  to  the  factors  of  production  in 
finance.  Chart  12  decomposes  total  GVA  of  financial  corporations  into  income  flowing  to 
labour (defined to include employees only) and income flowing to capital. Broadly speaking, 
the rise in GVA is equally split between the returns to labour (employee compensation) and 
to  capital  (gross  operating  surplus).  The  miracle  has  been  reflected  in  the  returns  to  both 
labour and capital, if not in the quantities of these factors employed. 
For  labour,  these  high  returns  are  evident  both  in  cross-section  and  time-series  data. 
Chart 13  shows  average  weekly  earnings  across  a  range  of  sectors  in  the  UK  in  2007. 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 7
Financial  intermediation  is  at  the  top  of  the  table,  with  weekly  average  earnings  roughly 
double  those  of  the  whole-economy  median.  This  differential  widened  during  this  century, 
broadly mirroring the accumulation of leverage within the financial sector (Chart 14). 
The  time-series  evidence  is  in  some  respects  even  more  dramatic.  Philippon  and  Reshef 
(2009) have undertaken a careful study of “excess” wages in the US financial industry since 
the start of the previous century, relative to a benchmark wage. Chart 15 plots their measure 
of  excess  wages.  This  shows  a  dramatic  spike  upwards  which  commenced  in  the  early 
1980s, but which exploded from the 1990s onwards. The only equivalent wage spike was in 
the run-up to the Great Crash in 1929. Philippon and Reshef attribute both of these wage 
spikes to financial deregulation. 
This picture is broadly mirrored when turning from returns to labour to returns to capital. In 
the 1950s gross profitability of the financial sector relative to capital employed was broadly in 
line with the rest of the economy (Chart 16). But since then, and in particular over the past 
decade, returns to capital have far outpaced those at an economy-wide level. 
Chart 17 plots UK banks’ return on equity capital (ROE) since 1920 (Alessandri and Haldane 
(2009)). Although conceptually a different measure of returns to capital, the broad message 
is the same. Trends in ROE are clearly divided into two periods. In the period up until around 
1970, ROE in banking was around 7% with a low variance. In other words, returns to finance 
broadly mimicked those in the economy as whole, in line with the gamble payoffs in Chart 6. 
But the 1970s mark a regime shift, with the ROE in banking roughly trebling to over 20%, 
again in line with gamble payoffs. Excess returns accumulated to capital as well as labour. 
These  returns  were  by  no  means  unique  to  UK  banks.  Chart  18  plots  ROEs  for  major 
internationally  active  banks  in  the  US  and  Europe  during  this  century.  Two  features  are 
striking. First, the level of ROEs was consistently at or above 20% and on a rising trend up 
until  the  crisis.  This  is  roughly  double  ROEs  in  the  non-financial  sector  over  the  period. 
Second, the degree of cross-country similarity in these ROE profiles is striking. This, too, is 
no coincidence. During much of this period, banks internationally were engaged in a highly 
competitive ROE race. Therein lies part of the explanation for these high returns to labour 
and capital in banking. 
4. Explaining aggregate returns in banking – excess returns and risk illusion 
How  do  we  explain  these  high,  but  temporary,  excess  returns  to  finance  which  appear  to 
have driven the growing contribution of the financial sector to aggregate economic activity? 
In this section we discuss potential balance sheet strategies which may have contributed to 
these rents. Essentially, high returns to finance may have been driven by banks assuming 
higher  risk.  Banks’  profits,  like  their  contribution  to  GDP,  may  have  been  flattered  by  the 
mis-measurement of risk. 
The  crisis  has  subsequently  exposed  the  extent  of  this  increased  risk-taking  by  banks.  In 
particular,  three  (often  related)  balance  sheet  strategies  for  boosting  risks  and  returns  to 
banking were dominant in the run-up to crisis: 
 
 
 
What  each  of  these  strategies  had  in  common  was  that  they  generated  a  rise  in  balance 
sheet risk, as well as return. As importantly, this increase in risk was to some extent hidden 
by  the  opacity  of  accounting  disclosures  or  the  complexity  of  the  products  involved.  This 
resulted in a divergence between reported and risk-adjusted returns. In other words, while 
reported ROEs rose, risk-adjusted ROEs did not (Haldane (2009)). 
increased leverage, on and off-balance sheet; 
increased share of assets held at fair value; and 
writing deep out-of-the-money options. 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2010
To  some  extent,  these  strategies  and  their  implications  were  captured  to  a  degree  in 
performance measures. For example, the rise in reported average ROEs of banks over the 
past few decades occurred alongside a rise in its variability. At the same time as average 
ROEs in banking were trebling, so too was their standard deviation (Chart 17). In that sense, 
the  banking  “productivity  miracle”  may  have  been,  at  least  in  part,  a  mirage  –  a  simple,  if 
dramatic, case of risk illusion by banks, investors and regulators. 
Increased leverage 
(a)  
Banks’  balance  sheets  have  grown  dramatically  in  relation  to  underlying  economic  activity 
over the past century. Charts 19 and 20 plot this ratio for the UK and the US over the past 
130 years. For the US, there has been a secular rise in banks’ assets from around 20% to 
over 100% of GDP. For the UK, a century of flat-lining at around 50% of GDP was broken in 
the early 1970s, since when banks’ assets in relation to national income have risen tenfold to 
over 500% of GDP. 
This  century  has seen  an  intensification  of  this growth.  According  to  data  compiled  by  the 
Banker,  the  balance  sheets  of  the  world’s  largest  1000  banks  increased  by  around  150% 
between 2001 and 2009 (Chart 21). In cross-section terms, the scale of assets in the banking 
system now dwarfs that in other sectors. Looking at the size of the largest firm’s assets in 
relation to GDP across a spectrum of industries, finance is by far the largest (Chart 22). 
The extent of balance sheet growth was, if anything, understated by banks’ reported assets. 
Accounting  and  regulatory  policies  permitted  banks  to  place  certain  exposures  off-balance 
sheet,  including  special  purpose  vehicles  and  contingent  credit  commitments.  Even 
disclosures of on-balance sheet positions on derivatives disguised some information about 
banks’ contingent exposures. 
This rapid expansion of the balance sheet of the banking system was not accompanied by a 
commensurate increase in its equity base. Over the same 130 year period, the capital ratios 
of banks in the US and UK fell from around 15–25% at the start of the 20th century to around 
5% at its end (Chart 23). In other words, on this metric measures of balance sheet leverage 
rose from around 4-times equity capital in the early part of the previous century to around 
20 times capital at the end. 
If  anything,  the  pressure  to  raise  leverage  increased  further  moving  into  this  century. 
Measures of gearing rose sharply between 2000 and 2008 among the major global banks, 
other than US commercial banks which were subject to a leverage ratio constraint (Chart 24). 
Once adjustments are made to on- and off-balance sheet assets and capital to give a more 
comprehensive  cross-country  picture,  levels  of gearing  are  even  more  striking.  Among  the 
major  global  banks  in  the  world,  levels  of  leverage  were  on  average  more  than  50  times 
equity at the peak of the boom (Chart 25). 
For a given return on assets (RoA), higher leverage mechanically boosts a banks’ ROE. The 
decision by many banks to increase leverage appears to have been driven, at least in part, 
by  a  desire  to  maintain  ROE  relative  to  competitors,  even  as  RoA  fell.  For  example,  as 
Chart 26 illustrates, virtually all of the increase in the ROE of the major UK banks during this 
century appears to have been the result of higher leverage. Banks’ return on assets – a more 
precise measure of their productivity – was flat or even falling over this period. 
Between  1997  and  2008,  as  UK  banks  increased  leverage,  they  managed  to  maintain 
broadly  constant  capital  ratios  by,  on  average,  seeking  out  assets  with  lower  risk  weights 
(Chart 27). A similar pattern was evident among a number of the Continental European major 
global banks (Chart 28). It is possible to further decompose ROE to provide additional insight 
into how banks increased reported returns as follows: 
 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 9
 Banks can boost ROE by acting on any of the terms on the right-hand side of equation (1.1): 
increasing assets relative to capital (financial leverage), holding a larger proportion of capital4 
other than as common equity (common equity margin), or assuming a greater degree of risk 
per unit of assets (return on risk-weighted assets, RoRWA) – leveraging assets, leveraging 
capital structure or leveraging regulation. 
Table 4 shows two of the elements of this breakdown for the major global banks – leverage 
and unit risk. For most banks, the story is one of a significant increase in assets relative to 
capital, with little movement into higher risk assets (unit risk makes a negative contribution 
for most banks). Those banks with highest leverage, however, are also the ones which have 
subsequently reported the largest write-downs. That suggests banks may also have invested 
in riskier assets, which regulatory risk-weights had failed to capture. 
Table 5 looks at the third component, the common equity margin, of some of the same global 
banks. Among at least some of these banks, this margin makes a significant contribution to 
ROE growth, as banks moved into hybrid Tier 1 capital instruments at the expense of core 
equity. As such hybrid instruments have shown themselves largely unable to absorb losses 
during the crisis, this boost to ROE is also likely to have been an act of risk illusion. 
Taken together, this evidence suggests that much of the “productivity miracle” of high ROEs 
in banking appear to have been the result not of productivity gains on the underlying asset 
pool, but rather a simple leveraging up of the underlying equity in the business. 
Larger trading books 
(b)  
A second strategy pursued by a number of banks in the run-up to crisis was to increase their 
assets  held  at  fair  value,  principally  through  their  trading  books,  relative  to  their  banking 
books of underlying loans. Among the major global banks, the share of loans to customers in 
total assets fell from around 35% in 2000 to 29% by 2007 (Chart 29). Over the same period, 
trading  book  asset  shares  almost  doubled  from  20%  to  almost  40%.  These  large  trading 
books were associated with high leverage among the world’s largest banks (Chart 30). 
What  explains  this  shift  in  portfolio  shares?  Regulatory  arbitrage  appears  to  have  been  a 
significant factor. Trading book assets tended to attract risk weights appropriate for dealing 
with market but not credit risk. This meant it was capital-efficient for banks to bundle loans 
into tradable structured credit products for onward sale. Indeed, by securitising assets in this 
way, it was hypothetically possible for two banks to swap their underlying claims but for both 
firms to claim capital relief. The system as a whole would then be left holding less capital, 
even though its underlying exposures were identical. When the crisis came, tellingly losses 
on structured products were substantial (Chart 31). 
A  further  amplifying  factor  is  that  trading  books  are  marked-to-market  and  any  gains  or 
losses taken through to the profit and loss account. So holding a large trading book is a very 
good  strategy  when  underlying  asset  prices  in  the  economy  are  rising  rapidly.  This  was 
precisely the set of the circumstances facing banks in the run-up to crisis, with asset prices 
driven higher by a search for yield among investors. In effect, this rising tide of asset price 
                                                 
4   The term “Tier 1 capital” refers to the component of banks’ regulatory capital comprising common equity and 
capital instruments close to common equity (“hybrid Tier 1 capital”), as defined by rules set out by regulators. 
For a discussion of the composition of UK banks’ regulatory capital see Bank of England (2009a). 
10 
 BIS Review 95/2010
rises was booked as marked-to-market profits by banks holding assets in their trading book. 
Everyone, it appeared, was a winner. 
But because these gains were driven by a mis-pricing of risk in the economy at large, trading 
book profits were in fact largely illusory. Once asset prices went into reverse during 2008 as 
risk  was  re-priced,  trading  book  losses  quickly  materialised.  Write-downs  on  structured 
products totalled $210 billion among the major global banks in 2008 alone. 
Writing deep out-of-the-money options 
(c)  
A third strategy, which boosted returns by silently assuming risk, arises from offering tail risk 
insurance.  Banks  can  in  a  variety  of  ways  assume  tail  risk  on  particular  instruments  –  for 
example,  by  investing  in  high-default  loan  portfolios,  the  senior  tranches  of  structured 
products or writing insurance through credit default swap (CDS) contracts. In each of these 
cases, the investor earns an above-normal yield or premium from assuming the risk. For as 
long as the risk does not materialise, returns can look riskless – a case of apparent “alpha”. 
Until, that is, tail risk manifests itself, at which point losses can be very large. 
There  are  many  examples  of  banks  pursuing  essentially  these  strategies  in  the  run-up  to 
crisis. For example, investing in senior tranches of sub-prime loan securitisations is, in effect, 
equivalent  to  writing  deep-out-of-the-money  options,  with  high  returns  except  in  those  tail 
states  of  the  world  when  borrowers  default  en  masse.  It  is  unsurprising  that  issuance  of 
asset-backed securities, including sub-prime RMBS (residential mortgage-backed securities), 
grew  dramatically  during  the  course  of  this  century,  easily  outpacing  Moore’s  Law  (the 
benchmark  for  the  growth  in  computing  power  since  the  invention  of  the  transistor) 
(Chart 32).5 
Tranched  structured  products,  such  as  CDOs  (collateralised  debt  obligations)  and  CLOs 
(collateralised loan obligations), generate a similar payoff profile for investors to sub-prime 
loans, yielding a positive return in stable states of the world – apparent alpha – and a large 
negative return in adverse states. Volumes outstanding of CDOs and CLOs also grew at a 
rate in excess of Moore’s Law for much of this century. The resulting systematic mis-pricing 
of,  in  particular,  the  super-senior  tranches  of  these  securities  was  a  significant  source  of 
losses to banks during the crisis, with ratings downgrades large and frequent (Chart 33). 
A similar risk-taking strategy was the writing of explicit insurance contracts against such tail 
risks,  for  example  through  CDS.  These  too  grew  very  rapidly  ahead  of  crisis  (Chart  34). 
Again, the writers of these insurance contracts gathered a steady source of premium income 
during the good times – apparently “excess returns”. But this was typically more than offset 
by losses once bad states materialised. This, famously, was the strategy pursued by some of 
the  monoline  insurers  and  by  AIG.  For  example,  AIG’s  capital  market  business,  which 
included its ill-fated financial products division, reported total operating income of $2.3 billion 
in the run-up to crisis from 2003 to 2006, but reported operating losses of around $40 billion 
in 2008 alone. 
What all of these strategies had in common was that they involved banks assuming risk in 
the  hunt  for  yield  –  risk  that  was  often  disguised  because  it  was  parked  in  the  tail  of  the 
return  distribution.  Excess  returns  –  from  leverage,  trading  books  and  out-of-the-money 
options – were built on an inability to measure and price risk. The productivity miracle was in 
fact  a  risk  illusion.  In  that  respect,  mis-measurement  of  the  contribution  of  banking  in  the 
National  Accounts  and  the  mis-measurement  of  returns  to  banking  in  their  own  accounts 
have a common underlying cause. 
                                                 
5   Moore’s Law  refers to the  observation by Intel co-founder  Gordon Moore in 1965 that transistor  density on 
integrated circuits had doubled every year since the integrated circuit was invented and the prediction that this 
would continue. 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 11
Explaining disaggregated returns to banking 
industries  can  be  concentrated  and  highly  decentralised 
5.  
A  distinct,  but  complementary,  explanation  of  high  returns  to  banking  is  that  they  reflect 
structural  features  of  the  financial  sector.  For  example,  measures  of  market  concentration 
are often used as a proxy for the degree of market power producers have over consumers. It 
is  telling  that  measures  of  the  concentration  of  the  banking  sector  have  increased 
dramatically over the course of the past decade, coincident with the rise in banking returns. 
Chart 35 plots the share of total bank assets of the largest three banks in the US since the 
1930s.  Having  flat-lined  up  until  the  1990s,  the  top  3  share  has  since  roughly  tripled.  A 
similar  trend  is  evident  in  the  UK  (where  the  share  of  the  top  3  banks  currently  stands  at 
above 50%) and globally (where the share of the top 3 has doubled over the past 10 years). 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  well  known  that  market  concentration  need  not  signal  a  lack  of 
competitiveness or efficiency within an industry or sector (Wood and Kabiri (2010)). Highly 
competitive 
industries 
uncompetitive. A better arbiter of market power may be measures of market contestability, in 
particular the potential for barriers to entry to and exit from the market. Entry and exit rates 
from  banking  have,  historically,  tended  to  be  very  modest  by  comparison  with  the 
non-financial sector and other parts of the financial sector, such as hedge funds. 
For  banks  operating  in  many  markets  and  offering  a  range  of  services,  aggregate  returns 
may offer a misleading guide to the degree of market contestability. Looking separately at the 
different  activities  financial  firms  undertake  provides  a  potentially  clearer  indication  of  the 
drivers  of  performance  and  the  structural  factors  determining  them.  In  this  respect, 
JP Morgan Chase provides an interesting case study. 
JP  Morgan  Chase  is  a  large  universal  bank  offering  a  full  package  of  banking  services  to 
customers,  retail  and  wholesale.  Its  published  accounts  also  provide  a  fairly  detailed 
decomposition  of  the  returns  to  these  different  activities.  Chart  36  looks  at  the  returns  on 
equity at JP Morgan Chase, broken down by business line and over time. These estimates 
are based on the firm’s economic capital model. So provided this model adequately captures 
risk,  these  estimates  ought  to  risk-adjust  returns  across  the  different  business  lines, 
allocating greater amounts of capital to riskier activities. 
“Low risk/low return” business activities 
(a) 
Consider  first  some  of  the  activities  generally  perceived  to  be  low-risk/low  return  –  asset 
management and treasury and securities services and retail financial services. All of these 
seemingly low risk activities appear to deliver above-average returns on equity, ranging from 
a high of around 50% on treasury and asset management services to around 20%+ on retail 
financial services. 
One  potential  explanation  of  these  high  returns  is  that  the  risk  associated  with  these 
activities,  and  hence  the  capital  allocated  to  them,  may  be  under-estimated  by  banks’ 
models. Another is that the demand for these services is highly price inelastic – for example, 
because of information imperfections on the part of end-users of these services. Anecdotally, 
there is certainly evidence of a high degree of  stickiness in the demand for retail financial 
services. Statistically, an adult is more likely to leave their spouse than their bank. 
In a UK context, there have been a number of studies by the authorities on the degree of 
competition within retail financial services, including by the Competition Commission (2005) 
and the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) (2008). The OFT market study found a very low rate of 
switching of personal current accounts between banks – fewer than 6% per year. By itself, 
however, this low switching rate does not necessarily imply a market failure. For example, it 
could be the result of a reputational equilibrium in which money gravitates to banks whose 
brand name is recognised and respected. 
A more obvious market friction in the UK retail financial services market derives from “free in 
credit”  banking.  In  effect,  all  retail  payment  services  are  charged  at  a  zero  up-front  fee, 
12 
 BIS Review 95/2010
except  large-value  payment  transfers  through  CHAPS6  (which  are  typically  charged  at 
around £25). This charging schedule is not well aligned with marginal costs. It encourages 
bundling of payment services and the charging of latent or hidden fees on other transactions 
services  –  for  example,  overdraft  fees.  Explicit  charging  for  retail  financial  services  would 
increase transparency and reduce the scope for distortions in the use of these services. 
High returns on treasury management services also present something of a puzzle. These 
include  transactions,  information  and  custodial  services  to  clients.  None  of  these  activities 
are especially expertise-intensive and the market for these services ought in principle to be 
contestable internationally. 
“High risk/high return” business activities 
(b)  
The  higher  risk  activities  associated  with  finance,  such  as  commercial  and  investment 
banking, do not on the face of it appear to yield as high returns on equity. Nonetheless these 
returns, at around 20%, are above levels in the non-financial sector. 
Investment banking activities are, in risk terms, a mixed bag. They comprise fairly low-risk 
activities,  such  as  (merger  and  acquisition)  M&A  advisory  work,  with  higher-risk  activities 
such as securities underwriting and proprietary trading. To complicate matters, banks’ annual 
accounts  data  do  not  differentiate  simply  between  these  activities  –  for  example,  between 
market-making and proprietary trading activities in fixed income, currency and commodities 
(FICC)  and  equities.  Chart  37  provides  a  revenue  breakdown  of  US  investment  banks’ 
activities. 
The lack of a breakdown between client and proprietary sources of revenues is problematic 
when  making  sense  of  investment  banking  activities,  both  in  the  run-up  to  and  during  the 
crisis.  In  the  run-up  to  crisis,  FICC  and  equity-related  activity  contributed  significantly  to 
revenues, partly on the back of proprietary trading in assets whose prices were rising rapidly. 
Some  of  these  gains  then  dissolved  when  asset  prices,  in  particular  for  FICC,  went  into 
reverse during 2008. 
The story of 2009/10 is of a strong recovery in FICC and equity revenues. The source of this 
revenue  recovery  is,  however,  different  to  the  boom.  Instead  of  proprietary  risk-taking, 
increased  revenues  appear  instead  to  have  been  driven  by  market-making  activities  on 
behalf of clients. These were boosted by a bulge in client activity and wider bid-ask spreads, 
against a backdrop of lower levels of competition (Chart 38). It is an open question whether 
these returns to market-making will persist. 
In some respects, returns to M&A and advisory activities represent even more of a puzzle. 
For  a  start,  it  is  well  known  that  most  M&A  activity  is  value-destroying  (for  example,  Palia 
(1995)).  Advisory  fees  of  0.5–1.5%  are  typically  taken,  even  though  these  activities  are 
essentially  risk-less.  And  in  total  under-writing  fees  are  often  around  3–4%  in  Europe  and 
higher still in the US, having risen during the course of the crisis. The level and persistence 
of these fees is also something of a puzzle. 
One  potential  explanation  is  that  high  fees  on  underwriting  and  advisory  activities  are 
sustained as a reputational equilibrium. In effect, clients are willing to pay a premium to have 
bonds  or  equity  underwritten  by  a  recognised  name,  as  this  is  a  signal  of  quality  to  end-
investors. A similar phenomenon might explain the “2 and 20” fee structure of hedge funds. 
The OFT has recently announced an investigation into underwriting fees in the UK market. 
                                                 
6   CHAPS  is  the  same-day  electronic  funds  transfer  system,  operated  by  the  bank-owned  CHAPS  Clearing 
Company, that is used for high-value/wholesale payments but also for other time-critical lower value payments 
(such as house purchase). 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 13
Another  part  of  the  puzzle  was  banks’  approach  to  managing  risk  across  these  business 
lines.  For  example,  treasury  functions  are  designed  to  help  a  firm  as  a  whole  manage  its 
balance sheet, with internal transfer pricing for liquidity services to business lines. By acting 
in that way, the risk-taking incentives of each business unit can be aligned with the business 
as a whole, thereby complementing firms’ internal risk management. 
In practice, during the run-up to crisis, treasury functions were often run as a profit centre. 
That  would  tend  to  encourage  two  sets  of  risk-taking  behaviour.  First,  it  may  have 
encouraged banks to take risks in balance sheet management – for example, by seeking out 
cheaper sources of capital (for example, hybrids over pure equity) or liquidity (shorter-term 
unsecured  borrowing  over  long-term  secured  funding).  Second,  it  may  have  led  to  the 
systematic  under-pricing  of  liquidity  services  to  banks’  business  unit,  fuelling  excessive 
growth  and/or  risk-taking.  Tackling  these  risks  would  require  banks’  treasury  operations  to 
cease being profit centres and to execute effective internal transfer pricing. 
Conclusion 
6.  
The financial sector has undergone an astonishing roller-coaster in the course of a decade. 
The ascent to heaven and subsequent descent to hell has been every bit as dramatic as in 
the 1930s. In seeking to smooth next time’s ride, prophylactic public policy has a key role to 
play. Of the many initiatives that are underway, this paper has highlighted three which may 
warrant further attention in the period head: 
 
First,  given  its  ability  to  both  invigorate  and  incapacitate  large  parts  of  the  non-
financial economy, there is a strong case for seeking improved means of measuring 
the  true  value-added  by  the  financial  sector.  As  it  is  rudimentary  to  its  activities, 
finding  a  more  sophisticated  approach  to  measuring  risk, as  well  as  return,  within 
the financial sector would seem to be a priority. The conflation of the two can lead to 
an overstatement of banks’ contribution to the economy and an understatement of 
the true risk facing banks and the economy at large. Better aggregate statistics and 
bank-specific  performance  measures  could  help  better  to  distinguish miracles  and 
mirages.  This  might  include  developing  more  sophisticated  risk-adjustments  to 
FISIM and a greater focus on banks’ return on assets rather than equity by investors 
and managers. 
Second,  because  banks  are  in  the  risk  business  it  should  be  no  surprise  that  the 
run-up  to  crisis  was  hallmarked  by  imaginative  ways  of  manufacturing  this 
commodity, with a view to boosting returns to labour and capital. Risk illusion is no 
accident;  it  is  there  by  design.  It  is  in  bank  managers’  interest  to  make  mirages 
seem  like  miracles.  Regulatory  measures  are  being  put  in  place  to  block  off  last 
time’s risk strategies, including through re-calibrated leverage and capital ratios. But 
risk  migrates  to  where  regulation  is  weakest,  so  there  are  natural  limits  to  what 
regulatory  strategies  can  reasonably  achieve.  At  the  height  of  a  boom,  both 
regulators and the regulated are prone to believe in miracles. That is why the debate 
about potential structural reform of finance is important – to lessen the burden on 
regulation and reverse its descent into ever-greater intrusiveness and complexity. At 
the  same  time,  regulators  need  also  to  be  mindful  of  risk  migrating  outside  the 
perimeter of regulation, where it will almost certainly not be measured. 
Third,  finance  is  anything  but  monolithic.  But  understanding  of  these  different 
business  lines  is  complicated  by  the  absence  of  reliable  data  on  many  of  these 
activities. There are several open questions about the some of these activities, not 
least those for which returns appear to be high. This includes questions about the 
risks they embody and about the competitive structure of the markets in which they 
are  traded.  These  are  issues  for  both  prudential  regulators  and  the  competition 
authorities,  working  in  tandem.  If  experience  after  the  Great  Depression  is  any 
  14 
 BIS Review 95/2010
guide, it seems likely that these structural issues will take centre-stage in the period 
ahead. 
the  State,  available  at 
References 
Akritidis,  L  (2007),  “Improving  the  measurement  of  banking  services  in  the  UK  National 
Accounts”, Economic and Labour Market Review 1(5), pp. 29–37. 
Alessandri,  P  and  Haldane,  A  G  (2009),  Banking  on 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf 
Bank  of  England  (2009a),  “The  changing  composition  of  the  major  UK  banks’  regulatory 
capital”, Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June, pp. 26–27. 
Bank  of  England  (2009b),  The  Role  of  Macroprudential  Policy  –  A  Discussion  Paper, 
available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/financialstability/roleofmacroprudentialpolicy
091121.pdf 
Berger, A, Herring, R and Szegö, G (1995), The Role of Capital in Financial Institutions, 
Journal of Banking and Finance Vol. 19(3–4), pp. 393–430. 
Billings, M and Capie, F (2004), “Evidence on competition in English commercial banking, 
1920–1970”, Financial History Review Vol. 11. 
Billings, M and Capie, F (2007), “Capital in British banking, 1920–1970”, Business History, 
Vol. 49(2), pp. 139–162. 
Colangelo, A and Inklaar, R (2010), “Banking Sector Output Measurement in the Euro Area – 
A  Modified  Approach”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series  No.  1204,  available  at 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1204.pdf 
Competition Commission (2005), Store Cards Market Inquiry: Provisional Findings Report, 
available at 
http://www.competition-
commission.org.uk/inquiries/completed/2006/storecard/provisional_findings.htm 
Feinstein,  C  H  (1972),  National  Income,  Expenditure  and  Output  of  the  United  Kingdom 
1855–1965, Cambridge University Press. 
Goodhart, C (2010), “How should we regulate the financial sector?”, Future of Finance and 
the Theory That Underpins It. 
Haldane, A G (2009), Small Lessons from a Big Crisis, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech397.pdf 
Haldane, A G (2010), The $100 Billion Question, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech433.pdf 
Kay, J (2009), Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation, Centre for the Study of 
Financial Innovation. 
Large, A (2010), Systemic Policy and Financial Stability: A Framework for Delivery, Centre 
for the Study of Financial Innovation. 
Mink, R (2008), An Enhanced Methodology of Compiling Financial Intermediation Services 
Indirectly Measured (FISIM), paper presented at OECD Working Party on National Accounts, 
Paris, 14–16 October 2008, available at 
http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2008doc.nsf/LinkTo/NT000059AE/$FILE/JT03251258.PDF 
Mitchell, B R (1988), British Historical Statistics, Cambridge University Press. 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 15
Office of Fair Trading (2008), Personal Current Accounts in the UK – An OFT Market Study, 
available at http://www.oft.gov.uk/shared_oft/reports/financial_products/OFT1005.pdf 
O’Mahony,  M  and  Marcel  P  T  (2009),  “Output,  Input  and  Productivity  Measures  at  the 
Industry Level: the EU KLEMS Database”, Economic Journal 119(538), pp. 374–403. 
Oulton,  N  and  Srinivasan,  S  (2005),  “Productivity  growth  in  UK  industries,  1970–2000: 
structural change and the role of ICT”, Bank of England Working Paper Series No. 259. 
Philippon, T (2008), “The Evolution of the US Financial Industry from 1860 to 2007: Theory 
and Evidence”, available at http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~tphilipp/papers/finsize.pdf. 
Philippon,  T  and  Reshef,  A  (2009),  “Wages  and  Human  Capital  in  the  U.S.  Financial 
Industry: 1909–2006”, NBER Working Paper Series No. 14644. 
Reinhart,  C  M  and  Rogoff,  K  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly, Princeton University Press. 
Schularick M and Taylor A M (2009), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage 
Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, NBER Working Paper Series No. 15512. 
Sheppard,  D  K  (1971),  The  Growth  and  Role  of  U.K.  Financial  Institutions  1880–1962, 
Methuen. 
Solow, R M (1957), “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”, Review of 
Economics and Statistics 39(3), pp. 312–320. 
Wadhwani, S (2010), “What mix of monetary policy and regulation is best for stabilising the 
economy?”, Future of Finance and the Theory That Underpins It. 
Wang, J C (2003), “Loanable Funds, Risk, and Bank Service Output”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston Working Paper Series No. 03–4. 
Wang, J C, Basu, A and Fernald J G (2004), A General-Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Approach 
to  the  Measurement  of  Nominal  and  Real  Bank  Output,  Invited  for  conference  volume  on 
Price Index Concepts and Measurement, Conference on Research on Income and Wealth 
(CRIW), available at http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/wp/wp2004/wp047.htm 
Wood, G and Kabiri, A (2010), Firm Stability and System Stability: The Regulatory Delusion, 
Paper prepared for a conference on Managing Systemic Risk at the University of Warwick 
7th–9th April 2010. 
16 
 BIS Review 95/2010
