Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Evolving the next frontier of Islamic finance 
development through innovation 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
at the Mock Cheque Exchange Ceremony between the International Centre for Education in 
Islamic Finance (INCEIF) and Bank Islam, Maybank Islamic and Affin Islamic, Kuala Lumpur, 
15 June 2010. 
 Thank you for inviting me to witness the mock cheque exchange ceremony for the allocation 
of zakat contributions from Bank Islam, Maybank Islamic and Affin Islamic to the International 
Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF). This act of giving signifies an exemplary 
commitment  on  the  part  of  these  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  support  human  capital 
development  in  Islamic  finance.  As  a  leading  provider  of  advanced  education  in  Islamic 
finance, INCEIF plays an important role to position Malaysia as a center for innovation and 
thought leadership in this field. But INCEIF alone would not be able to achieve this objective 
without the continuous efforts and support by all stakeholders within the industry. 
Let me make a few remarks on innovation. Few would argue on the role of innovation as the 
connerstone to sustaining growth and securing competitive advantage for any organization, 
industry, economy and nation. As we have seen in the more recent decades, innovation has 
fundamentally transformed the global financial landscape at a very rapid pace. Innovation in 
the financial services industry has enabled financial institutions to obtain better insight into 
customer  needs  and  correspondingly,  develop  new  and  better  products  to  match  their 
diverse  needs,  make  significant  improvements  in  operational  efficiency  by  improving 
processes and business models as well as ensure more effective risk management. It has 
facilitated greater financial inclusion by allowing broader access to financial services in many 
emerging and developing countries. But the abilities to innovate will very much depend on 
the  ability  to  get  the  necessary  talent:  the  creativity  to  develop  new  ideas,  the  capacity  to 
absorb knowledge and the capacity to acquire the new skill to turn ideas into results. This 
requires a talented workforce as the driving force of innovation. Building such a workforce 
would thus become a constant challenge for the Islamic financial services industry.  
In the context of Islamic finance, human capital development is all the more important given 
that the Islamic finance industry is still relatively in a nascent development phase. There is no 
doubt that the Islamic financial services industry in Malaysia has experienced an exciting and 
phenomenal  growth.  The  proliferation  of  competitively  priced  Islamic  financial  products  to 
match  the  diverse  and  discerning  needs  of  customers  particularly  in  this  recent  decade  is 
quite evident. But we cannot be complacent. What has served us well in the past is unlikely 
to serve us well into the future.  
We  must  be  mindful  that  being  innovative  in  this  environment  of  constant  change  and 
heightened complexity in itself is a challenge. Along with technological advancements which 
bring  about  more  efficient  ways  of  conducting  financial  services,  globalisation  and 
liberalization of markets are amongst today’s major forces of change that are transforming 
the  global  financial  landscape,  blurring  the  geographical  borders  in  doing  business  and 
increasing competition in the financial sector. Moreover, the recent global financial crisis has 
brought  about  several  important  developments  that  are  shaping  the  global  financial 
landscape. One that is relevant is the increasing awareness and appreciation amongst the 
international  financial  community  on  the  distinct  nature  and  inbuilt  strengths  of  Islamic 
finance.  The  crisis  thus  has  provided  an  opportunity  for  Islamic  finance  to  strategically 
position itself as a stable form of financial intermediation. A few challenges stood before us  
– ongoing global reform that is going to change the contour of financial regulation, challenges 
associated  with  a  general  public  distrust  on  the  financial  sector,  general  suspicion  on 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
financial  innovation,  and  constant  competition  from  other  financial  centers  aspiring  to  take 
advantage of opportunities in Islamic finance as a new area of growth.  
Against these developments, we need to rise above these challenges whilst transitioning into 
the  next  level  of  its  development.  This  will  require  rethinking  of  existing  product  structures 
and formulating new ones. New products being developed must also be competitive, meet 
the greater sophistication of customers’ needs and distinct from financial solutions offered by 
conventional banks.  
As new players enter the industry, the competition for the best talent would become more 
intense. Demand will increase for talents in the Islamic financial services industry who are 
not only conversant in both fields of finance and Shariah but must also possess soft skills 
such as managerial expertise, leadership and effective communication. Thus education and 
learning providers must constantly relook at the methodology of teaching, learning contents 
and  the  contemporary  skills  requirements  of  the  industry.  Forging  greater  collaboration 
between  industry  and  academia  is  also  an  important  aspect  to  align  the  training  and 
development and the business requirements of the industry. We should all be mindful about 
the employability of our graduates.  
The industry-academia partnership could come in various forms. For example, there could be 
more  reciprocal  dialogues  and  strategic  alliances  to  explore  areas  with  the  aim  to  provide 
real solutions to contemporary issues that are key to progressive development of the Islamic 
financial  services  industry.  We  should  capitalize  on  our  extensive  experience  in  industry 
development  which  makes  Malaysia  a  fertile  learning  ground  on  Islamic  finance.  For 
example, our Islamic financial market is vibrant and progressive, whilst our Islamic financial 
institutions  are  innovative  and  dynamic.  Islamic  financial  institutions  could  complement 
INCEIF’s  education  programmes  by  offering  practical  training  at  their  organization.  The 
opportunity for an attachment at our institutions is an added value to INCEIF’s programmes, 
and  an  attractive  value  proposition  for  foreign  students.  On  this  note,  the  strong  industry 
support has indeed been commendable and contributed to the progress of INCEIF. Efforts by 
INCEIF to forge strategic alliances with entities from all over the world must also continue. 
Today’s  allocation  of  zakat  contribution  to  INCEIF  by  the  three  Islamic  banks  is  another 
commendable  act  of  industry  in  support  of  learning.  INCEIF  has  received  monetary 
contributions  from  several  other  Islamic  financial  institutions  since  2007.  This  has  enabled 
INCEIF  to  continuously  enhance  its  internal  capacity  as  the  leading  provider  of  Islamic 
finance education and knowledge. The contributions are being utilized to create the provision 
of  scholarships,  research  and  facilities  development.  In  this  regard,  INCEIF  has  recently 
been  accorded  the  “Project  of  National  Interest”  (Projek  Berkepentingan  Nasional)  status. 
This status, which accords contributors with tax benefits in the forms of tax rebates for zakat 
contributions and tax deductions for non-zakat contributions, will incentivize more individuals 
and institutions in providing monetary support to INCEIF. The contributions will indeed go a 
long way towards the growth and development of Islamic finance in Malaysia and beyond.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2010
