Anselmo L S Teng: The international financial crisis – impact on Asia 
and lessons for Macao 
Speech  by  Mr  Anselmo  L  S  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the 
International  Symposium  on  the  occasion  of  the  35th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of 
Mozambique, Maputo, 17 May 2010.  
 Dear Governor Gove,  
Dear Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Introduction 
1) 
I feel very honoured to have been invited by Governor Ernesto Gove to take part in 
the celebrating activities to mark the 35th Anniversary of the Banco de Moçambique 
and to talk about this big topic “The International Financial Crisis – Impact on Asia 
and Lessons for Macao”. It has been almost three years since I led the delegation of 
the Macao financial sector for the visit to Maputo in July 2007. I am very pleased to 
be in Maputo again. First of all, may I wish Banco de Moçambique happy birthday 
and many happy returns.  
At this moment, it is generally believed that the financial tsunami is behind us. There 
may  be  hiccups,  but  a  double  dip  appears  not  quite  likely,  according  to  recent 
performance of major financial markets around the world. It however appears that 
the recent volatility provoked by sovereign risks will be around for some time.  
For this presentation, I am going to talk about the economy of Macao before and 
after the crisis, then I will touch on Asia and the economy of China post crisis before 
moving  back  to  introduce  the  way  forward  for  Macao.  The  second  half  of  this 
presentation  will  be  focused  on  the  lessons  Macao  and  the  global  village  have 
learned from the crisis, which will be followed by the epilogue.  
The economy of Macao – before and after the crisis  
4) 
Coming back to Macao, we all know that it is a tiny but open economy. It has been 
known for its tourism services business and cultural heritage. Under the auspices of 
China and a series of policy measures, the economy has taken leaps and bounds 
for about 10 years in a row since the return of sovereignty to China. I do not want to 
throw  out  a  series  of  statistics,  but  I  can  say  that  GDP  has  been  growing  at  an 
average of 12.4% per annum over the past 10 years and per capita GDP jumped 
from USD14,000 in 1999 to USD39,000 in 2009. On the other hand, The Heritage 
Foundation of the U.S.A. has been awarding high scores on many aspects of the 
Macao  economy  in  its  assessment.  This  year,  our  overall  score  is  72.5  making 
Macao the 6th freest economy in Asia Pacific and 20th freest globally.  
Inevitably,  we  are  not  immune  to  the  destruction  inflicted  by  the  international 
financial  crisis.  Our  financial  sector,  which  consists  of  banking  arm  and  insurance 
arm, experienced a small setback as a result of the contraction of the economy.  
At the beginning of the outbreak, the Macao Special Administrative Region (MSAR) 
Government took quick and resolute measures to soften the impact. It immediately 
announced a 100% guarantee on all onshore bank deposits. A series of measures 
were  kicked  out,  which  included  accelerated  public  investment  and  expenditure; 
various  subsidies;  as  well  as  liberal  loans  extended  to  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  in  order  to  boost  internal  demand  and  employment.  The  Monetary 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 1
2) 
3) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
Authority  of  Macao  also  complemented  the  efforts  of  the  MSAR  Government  by 
adopting  measures  to  enhance  liquidity  of  banks  when  needed,  setting  up 
mechanism  to  more  closely  monitor  the  prudential  operations  of  banks  and 
coordinating with neighbouring authorities in order to ensure normal operations and 
stability of the financial system.  
The above policies and measures, together with the locomotive effect of the China 
economy, which I am going to mention later, have enabled Macao to emerge from 
the tsunami unscathed. The economic contractions for Macao were 12% and 14.8% 
respectively  for  the  1st  and  2nd  quarter  of  2009.  The  3rd  quarter  saw  a  sharp 
rebound of 8.8% followed by a spectacular growth of 27.4% in the 4th quarter. The 
overall result for 2009 is a real growth of 1.3%. At the same time, the unemployment 
rate has been down to an enviable rate of 2.9%. Due to limited exposure to toxic 
assets, overall bank profit experienced only a minor setback in 2008. It now returns 
to  pre-eruption  level,  thanks  to  the  ongoing  prudence  of  our  practitioners  and  the 
effort of the regulator before and during the eruption.  
Asia and the economy of China – post crisis  
8) 
China  adopted  very  fast  action  to  rescue  the  economy.  It  announced  a  stimulus 
package of RMB4 trillion, which was mainly intended to boost internal consumption, 
enhance  social  security,  improve  health  care  and  rural  development.  It  is  worth 
mentioning that financial institutions of China have not been appreciably affected by 
toxic assets and hence suffered less from the financial tsunami. As a result, they are 
in  a  better  position  to  extend  more  liberal  credit  to  enterprises  operating  in  China 
and  finance  construction  of  substantive  infrastructures.  In  the  13  months  ending 
January  2010,  banks  on  the  Mainland  of  China  extended  new  credit  valued  at 
RMB11 trillion. The results of all these tremendous stimulus packages, both fiscal 
and  monetary,  were  spectacular.  There  was  an  uplift  in  sales  of  electrical 
appliances,  motor  vehicles,  construction  of  infrastructures  and  consumption.  In 
2009, most major economies in the world suffered a contraction but the economy of 
China had an enviable growth of 8.7%. Another major economy in Asia, India, also 
registered a growth of over 7% in 2009.  
The green shoots of China spread to other areas in the world, particularly Asia. In 
international trade, China has applied strenuous efforts in the hope that increased 
international trade can pull the world economy out of the doldrums. The efforts of 
China bear fruit. In line with the tremendous increase in its domestic demand, China 
has  absorbed  an  increasing  amount  of  imports  from  neighbouring  regions.  For 
instance,  Korea’s  exports  to  China  jumped  59.1%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010. 
Figures for Chinese Taiwan and Malaysia were 76.0% and 95.0%. These may be 
selective presentations, but statistics show that China’s green shoots have benefited 
another economic giant, Japan, whose exports to China jumped 56.6% in the first 
three months of 2010. The Asian nations and regions learned a bitter lesson in the 
Asian  Financial  Crisis  of  1997-1998,  after  which  they  accumulated  ample  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  I  should  say,  the  impact  of  the  financial  tsunami  on  Asia  this 
time is comparatively less severe. Thanks to the accelerated regional co-operation 
and  the  locomotive  effect  of  the  China  economy  and  the  ample  reserves 
accumulated out of frugality, which is an Asian virtue. The Asian Development Bank 
recently  painted  a  positive  picture  of  the  economic  outlook  for  Asia  following  the 
severe  recession in  advanced  economies,  forecasting  an  average  growth  of  7.5% 
for developing Asia and the Pacific in 2010 and 7.3% next year. The GDP growth, 
though  rebounding  from  5.2%  in  2009,  would  significantly  weaken  from  the  high 
9.6% in the pre-crisis year of 2007. East Asia continued to lead, with China, India 
and some small countries in Central Asia predicted to maintain strong growth.  
9) 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2010
The economy of Macao – the way forward  
10) 
The future of Macao appears to be broad and bright in the next few years. Macao 
has  benefited  and  will  continue  to  benefit  from  the  “closer  economic  partnership 
arrangement” (the “CEPA”) signed with China, whereby Macao’s merchandise and 
services  will  have  a  much  freer  access  to  the  China  market.  In  addition,  in 
consideration of the scarcity of land resources of Macao, which has an area of only 
30 sq.km, China allows Macao to make reclamation of land from the seabed up to 
3.5 sq.km. The University of Macao is also allowed to relocate to Hengqin Island, a 
neighbouring  island  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Zhuhai.  After  all  these  have  been 
completed, the area of Macao will be enlarged by over 15%. In January 2009, the 
National Development and Reform Commission of the State Council of the People’s 
Republic of China released “The Outline of the Plan for Reform and Development of 
the Pearl River Delta (2008-2020) (the “Outline”). The gist of the Outline is to turn 
the Pearl River Delta into one of the world’s most competitive conurbations with a 
high quality of life. The Outline defines Macao as an international leisure destination 
committed to further its tourism sector. By then, Macao will be connected to other 
major cities of the Pearl River Delta, including Hong Kong, by land transport through 
the  completion  of  the  Hong  Kong-Zhuhai-Macao  Bridge.  Ultimately,  Macao  will 
become part of the Pearl River Delta conurbation which accommodates a population 
of 50 million with a GDP equivalent to that of a medium-sized sovereign country.  
Another important role to be played by Macao is its bridging function between China 
and Portuguese-speaking countries in trade and economic aspect. Macao started to 
acquaint  with  Portuguese-speaking  countries  some  450  years  ago.  Portuguese-
speaking  countries  are  a  market  of  more  than  200  million  consumers  and  are 
endowed with abundant natural resources. China is a thriving economic entity with 
foreign  exchange  reserves  of  about  USD2.5  trillion.  Macao  is  also  a  special 
administrative region of China. All along, it has always played the leading role of a 
liaison platform servicing the economic and commercial cooperation between China 
and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  In  fact  the  standing  secretariat  for  the 
Economic and Commercial Cooperation Forum of China and Portuguese-speaking 
Countries is domiciled in Macao. The way forward for Macao is bright and we can 
conclude  that  Macao  together  with  Asia,  has  emerged  from  the  international 
financial crisis stronger than before.  
Lessons for Macao and for the global village  
12) 
What have Macao and the global village learned from the crisis? There are many, 
but they all boil down to one word “prudence”. It however appears that we regulators 
should adopt more measures in order to prevent another eruption of such nature. It 
is  true  that  we  cannot  see  bubble  from  forming  but  certainly  we  can  sense 
something is going wrong in the process. To put it in a more layman language, we 
regulators can take away the punch bowl before the party goes wild by applying a 
little brake on the creation of credit.  
It appears that we have to address the “procyclicality” approach. Procyclicality refers 
to  the  interaction  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy  which  are 
mutually reinforcing. A recurring characteristic of financial cycle is that good news 
fuels  credit  demand  and  supply.  Asset  prices  rise  in  response,  creating  yet  more 
collateral for more lending. The bursting of the resulting bubble then kills speculation 
and  shrinks  debts  incurred  in  the  boom.  Procyclical  interactions  amplify  the 
amplitude of the business cycle, thereby enlarging systemic risk. The latest bubble 
saw a flawed risk management and securitization, which allowed banks to use less 
capital  to  support  an  over-sized  volume  of  business  by  leverage  and  off-balance 
sheet vehicles. Leverage was also implicit in the structure of derivatives and options 
extensively  used  in  proprietary  tradings  of  financial  institutions.  Revaluation  of 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 3
11) 
13) 
14) 
15) 
16) 
17) 
18) 
19) 
assets also boosts bank capital in booms and shrinks it in downturns, reducing its 
capacity to lend in recession.  
To  address  on  procyclicality,  regulators  can  design  the  regulation  in  a  counter-
cyclical fashion to dampen procyclical behaviour of financial institutions. The major 
tool is probably capital requirement which should align with a long-term perspective 
of risks which not only affect individual banks but also could spill over into the wider 
system. In this connection, capital buffers may be created in good times to be drawn 
down in recessions as losses increase.  
Macroprudential supervision can be adopted to restrain build-up of risk either in the 
overall  financial  market  or  in  specific  asset  class,  such  as  the  adjustment  of 
loan-to-value ratio on real estate loans and margin requirements for securities and 
derivatives speculations. There are other measures such as macro-surveillance of 
the financial system to monitor aggregate risk and revamping of stiff compensation 
packages.  
The  Glass-Steagall  Act  of  1930  had  by  and  large  prevented  major  financial 
catastrophes  from  happening.  Regrettably,  its  repeal  in  1999  opened a  Pandora’s 
box. I am very much in favour of the recommendations of the financial veteran, Mr. 
Paul  Volcker.  He  advocates  the  banning  of  proprietary  trading  of  deposit  taking 
banks, who should not be allowed to own hedge funds or private equity funds. In 
addition,  a  cap  is  to  be  imposed  on  financial  institutions  to  prevent  them  from 
growing too big which gives rise to systemic risks. If the Volcker’s rules are adopted, 
we shall have a much stable global financial system.  
It is worthwhile mentioning that both credit rating agencies and derivatives should be 
put under the microscope of regulators. The woes brought about by rating agencies 
in  rating  securities,  financial  institutions  and  even  sovereign  countries  have  been 
known too well to our dear audience. I therefore do not want to go into details but 
call upon regulators globally either to have these agencies to put under supervision 
or  we  just  discount  the  ratings  in  enforcing  capital  requirement  calculations.  The 
rating agencies should be made impartial and should stay away from any conflict of 
interest.  
The  control  on  derivatives,  or  otherwise  known  as  “financial  weapons  of  mass 
destruction” should be put under closer supervision. There is no need for me to state 
the  very  obvious  “market  risk”  and  “counterparty  risk”,  which  led  to  widespread 
systemic  risk  in  the  last  financial  crisis.  We  should  seriously  consider  the 
requirement that they must be standardized and traded in exchanges and clearing 
houses.  
It has been proven that international cooperation is paramount before and after the 
outbreak  in  the  context  of  financial  stability.  Therefore  cross-border  regulatory 
supervision should be absolutely upheld for multi-national financial institutions. The 
malpractice of “regulatory arbitrage” should not be allowed to exist. IMF staff have 
proposed  the  creation  of  an  integrated  framework  for  crisis  management  and 
resolution, including a European Resolution Authority (the “ERA”) for  cross-border 
banks  in  Europe.  The  existence  of  such  a  body  will  greatly  reduce  impact  on  the 
European financial system when a major financial crisis has erupted. It appears that 
the  idea  of  ERA  may  perhaps  expand  internationally  to  provide  a  more  stable 
financial  environment  in  the  event  that  an  international  financial  crisis  occurs. 
Cross-border supervision is particularly important to Macao as the majority of banks 
operating in Macao are financed by overseas capital.  
Epilogue  
20) 
So far, the degree of recovery varies from one economy to another. The Asian ones 
appear to be doing well; China is trying to dampen its economy from  overheating 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2010
while India and Australia have raised interest rates a few times in the past 6 months. 
On the other hand, some economies have focused on fiscal discipline and therefore 
cannot contemplate any exit strategy. On the regulatory front, there is still a lack of 
consensus  on  major  financial  reform,  such  as  the  limitation  on  size  of  financial 
institutions, levy on financial transactions (the FAT or Tobin Tax) and the application 
of Volcker’s rules. Indeed we need global cooperation and consensus to cure our 
financial disease.  
I hope what I have said today may provide food for further thought on our discussion on how 
to prevent the recurrence of another financial tsunami and how to soften its blow. This is the 
purpose of my speech today.  
Thank you for all your attention. 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 5
