Anselmo Teng: Macao’s financial sector development 
Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the 2010 
Monetary  Authority  of  Macao  (Autoridade  Monetária  de  Macau  –  AMCM)  Spring  Cocktail, 
Macao SAR, 18 March 2010. 
 The Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Francis Tam,  
The  Honourable  Assistant  Director-General  of  the  Economic  Affairs  Department  of  the 
Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Gao Shang De,  
The Honourable Acting Director-General of the Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs in the MSAR, Ms. Han Xiao-yan,  
The Honourable Chairman of the AMCM Audit Committee, Mr. Leonel Alberto Alves,  
Dear Guests, Friends from the media, Dear colleagues  
It  is  the  beginning  of  the  Year  of  the  Tiger.  We  take  this  opportunity  to  have  a  joyous 
gathering with friends from the industry. While wishing each other good fortune, we express 
the friendship we have been sharing. On behalf of the Board of Directors of AMCM, I would 
like  to  convey  our  heartfelt  gratitude  to  Mr.  Francis  Tam,  Mr.  Gao  Shang  De,  Ms.  Han 
Xiao-yan,  the  representatives  from  the  Macau  Association  of  Banks,  the  Macau  Insurers’ 
Association, the Macau Insurance Agents and Brokers Association, the Federation of Macau 
Professional  Insurance  Intermediaries,  the  Macau  Financial  Markets  Association,  the 
Association of Macau Financial Employees, and our esteemed guests for their presence.  
In 2009, citizens of the MSAR and our financial market participants cheerfully celebrated the 
60th anniversary of our great Motherland and the 10th anniversary of the MSAR. 2009 also 
marked  the  20th  anniversary  of  AMCM  in  which  we  fought  strenuously  with  the  global 
financial  crisis.  It  is  glad  to  see  that,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Central  Government,  the 
direction of the MSAR Government and Mr. Tam, AMCM and our market participants were 
able  to  uphold  the  stability  of  our  financial  system.  We  managed  to  enhance  the  overall 
competitiveness of the industry, promote the recovery and development of the markets. I hereby 
propose a vote of thanks, on behalf of the Monetary Authority of Macao, to all sectors of our 
community  who  have  contributed  in  defending  our  financial  system  against  this  worldwide 
financial crisis which would rarely happen once in a century, and to our colleagues who have 
proactively and assiduously performed their duties in this respect.  
The global financial markets have learned a hard lesson arising from systemic risk which led 
to loss in confidence due to over ambitious expansion. International financial institutions have 
generally  realized  their  own  deficiencies  after  introspection.  They  therefore  strive  to 
consolidate, avert risks and perfect internal control mechanism with a view to shaking off the 
crisis  at  an  earlier  date  and  to  restore  the  confidence  of  consumers  in  the  financial 
institutions. Regulatory authorities around the world have displayed their decisiveness in the 
face  of  the  challenge  by  implementing  timely  and  appropriate  measures,  making  visionary 
arrangements  to  soften  the  blow.  However,  after  the  storm,  the  “exit  strategy”  initiated  or 
contemplated by various nations may conceal risks which may trigger market volatility and 
thus  pose  an  acid  test  for  global  financial  system  when  green  shoots  first  appear.  To  the 
regulators and practitioners, this will be the trial we shall face.  
In the realm of banking supervision, AMCM adheres to the principle of “risk-based” approach 
by  reinforcing  risk  supervision.  Through  the  maintaining  of  good  communication  and 
cooperation with the industry, it not only enhances supervision on capital, liquidity and asset 
quality  of  the  institutions,  it  also  requires  them  to  impose  more  stringent  measures  on 
operation  management  and  internal  control.  Under  concerted  endeavour,  the  banking 
industry has made a turnaround. Growth has been sustained, the banking system exhibits 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 1
greater  stability.  As  at  the  end  of  last  year,  aggregate  assets  of  27  banks  amounted  to 
MOP426.9 billion which was a record, or a growth of 18.7%. CAR was kept at a high level of 
15.6%; non-performing loan ratio was 0.61% which purported a continued good asset quality. 
Deposits amounted to MOP186.6 billion, loan-deposit ratio was 60.8%. At the moment, there 
is a change for the better in market operating environment which reflects a more optimistic 
market perspective.  
Apart  from  carrying  out  the  usual  onsite  and  offsite  inspections,  AMCM  also  pays  close 
attention to changes in internal operating environment of banks and external economy with a 
view to issuing timely directives and suggestions. It continues to perfect legislations relating 
to financial supervision to ensure that financial institutions are able to maintain stability and 
enhance their ability to combat risks.  
To  ensure  that  banks  are  able  to  develop  their  business  in  a  more  steady  and  effective 
manner,  AMCM  has  issued  guideline  on  business  continuity  which  requires  institutions  to 
comply  with  the  prescribed  risk  management  planning  and  preparation  when  formulating 
sustainable operation target. A guideline on outsourcing management has been implemented 
which imposes appropriate supervision on the increasing outsourcing of business operation. 
AMCM has carried out guideline on management of customer complaints. To enhance the 
protection of financial consumers, a draft regulatory guideline on sale and offer of financial 
products  and  related  bank  disclosure  has  been  rolled  out  for  consultation.  In  this  respect, 
AMCM has conducted a number of discussions with practitioners on the guideline. We are 
striving  to  strike  a  balance  between  supervision  and  market  development  by  arriving  at  a 
consensus with all parties concerned at an earlier date and hope that it can be implemented 
as  soon  as  possible  this  year.  Moreover,  in  light  of  past  experience  and  based  on  the 
appraisal  and  suggestion  of  international  organizations,  AMCM  has  revised  and  issued 
related guidelines on AML and CFT.  
It  is  worth  mentioning  that,  after  a  solid  year  of  endeavour  and  coordination,  the  Macao 
distributor  institutions  of  Lehman  minibonds  have  proactively  proposed  a  repurchase 
arrangement,  under  which  99%  of  the  affected  investors  have  come  to  terms  with  the 
distributors. Last year saw the start of the business of RMB settlement for cross-border trade. 
The  scope  of  RMB  business  for  individuals  has  also  been  permitted  to  enlarge  which 
purports  that  RMB  business  has  entered  into  a  new  stage.  At  the  same  time,  AMCM  has 
promoted business communication and cooperation between local financial institutions, the 
Mainland  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  Through  visits,  studies  and  seminars, 
understanding with each other has been enhanced which has laid down solid foundation for 
future  cooperation.  Moreover,  through  participation  in  the  framework  mechanism  for  study 
and planning relating to Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA) and Outline of 
the  Plan  for  the  Reform  and  Development  of  the  Pearl  River  Delta,  AMCM  has  injected 
momentum  into  the  realization  of  harmonious  cooperation  of  financial  business  of  the  two 
regions. It has also created more diversified business cooperation opportunity for the industry 
which has served to enlarge the scope of business for our financial sector.  
In  fulfilling  insurance  supervisory  work,  AMCM  has  carried  out  offsite  inspections  on 
insurance  and  retirement  fund  management  institutions,  executed  effective  supervision, 
aided by corresponding onsite inspections to enhance risk supervision. At the same time, to 
enhance solvency of insurance companies, AMCM has perfected the requirements for quality 
of guaranteeing assets and established regulatory system for technical reserves, which will 
ensure  that  the  institutions  are  equipped  with  appropriate  financial  capability  and  liquidity. 
Although the market has experienced some volatility brought about by the financial tsunami, 
local insurance market as a whole has preserved its stability and vitality. Premium receipts 
for all sorts of insurance have remained stable, but claims have not shown any abnormality. 
Profit  has  gradually  returned  to  pre-eruption  level.  Total  premiums  for  2009  amounted  to 
MOP3.26  billion,  of  which  MOP0.93  billion  belonged  to  non-life,  while  life  premiums 
amounted to MOP2.33 billion, gradually approaching record of the previous year.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/2010
to  original  plan,  AMCM  has 
the  business  via  supervision  on  pension 
To  maintain  stability  of  our  community  and  safeguard  the  livelihood  of  retirees,  AMCM 
indirectly  promotes  development  of 
fund 
management  institutions.  As  at  the  end  of  2009,  total  assets  under  pension  fund 
management  amounted  to  MOP5.16  billion,  an  increase  of  23%,  which  would  benefit 
74,600 employees.  Besides,  according 
implemented 
arrangements relating to new limits of indemnity and increase in premiums in respect of work 
injuries  and  professional  diseases.  There  is  also  a  civil  liability  insurance  issue  involving 
adjustment  of  premiums  and  limits  of  indemnity  for  business  vehicles  in  response  to  the 
special  operating  environment  of  the  trade.  Under  the  proactive  coordination  of  our  staff, 
there have been candid communications between numerous entities in order to strive for a 
consensus.  
To  perfect  insurance  related  legislations,  including  those  involving  insurance  agents  and 
brokers, the proposed amendments have been rolled out for initial consultation as scheduled, 
while  the  work  relating  to  revisions  of  specific  articles  has  been  in  orderly  progress. 
Simultaneously, in line with the spirit of CEPA, and to create a wider business scope for our 
insurance practitioners, AMCM has been in consultation with the insurance regulatory body 
of  the  Mainland  to  set  up  a  qualifying  examination  centre  in  Macao  for  our  insurance 
practitioners. The initial response has been encouraging. In addition, in line with the spirit of 
the Outline of the Plan for the Reform and Development of the Pearl River Delta, AMCM is 
proactively  studying  the  feasibility  of  encouraging  the  practitioners  to  probe  along  the 
direction of closer cooperation with their Mainland counterparts.  
As  at  31  December  2009,  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  MSAR  stood  at 
MOP146.6 billion, an increase of MOP19.4 billion from last year, or 15%. At the same time, 
the MSAR Reserve Fund amounted to MOP12.8 billion, which increased by MOP400 million 
year-on-year,  or  3%.  In  view  of  the  turbulence  of  the  investment  markets,  which  was 
aggravated  by  the  volatility  of  FX,  debt  market  and  interest  rates,  AMCM  insisted  on  a 
prudent  and  sturdy  investment  strategy  and  arrangement,  which  embodied  the  target  of 
maintaining  the  value  and  enhancing  income  for  our  FX  reserves  and  Reserve  Fund.  The 
substantial FX reserves provide fundamental guarantee for stable convertibility of the local 
currency.  
The  mastering  of  financial  information  and  related  statistics  enables  regulators  and 
practitioners  to  perform  self-assessment  in  respect  of  their  own  results.  Such  information 
also provides valuable and pivotal reference for policy formulation. Last year, AMCM kicked 
off a series of timely and innovative surveys and disseminations of statistics, including credits 
granted  by  local  banks  to  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises,  international  business  of 
banks,  use  of  locally  issued  credit  cards  and  balances,  and  mortgage  loans  granted  by 
banks.  In  addition,  we  reinforced  our  cooperation  and  communication  with  international 
financial  organizations.  We  followed  closely  the  requirements  of  international  financial 
statistics  by  participating  in  organizational  information  dissemination  mechanisms.  In  this 
way, we continuously enhance the reputation of our financial sector internationally which will 
arouse the interest of international funds to share our development. It also promotes the level 
of  internationalization  of  our  financial  sector.  Moreover,  participation  in  training  and 
communication  involving  international  financial  institutions  will  enhance  our  capability  in 
professional  research  and  analysis,  reinforce  credibility  and  authority  in  the  course  of 
financial policy formulation and implementation.  
Looking forward to 2010, international financial scenario is still riding on its V shape rebound, 
following the recovery of major economies. We are not yet sure of an utter recovery, but we 
see light from the other end of the tunnel in the midst of fluctuations. However, there are still 
many  factors  of  uncertainty  which  may  give  rise  to  changes,  especially  the  “exit  strategy” 
contemplated  by  a  number  of  nations.  The  act  will  no  doubt  wreak  havoc  on  the  nascent 
economic recovery. As an open regional economy, Macao is not immune to the fluctuations 
of external economies. Therefore, we should stay vigilant against even the smallest changes 
in  the  international  financial  markets  and  be  ready  to  master  the  information  to  formulate 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 3
preventive  measures  in  a  timely  manner,  so  as  to  reduce  the  impact  of  adverse  factors 
inflicted  on  the  overall  economy  and  financial  system.  As  regulator,  we  hope  to  work  with 
market participants to pay close attention to the future development of the markets, maintain 
close communication and cooperation with each other to take on all possible difficulties and 
challenges.  
The word “crisis” in Chinese language is composed of two words; danger and opportunity. In 
the face of a crisis, we also clearly see opportunities ahead. The Central Government has 
reiterated that our Motherland shall always back up the development of the MSAR. Under the 
auspices  of  the  Central  Government,  we  shall  weather  the  storm  and  pass  the  test. 
Moreover, under the Outline of the Plan for the Reform and Development of the Pearl River 
Delta  and  the  framework  of  CEPA,  the  prospect  for  economic  and  financial  cooperation 
between  the  MSAR  and  the  Mainland  appears  to  be  broad  and  bright.  The  temporary 
measure adopted by the MSAR at the beginning of the financial tsunami to provide full cover 
for all deposits will expire at year end. AMCM is proactively consulting market participants 
about a subsequent arrangement. We hope to arrive at an solution satisfactory to all parties 
concerned.  
As usual, under the leadership of our Chief Executive, Mr. Fernando Chui and the guidance 
of our Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Francis Tam, in addition to the support and 
cooperation of the practitioners, AMCM shall sturdily fulfil its duties in upholding the stability 
of  the  local  financial  system  and  promoting  the  enhancement  of  market  development. 
Shoulder to shoulder with our practitioners, we shall strenuously promote the development of 
our  financial  industry  to  become  an  important  element  in  the  course  of  economic 
diversification of the MSAR. The financial industry shall act as an economic lever to provide 
the necessary driving force with a view to achieving sustainable economic development and 
prosperity and hence the stability of the community of the MSAR.  
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2010
