Spencer Dale: QE – one year on 
Speech  by  Mr  Spencer  Dale,  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  at  the  Centre  for  International  Macroeconomics  and  Finance  (CIMF)  and  Money 
Macro  and  Finance  (MMF)  Research  Group  Conference  “New  Instruments  of  Monetary 
Policy: The Challenges”, Cambridge, 12 March 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Rohan  Churm,  Chris  Kubelec,  James  Smith  and  Jing  Yang  for  their  considerable  help  in 
preparing these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members 
of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Introduction 
This has been a truly extraordinary year for our economy and for economic policy. 
A year ago – almost to this very day – the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) conducted its 
first gilt auction as part of its asset purchase programme or its policy of quantitative easing as 
it became known. The need for policy action was clear. The three months to March 2009 are 
estimated to have seen the sharpest quarterly contraction in GDP since comparable records 
began in the 1950s. Manufacturing output was contracting at an annualised rate of close to 
20%. Claimant count unemployment was rising at the fastest rate on record. 
And financial markets remained in a state of shock. By early March last year, 40% had been 
wiped  off  the  value  of  the  FTSE  companies;  corporate  bond  spreads  were  at  their  widest 
since the 1970s; and banks continued to hoard liquidity, with spreads in the interbank market 
still around fifteen times higher than their pre-crisis levels. 
The financial crisis began in earnest in the summer of 2007, when the burgeoning sub-prime 
mortgage crisis began to pile pressure on banks. But it intensified dramatically following the 
failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, leading to the most severe banking crisis in 
living memory. The Monetary Policy Committee responded aggressively, cutting Bank Rate 
from 5% to 0.5% – its lowest ever level – in just five months. 
But  the  need  for  further  monetary  stimulus  was  clear.  In  principle,  it  would  have  been 
possible to cut Bank Rate a little further, to zero or even to a small negative number. But the 
structure  of  many  traditional  mortgage  lenders’  balance  sheets  meant  that  lowering  Bank 
Rate even further was likely to eat into their profitability and so intensify the credit crunch. 
Exactly what the monetary loosening was trying to avoid. Instead, the Bank decided to vary 
the size and composition of its balance sheet to inject money directly into the economy. And 
so QE was born. 
Since then the economy has stabilised, household and business confidence have recovered, 
and financial market conditions have improved. Taken at face value, the extraordinary policy 
measures implemented by the Bank, alongside those enacted by the Government, appear to 
have been successful in averting a deeper and more severe recession. And the hope now is 
that  a  sustained  recovery  in  demand  will  follow  consistent  with  the  objectives  of  those 
polices. 
But the contribution of our asset purchases in bringing about this stabilisation is still an open 
question.  One  year  on,  what  have  we  learnt  about  QE?  Today,  I  will  address  three  key 
questions. What is the theoretical foundation for such a policy? What are the key channels of 
transmission? And what can we say about its impact to date? 
These  questions  are  critical  for  the  operation  of  monetary  policy.  But  they  are  equally 
important  for  the  study  of  monetary  policy.  The  financial  crisis  posed  questions  which  the 
models  most  commonly  used  to  analyse  monetary  policy  were  not  well  suited  to  answer. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 1
There is an emerging literature that responds to these shortcomings. It is important – both for 
the theory and practice of monetary policy – that this continues. 
The theoretical foundation for unconventional monetary policy 
Let me turn first to the theoretical foundation for quantitative easing. 
Over the past 15 years, the canonical New-Keynesian New Classical synthesis model has 
become  the  benchmark  for  economists  to  study  the  operation  of  monetary  policy.  The 
attraction  of  this  class  of  models,  as  typified  for  example  by  Woodford  (2003)  and  Walsh 
(2003), is that its relative simplicity and tractability means that it can be used to derive clear 
and precise policy prescriptions. And indeed that is the case when used to analyse monetary 
policy at the zero bound. The only way policy can gain traction at the lower bound in such a 
model  is  through  influencing  expectations  –  the  most  well  known  reference  here  being 
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 
This result stems from the fact that the economy behaves as if, in effect, there are only two 
assets in existence, typically modelled as money and bonds. Agents hold more money up to 
the  point  at  which  the  marginal  benefit  from  the  liquidity  services  it  confers  equals  the 
marginal  cost:  the  nominal  interest  rate.  At  the  zero  bound,  both  the  marginal  benefit  and 
marginal  cost  are  effectively  zero,  and  money  and  bonds  become  perfect  substitutes.  It 
follows that exchanging money for bonds at this point has no impact on activity or inflation. 
The economy is assumed – by construction – to be in a liquidity trap. 
As  is  well  known,  the  optimal  policy  within  this  class  of  models  is  for  the  central  bank  to 
commit  to  low  interest  rates  for  an  extended  period  and  to  a  temporary  overshoot  of  the 
inflation target. Exchange rate depreciations (Svensson 2001) and interest rate commitments 
(Krugman 1998, Woodford 2003) are examples of policy recommendations stemming from 
this result. 
The crucial insight emphasised by these models is that expectations matter, and provide a 
mechanism  through  which  policy  makers  can  seek  to  influence  activity  at  the  zero  bound. 
This is an important channel of monetary transmission and one I will return to. 
But the argument that monetary policy can work only through expectations management is 
not a robust result. It rests on very particular assumptions. In this class of models, financial 
markets are assumed to be complete and frictionless and the representative agent is able to 
arbitrage across all financial markets. As such, all non-aggregate risk in the economy can be 
hedged  perfectly  and  asset  prices  depend  only  on  state-contingent  payoffs.  Under  these 
assumptions, demand curves for financial assets are perfectly elastic. 
But in the real world it seems plausible that demand curves for assets, in addition to money, 
are downward sloping to some degree, in which case changes in their relative supplies can 
affect their relative prices. It is this which gives quantitative easing its traction. 
Half a century ago Tobin (1958), in pioneering work on portfolio allocation, recognised that a 
range of assets, in addition to money, are likely to be imperfect substitutes. But Tobin did not 
articulate fully the frictions that could generate such imperfect substitutability. 
More recently, there has been rapid development in micro models of the source of financial 
frictions  which  can  motivate 
include 
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Vayanos and Weill (2008).1 These models help to 
explain when and why investors may face un-diversifiable risks when holding specific types 
of  securities,  such  that  they  become  imperfect  substitutes  for  otherwise  similar  assets.  In 
Brunnermeier  and  Pedersen  (2009),  for  example,  marketmakers  face  uncertainty  over  the 
imperfect  substitutability.  Recent  examples 
                                                 
1  
In addition see Duffie, Gârleanu and Pedersen, (2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2010
timing of customers’ trades. They are unable to hedge perfectly this liquidity risk because of 
borrowing constraints, so that less liquid securities are imperfect substitutes for more liquid 
ones.  This  liquidity  risk  leads  asset  prices  to  diverge  from  “fundamentals”  determined  by 
underlying cash flows. 
Researchers are also beginning to make a number of important contributions that introduce 
various  forms  of  financial  frictions  into  otherwise  standard  macro  models.  For  example,  in 
Kiyotaki  and  Moore  (2008),  firms  face  a  “liquidity  constraint”  in  financing  their  investment 
which  arises  from  a  combination  of  borrowing  constraints  and  a  difficulty  in  selling  their 
illiquid  assets.  This  need  for  liquidity  gives  rise  to  an  endogenous  demand  for  money.  An 
important  feature  of  this  model  is  that  the  central  bank  can  offset  the  effects  of  liquidity 
shocks  by  purchasing  illiquid  assets  with  central  bank  money.2  Building  on  Kiyotaki  and 
Moore’s  resalability  constraint,  Gertler  and  Kiyotaki  (2009)  introduce  a  funding  friction  for 
banks,  whereby  banks  need  to  hold  capital  in  order  for  depositors  to  be  willing  to  deposit 
funds. Such a funding friction affords a role for the authorities to lend directly to firms when 
capital  constraints  bite  on  banks.  Andrés,  López-Salido  and  Nelson  (2004)  incorporate 
imperfect substitutability between short- and long-term bonds. Here the lack of a secondary 
market for long bonds is the source of the friction. In this model, base money expansion by a 
central  bank  can  relieve  portfolio  constraints  and  lead  to  an  increase  in  demand  for  long 
bonds, thereby raising their prices. 
Much  of  this  literature  is  still  in  its  infancy  and  there  is  some  way  to  go  before  it  can  be 
combined within an applied, quantitative model that policy makers can use. But the central 
message  I  take  from  this  work  is  that  there  are  a  number  of  channels  through  which 
monetary  policy  is  likely  to  be  able  to  influence  the  economy  at  the  zero  bound. 
Unfortunately, the financial crisis meant that we had to put these insights into practice. When 
doing so at the Bank, we placed weight on three key channels of monetary transmission: the 
impact of imperfect substitutability and the portfolio rebalancing channel on relative prices, 
the role of financial market liquidity, and the importance of expectations. 
All  three  channels  were  important  in  the  design  of  the  Committee’s  asset  purchase 
programme. Let me take them in turn. 
Channels of transmission 
To date, the Bank has purchased £200 billion of assets financed by the issuance of central 
bank reserves, the vast majority of which have been relatively long maturity gilts. The central 
objective  underlying  those  gilts  purchases  was  to  inject  a  substantial  amount  of  additional 
money  into  the  economy.  The  main  behavioural  assumption  underlying  this  monetary 
injection was that it would gain traction via a portfolio rebalancing channel. 
Most UK government bonds are held by non-bank financial sector companies (OFCs), such 
as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies.3  As  long  as  these  investors  do  not  regard 
money  as  a  perfect  substitute  for  gilts,  they  will  attempt  to  reduce  the  additional  money 
holdings  associated  with  gilt  purchases  by  switching  into  other  assets.  This  process  of 
portfolio rebalancing will continue until the yields on gilts and on alternative assets, such as 
corporate bonds and equities, have fallen sufficiently to compensate investors for holding the 
higher  level  of  money  balances.  The  degree  of  stimulus  associated  with  the  monetary 
                                                 
2   Del Negro, Eggertsson, Ferrero and Kiyotaki (2009) extend this framework to analyse monetary policy at zero 
bound. 
3   At the end of 2008, prior to the commencement of the asset purchase programme, almost 60% of outstanding 
gilts were held by OFCs (of which 40% were held by insurance companies and pension funds), and 35% were 
held by overseas investors. UK banks and building societies held only 4% of gilts. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 3
injection will be greater the lower the substitutability between money and gilts, and the higher 
the substitutability between gilts and other assets. 
Trying to estimate the likely size of these effects is very difficult, not least because a policy of 
this form and scale has never been implemented in the UK. There is a natural limit to what 
can be learnt from past time-series relationships. A standard portfolio model of OFC’s money 
demand, in which money holdings are jointly modelled with movements in asset prices and 
relative rates of return, would suggest that asset purchases on the scale seen might increase 
asset prices by the order of 20–30%.4 At first blush, this impact may seem surprisingly large. 
But  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  scale of  the  asset  purchases made  over  the  past 
year is truly substantial, amounting to some 14% of nominal GDP. But there are obviously 
huge uncertainty bands surrounding this type of estimate and I would not be surprised if it 
was revised, perhaps significantly, as we learn more about the impact of our current policy. 
These higher asset prices should help to stimulate increases in consumption and investment 
via  wealth  and  cost-of-capital  channels.  But  the  transmission  of  the  monetary  stimulus 
through  to  higher  nominal  spending  may  occur  only  gradually.  This  suggests  that  a 
significant impact from our asset purchases is still to come through. 
An important issue when thinking about the likely channels of monetary transmission is the 
state of the banking system. In normal times, a key channel through which asset purchases 
might  be  expected  to  operate  is  by  increasing  banks’  stocks  of  liquid  assets,  which  may 
encourage them to extend new loans. But we are not in normal times. Banks are pulling back 
on their lending as they seek to strengthen their balance sheets and reduce their leverage. 
For  this  reason,  when  making  an  assessment  of  the  likely  impact  of  asset  purchases,  the 
Committee did not factor in a material expansion of bank lending. 
Indeed,  our  asset  purchases  were  designed  to  facilitate  a  disintermediation  of  corporate 
financing away from banks and toward capital markets. This disintermediation was supported 
in part by the portfolio rebalancing triggered by our gilt purchases. As investors’ demand for 
alternative assets such as corporate bonds and equities increased, the ability of businesses 
to raise finance in capital markets improved and the cost fell. 
This disintermediation was reinforced by the Bank’s operations to improve the functioning of 
corporate credit markets. The financial market dislocation in the immediate aftermath of the 
crisis hindered the functioning of the commercial paper and corporate bond markets and led 
to  substantial  increases  in  liquidity  premia.  In  response,  the  Bank  established  facilities  to 
make  small  regular  purchases  of  corporate  bonds  and  commercial  paper,  with  the  aim  of 
aiding secondary market liquidity. The significance of these purchases of private sector debt 
should  not  be  judged  by  their  scale,  which  was  tiny  in  comparison  to  gilt  purchases.  The 
purpose of these operations was not to purchase a specific quantity of assets, but rather to 
improve  the  functioning  of  those  markets.  In  that  respect,  the  knowledge  that  the  Bank 
stands ready to purchase assets may be as beneficial as actual purchases.5 
The importance of expectations also played a central role in the design of our asset purchase 
programme.  It  was  vitally  important  that  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  was  able  to 
introduce a new policy instrument at the point at which Bank Rate reached its effective lower 
bound.  This  instrument  had  to  be  credible,  both  in  terms  of  its  economic  impact  and  the 
willingness of the Committee to use the instrument in force. My own view is that the speed 
with which the asset purchase programme was introduced and the scale of the programme 
played  an  important  role  in  reaffirming  the  MPC’s  commitment  to  achieving  the  inflation 
target and reinforcing the belief in our ability to do so. 
                                                 
4   See, for example, Thomas (1997). 
5   See Fisher (2010) for a more detailed discussion of these operations. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2010
Estimating the effects so far 
So what impact have our asset purchases had to date? 
That’s the two hundred billion pound question. Unfortunately, it is hard to provide a definitive 
answer. To be clear this is no different from our inability to assess precisely the impact of the 
reduction in Bank Rate from 5% to 0.5%. Or indeed of any macroeconomic policy measure. 
Without  knowing  what  would  have  happened  in  the  absence  of  a  policy  action,  it  is  not 
possible to identify its incremental impact. But what is different is that this policy instrument is 
relatively untried and untested. So the demand to provide some insight into its impact is that 
much greater. This demand is quite understandable, but difficult to satisfy. 
One  possible  approach  to  assessing  the  impact  of  our  asset  purchases  is  to  consider  the 
growth  of  broad  money.  A  key  principle  underlying  the  asset  purchase  programme  is  the 
belief  in  a  causal  mechanism  running  from  increased  money  balances  into  higher  asset 
prices and nominal spending. This mechanism can be expressed in terms of a process of 
portfolio rebalancing in which yields of different assets adjust in order for the higher level of 
money balances to be willingly held. But the same mechanism could be expressed in terms 
of  a  monetarist  approach,  in  which  asset  purchases  work  through  measures  of  money 
disequilibrium  which  in  turn  spur  additional  spending.  These  different  frameworks  are 
sometimes  presented  as  conflicting  models  of  the  transmission  of  asset  purchases.  But  I 
view  them  as  essentially  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  Importantly,  they  share  the  same 
fundamental assumption about why monetary policy at the zero bound can stimulate nominal 
spending: namely, imperfect substitutability between money and other assets. 
Over  the  past  year,  despite  money-financed  asset  purchases  totalling  £200  billion,  broad 
money has increased by just £8 billion.6 What should we make of this weakness? In part it 
speaks  to  the  counterfactual.  The  falls  in  nominal  spending  and  the  desire  by  banks  to 
reduce leverage means that, absent the monetary injection, broad money would have almost 
certainly been far weaker. But it is also symptomatic of the scale of the new equity and debt 
raised by UK banks over this period which, together with retained profits, totals more than 
£85 billion. Given that the non-bank private sector is likely to have been the source for much 
of this funding, this is likely to have squeezed broad money growth. But the counterpart to 
this fall in private sector deposits is a strengthening in banks balance sheets which should in 
turn aid the recovery by improving the availability of bank lending. So the monetary impulse 
still operates. 
One  approach  to  help  mitigate  the  counterfactual  problem  is  to  use  event  studies  which 
consider the impact of QE announcements on asset prices over relatively short windows.7 
Gilt  yields  may  respond  to  such  policy  announcements  both  because  of  the  impact  gilt 
purchases have on the yields at which investors are willing to hold the reduced supply of gilts 
– the portfolio balance effect – and because of the information the announcement may be 
perceived  to  contain  about  the  future  stance  of  monetary  policy  –  one  element  of  the 
expectations channel. 
It  is  possible  to  get  some  indication  of  the  size  of  the  portfolio  effect  by  considering 
movements in the spread of gilt yields to Overnight Indexed Swap (OIS) rates, which should 
not  be  affected  by  changes  in  the  relative  supply  of  gilts.  Although  precise  estimates  vary 
according to the maturity of the gilts and the size of the window, summing movements in gilt-
OIS  spreads  following  our  announcements  suggests  that  the  portfolio  balance  effect  may 
have reduced gilt yields by around 100 basis points. Again, a pretty sizeable effect. 
                                                 
6   This excludes the money holdings of intermediate OFCs. See the box on page 13 of the May 2009 Inflation 
Report for discussion of the reasons for excluding intermediate OFCs in measures of broad money. 
7   This is in a similar spirit to Bernanke, Reinhart and Sack (2004). 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 5
Similarly, movements in OIS rates following policy announcements may provide a guide to 
the  extent  to  which  the  announcements  affected  expectations  about  the  future  stance  of 
monetary policy. OIS rates fell sharply following the initial announcements of QE, particularly 
at  short  horizons,  suggesting  these  announcements  caused  market  participants  to  revise 
down the expected future path of Bank Rate. However, perhaps not surprisingly, as QE has 
become better understood, OIS rates have responded less to more recent announcements. 
This is consistent with market participants increasingly viewing QE as part of the systematic 
component  of  monetary  policy.  To  the  extent  that  gilt  yields  and  other  asset  prices  have 
moved in response to this systematic component, these movements would not be captured 
by event studies and hence looking only at announcement effects may tend to understate the 
impact of QE. 
Gilts make up a relatively small proportion of total assets held by the private sector. As such, 
when  assessing  the  overall  impact  of  our  asset  purchases  it  is  important  to  consider  the 
increase in other asset prices. Since we started QE, equity prices have increased by more 
than  50%,  and  corporate  bond  yields  have  fallen  by  over  400  basis  points.  These 
movements  have  been  very  beneficial  for  the  economy  and,  when  starting  our  asset 
purchases  a  year  ago,  I  would  have  been  more  than  willing  to  have  settled  for  such  an 
outcome. 
However, it is difficult to identify the incremental role of QE in driving these improvements. 
These other asset prices may respond less quickly to asset purchase announcements and 
so are less easily isolated using event studies. Moreover, these movements coincided with a 
global  rally  in  financial markets,  which  further  complicates  the  task  of isolating  UK-specific 
effects.  However,  it  is  important  to  see  this  global  rally  in  the  context  of  the  similar  policy 
strategies adopted by a number of the world’s most important central banks: official interest 
rates  were  cut  to  very  low  levels  and  central  banks’  balance  sheets  in  many  parts  of  the 
world  were  greatly  expanded.  The  fact  that  UK  capital  markets  moved  in  line  with  global 
markets during this period does not suggest that domestic policy had little impact. 
Indeed,  I  have  little  doubt  that  our  asset  purchases  contributed  substantially  to  these 
movements,  via  the  channels  I  have  discussed.  Through  a  portfolio  rebalancing  effect,  as 
both  retail  and  institutional  investors  switched  out  of  gilts  into  alternative  assets,  such  as 
corporate  bonds  and  equities.  Through  improvements  to  market  liquidity,  aided  by  our 
purchases  of  commercial  paper  and  corporate  bonds.  And  through  their  impact  on 
expectations, as asset purchases demonstrated our commitment to act, boosted confidence 
in  the  economic  environment  and  so  reduced  the  likelihood  of  further  large  falls  in  asset 
prices. 
The  ultimate  success  of  QE  will  depend  on  whether  the  monetary  injection  and  increased 
asset prices stimulate nominal spending and so help achieve the 2% inflation target in the 
medium term. Much of the impact of our asset purchases to date is to still to come through 
and  so  it  is  too  early  to  judge  their  final  impact.  However,  in  that  respect,  it  is  perhaps 
noteworthy that nominal GDP in the UK grew at an annualised rate of around 4% during the 
third and fourth quarters of 2009. These estimates are still relatively early and so subject to 
considerable uncertainty. But there are perhaps some tentative signs that nominal spending 
in our economy is starting to accelerate. 
Conclusion 
It is exactly a year since the MPC started its programme of large-scale asset purchases. The 
move to quantitative easing met with mixed reactions. Some commentators claimed that it 
would  end  in  inflationary  tears.  Many  academics  questioned  whether  it  would  have  any 
impact at all. 
From the outside, you may imagine that this was a difficult decision for a committee of nine, 
conservative  central  bankers  to  reach.  In  fact,  from  my  perspective  the  decision  was 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2010
relatively straightforward. The inflation target provides a clear, numerical objective for policy. 
The outlook for inflation suggested further monetary stimulus was necessary to achieve that 
target.  With  Bank  Rate  close  to  its  lower  bound,  this  stimulus  had  to  be  implemented  via 
alternative means. And there are clear and convincing economic arguments why – in the real 
world – injecting money directly into the economy is likely to provide a means of achieving 
that stimulus. 
One year on, there is a range of evidence – some relatively hard, some more circumstantial – 
that quantitative easing is having its desired effect. Asset prices have increased substantially, 
companies have made record recourse to debt and equity markets, confidence has recovered 
and inflation expectations remain firmly anchored. But there is still a long way to go. The bulk of 
our asset purchases have been made only over the last 9 months or so. Much of their effect 
on nominal spending and inflation is still to come through. We are likely to learn a lot about 
the transmission of those purchases and about their ultimate impact over the course of the 
next year. 
As  you  know,  at  its  meetings  in  February  and  March,  the  Committee  decided  to  maintain 
Bank Rate at 0.5% and to maintain the stock of asset purchases at £200 billion. It is worth 
emphasising two important considerations underlying these most recent decisions. First, the 
portfolio balance channel implies that the primary stimulus from QE stems from the stock of 
past  purchases,  not  the  flow  of  additional  ones.  As  such,  maintaining  the  stock  of  asset 
purchases, together with the low level of Bank Rate, should continue to impart a substantial 
stimulus to the economy for some time to come. 
Second,  the  Committee  stands  ready  to  make  further  asset  purchases  should  the  outlook 
warrant  them.  Just  as  with  movements  in  Bank  Rate  in  more  normal  times,  a  pause  in 
monetary loosening does not necessarily mean that loosening has come to an end. It will all 
depend on how the outlook for inflation evolves. 
Looking  further  ahead,  the  Committee  at  some  point  will  need  to  reduce  the  current 
exceptional degree of monetary stimulus. Some commentators have suggested that the MPC 
has been less forthcoming than other central banks in explaining its exit strategy. But to a 
large extent this reflects the fact that we have less to communicate. The Committee has two 
instruments through which it can withdraw the stimulus, raising Bank Rate and selling assets. 
Unlike  some  other  central  banks  which  need  to  create  new  instruments  to  drain  excess 
reserves  or  alter  the  terms  of  existing  facilities,  the  structure  of  the  Bank’s  operating 
framework  means  these  two  instruments  can  be  used  at  any  time,  in  any  order.  And  the 
strategy guiding our policy decisions will be unchanged – monetary policy will continue to be 
determined by the outlook for inflation relative to target. The most difficult decision will be to 
decide the timing of the withdrawal, but that is always the case. 
The  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  posed  many  questions  for  the  theory  and  practice  of 
monetary policy. One year on from reaching the effective lower bound of interest rates and 
starting a policy of quantitative easing, there is still much for academics and policy makers to 
learn. I hope today’s conference will mark another step in that collaboration. 
References 
Andres,  J,  Lopez-Salido,  D  J  and  Nelson,  E  (2004),  “Tobin’s  imperfect  substitution  in 
optimising  general  equilibrium”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  Vol.  36,  No.  5, 
pages 665–90. 
Bernanke, B S, Reinhart, V R and Sack, B P (2004), “Monetary policy alternatives at the 
zero  bound:  an  empirical  assessment”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  Issue  2, 
pages 1–78. 
Brunnermeier,  M  K  and  Pedersen,  L  H  (2009),  “Market  liquidity  and  funding  liquidity”, 
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 22(6), pages 2201–38. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 7
Duffie, D, Gârleanu, N and Pedersen, L H (2007), “Valuation in over-the-counter markets”, 
The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 20. 
Del Negro, M, Eggertsson, G, Ferrero, A and Kiyotaki, N (2009), “The great escape? A 
quantitative  evaluation  of  the  Fed’s  non-standard  policies”,  Manuscript,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York and Princeton University. 
Eggertsson,  G  and  Woodford,  M  (2003),  “The  zero  bound  on  interest  rates  and  optimal 
monetary policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 212–219. 
Fisher,  P  (2010),  “The  corporate  sector  and  the  Bank  of  England’s  Asset  Purchases”, 
Association of Corporate Treasurers Winter Paper. 
Gertler,  M  and Kiyotaki, N (2009),  “Financial intermediation  and  credit  policy  in  business 
cycle analysis”. Manuscript, New York University and Princeton University. 
Kiyotaki,  N  and  Moore,  J  (2008),  “Liquidity,  business  cycles  and  monetary  policy”, 
Manuscript, Princeton University. 
Thomas, R (1997), “The demand for M4: a sectoral analysis, part 2 – the corporate sector”, 
Bank of England Working Paper, No. 62. 
Tobin, J (1958), “Liquidity preference as behaviour towards risk”, The Review of Economic 
Studies, Vol 25, No 2. 
Vayanos, D and Weill, P-O (2008), “A search-based theory of the on-the-run phenomenon,” 
Journal of Finance, Vol 63, pp 1361–98. 
Walsh, C (2003), Monetary theory and policy, The MIT Press. 
Woodford, M (2003), Interest and prices, Princeton University Press. 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2010
