Tarisa Watanagase: The road ahead for central banks – meeting new 
challenges to financial stability 
Luncheon talk by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Foreign 
Correspondents Club of Thailand, Bangkok, 20 July 2010.  
 Distinguished FCCT Members and Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
First of all, I would like to thank the FCCT Board for inviting me to deliver this luncheon talk 
as part of the Club’s newly established Speaker’s Lunch Series. To this, I am honored as 
well as delighted to be back. It was exactly two years ago when I was here for the Club’s 
dinner program in July 2008, and let me tell you that I very much enjoyed our Q&A session 
then. I certainly look forward to participating in such a lively exchange again this afternoon.  
The topic of my talk today is “The Road Ahead for Central Banks: Meeting New Challenges 
to Financial Stability,” in which I will share with you my views on the roles of central banks 
regarding the maintenance of financial stability, with particular reference to those at the Bank 
of Thailand during the past few years and going forward. This talk will be divided into three 
parts. The first part will be about the changing global view on financial stability policies as a 
result  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  The  second  part  will  be  a  summary  of  what  the 
Bank of Thailand has done with regard to the maintenance of Thailand’s financial stability. 
The final part will be a discussion about the challenges ahead.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Since  my  previous  FCCT  address,  things  have  changed  dramatically.  Two  years  ago,  the 
main  policy  issue  surrounding  the  economy  was  the  sharp  acceleration  in  inflation  due  to 
drastic  increases  in  oil  prices.  Two  months  after  my  talk,  starting  with  the  fall  of  Lehman 
Brothers, the world went into the deepest recession never seen since the Great Depression. 
Thailand was not spared, as the Thai economy last year experienced negative growth for the 
first time since the 1997 crisis. In tandem with the slowdown of the global economy, oil prices 
collapsed and inflation was no longer an issue. Over the past two years, policy focus would 
be on how to restore the stability of the global and individual country’s financial systems and 
how  to  prevent  such  a  systemic  crisis  from  happening  in  the  future.  In  other  words,  the 
spotlight  has  turned  from  price  stability  to  financial  system  stability,  or  in  short,  financial 
stability.1  
The global financial crisis has a significant impact on central banks’ thinking of economic and 
financial stability policies in three major areas. First, it is now widely accepted that monetary 
policy  also  needs  to  take  care  of  financial  stability  concerns.  The  pursuit  of  price  stability 
alone  is  not  enough  to  ensure  a  smooth  progress  of  the  economy.  Second,  traditional 
“micro” prudential regulation which aims to limit the distress of individual financial institutions 
is not enough to ensure that the financial system as a whole will be able to cope with large 
systemic  shocks.  There  is  the  need  for  regulation  that  takes  care  of  interactions  between 
financial institutions, markets, and the real economy. The latter is known as macroprudential 
policy, a new buzzword that you may have heard of or will be hearing increasingly more often 
in the future.  
                                                 
1   Unlike price stability which refers to low and stable inflation, there is no universal definition of financial stability. 
One  commonly  used  definition  of  financial  stability  is  a  situation  in  which  the  financial  system  is  robust  to 
shock and the stable provision of various financial intermediation services to the wider economy is ensured. 
BIS Review 96/2010 
 1
The  third  policy  rethinking  concerns  the  separation  of  banking  regulation  and  supervision 
from  central  banks.  Before  the  crisis,  an  increasing  number  of  countries  had  adopted  a 
model where a central bank only takes care of monetary policy and a separate independent 
authority takes care of regulation and supervision of financial institutions. That model, which 
promises superior performance in terms of financial stability maintenance, is now in question.  
Let me elaborate on these three issues in a bit more detail. In the realm of monetary policy, 
the conventional wisdom before the crisis, based on the long-standing success of former Fed 
Chairman Alan Greenspan, was that monetary policy should stay away from direct financial 
stability  responsibility,  particularly  the  management  of  asset  price  bubbles,  and  let  the 
financial markets take care of themselves. And if things go wrong, policymakers can always 
clean up the mess after a bubble has burst by cutting interest rate aggressively.  
As  we  all  know,  the  severity  and  the  costs  of  this  global  financial  crisis  have  very  much 
discredited the so-called Greenspan Doctrine. Talk of risks to financial stability has now been 
mentioned  frequently  in  several  central  banks’  monetary  policy  statements.  Equally 
important, signs of financial imbalances have become parts of a watch list for many central 
banks.  These  developments  stood  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  pre-crisis  orthodoxy  where 
financial stability would factor into monetary policy decisions only to the extent that it affected 
growth and inflation.  
The changing consensus on monetary policy does not mean that central banks will be using 
interest  rates  aggressively  to  fight  off  asset  price  misalignments  and  financial  imbalances, 
however. By all means, interest rate policy is probably too blunt to be a “corrective” tool for 
financial stability given that, to materially impact asset prices, a substantial increase in the 
interest  rate  is  required.  Using  the  policy  interest  rate  to  actively  steer  asset  prices  would 
therefore have adverse consequences on the economy as a whole. Instead, the post-crisis 
consensus  emphasizes  the  use  of  monetary  policy  as  a  "preventive"  tool  for  financial 
stability,  that  is,  not  to  allow  monetary  policy  to  sow  the  seed  of  asset  price  bubbles.  An 
important  lesson  from  this  crisis  is  that  an  over-extended  period  of  low  interest  rates  can 
distort risk perception, leading to excessive risk taking and costly financial imbalances.  
Beyond the reorientation of monetary policy, the post-crisis consensus advocates the use of 
macroprudential  policy  as  the  first  line  of  defense  against  the  buildups  of  financial 
imbalances.  In  comparison  to  interest  rate  measures,  macroprudential  policy  can  address 
sector-specific financial stability concerns more directly without excessive side effects on the 
overall economy.  
Macroprudential policy differs from traditional prudential regulation in that it adopts a system-
wide or systemic perspective. The idea behind macroprudential policy is that while financial 
institutions may be individually safe, collectively they may be at risk due to herd behaviors 
and  their  interconnections.  Here,  the  U.S.  subprime  crisis  serves  as  a  case  in  point. 
Regulators thought banks were safe because they had off-loaded their subprime credit risk 
exposures through securitization and unknowingly allowed the market to grow out of hand. 
From a system-wide perspective, the risk did not go anywhere as banks, in search for good 
yields during the low interest rate environment, invested in securitized assets issued by other 
banks. The situation was further exacerbated by the complex interconnections among U.S. 
financial institutions whereby the failure of one institution greatly increased the probability of 
failure of others.  
To  maximize  its  effectiveness,  macroprudential  policy  should  cover  all  types  of  financial 
institutions that make up a financial system, not just banks, but also the likes of securities 
companies, insurance companies, and hedge funds, to name a few. This is because modern 
financial systems are complex and intertwined. In fact, one root cause of the global financial 
crisis can be traced to loose regulation of the so-called shadow banking system in the U.S.  
One key purpose of macroprudential policy is to limit excessive exuberance that could come 
about during “good times,” for example, by requiring financial institutions to hold extra capital 
or  by  putting  a  cap  on  how  much  they  can  lend  during  an  economic  upswing.  An  implicit 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2010
message behind this is that these policies will not only help strengthen the financial system’s 
resilience, but also moderate financial institutions’ actions from being too optimistic during an 
economic upturn or too pessimistic during an economic downturn – the behavior known as 
“procyclicality”  of  the  financial  system  that  exacerbates  the  business  cycle.  All  in  all,  it  is 
envisioned that the combination of monetary policy and macroprudential policy will effectively 
safeguard financial stability and hence macro stability at large.  
On institutional arrangements, the global financial crisis clearly shows that the independent 
regulator model does not live up to its promise. Some countries would have been better off in 
dealing with this crisis had the regulatory power remained with the central banks. The most 
notable example here is perhaps in the UK where the government will abolish the Financial 
Services  Authority  (FSA)  and  transfer  its  regulatory  responsibility  back  to  the  Bank  of 
England.  
While  the  UK  may  be  an  extreme  case,  a  growing  consensus  has  emerged  that  central 
banks should play a key role in preserving the overall stability and smooth functioning of the 
financial  system.  In  this  respect,  having  supervisory  authority  over  systemically  important 
financial institutions, such as commercial banks, would make the central bank’s job a little 
easier.  Clearly,  having  monetary  policy,  lender  of  last  resort  function, and  macroprudential 
policy under the same roof allows for better policy coordination.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Against  the  backdrop  of  the  changing  policy  philosophy  in  the  global  central  banking 
community, let me now turn to the second part of my talk which is what the Bank of Thailand 
has been doing in the past few years with regard to the maintenance of financial stability.  
Through  the  1997  Asian  financial  crisis,  we  learnt  firsthand  the  importance  of  financial 
stability  to  the  real  economy  as  well  as  the  need  to  preserve  it.  Indeed,  that  the  Thai 
economy recovered rapidly from the global financial crisis this time can be attributed in part 
to policies that put a strong emphasis on the health of the financial system.  
In July 2004, upon an assessment that the booming economy may result in the buildup of 
certain financial imbalances, the Monetary Policy Committee made the monitoring of “factors 
contributing  to  financial  imbalances"  a  permanent  part  of  its  assessment  and  policy 
formulation  process.  As  part  of  this  macro-financial  risk  surveillance,  signs  of  financial 
imbalances  in  seven  key  areas  are  regularly  monitored:  the  property  market,  the  stock 
market,  the  banking  sector,  the  non-financial  corporate  sector,  household-sector  balance 
sheet,  government  finance  and  public  debt,  and  the  external  sector,  with  the  goal  of 
establishing  an  early  warning  system  for  potential  threats  to  financial  stability,  especially  if 
the underlying imbalances are related to monetary policy actions.  
On the regulatory side, fully aware of the implications of systemic risk, we have incorporated 
macroprudential  elements  into  our  regulatory  framework  well  before  the  concept  became 
popular in the wake of the global financial crisis. Although we did not use the term, some of 
the prudential measures that we have deployed in the past few years  were in the spirit of 
macroprudential policy of enhancing the resilience of the financial system over the cycle and 
of restraining the buildup of systemic risks. For example, in 2003, when we observed rising 
high-end real estate prices along with strong mortgage lending, we imposed a ceiling on the 
loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratio  for  residential  property  with  the  transaction  price  exceeding  10 
million baht. Later in 2004, observing a significant credit card loan growth, we placed limits 
on credit card borrowing by instituting a minimum income requirement, among others. More 
recently in 2006, seeing that banks were strong enough, we asked them to further set aside 
sizable  provisions  for  loan  losses  in  compliance  with  a  new  international  accounting 
standard.  This  had  an  adverse  impact  on  banks’  bottom  line  at  the  time,  but  the  extra 
provisioning  would  later  provide  cushions  for  Thai  banks  during  last  year’s  economic 
downturn.  Regarding  all  these  instances,  it  should  be  noted  that  in  choosing  the  specific 
macroprudential measure to be used, the Bank of Thailand has exercised great caution in 
BIS Review 96/2010 
 3
terms of market friendliness, for a fine line exists between the balance of financial efficiency 
and financial stability.  
Here,  I  would  like  to  note  that  having  both  monetary  policy  and  regulatory  responsibilities 
together  allows  us  to  see  the  big  picture  when  making  policies,  whether  monetary  or 
macroprudential ones. This synergy has also enabled us to act quickly and decisively with an 
informed judgment, which served us well during the global financial crisis. In Thailand, talk of 
removing  regulatory  duties  from  the  Bank  of  Thailand  surfaced  from  time  to  time  after  the 
1997 crisis, and I think we were fortunate that the government did not go through that path.  
In  addition,  with  regard  to  the  purview  of  our  regulation,  the  new  Financial  Institutions 
Business Act (Section 5) allows room for the Bank of Thailand to regulate any unregulated 
financial  businesses  that  may  have  significant  impacts  on  the  economic  and  financial 
systems.  This  means  that,  we  will  be  able  to  take  care  of  systemically  important  financial 
firms outside current regulatory purview if the situation warrants.  
Ladies and Gentleman,  
Lastly, let me share with you what I see as major challenges for the maintenance of financial 
stability  in  Thailand.  While  we  may  have  a  head  start  over  many  countries,  we  are  not  in 
anyway complacent. In particular, three important challenges loom on the horizon.  
First,  the  global  economy,  while  doing  much  better  than  a  year  ago,  still  have  many 
vulnerabilities  which  could  give  rise  to  the  next  round  of  global  financial  instability.  Most 
importantly,  the public debt problems in certain European countries constitute a major risk 
factor. At the other end of the spectrum, the growth and interest rate disparity between Asia 
and advanced economies amidst the still abundant global liquidity from the unprecedented 
monetary policy stimulus around the world could attract de-stabilizing capital inflows that will 
put pressure on exchange rate, encourage a buildup of financial institutions’ short-term debt, 
and fuel bubbles in various sectors.  
Second, in light of the possible buildups of financial imbalances, there is a need to further 
enhance  the  ability  to  identify  potential  threats  early  on.  For  example,  at  least  in  its  early 
phase,  bubbles  are  almost  always  associated  with  favourable  economic  fundamentals. 
Effective monitoring of bubbles therefore calls for better data collection, market intelligence, 
and risk analysis. While timely bubble identification remains very difficult, the good news is 
that better identification techniques are being developed and will continue to improve.  
Finally, there is a need to watch the developments in international regulatory reforms very 
closely. It is true that a plethora of proposals have been discussed in the world stage, but 
some  may  impose  more  costs  than  benefits  to  Thailand.  After  all,  many  regulatory  pitfalls 
that  gave  rise  to  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  do  not  apply  to  us,  for  example,  those 
related to securitization. In addition, some proposals may be more stringent than necessary 
given the nature of financial transactions in Thailand. For example, the currently proposed 
leverage  ratio  requirement  treats  banks’  letter  of  credit  (L/C)  the  same  as  complex 
derivatives, which will impose substantial  
costs  on  Thailand’s  trade  finance  business.  The  challenge  here  is  therefore  to  weigh 
carefully the benefits, the costs, the necessity, and the appropriate timing for the adoption of 
the new international standards so as to ensure that our financial system is not overburdened 
by  unnecessary  rules.  Again,  this  highlights  the  tradeoff  between  financial  stability  and 
financial efficiency  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In closing, let me reiterate that the Bank of Thailand gives great care to both price stability 
and financial stability. The policy responses undertaken by the Bank over the past few years 
have helped preserve the Thai financial system’s resiliency which in turn contributed to the 
economy’s turnaround. Despite challenges in the period ahead, we will try our best to ensure 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2010
that Thailand’s economic and financial stability continues to remain intact so as to support 
the economy’s sustainable long-term growth.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 96/2010 
 5
