Lars E O Svensson: Inflation targeting after the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Prof  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
International  Research  Conference  “Challenges  to  Central  Banking  in  the  Context  of 
Financial Crisis”, Mumbai, 12 February 2010. 
 I thank Charles Bean, Claes Berg, Alan Blinder, Stephen Cecchetti, Chuck Freedman, Charles Goodhart, Lars 
Nyberg, Irma Rosenberg, Hyun Shin, Frank Smets and Staffan Viotti for discussions of these issues. The views 
expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Riksbank’s executive board or of 
the Riksbank’s staff. Hanna Armelius and Hans Dellmo of the Riksbank’s staff contributed to this speech. 
As  the  world  economy  begins  to  recover  from  the  financial  crisis  and  the  resulting  deep 
recession of the global economy, there is a lively debate about what caused the crisis and 
how the risks of future crises can be reduced. Some blame loose monetary policy for laying 
the foundation for the crisis and there is a lively debate about the future of monetary policy 
and its relation to financial stability. Here I will discuss the lessons for inflation targeting after 
the  crisis.  My  view  is  that  the  crisis  was  not  caused  by  monetary  policy  but  mainly  by 
regulatory  and  supervisory  failures  in  combination  with  some  special  circumstances. 
Ultimately,  my  main  conclusion  for  monetary  policy  from  the  crisis  so  far  is  that  flexible 
inflation targeting, applied in the right way and using all the information about financial factors 
that is relevant for the forecast of inflation and resource utilization at any horizon, remains the 
best-practice  monetary  policy  before,  during,  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  But  a  better 
theoretical,  empirical  and  operational  understanding  of  the  role  of  financial  factors  in  the 
transmission  mechanism  is  urgently  required  and  needs  much  work,  work  that  is  already 
underway in academia and in central banks.  
So I will focus on two particular issues: whether monetary policy caused the crisis and what 
the possible lessons for future monetary policy are.1
 Best practice before the crisis: Flexible inflation targeting  
It is probably not a surprise to hear that I consider flexible inflation targeting the best-practice 
monetary  policy.  The  Riksbank  and  all  the  other  inflation-targeting  central  banks  conduct 
flexible  inflation  targeting  rather  than  strict  inflation  targeting.  Flexible  inflation  targeting 
means that monetary policy aims at stabilizing both inflation around the inflation target and 
the real economy, whereas strict inflation targeting aims at stabilizing inflation only, without 
regard to the stability of the real economy, what Mervyn King (1997) has described as being 
an  “inflation  nutter”.  By  stabilizing  the  real  economy  I  mean  stabilizing  resource  utilization 
around a normal level, keeping in mind that monetary policy cannot affect the long-term level 
of resource utilization.2 
Because of the time lags between monetary-policy actions and their effect on inflation and 
the  real  economy,  flexible  inflation  targeting  is  more  effective  if  it  relies  on  forecasts  of 
inflation  and  the  real  economy.  Therefore,  flexible  inflation  targeting  can  be  described  as 
“forecast  targeting”:  the  central  bank  chooses  a  policy-rate  path  so  that  the  forecast  of 
inflation  and  resource  utilization  “looks  good.”  By  a  forecast  that  looks  good  I  mean  a 
forecast  for  inflation  and  resource  utilization  that  effectively  stabilizes  both  inflation  around 
I have previously discussed these issues in Svensson (2009 b). 
                                                 
1  
2   The term “inflation nutter” for a central bank that is only concerned about stabilizing inflation was introduced in 
a  paper  by  Mervyn  King  at  a  conference  in  Gerzensee,  Switzerland,  in  1995  and  later  published  as  King 
(1997). The terms “strict” and “flexible” inflation targeting were to my knowledge first introduced in a paper of 
mine presented at a conference at the Bank of Portugal in 1996, later published as Svensson (1999). 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 1
 the inflation target and resource utilization around a normal level. In the event of conflicting 
objectives,  it  achieves  a  reasonable  compromise  between  the  stability  of  inflation  and  the 
stability of resource utilization. Different central banks express this in slightly different words. 
The Riksbank has often used the term “well-balanced” monetary policy.3
The  forecasts  of  inflation  and  the  real  economy  are  then  conditional on  the  central  bank’s 
view of the transmission mechanism, an estimate of the current state of the economy and a 
forecast  of  important  exogenous  variables.  The  central  bank  uses  all  relevant  information 
that has an impact on the forecast of inflation and the real economy. In this framework, the 
central  bank  takes  financial  conditions  such  as  credit  growth,  asset  prices,  imbalances, 
potential  asset  price  bubbles  and  so  on  into  account  only  to  the  extent  that  they  have  an 
impact on the forecast of inflation and resource utilization. Inflation and resource utilization 
are  target  variables,  that  is,  variables  that  the  central  bank  tries  to  stabilize.  Financial 
conditions  are  not  target  variables.  Instead,  they  are  only  indicators,  as  they  provide 
information to the central bank about the state of the economy, the transmission mechanism 
and exogenous shocks. Financial conditions then affect policy rates only to the extent that 
they have an impact on the forecast of inflation and resource utilization.4
Now, is there any reason to modify this view of monetary policy given the experience of the 
financial crisis so far? Let me approach this question by first asking what the causes of the 
financial  crisis  were,  whether  monetary  policy  contributed  to  the  crisis,  and  whether  a 
different monetary policy was warranted and could have prevented or reduced the size of the 
crisis.  
 The financial crisis was not caused by monetary policy  
Many have claimed that excessively easy monetary policy by the Federal Reserve after 2001 
helped  cause  a  bubble  in  house  prices  in  the  U.S.,  a  bubble  whose  inevitable  bursting 
proved to be a major source of the financial crisis.5
 However, as I see it, the crisis was mainly 
caused  by  factors  that  had  very  little  to  do  with  monetary  policy  and  were  mostly  due  to 
background  macro  conditions,  distorted  incentives  in  financial  markets,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  failures  (also  when  central  banks  have  been  responsible  for  regulation  and 
supervision),  information  problems  and  some  specific  circumstances,  including  the  U.S. 
housing policy to support home ownership for low-income households.6
The macro conditions preceding the crisis included low world real interest rates associated 
with global imbalances, as well as the Great Moderation, with a long period of very stable 
growth and stable low inflation, which led to a systematic underestimation of risk and very 
low  risk  premia  in  financial  markets.  There  were  distorted  incentives  for  commercial  and 
investment  banks  to  increase  leverage  that  were  made  possible  by  lax  regulation  and 
supervision and the lack of an appropriate bank resolution regime. There were also distorted 
                                                  
3   The idea that inflation targeting implies that the inflation forecast can be seen as an intermediate target was 
introduced in King (1994). The term “inflation-forecast targeting” was introduced in Svensson (1997), and the 
term “forecast targeting” in Svensson (2005). See Woodford (2007a, b) for more discussion and analysis of 
forecast targeting. 
4   Several  central  banks  that  do  not  call  themselves  inflation  targeters  effectively  do  conduct  flexible  inflation 
targeting, although they may not be quite as transparent about their inflation target, the role of stability of the 
real economy, etc. 
5   See, for instance, Taylor (2007). 
6   See Bean (2009) for an extensive and excellent discussion of the crisis, including the credit expansion and 
housing  boom,  the  macroeconomic  antecedents,  the  distorted  incentives,  the  information  problems,  the 
amplification  and  propagation  of  the  crisis  into  the  real  economy,  the  policy  responses  and  the  lessons  for 
monetary  policy  and  economics  generally.  The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2009)  provides  a  more 
detailed account of the possible macro- and microeconomic causes of the crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2010
incentives to exercise less due diligence in loan origination because of securitisation and to 
conduct  regulatory  arbitrage  by  setting  up  off-balance-sheet  entities,  which  for  various 
specific reasons ended up still effectively remaining on the balance sheet. There were also 
distorted incentives for traders and fund managers to take excessive risks because of myopic 
and  asymmetric  remuneration  contracts.  There  were  eventually  enormous  information 
problems in assessing the risks of extremely complex asset-backed securities, and there was 
a huge underestimation of the potential for correlated systemic risks. None of these causes 
had anything to do with monetary policy, except that monetary policy may have contributed 
to the Great Moderation.  
Regarding the role of Federal Reserve monetary policy in the crisis, there are two relevant 
questions. First, was the low interest rate reasonable given the information available at the 
time? Second, could a different monetary policy with higher interest rates have prevented the 
crisis? The first question, whether the low interest rate was reasonable given the available 
information,  is  the  relevant  one  when  evaluating  monetary  policy.  It  is  more  relevant  to 
evaluate policy taking into account the information available ex ante to the policymaker rather 
than information ex post that was unknown to the policymaker at the time (see Svensson, 
2009a, on evaluating monetary policy ex ante and ex post).7
 During the period in question, 
given  the  information  available,  there  was  a  genuine  and  well-motivated  fear  of  the  U.S. 
falling  into  a  Japanese-style  deflationary  liquidity  trap,  and  the  optimal  policy  in  such  a 
situation is a  very  expansionary  monetary  policy.8  It  may  be  that,  in  retrospect,  the  risk  of 
deflation was exaggerated, but there was no way to know this ex ante. Hence, I consider the 
expansionary policy very appropriate. Adding some ex post evaluation, one can note that it 
did not lead ex post to very high inflation or an overheated economy.9  
The second question, whether a different monetary policy could have prevented the crisis, is 
relevant  when  assessing  to  what  extent  monetary  policy  can  be  blamed  for  causing  the 
crisis, notwithstanding if it was reasonable from an ex ante perspective. The credit growth 
and  the  housing  boom  in  the  U.S.  and  elsewhere  were  very  powerful.  Real  interest  rates 
were  low  to  a  large  extent  because  of  global  imbalances,  the  global  saving  glut  and 
investment shortage. I believe that somewhat higher interest rates would have made little or 
no difference. Empirical evidence indicates that only a small portion of house-price increases 
can be attributed to monetary policy.10
 Bernanke (2010) shows that the recent phenomenon 
of a higher share of adjustable-rate mortgages was unlikely to have significantly increased 
the  sensitivity  of  house  prices  to  monetary  policy.  The  availability  of  new,  more  exotic 
mortgage types mattered much more for initial mortgage payments than the level of short-
term interest rates. In my view, interest rates would probably have had to be raised very high 
so as to cause considerable damage to the real economy in order to stop the credit growth 
and housing boom.11
 That could have thrown the U.S. right into Japanese-style deflation and 
eventually a liquidity trap. Certainly, higher interest rates would have had no impact on the 
regulatory  problems,  distorted  incentives  and  information  problems  mentioned  above 
                                                 
7  
I remember this period very vividly, because I was fortunate to have the opportunity to discuss and debate the 
problems of current monetary policy, deflation and liquidity traps in a group of great economists at Princeton 
University that included Ben Bernanke (before he left to be a Governor on the Federal Reserve Board), Alan 
Blinder, Paul Krugman, Chris Sims and Michael Woodford. 
8   See Svensson (2003) for a discussion of policy options before and in a liquidity trap. 
9   Bernanke (2010) shows that Fed policy rates do not seem excessively low given real-time FOMC forecasts. 
10   See Del Negro and Otrok (2007), Jarocinski and Smets (2008), Edge, Kiley, and Laforte (2008), and Iacoviello 
and Neri (2008). 
11   See Nyberg (2010) for similar arguments. 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 3
 (although  they  could  have  ended  the  Great  Moderation  with  a  deep  recession  and 
deflation).12
However,  going  beyond  the  Fed’s  actual  monetary  policy,  perhaps  it  is  possible  that  the 
Fed’s emphasis on its readiness to relax monetary policy aggressively in the wake of a sharp 
fall  in  asset  prices,  as  expressed  by  Greenspan  (2002)  for  example,  may  have  induced 
expectations of a floor under future asset prices and contributed to the asset-price boom, the 
so-called  Greenspan  put  (Miller,  Weller  and  Zhang,  2002).  Arguably,  this  is  more  of  a 
communication issue than one of actual policy, and less emphasis on the readiness to clean 
up after a sharp fall in asset prices might have been a preferable alternative.  
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (2009,  Chapter  3)  has  investigated  the  role  of  monetary 
policy  in  causing  financial  crises.  A  large  number  of  countries  and  financial  crises  were 
included  in  the  sample.  The  conclusion  is  that  “the  stance  of  monetary  policy  has  not 
generally  been  a  good  leading  indicator  of  future  house  price  busts…  There  is  some 
association between loose monetary policy and house price rises in the years leading up to 
the current crisis in some countries, but loose monetary policy was not the main, systematic 
cause of the boom and consequent bust.” Further-more, the overall relationship between the 
stance of monetary policy and house-price appreciation across countries in the years before 
the  current  crisis  is  statistically  insignificant  and  economically  weak,  and  monetary  policy 
differences explain only about 5 percent of the variability in house price appreciation across 
countries.13
 Lessons for flexible inflation targeting  
What conclusions can we draw so far from the financial crisis about the conduct of monetary 
policy  and  any  need  to  modify  the  framework  of  flexible  inflation  targeting?  One  obvious 
conclusion  is  that  price  stability  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability  (Carney  2009, 
White 2006). Good flexible inflation targeting by itself does not achieve financial stability, if 
anyone ever believed that. Specific policies and instruments are needed to ensure financial 
stability.  
Another  conclusion  is  that  interest-rate  policy  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability. 
Other  instruments  like  supervision  and  regulation,  including  appropriate  bank  resolution 
regimes, should be the first choice for financial stability. In many countries, the responsibility 
for these instruments rests on authorities other than the central bank. Generally, to the extent 
financial  instability  depends  on  specific  distortions,  good  regulation  should  aim  to  attack 
these distortions as close to the source as possible. To counter the observed procyclicality of 
existing regulation, macro-prudential regulation that is contingent on the business cycle and 
financial  indicators  may  need  to  be  introduced  to  induce  better  financial  stability.  Possible 
macro-prudential regulation includes variable capital, margin, and equity/loan requirements. 
As  expressed  by  Bean  (2009),  “the  best  approach  is  likely  to  involve  a  portfolio  of 
instruments”.14
More generally, what is the relation between financial stability and monetary policy? Financial 
stability is an important objective of economic policy. A possible definition of financial stability 
is a situation when the financial system can fulfil its main functions (of submitting payments, 
channelling saving into investment and providing risk sharing) without disturbances that have 
                                                  
12   Kohn (2008), after extensive discussion, concludes that there is insufficient evidence that low interest rates 
would have contributed much to the house-price boom and that higher interest rates would have had much 
dampening effect on it. 
13   The relationship for the Euro area countries is less weak, but for reasons explained by Bernanke (2010) it is 
potentially overstated. 
14   Nyberg (2010) provides more discussion of macroprudential regulation and regulation reform. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2010
intervention 
foreign-exchange 
significant  social  costs.  I  find  it  helpful  to  conceptually  distinguish  financial-stability  policy 
from  monetary  policy.  Different  economic  policies  and  policy  areas,  such  as  fiscal  policy, 
labor  market  policy,  structural  policies  to  improve  competition,  etc.,  can  be  distinguished 
according  to  their  objectives,  the  policy  instruments  that  are  suitable  for  achieving  the 
objectives,  and  the  authority  or  authorities  controlling  the  instruments  and  responsible  for 
achieving  the  objectives.  Monetary  policy  in  the  form  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  has  the 
objective  of  stabilizing  both  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  resource  utilization 
around a normal level. The suitable instruments are under normal circumstances the policy 
rate  and  communication,  including  possibly  a  published  policy-rate  path  and  a  forecast  of 
inflation and the real economy. In times of crisis, as we have seen during the current crisis, 
other  more  unconventional  instruments  can  be  used,  such  as  fixed-rate  lending  at  longer 
maturities,  asset  purchases  and 
to  prevent  currency 
appreciation. The authority responsible for monetary policy is typically the central bank.  
Financial-stability policy has the objective of maintaining or promoting financial stability. The 
available instruments are under normal circumstances supervision, regulation and financial-
stability  reports  with  analyses  and  leading  indicators  that  may  provide  early  warnings  of 
stability  threats.  In  times  of  crisis,  there  are  instruments  such  as  lending  of  last  resort, 
variable-rate  lending  at  longer  maturities,  special  resolution  regimes  for  financial  firms  in 
trouble, government capital injections and so forth. The responsible authority or authorities 
vary across countries. In some countries it is the central bank, in other countries there is a 
separate  financial  supervisory  authority,  sometimes  the  responsibility  is  shared  between 
different  institutions.  In  Sweden,  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  is  responsible  for 
supervision and regulation, the Riksbank is responsible for lending of last resort to solvent 
banks and for promoting a safe and efficient payment system, while the National Debt Office 
is  responsible  for  the  resolution  of  failed  banks.  During  times  of  crisis,  these  authorities 
cooperate closely with the Ministry of Finance.  
My  point  here  is  that  financial-stability  policy  and  monetary  policy  are  quite  different,  with 
different  objectives,  instruments  and  responsible  authorities,  the  latter  with  considerable 
differences across countries. This does not mean that there is no inter-action between them. 
Financial  stability  directly  affects  the  financial  markets,  and  financial  conditions  affect  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Problems  in  financial  markets  may  have  a 
drastic effect on the real economy, as the current financial crisis has shown. Monetary policy 
affects asset prices and balance sheets and can thereby affect financial stability. But the fact 
that  financial-stability  policy  and  monetary  policy  are  conceptually  distinct,  with  distinct 
objectives and distinct suitable instruments, has to be taken into account when considering 
the lessons of the financial crisis for monetary policy. In particular, it makes little sense to 
extend the mandate of monetary policy to include financial stability.15
What are the specific conclusions for flexible inflation targeting? One important lesson from 
the financial crisis is that financial factors may have a very strong and deteriorating effect on 
the transmission mechanism, making standard interest-rate policy much less effective. This 
motivates more research on how to incorporate financial factors into the standard models of 
the  transmission  mechanism  used  by  central  banks.  A  rapidly-increasing  volume  of  such 
research is now being produced by academic and central-bank researchers and presented at 
an increasing number of conferences on financial factors and monetary policy. Important and 
challenging questions include how potential output and neutral real interest rates are affected 
by financial factors and financial distortions (Curdia and Woodford 2009, Walsh 2009), and 
                                                  
15   However, conceptually distinguishing the two policy areas does not rule out that there might be advantages of 
to keeping a large part of the responsibility for financial-stability policy within the central bank, as argued by, 
for instance, Blinder (2010) and Nyberg (2010). 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 5
 what impact financial factors have on the general equilibrium effects of alternative policy-rate 
paths on inflation and resource utilization forecasts.16
Even with much better analytical foundations concerning the role of financial factors in the 
transmission  mechanism,  there  will  of  course,  as  always,  be  considerable  scope  for  the 
application of good judgment in monetary policy.  
Another conclusion, which is not new, is that consideration of the impact of financial factors 
on  the  forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilization  may  require  longer  forecast  horizons. 
Several  inflation-targeting  central  banks  (including  the  Bank  of  England,  Norges  Bank  and 
the  Riksbank)  have  for  other  reasons  already  extended  their  forecast  horizon  from  the 
previously common two years to three years. There is nothing that in principle prevents an 
inflation  targeter  from  considering  forecasts  beyond  a  three-year  horizon,  but  in  practice 
there  is  usually  little  information  about  anything  at  longer  horizons  except  the  tendency  to 
revert to the long-term average.  
What about “leaning against the wind” (as advocated by, for instance, Borio and White, 2003, 
and Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani, 2002), the idea that central banks should raise the 
interest rate more than what appears to be warranted by inflation and resource utilization to 
counter rapid credit growth and rising asset prices? It has sometimes not been quite clear 
whether  advocates  of  leaning  against  the  wind  mean  that  credit  growth  and  asset  prices 
should  be  considered  targets  and  enter  the  explicit  or  implicit  loss  functions  alongside 
inflation and resource utilization, or whether they mean that credit growth and asset prices 
should still be considered just indicators and are emphasized only because credit growth and 
asset  prices  may  have  potential  negative  effects  on  inflation  and  resource  utilization  at  a 
longer horizon. In the latter case, leaning against the wind is a way to improve the stability of 
inflation  and  resource  utilization  in  the  longer  run.  Then  it  is  completely  consistent  with 
flexible inflation targeting.17 
However, in line with the previous discussion, instruments other than interest rates are likely 
to be much more effective in avoiding excessive credit growth and asset-price booms, and 
should thus be used as a first best alternative. Interest rates that are high enough to have a 
noticeable  effect  on  credit  growth  and  asset  prices  may  have  strong  negative  effects  on 
inflation  and  resource  utilization,  and  a  central  bank  will  probably  rarely  have  sufficient 
information  about  the  likely  beneficial  longer-horizon  effects  on  inflation  and  resource 
utilization for the trade-off to be worthwhile and motivated.18
                                                  
16   Walsh (2009) points out that when financial factors cause distortions, these distortions will in general introduce 
corresponding terms in a loss function for monetary policy that is a second-order approximation to household 
welfare.  Curdia  and  Woodford  (2009)  present  a  model  where  the  second-order  welfare  approximation  is  a 
standard quadratic loss function of inflation and the output gap between output and potential output, but where 
potential output is affected by financial factors. Then inflation and the output gap remain the target variables, 
with and without financial factors. The neutral rate in the model, that is, the real rate consistent with output 
equal to potential output, is then also affected by financial factors. 
17   Adrian and Shin (2007, 2009) argue, in a model with a risk-taking channel as in Borio and Zhu (2008), that 
short interest-rate movements may have considerable effects on the leverage of securities broker-dealers in 
the market-based financial sector outside the commercial-banking sector. However, new regulation may affect 
the magnitude of these affects, and the size of the market-based financial sector may end up being smaller 
after the crisis. In Europe, the commercial banks dominate the financial sector. 
18   Kohn (2006, 2008) specifies three conditions that should be fulfilled for central banks to take “extra action” to 
deal  with  a  possible  asset-price  bubble:  “First,  policymakers  must  be  able  to  identify  bubbles  in  a  timely 
fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have a high probability 
that it will help to check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, the expected improvement in future 
economic  performance  that  would  result  from  the  curtailment  of  the  bubble  must  be  sufficiently  great.”  He 
concludes, also in 2008 and after thorough considerations, that those conditions would rarely be met. See also 
Kohn (2009). 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2010
In particular, if there is evidence of rapidly-rising house prices and mortgage loans, and these 
developments are deemed to be unsustainable and a possible bubble, there are much more 
effective  instruments  than  policy  rates.  Restrictions  on  loan-to-value  ratios  and  minimum 
mortgages and requirements of realistic cash-flow calculations for house buyers with realistic 
interest  rates  are  much  more  effective  in  putting  a  break  on  possible  unsustainable 
developments than a rise in the policy rates. In particular, more transparency about future 
policy  rates,  in  the  form  a  policy-rate  path  published  by  the  central  bank,  may  help  in 
providing realistic information about future interest rates.  
Ultimately, my main conclusion from the crisis so far is that flexible inflation targeting, applied 
in the right way and using all the information about financial factors that is relevant for the 
forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilization  at  any  horizon,  remains  the  best-practice 
monetary  policy  before,  during,  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  But  a  better  theoretical, 
empirical  and  operational  understanding  of  the  role  of  financial  factors  in  the  transmission 
mechanism  is  urgently  required  and  needs  much  work,  work  that  is  already  underway  in 
academia and in central banks.  
The outcome might very well be that financial factors are considered to have a larger role in 
affecting  the  transmission  mechanism  and  as  indicators  of  future  inflation  and  resource 
utilization. If so, central banks would end up responding more to financial indicators, in the 
sense of adjusting the policy rate and policy-rate path more to a given change in a financial 
indicator. However, this would not mean that financial factors and indicators have become 
independent targets besides inflation and resource utilization in the explicit or implicit central-
bank  loss  function.  Instead,  it  would  be  a  matter  of  responding  appropriately  to  financial 
indicators in order to achieve the best possible stabilization of inflation around the inflation 
target and resource utilization around a normal level over time.  
References  
Adrian,  Tobias  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2007)  “Liquidity  and  Leverage”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Intermediation,  forthcoming.  Available  as  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff 
Reports 328.  
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2009),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary 
Economics”, in Friedman, Benjamin M., and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary 
Economics, Volume 3a and 3b, forthcoming.  
Bank for International Settlements (2009), 79th Annual Report, www.bis.org.  
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2009),  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great 
Contraction”, Schumpeter Lecture, Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk.  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” speech on January 3, 
2010, www.federal.reserve.  
Blinder, Alan S. (2010), “How Central Should the Central Bank Be?” CEPS Working Paper 
No. 198.  
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” Bank for International Settlements Working 
Paper 268.  
Borio, Claudio and White, William R. (2003), “Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The 
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a 
Changing  Economy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Jackson  Hole  Symposium,  
131–212.  
BIS Review 16/2010 
 7
Carney, Mark (2009), “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic 
Activity”, in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Jackson Hole Symposium.  
Cecchetti, Stephen, Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002), “Asset Prices in a Flexible 
Inflation Targeting Framework”, in Hunter, W., G. Kaufman, and M. Pomerleano, eds., Asset 
Price  Bubbles:  The  Implications  for  Monetary,  Regulatory  and  International  Policies, 
Cambridge, 427–444.  
Curdia,  Vasco,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2009),  “Credit  Frictions  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy”, working paper.  
Del Negro, Marco, and Christopher Otrok (2007), “99 Luftballons: Monetary Policy and the 
House Price Boom across U.S. States”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1962–1985.  
Edge,  Rochelle  M.,  Michael  T.  Kiley,  and  Jean-Philippe  Laforte  (2008),  “The  Sources  of 
Fluctuations  in  Residential  Investment:  A View from a Policy-Oriented  DSGE  Model of the 
U.S.  Economy”,  paper  presented  at  the  2009  American  Economic  Association  annual 
meeting, January 3–5.  
Greenspan,  Alan  (2002)  “Opening  Remarks”,  in  Rethinking  Stabilization  Policy,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 1–10.  
Iacoviello,  Matteo,  and  Stefano  Neri  (2008)  “Housing  Market  Spillovers:  Evidence  from  an 
Estimated DSGE Model”, working paper, Boston College.  
International Monetary Fund (2009), World Economic Outlook, October 2009.  
Jarocinski, Marek, and Frank R. Smets (2008), “House Prices and the Stance of Monetary 
Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 90, 339–365.  
King, Mervyn (1994), “Monetary Policy in the UK”, Fiscal Studies 15(3), 109–128.  
King,  Mervyn,  (1997),  “Changes  in  UK  Monetary  Policy:  Rules  and  Discretion  in Practice”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 81–97.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2006),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices”,  speech  on  March  16,  2006, 
www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices  Revisited”,  speech  on 
November 19, 2008, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2009),  “Policy  Challenges  for  the  Federal  Reserve”,  speech  on 
November 16, 2009, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Miller, Marcus H., Paul A. Weller, and Lei Zhang (2002), “Moral Hazard and the U.S. Stock 
Market: Analysing the Greenspan Put”, Economic Journal. 112, C171–C186.  
Nyberg, Lars (2010), “After the Crisis”, speech on February 5, 2010, www.riksbank.se.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (1997),  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring 
Inflation Targets”, European Economic Review 41, 1111–1146. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999), “Inflation Targeting: Some Extensions”, Scandinavian Journal of 
Economics 101, 337–361.  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003), “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof 
Way and Others”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4), 145–166.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy  with  Judgment:  Forecast  Targeting”, 
International Journal of Central Banking 1(1), 1–54.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2009a),  “Evaluating  Monetary  Policy”,  in  Koenig,  Evan,  and  Robert 
Leeson,  eds.,  From  the  Great  Moderation  to  the  Great  Deviation:  A  Round-Trip  Journey 
Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, forthcoming, www.larseosvensson.net.  
8 
 BIS Review 16/2010
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2009b),  “Flexible  Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the  Financial 
Crisis”, speech on September 21, 2009, www.riksbank.se.  
Taylor, John B. (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy”, in  Housing, Housing Finance, and 
Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 463–476.  
Walsh,  Carl  E.  (2009), “Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic Activity”,  in  Financial 
Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium.  
White,  William  R.  (2006),  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?”,  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  205, 
www.bis.org.  
Woodford,  Michael  (2007a),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007.  
Woodford,  Michael  (2007a),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007.  
Woodford, Michael (2007b), “Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy: Policy Rules 
in Practice”, in Koenig, Evan, and Robert Leeson, eds., From the Great Moderation to the 
Great Deviation: A Round-Trip Journey Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, forthcoming.  
BIS Review 16/2010 
 9
