Jean-Claude Trichet: European integration – the benefits of acting 
collectively 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Feri 
Foundation award ceremony, Frankfurt am Main, 9 June 2010. 
 Lord Mayor, 
Mr Stammler, 
Mr Sloterdijk, 
Mr Görlitz, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here paying tribute to the winners of this year’s Feri Foundation 
Award and share a few thoughts with you on this occasion. Given that we will have an ECB 
Governing  Council  meeting  tomorrow,  let  me  clarify  from  the  outset  that  nothing  in  my 
remarks this morning should be interpreted with regard to current monetary policy issues.  
Turning to today’s event, I am impressed and deeply moved by the charitable work done by 
the various foundations that have won this award over the years.  
As different as they are, they all have several things in common. They all strive to make a 
difference  to  our  society.  And  they  do  so  through  targeted  efforts,  acting  in  a  way  that 
complements the work of public institutions. The work they do is a heartening expression of 
their solidarity with their fellow citizens, and they deserve the gratitude of society as a whole. 
The challenges ahead of us 
Solidarity  will  also  be  the  focus  of  my  remarks  today.  However,  I  will  approach  it  from  a 
slightly different angle – a European angle, as befits a European institution such as the ECB. 
My main message today is that, in the current circumstances, the very existence of solidarity 
can give rise to confidence.  
The  financial  crisis,  which  has  lasted  quite  some  time,  has  placed  our  economies  and 
societies under considerable strain. Policy-makers have had to make bold and far-reaching 
decisions in order to address the most acute of challenges. They have done so in order to 
preserve the cohesion within and across our societies.  
We have also begun work on the more profound reforms that will need to be implemented if 
we  are  to  address  the  underlying  deficiencies  that  have  become  apparent  in  our  financial 
systems. We need to make our financial institutions more resilient and re-establish a sense 
of values, in particular a strong sense of responsibility vis-à-vis the real economy. To achieve 
this,  legislators  and  regulators  may  have  to  introduce  a  new  set  of  incentives  for  those 
operating in the financial sector.  
This  is  one  of  the  lessons  that  we  have  learned  from  the  financial  crisis.  Other  lessons 
concern the construction of Europe, where we have to make a quantum leap in strengthening 
the governance of economic policies and surveillance. If we do this, I believe that we will exit 
the crisis with a policy framework that will be much better and stronger than the one we had 
when the crisis began.  
Some  observers  have  said  that  the  solution  to  our  difficulties  lies  in  more  –  not  less  – 
European integration, and I agree with this view. Let me explain why. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 1
Working together to meet these challenges is not just an act of solidarity; it is very much in 
the best interests of all the participating countries and their citizens. Monetary Union is not a 
matter  of  convenience;  it  offers  us  protection  and  improves  resilience,  provided  that  we 
embrace the underlying ideas and principles. Just as the idea of statehood is that citizens 
gain from acting collectively, the European Union embodies the idea that nations also gain 
from acting collectively.  
European integration is a long-term process, one that began after the Second World War and 
has brought stability and peace to our continent. The crisis is now prompting us to ponder the 
direction in which our next steps should take us. This discussion is taking place not because 
we  have  failed,  but  because  we  have  been  successful.  Europe  has  succeeded  in  virtually 
everything it has sought to achieve.  
The ECB’s responsibility 
As regards the ECB, we are responsible for ensuring medium-term price stability in the euro 
area. The citizens of Europe can rely on us to focus on this objective at all times.  
We have the tools we need to ensure price stability over the medium term. The fact that the 
ECB has full statutory independence gives us credibility in our pursuit of price stability.  
The mandate and independence of the Eurosystem are enshrined in the Treaty. The people 
of Germany and the other countries of the euro area can rely on us to continue delivering 
price  stability  in  the  years  to  come,  just  as  they  have  been  able  to  rely  on  us  in  the  first 
11½ years  of  Monetary  Union.  During  that  period  the  general  price  level  has  risen  by  an 
average of just below 2% per year – in line with our definition of price stability and better than 
was achieved by any of the currencies that merged to form the euro. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Public  policy-makers  make  decisions  on  behalf  of  the  people.  In  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union,  monetary  policy  decisions  are  delegated  to  an  independent  central  bank:  the  ECB. 
This  framework  is  appropriate  and  has  delivered  the  results  that  the  Treaty  demands  and 
that our 330 million fellow citizens expect from us, namely medium-term price stability.  
The framework for policy-making in the area of fiscal policy needs to inspire the same level of 
confidence  as  the  framework  for  monetary  policy.  The  crisis  has  shown  that  reforms  to 
improve fiscal surveillance and control are needed in order to achieve this.  
These reforms are necessary, and they are under way. Looking back, it is a pity that it has 
taken  a  crisis  for  everybody  to  realise  this.  Looking  ahead,  I  think  that  everybody  now 
understands.  Let  me  close  my  remarks  this  morning  –  which  I  repeat  have  no  bearing  on 
current  monetary  policy  matters  –  by  recalling  that  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  we 
share a common destiny.  
Wir teilen ein gemeinsames Schicksal.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2010
