Sada Reddy: Consumer-related issues in financial services 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  World 
Consumer Rights Day Celebration, Suva, 13 April 2010. 
 Honoured Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
A very good morning to you all.  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  grace  the  opening  of  the  World 
Consumer Rights Day Celebration.  
This  month,  Consumers  International  celebrates  its  50th  birthday  since  its  beginnings  in 
March 1960. At that time, a group of consumer leaders met at the Hague and signed papers 
to  create  the  “International  Organization  of  Consumers  Union  (IOCU)”  giving  birth  to  the 
global  consumer  movement.  The  organizations  that  signed  the  formation  of  the  new  body 
had a common desire and that was to help ordinary people make informed buying decisions 
and get value for their money.  
Since those formative years, the consumer movement has grown from strength to strength. 
Both its membership base and coverage of countries expanded. This, of course, includes the 
Consumer Council of Fiji. The focus of the consumer movement broadened from its founding 
principles and today they address issues such as poverty reduction, corporate responsibility, 
services and sustainable consumption as well as advice on consumer products.  
I  commend  the  Consumers  International  for  its  work  on  consumer  advocacy  and  take  this 
time to wish the Movement a happy 50th birthday.  
Theme and implications for consumers  
The Consumers International has chosen the theme “Our money, our rights”. A theme, I feel 
is so befitting the times we are living in considering the recent global financial crisis and the 
continued fall out being felt from the crisis.  
I  therefore  wish  to  talk  this  morning  on  a  number  of  issues  that  embraces  this  theme,  in 
particular from the point of view of the financial system and our role as the regulator 
of Fiji’s financial system.  
The  questions  consumers  ask  are;  this  is  our  money  and  hence  we  have  the  right  to  its 
safety and security. This is our money and we have the right to reasonable and cost-effective 
services.  These  are  important  questions  that  should  drive  financial  institutions  behavior  in 
terms of customer service.  
Update on Fiji’s economy  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  before  I  touch  on  consumer  related  issues  in  terms  of  financial 
services, let me start by briefly providing an overview of the Fiji economy since the time of 
the global financial crisis. There are now some positive signs emerging that the worst may be 
over but no doubt, the road to full recovery will be slow and very uncertain. The Fiji economy 
was hit on two fronts last year. The first was the global crisis and secondly, in January of 
2009, Fiji suffered one of its worst flooding in its history. Another cyclone hit us in December.  
Our  economy  is  estimated  to  have  declined  by  2.5  percent  in  2009.  Some  of  the  sectors 
which  were  directly  affected  through  the  global  crisis  last  year  were  tourism,  inward 
remittances  and  exports  such  as  fish,  timber,  garments,  bottled  water  and  some  other 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 1
manufactured items. Tourism, however, has picked up strongly and the declines in earnings 
from remittances are slowly reversing. The other exports, of course, are heavily dependent 
on the global recovery.  
There are now definite signs of recovery in our major trading partner economies, and if this 
continues,  I  am  quite  confident  that  most  of  our  exports  should  start  recovering  gradually 
from this year.  
Against  this  background,  we  are  now  expecting  the  Fiji  economy  to  recover  modestly  at 
around 2 percent this year.  
Fiji’s  balance  of  payment  came  under  increasing  pressure  in  recent  years.  The  foreign 
reserves dropped very rapidly to close to one and a half months of imports or F$430 million 
in the first quarter of last year. Certain policy measures put in place by the Reserve Bank has 
seen  the  foreign  reserves  recover  strongly  and  are  close  to  4  months  of  imports  or 
F$1.1 billion as of now.  
I am pleased to say that with the level of reserves now reaching a comfortable position, the 
Reserve  Bank  has  eased  credit  policy  by  lifting  the  credit  ceiling  that  was  put  in  place  in 
December  2006.  Interest  rates  are  now  trending  downwards  with  liquidity  in  the  banking 
system at around F$330 million. We are now seeing more positive investor and consumer 
sentiments  especially  with  much  improved  financial  conditions.  Consumer  confidence  and 
spending will contribute to our recovery. 
Let me now turn to specifically consumer issues.  
Consumer issues arising out from financial crisis  
The financial crisis brought out quite a number of consumer issues to the forefront. Prior to 
the  crisis,  consumer  demand  was  high  the  world  over,  more  so  in  the  US.  Consumer 
spending and consumption was high. Financial institutions supported consumer appetite with 
the  wide  usage  of  financial  instruments  including  credit  cards  and  lending  in  the  area  of 
subprime mortgages.  
The crisis saw consumers hit on a number of fronts. These included, the effect of massive 
job  losses  in  some  countries,  mortgage  rates  being  reset,  lending  standards  and  criteria 
tightened which saw large numbers of people losing their homes and other assets.  
People’s  investments  in  financial  products  and  property  were  lost  as  stock  and  property 
prices  fell  dramatically.  The  crisis  was  a  perfect  consumer  storm  that  consumers  did  not 
prepare for, as they had virtually no control of the unfolding crisis.  
The  global  financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  the  fragility  of  the  financial  system  and 
financial institutions in this highly globalised and financially complex world.  
Major developments to rectify deficiency in meeting the safety of consumer funds  
What  followed  the  global  financial  crisis  were  major  reform  agendas  to  put  right  principles 
and  practices  that  will  ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  consumer  funds.  Governments, 
regulators and financial institutions all had a part to play. Governments have had to provide 
institutional strengthening of major financial institutions and at the same time, international 
regulatory standards and best practices are being reviewed and new policies put in place to 
prevent the reoccurrence of such a financial crisis again.  
The  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions  aims  to  ultimately  ensure  that  the 
consumers receive the financial services and financial promises that are due to them from 
these institutions.  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2010
Turning now to Fiji  
The  global  financial  crisis  did  not  directly  affect  Fiji’s  financial  system  and  financial 
institutions. So, whilst the impact of the financial crisis had an immense effect on consumers 
abroad, our people did not feel the same effects. It is the second round effect of the global 
crisis through the real sector that had an impact on Fiji by affecting our exports and balance 
of payments.  
However,  there  are  lessons  to  learn  from  what  is  happening  around  us  which  we  must 
embrace,  that  will  ensure  consumers  are  not  disadvantaged  and  left  to  bear  the  brunt  of 
misjudgment and ill practices of financial institutions.  
For  financial  institutions,  in  particular  banks  and  insurance  companies,  consumer  issues 
arise all the time irrespective of whether we are in a crisis mode or in good times.  
We,  at  the  Reserve  Bank  keep  the  consumer  issues  at  the  forefront  when  formulating 
policies.  
The Reserve Bank therefore keeps a close eye on the following:  
 
 
safety and soundness of the financial institutions,  
transparency  and  governance  of  these  institutions  including  the  expertise  and 
competencies of those running these institutions,  
financial  products  and  services  offered  by  these  institutions  and  those  by  other 
players in the market place,  
pricing of these products and services,  
disclosure levels required of both the institutions and the products and services,  
outreach of these services to the wider community, and  
consumer awareness and education. 
 
 
 
 
Let me elaborate on these.  
 Safety and soundness of financial institutions  
The  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions  is  a  function  of  effective  legislation  and 
prudential  supervision.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  concerned  with  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
financial institutions because at the end of the day, it is the depositor’s money that needs to 
be protected. In the case of insurance companies, it is the policyholder’s funds and in the 
case of the Fiji National Provident Fund, it is the members’ contributions.  
The supervisory regime must ensure that the monies of consumers are protected and their 
interests  are  safeguarded.  For  this  reason,  the  Reserve  Bank  licenses,  regulates  and 
supervises a range of financial institutions. These include banks, credit institutions, insurance 
companies  and  the  Fiji  National  Provident  Fund.  In  2006,  the  World  Bank  and  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  carried  out  a  comprehensive  health  check  of  our  financial 
institutions. They assessed our institutions to be sound and stable.  
Financial instruments/services and products offered 
As  you  know,  financial  systems  continue  to  change  and  adapt  to  new  technologies  and 
global  developments.  The  use  of  debit  cards  and  credit  cards  are  now  being  extensively 
used and an increase in Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) and Electronic Funds Transfer 
at Point of Sale (EFTPOS) machines are widely available to the public.  
The innovation and financial products on branchless banking and electronic money, that is 
extending  the  bounds  of  normal  banking  in  other  countries,  will  see  banks  reaching  areas 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 3
beyond  the  towns  and  cities.  Banks  using  agent  networks  and  even  working  with 
telecommunication  companies  to  reach  a  wider  spectrum  of  the  population  will  no  doubt 
bring consumer issues to the forefront. Such innovations and financial products will require 
the approval of the Reserve Bank so that consumers’ interests are safeguarded.  
Financial disclosure  
Let  me  say  something  about  disclosure.  At  present,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  in  place  a 
Disclosure  Policy  for  commercial  banks  and  licensed  credit  institutions  whereby  these 
institutions are required to disclose to the public their fees and charges and the products they 
offer. The consumers need to know the performances of these institutions and are able to 
make informed decisions about the institution.  
Outreach  
We are also concerned with the current outreach of commercial banks and financial services 
to the wider community in Fiji. This is one of the reasons why we issued a policy guideline 
early  this  year  for  the  commercial  banks  to  become  more  involved  in  the  provision  of 
microfinance to the non-bankable sections of our population. Currently many of our people 
are disadvantaged and hence do not have access to financial services and products.  
In this regard, consumer education and financial literacy is very important.  
Consumer education and financial literacy  
Consumer  education  and  financial  literacy  is  the  responsibility  of  all  stakeholders;  the 
government, consumer advocates, the public and the private sector. This is an area that we 
hear  a  lot  about  but  very  little  and  sustainable  consumer  education  and  financial  literacy 
programs have been carried out. Whilst we can say that we have a high literacy rate in Fiji, 
financial literacy in itself, however, is not very high. The bulk of the population in Fiji, in fact 
are financially illiterate.  
Financial  institutions  must  ensure  that  they  carry  out  consumer  education  programs. 
Consumers must know very clearly the financial products and services on offer, what these 
are intended for and their advantages and disadvantages. Consumers must be made aware 
of all bank fees and charges and options available in financial products.  
Consumer education will help consumers make the right choices. The legal cliché of “let the 
buyer beware” is not just the responsibility of the consumer but it is very much that of the 
financial institutions who are issuing the financial services and products.  
A well-designed consumer education program helps minimize or removes possible customer 
complaints.  
The Reserve Bank has drawn up a public awareness program on financial literacy so as to 
assist  in  the  education  and  financial  literacy  of  Fiji  consumers.  We  intend  to  engage  in 
discussions  with  key  stakeholders  such  as  commercial  banks,  donor  agencies,  non-
government organizations and others from the private sector over the coming months. This 
program is expected to be rolled out by the middle of this year.  
In this regard, we had convened the first meeting of the National Task Force Committee on 
Financial  Inclusion.  A  subcommittee  of  this  Task  Force  has  been  formed  known  as  the 
Financial  Literacy  Subcommittee  and  their  responsibility  is  to  drive  a  financial  literacy 
program throughout Fiji. It is intended that financial literacy be taken through the education 
curriculum in Fiji both at the primary and secondary school level.  
4 
 BIS Review 47/2010
Let  me  now  turn  to  what  the  Reserve  Bank  has  done  with  regards  to  the  management  of 
consumer  complaints  and  the  steps  taken  to  ensure  that  consumer  complaints  are 
addressed.  
The Reserve Bank has set up a Complaints Unit within the Bank for addressing consumer 
issues and complaints within the financial system in Fiji.  
On  1st  January  this  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  issued  a  Policy  guideline  to  the  commercial 
banks  and licensed credit  institutions  on  complaints  management.  The  policy  ensures  that 
commercial banks and licensed credit institutions put in place processes and procedures that 
will  enable  the  effective  and  efficient  management  of  complaints  by  the  public.  The  banks 
and  licensed  credit  institutions  are  encouraged  to  conduct  public  awareness  about  their 
complaints management processes.  
The Reserve Bank encourages the consumers to raise their complaints with the commercial 
banks and licensed credit institutions. Where consumers are not satisfied with the outcome 
of  their  complaints  with  the  financial  institutions,  they  should  raise  these  concerns  directly 
with  the  Reserve  Bank.  We  will  soon  be  publishing  an  awareness  brochure  about  the 
complaints policy and processes to be followed for the benefit of consumers.  
The Reserve Bank has also issued similar policy guidelines to the insurance companies and 
the  Fiji  National  Provident  Fund  for  consultation.  Following  these  consultations,  the 
guidelines will then be issued formally to these institutions. Similar complaints management 
policy guidelines will be issued to players in the capital market.  
As part of this policy framework, the Reserve Bank plans to meet once every 6 months with 
nominated  institutions  including  the  Consumer  Council  of  Fiji  and  Non-Government 
Organizations.  At  these  consultative  meetings,  the  Bank  will  give  a  full  briefing  of  all 
complaints  received  and  issues  identified  from  those  complaints.  This  forum  will  provide  a 
feedback  mechanism  to  financial  institutions  where  improvements  can  be  made  to  better 
address consumer issues.  
Experiences on the types of complaints  
At this point, the total number of complaints made to the Reserve Bank is few in number. 
However, from the time we made the announcement in April of 2009, complaints received 
tripled in numbers from those that were received in the past.  
The Reserve Bank will be publishing on its website statistics of complaints made under the 
different  financial  industries.  This  will  be  updated  every  quarter.  However,  on  a  monthly 
basis, a complaints management update will be disseminated to all interested stakeholders 
on the progress of complaints made.  
Conclusion  
Finally,  we  in  the  financial  system  are  here  to  serve  the  consumers  of  Fiji.  However,  to 
ensure consumer satisfaction, there is a need to work together. In this regard, the Reserve 
Bank  and  all  regulated  financial  institutions  will  need  to  work  together  with  the  Consumer 
Council  of  Fiji  and  vice  versa.  We  all  have  a  common  goal  and  that  is  to  bring  about 
consumer satisfaction. If we have divergent views on this goal and do not work in harmony, 
then the ultimate effect is that the consumer suffers.  
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  we  view  consumer  issues  and  consumer  complaints  very 
seriously.  The  whole  issue  of  meeting  the  needs  of  consumers  is  imbedded  in  the  entire 
supervision and regulatory role of the Reserve Bank. We intend to build an environment that 
is conducive for consumer protection and the meeting of consumer needs. It is important to 
know that the consumer is at the heart of all the operations of financial institutions. Take the 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 5
consumers out and there will be no financial institutions nor financial services and products 
to sell.  
With  those  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  declare  the  World  Consumer  Rights  Day 
Celebration open and wish all consumers and our Consumer Council of Fiji all the best in the 
celebrations.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2010
