Philipp M Hildebrand: Major challenges facing the Swiss National Bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  M  Hildebrand,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
30 April 2010. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests 
The recession has run its course 
I. 
A  little  over  a  year  ago,  we  were  still  in  the  midst  of  the  worst  financial  crisis  in  post-war 
history. True, we were able to discern the first tentative signs that the tide might be turning, 
but the outcome was still highly uncertain. Today, the worst is behind us. We can look to the 
future with a measure of optimism. Yet the challenges that the crisis has left in its wake are 
still substantial. 
While 2008 will go down in history as an annus horribilis for the financial markets, 2009 was 
dominated by the gloomy economic environment. The global economy contracted for the first 
time  since  the  Second  World  War.  The  huge  loss  of  confidence  on  financial  markets  in 
autumn 2008 caused economic activity to nosedive. Indeed, one of the most striking features 
of  this  recession  was  the  speed  and  severity  with  which  economic  growth  dropped  in  a 
number of countries. 
Faced with such a dramatic situation, governments and central banks across the world found 
themselves  having  to  swiftly  implement  innovative  support  and  rescue  measures  on  an 
unprecedented scale, in a bid to stabilise the global financial system and limit the economic 
downturn. 
The  decisive  economic  policy  intervention  was  a  key  contributor  in  calming  the  markets, 
halting the downward spiral and clearing the way for economic recovery. 
As  a  small  open  economy,  Switzerland  could  not  avoid  being  drawn  into  the  global 
recession. The sharp fall in economic activity, which had begun in the second half of 2008, 
continued in the first half of 2009. Around the middle of the year, the trough was reached and 
the economy began to grow again. Over the year 2009 as a whole, GDP dropped by 1.5%, 
the largest decline since 1975. 
Nevertheless, Switzerland has so far weathered the effects of the financial crisis better than 
most  industrialised  economies.  This  may  come  as  a  surprise,  given  the  importance  of  our 
financial  centre.  A  deciding  factor  behind  the  comparative  mildness  of  the  recession  in 
Switzerland was private consumption, which proved to be an important buttress of growth. 
Moreover, no major distortion was observed in the property market, and banks did not restrict 
access to lending. Last but not least, the  rapid and decisive expansion of monetary policy 
also played a supporting role. 
Despite this positive bill of health compared to other countries, the crisis has clearly left its 
mark on Switzerland too. For example, unemployment has risen markedly and manufacturing 
is suffering from the continuing low level of technical capacity utilisation. Finally, the events of 
the past two and a half years have shown exactly how vulnerable our country is in the event 
of a banking crisis, particularly one involving large banking institutions. 
I would therefore like to begin by outlining a few of the Swiss National Bank’s thoughts on the 
“too big to fail” issue. I will then briefly review our monetary policy in 2009, and describe the 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 1
challenges  facing  the  SNB  in  this  area.  In  the  final  part  of  my  speech,  I  will  address  the 
recent discussion surrounding the appropriate level of inflation. 
The “too big to fail” issue 
II. 
Without appropriate countermeasures, Switzerland would remain very exposed to any fallout 
from  a  banking  crisis.  True,  the  big  banks  have  substantially  cut  their  balance  sheets, 
something  which  the  SNB  explicitly  welcomes.  Yet  the  size  of  those  balance  sheets  still 
represents a multiple of our country’s GDP. And the big banks continue to hold a dominant 
position in domestic lending and investment business. They are thus still “too big to fail”. 
In a comparable crisis, the government and the SNB would once again face an impossible 
choice: either they accept the devastating consequences of a big bank failure for the Swiss 
economy,  or  they  take  on  the  considerable  financial  risk  of  stabilisation  measures.  In  the 
worst case scenario, it is even conceivable that the funds needed to provide such support 
would exceed our country’s financial resources. 
The lion’s share of the burden from the measures taken to stabilise the Swiss financial centre 
was borne by the SNB. For this reason, it has been a staunch advocate of addressing and 
remedying the “too big to fail” issue. The SNB has always stressed the need for a political 
decision in this regard. 
In November 2009, the Federal Council appointed a commission of experts, whose mandate 
is  to  formulate  possible  approaches  for  resolving  the  “too  big  to  fail”  issue.  The  SNB  is 
represented  by  its  Vice  President,  Thomas  Jordan.  The  commission  published  its  interim 
report  last  week.  The  report  proposes  measures  in  the  areas  of  capital,  liquidity,  risk 
diversification  and  organisational  structure.  These  measures  are  designed,  first,  to  be 
preventative, reducing the likelihood of failure by a systemically important institution. Second, 
they  should  minimise  the  cost  to  the  economy  as  a  whole,  in  the  event  that  a  failure 
nevertheless  occurs.  The  aim  is  to  remove  the  need  for  renewed  state  intervention  in  the 
event of a crisis. 
The report by the commission of experts represents an important milestone in the “too big to 
fail”  debate.  The  SNB  supports  the  direction  proposed  by  the  commission.  It  shares  the 
commission’s  view  that  it  is  necessary  to  establish  a  legal  basis  which  will  allow  special 
requirements to be imposed on systemically important banks. In the SNB’s opinion, the draft 
legislation  proposed  by  the  commission  is  a  good  basis  for  alleviating  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
issue. In our view it is important to launch the legislative process as soon as possible after 
the  commission’s  final  report  has  been  completed.  The  key  elements  of  these  special 
requirements,  such  as  minimum  and  maximum  capital  provisions  or  the  permissible 
organisational restrictions, will have to be set out in detail in a Federal Council Ordinance. 
It is essential that the capital requirements are designed to be progressive. This progressive 
nature  should  incentivise  the  banks  to  reduce  their  systemic  importance.  The  capital 
requirements must be sufficiently strict to motivate the banks to bear the risks themselves 
which, up to now, they have been able to pass on to the general public. 
Moreover,  higher  capital  requirements  can  provide  an 
for  a 
future-oriented  business  model  geared  towards  sustainability.  In  the  fields  of  business  in 
which Swiss financial institutions are traditionally strong, well capitalised banks certainly have 
a competitive advantage. 
The SNB also takes the view that the organisation and legal structure of the big banks must 
be modified so that an orderly wind-down in extreme crisis situations is rendered possible. In 
particular, it must be possible for systemically important functions to keep running without the 
company as a whole having to be rescued. 
At the international level, proposals are also being drawn up on measures to address the “too 
big  to  fail”  issue.  We  need  to  take  these  international  regulatory  developments  into 
foundation 
important 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2010
consideration to ensure the global competitiveness of our financial centre. Yet, as the past 
two and a half years have shown all too clearly, in the event of a crisis each country must 
take responsibility for its own banks. The formulation and implementation of measures at the 
national  level  must  take  into  account  the  specificities  of  the  country  concerned.  Here  in 
Switzerland, the “too big to fail” issue is particularly pronounced, hence the need for a “Swiss 
Finish”. 
Reform of financial sector regulation and oversight is, without a doubt, a tough challenge. But 
the SNB is also faced with equally tough challenges in the area of monetary policy. 
Review of monetary policy in 2009 
III. 
In  2009,  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy  activities  were  focused  entirely  on  combating  the 
financial and economic crisis and the associated deflationary trends. Price stability, which is 
not compatible with either deflation or inflation, remained the core objective. 
As early as autumn 2008, the SNB had adopted an expansionary monetary policy stance as 
a  result  of  the  increasingly  unfavourable  economic  outlook  and  the  prospect  that  inflation 
would  be  low  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Between  October  and  December  2008,  the  SNB 
lowered  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  by  a  total  of  225  basis  points,  to  only  
0.0–1.0%. The SNB also ensured a generous supply of liquidity to the money market. 
The  economic  situation  continued  to  worsen  into  the  spring  of  2009.  In  addition,  the 
uncertainty engendered by the financial crisis had led to a strong appreciation of the Swiss 
franc  against  the  euro.  In  view  of  the  economic  situation  prevailing  in  Switzerland  at  that 
time, there was the risk of a pronounced deflationary trend, in particular if the Swiss franc 
were to appreciate further. This risk necessitated a further easing of our monetary policy. 
The  substantial  monetary  policy  easing  therefore  continued,  with  a  further  25  basis  point 
reduction  in  the  Libor  target  range  in  March  2009.  This  left  the  new  range  at  0.0–0.75%, 
where it has since remained. The SNB aims to keep the Libor in the lower end of the range, 
i.e. at around 0.25%; the one-week repo rate has been at practically zero since the end of 
2008. 
The  room  for  manoeuvre  using  the  traditional  interest  rate  instrument  was  thus  effectively 
exhausted  in  March  2009.  To  relax  monetary  conditions  further,  the  SNB  significantly 
increased liquidity. It did so via a number of unconventional monetary policy instruments. It 
concluded  longer-term  repos  and  purchased  bonds  issued  by  private  sector  borrowers.  It 
also bought foreign exchange on the foreign currency market and acted to prevent the Swiss 
franc from appreciating further against the euro up to the end of the year. 
Against the background of the economic recovery, following its monetary policy assessment 
in December the SNB is acting only to decisively counter an excessive appreciation of the 
Swiss  franc  against  the  euro.  In  addition,  it  has  discontinued  its  purchases  of  Swiss  franc 
bonds issued by private sector borrowers. Indeed, movements in the Swiss franc against the 
euro over the past few months have caused monetary conditions to tighten somewhat. Yet, 
overall, monetary policy is still expansionary. The three-month Libor remains at a low-water 
mark of 0.25%, and we continue to supply the banks with generous amounts of liquidity. 
Let me now turn to the outlook for 2010 and the monetary policy challenges ahead. 
Outlook for 2010 
IV. 
The global economy has been in a phase of recovery since mid-2009. The SNB expects that 
this  will  continue,  although  the  recovery  is  still  exposed  to  risks  and  will  vary  greatly  from 
region to region. 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 3
The greatest expansion will be seen in emerging Asia. The entire region will, in particular, 
benefit from the strong growth in Chinese domestic demand. In the industrialised economies, 
the recovery is still being driven by the expansionary monetary and fiscal policy measures 
adopted at the start of the crisis. At the same time, there are a number of factors weighing on 
growth  prospects.  High  unemployment,  growing  sovereign  debt  and  the  deterioration  in 
household wealth  are  likely  to  dampen  private  consumer  spending  in  many  economies.  In 
addition, given the underutilisation of capacity and the tighter lending conditions, corporate 
investment seems unlikely to stage a strong recovery. Moreover, in a number of countries 
the situation in the real estate market, and hence the outlook for the construction industry, 
will remain difficult. 
For 2010, the SNB is currently expecting real GDP growth of about 1.5%. On the one hand, 
our export industry is exposed to the relatively hesitant growth in European demand. On the 
other, Switzerland is well equipped for a recovery. Public finances are relatively healthy, the 
financial positions of both households and corporates are sound, and the labour market is 
flexible. 
The risk of deflation has fallen in the wake of the economic recovery. The most recent SNB 
inflation forecast from mid-March shows that price stability is not threatened in the short term. 
The  SNB  has  sufficient  leeway  to  maintain  its  expansionary  monetary  policy  for  the  time 
being.  However,  the  forecast  also  shows  that  the  current  monetary  policy  cannot  be 
maintained  over  the  entire  forecast  horizon  without  compromising  medium  and  long-term 
price stability. 
Moreover,  this  forecast  is  still  associated  with  considerable  uncertainties.  The  most  recent 
financial market concerns that have arisen about the public finances of individual euro area 
countries represent a considerable risk in this regard. Over the past few years, Switzerland 
has benefited from the advent of the euro and the associated increase in European currency 
stability. Any threat to this currency stability would, by definition, have a negative impact on 
Switzerland, above all if the Swiss franc were to appreciate sharply due to its role as a safe 
haven  currency.  The  SNB  will  not,  however,  allow  such  a  development  to  turn  into  a  new 
deflation  hazard  for  Switzerland.  For  this  reason,  it  is  acting  decisively  to  prevent  an 
excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc. 
As part of its measures to combat the crisis, the SNB supplied large amounts of liquidity to 
the  banks.  Liquidity  created  via  repos  and  currency  swaps  is  temporary:  it  flows  back 
automatically when the transactions are not renewed. Since the volume of these transactions 
has declined sharply over the past few months, the amount of liquidity resulting from repos 
and swaps has already decreased substantially. 
The  liquidity  that  we  created  by  purchasing  foreign  exchange  or  Swiss  franc  bonds  is, 
however, of a more permanent nature and must be reabsorbed in good time, to ensure price 
stability in the medium and long term. The SNB has at its disposal the requisite instruments 
for  rapidly  absorbing  large  amounts  of  liquidity  as  and  when  necessary.  Foremost  among 
these are the SNB’s own debt certificates, SNB Bills. We can also use reverse repos. 
Thus, absorbing excess liquidity is technically not a problem. The challenge lies in selecting 
the right moment for a normalisation of monetary policy. A major factor in this decision will be 
the further development of the inflation outlook. The inflation forecast is the main indicator 
used  in  monetary  policy  decision-making  by  the  SNB.  The  SNB  monetary  policy  strategy 
does  not,  however,  foresee  a  mechanical  reaction  to  the  forecast  on  the  part  of  the 
Governing  Board.  Aspects  such  as  uncertainty  about  economic  development  and  the 
situation on the financial markets are also factored into the monetary policy decision. 
Maintaining price stability 
V. 
In concluding my remarks today, I would like to reaffirm that maintaining price stability is the 
SNB’s utmost priority. We equate price stability with having average annual inflation below 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2010
2% while avoiding deflation. The reason why I am emphasising this is because the financial 
crisis  has  also  sparked  a  debate  on  the  appropriate  level  for  inflation.  In  particular,  it  has 
been suggested that central banks should target a higher inflation level in normal times. The 
argument goes like this: if central bank reference rates are low, there is also little freedom for 
reducing  interest  rates,  as  the  nominal  rate  cannot  fall  below  zero.  In  turn  –  so  runs  the 
argument  –  a  central  bank’s  ability  to  react  to  a  severe  crisis  is  also  limited.  In  contrast, 
higher inflation would lead to higher nominal interest rates. These could serve as a buffer in 
the event of a major shock. Monetary policy would then have scope for larger interest rate 
cuts,  and  a  reduction  in  deflation  risks.  In  other  words:  there  would  be  more  leeway  for  a 
relaxation of monetary policy in a crisis. 
This argument is severely flawed. First, it is very doubtful that further interest rate cuts alone 
would have been enough to deal with the crisis. Second, this line of argument implies that 
monetary policy is ineffective once the zero lower bound has been reached. However, as I 
mentioned  earlier,  our  experience  shows  that  there  is  still  room  for  monetary  policy 
manoeuvre  even  at  the  zero  lower  bound.  Using  the  unconventional  measures  I  have 
described,  the  SNB  certainly  was  able  to  relax  monetary  policy  even  further  and  thereby 
successfully ward off the risk of deflation. 
So in times of crisis, the apparently greater monetary policy freedom with a higher inflation 
rate would be illusory. Moreover, a higher rate of inflation in normal times would create costs 
and  threaten  macroeconomic  stability.  Costs  would  arise  even  if  the  central  bank  were 
successful  in  keeping  inflation  constant  at  the  desired  level,  and  thus  enabled  households 
and companies to correctly anticipate the inflation rate. 
Experience shows, however, that the inflation rate cannot be fine-tuned and a higher level of 
inflation  often  goes  hand  in  hand  with  large  fluctuations  in  inflation  rates.  It  then  becomes 
almost impossible to correctly factor inflation into calculations, leading to the misallocation of 
resources, as well as random and undesirable income and asset redistributions. In addition, 
it is generally the most disadvantaged members of society who bear the brunt of inflation, as 
they have only limited means of protecting themselves against it. 
But, above all, higher and fluctuating inflation rates would undermine public confidence in the 
central bank. Credibility, built up painstakingly over decades, would quickly be eroded. The 
central bank would lose control of inflation and inflation expectations. Moreover, as inflation 
rose higher, pecuniary benefits such as salaries would increasingly be indexed, which would 
amplify the stickiness of inflation. But indexation, combined with a failure to anchor inflation 
expectations,  would  lessen  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  and  lead  to  greater 
fluctuations in interest rates, economic activity and employment. 
We are therefore convinced that allowing higher inflation rates would be the wrong lesson to 
draw from the crisis. Price stability, i.e. neither inflation nor deflation, is a key public good. It 
is a decisive factor in achieving sustainable economic growth and prosperity, and not least 
social stability. 
Switzerland  has  had  a  long  and  positive  experience  with  low  inflation  and  low  nominal 
interest rates. The SNB is, and will remain, committed to price stability. Its monetary policy 
strategy gives it the necessary leeway to act decisively against both inflation and deflation. 
Conclusion 
VI. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the worst of the financial and economic crisis that erupted in summer 
2007  is  now  behind  us.  But  we  will  be  dealing  with  the  fallout  for  some  time  to  come. 
Hopefully, the Swiss economy will return to a sustainable growth trajectory. Until then, the 
SNB will continue to face major challenges. The Governing Board will approach them with 
great respect, but also with confidence and conviction. To achieve this, we will once again 
need to count on the exceptional efforts of each and every SNB staff member. We thank our 
shareholders for their continuing support and for their interest in the activities of the SNB. 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 5
