Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with FOCUS 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  the 
German  magazine  FOCUS,  conducted  by  Messrs  Uli  Dönch,  Thomas  Zorn  and  Bernd 
Johann on 19 January 2010 and published on 25 January 2010. 
 FOCUS: Mr President, the rate of inflation in the euro area is close to zero. You have 
done a good job – are you now out of work? 
Trichet: As you know, the latest available figure is 0.9%. What counts is price stability in the 
medium term. And from that point of view, my colleagues and I are proud to be able to tell 
the citizens of Europe that they have a credible and stable currency. We promised them that 
the euro would be as stable and credible as individual national currencies had been earlier. 
And we have kept our word. 
FOCUS: How great is the risk that you will rest on your laurels? 
Trichet: You need have no fears in that respect. We will continue to remain alert. At a central 
bank, there is never a time for complacency. 
FOCUS: At the beginning of your period in office in 2003, your policy of maintaining 
price stability caused you to be criticised as a “prolonged arm” of the Bundesbank. 
Did this hidden praise help you, or did it do more harm than good? 
Trichet: In my own country, I was seen as the “strongest advocate of the strong franc (‘franc 
fort’) policy”. But the monetary policy of the Banque de France was backed by the people. 
Historically,  what  matters  is  that  all  future  euro  area  countries,  including  France  and 
Germany,  cooperated  very  closely  from  the  very  outset  to  ensure  convergence.  Today, 
people  throughout  Europe  are  convinced  of  the  importance  of  price stability.  And  they  are 
also aware of the fact that being addicted to inflation is like being addicted to a drug that over 
time has extremely negative effects: stagnation and the destruction of jobs. 
FOCUS: Nevertheless, many experts are expecting prices to rise significantly again in 
the near future ... 
Trichet:  We  have  made  it  very  clear  that  we  always  take  the  decisions  necessary  to 
guarantee  price  stability  over  the  medium  term:  an  inflation  rate  below,  but  close  to,  2%. 
Observers  and  market  participants  are  fully  aware  of  this.  It  is  precisely  because  of  the 
challenges  posed  by  price  stability  that  we  stand  ready  for  action  at  all  times.  I  call  that 
“credible alertness”. 
FOCUS:  At  the  moment,  the  markets  are  addicted  to  cheap  money  –  to  low interest 
rates. Politicians, bankers and stock market traders have already become too used to 
this situation, and as a result the risk of inflation is on the rise. How do you intend to 
change this? 
Trichet: You can be sure that the European Central Bank will continue, as before, to maintain 
price stability. Keeping inflation expectations solidly anchored – in line with our definition of 
price  stability  –  protects  us  against  the  materialisation  of  both  inflationary  and  deflationary 
risks. We succeeded in avoiding deflation at the peak of the crisis. You can be sure that the 
needle in our compass will always point towards price stability.  
FOCUS: How quickly have you taken action during the crisis? 
Trichet: As I have said, alertness is of the essence. On 9 August 2007, for instance, ... 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 1
FOCUS: ... just before the US real estate bubble burst ... 
Trichet:  ...  we  were  the  first  to  diagnose  that  a  major  crisis  was  unfolding  and  supply 
additional liquidity to the money market. We did so because we had realised that something 
exceedingly dangerous was developing.  
FOCUS:  Could  the  ECB  really  raise  interest  rates  on  its  own  –  i.e.  without  the  US 
Federal  Reserve  doing  so  as  well?  If  the  ECB  were  to  take  such  action,  the  euro’s 
exchange rate vis-à-vis the dollar would be sure to shoot upwards, causing European 
exports to collapse. And that is something nobody in Europe would want ... 
Trichet: I am convinced that the US authorities – both the central bank and the Treasury – 
consider that a strong dollar vis-à-vis the other major floating currencies is in the interests of 
the United States. Ben Bernanke and Tim Geithner have made this very clear. 
FOCUS: Do you believe what those responsible in the United States are saying? The 
US economy is currently benefiting immensely from the cheap dollar. 
Trichet: I believe in the sincerity of the people I have just mentioned. They know that a loss of 
monetary credibility would be damaging. 
FOCUS: Nevertheless, if the excessively lax monetary policy in the United States were 
actually the reason why  you needed to raise interest rates in Europe,  you would be 
unable to do so without the US central bank following suit. 
Trichet:  Let me  repeat  myself.  Every  central  bank  has  its own  responsibilities  –  in  its  own 
economy, with its own particular features, its own different structures and its own different 
shocks to cope with – and will take the necessary action. I have no doubt that the Federal 
Reserve, too, is committed to maintaining price stability. 
FOCUS: Is there some kind of tacit agreement to raise interest rates only jointly? In an 
interview on CNN, you recently answered the question as to whether the ECB would 
raise interest rates unilaterally even before the Federal Reserve did so by saying, “I 
trust that it will also be done on the other side of the Atlantic” (and on the other side of 
the Channel, i.e. by the Bank of England). 
Trichet: We all have our own responsibilities, which do not call for the same decisions at the 
same point in time. I have always said that central banks are united in purpose: the delivery 
of price stability in their own economies. 
FOCUS: A basic principle applies to central banks: they take away the punch bowl just 
as  the  party  gets  going.  In  other  words,  they  increase  interest  rates.  The  Federal 
Reserve did the opposite. It left the punch bowl on the table and said “let’s party” ... 
Trichet: As regards the punch bowl, you are quoting William McChesney Martin, a previous 
Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve!  Again,  let  me  say  that  we  are  united  in  purpose.  As 
regards  the  ECB,  the  very  solid  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  is  a  major  asset  in  all 
circumstances.  
FOCUS: However, you do sometimes make comments about the US Federal Reserve. 
When  its  Chairman,  Ben  Bernanke,  was  chosen  as  Time  magazine’s  Person  of  the 
Year,  you  commended  him,  saying  that  he  had  done  extraordinary  things  under 
extraordinary circumstances. Were they also the right things?  
Trichet:  When  the  financial  crisis  intensified  in  2008,  the  ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve 
cooperated closely, together with other central banks, including through swap agreements. 
We  ourselves  supplied  US  dollars  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  as  part  of  this  very  close 
cooperation.  
2 
 BIS Review 7/2010
FOCUS: How important is it, in such dramatic situations, that the ECB is able to act 
independently of politics?  
Trichet: This is crucial. The European Central Bank is totally independent. This is guaranteed 
for  us  by  an  international  treaty.  It  is  essential  for  the  confidence  of  our  fellow  citizens, 
economic agents and market participants. And “confidence” is the key word at the moment. 
FOCUS: Do you consider this independence to be a great advantage? The Chairman of 
the  Federal  Reserve  was  appointed  by  the  President  –  and  the  Senate  is  currently 
deciding whether Ben Bernanke can have a second term in office.  
Trichet:  It  is  of  key  importance  that  the  ECB’s  independence  is  guaranteed  by  an 
international treaty and not just by national law. National laws can be adopted, but they can 
also be overturned again.  
FOCUS:  Nevertheless,  time  and  again  the  heads  of  state  of  some  countries  try  to 
pressure the ECB into decisions – usually the lowering of interest rates.  
Trichet: I remember well that in 2004, shortly after I took office, the then German, French and 
Italian heads of state or government made public remarks to the effect that the ECB should 
reduce interest rates. We didn’t do it. 
FOCUS:  Now,  in  a  reversal  of  roles,  the  ECB  must  put  pressure  on  many  European 
governments.  National  deficits  have  increased  so  drastically  as  a  result  of  the 
financial crisis that all EU Member States are violating the debt ceiling put in place by 
the Maastricht Treaty.  
Trichet:  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  a  fundamental  economic  pillar  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. We will always call upon national governments to comply with it.  
FOCUS: Greece is currently brazenly violating the 3% debt limit, with its budget deficit 
standing at 13%. Is Greece showing you a lack of respect?  
Trichet: Greece has not respected the Stability and Growth Pact. Not only Greece, but also 
other countries – that goes without saying – must do everything they can to put their national 
finances in order, bringing them fully into line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth 
Pact. 
FOCUS: Greece, with its high levels of debt, would need to make drastic savings. How 
is that possible? It would result in mass demonstrations or even political unrest. 
Trichet: Let me say this again. All countries have to put their house in order. Greece is no 
exception  to  this  rule.  Ireland  has  also  taken  these  courageous  and  difficult  steps.  I  am 
convinced  that,  given  the  nature  of  the  situation,  the  Greek  government  will  do  likewise  in 
order to meet the 3% goal it has just committed itself to for 2012. 
FOCUS: Can you envisage Greece having to leave the euro area if the country does 
not manage to resolve its problems? 
Trichet: I have already said that I don’t comment on absurd hypotheses. 
FOCUS:  You  once  said  that  the  countries  participating  in  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union share a common destiny. In this case, the strong countries would have to help 
the weak ones. Should France and Germany help Greece? 
Trichet: I repeat solemnly: we – the 330 million citizens of the euro area – share a common 
destiny. In a monetary union, the ties between the individual member countries are indeed 
extremely  close.  The  external  surpluses  of  some  member  countries  (in  the  balance  of 
payments)  finance  the  external  deficits  of  some  others,  and  the  constellation  can  change 
over time. We all share a credible currency, which is an immense advantage. At the same 
time, all countries owe it to their partners in the euro area to behave responsibly and correct 
their imbalances.  
BIS Review 7/2010 
 3
FOCUS: This problem will become even bigger if other countries – such as Bulgaria or 
Romania – introduce the euro. 
Trichet: Other European Union countries are indeed committed to joining the euro area. But 
only when the time is right. As you know, there are strict criteria governing the introduction of 
the  euro,  and  these  must  be  met  in  full.  And  they  have  to  be  met  not  just  at  a  particular 
moment in time, but on a sustainable basis. The ECB is and will remain extremely vigilant in 
this respect.  
FOCUS: But what if new member countries doctor their figures – as Greece did – and 
trick their way into the euro area? 
Trichet: Let me be very clear on this. Never again will we accept budget figures that do not 
reflect the facts. Appropriate auditing must always be possible. As early as next month the 
European  Commission  will  make  proposals  that  will  dramatically  improve  the  relevant 
framework. This is absolutely critical. 
FOCUS: Your job and the crisis are both very demanding. Do you have the opportunity 
at all to see colleagues outside of work? 
Trichet: Yes, certainly. And that’s important, too, as the high level of mutual trust that exists 
within the ECB, between the members of the Executive Board and the Governing Council, is 
in my view absolutely fundamental.  
FOCUS: Is Frankfurt a good location for meetings outside of your official schedule? 
Trichet: I think so. You have in this city and this region a combination of excellent cultural 
opportunities – both in music and in the visual arts – and a cosmopolitan milieu which is very 
cultivated.  
FOCUS: You come from Paris. Is Frankfurt not too provincial?  
Trichet: You will not be surprised if I tell you that Paris is unique! 
FOCUS: And Frankfurt? 
Trichet: When I arrived, I found I had underestimated three things. First, the range of cultural 
opportunities in the area. There are five opera houses within just 45 minutes of my flat: in 
Wiesbaden, Mainz, Darmstadt and Frankfurt. There are very few places in the world that can 
compete  in  this  respect  –  perhaps  New  York,  London  and  Paris.  Second,  the  quality  of 
what’s on offer is very high indeed. I was very impressed, for example, by the sculptures in 
the Messerschmidt exhibition at the Liebieghaus or the Picasso theatre sets exhibited at the 
Schirn. I hope that I will find time over the next few weeks to see the much-praised Botticelli 
exhibition at the Städel. Third, as I have said, people here are impressively cultivated, as I 
saw for myself when the ECB launched its own Cultural Days.  
FOCUS: What are the highlights of your work as a central bank president so far? 
Trichet: When Economic and Monetary Union began, many were sceptical about whether it 
would  be  successful  or  even  possible.  As  a  representative  of  the  French  government,  I 
negotiated the Maastricht Treaty with Horst Köhler, the current German President, who, like 
me,  was  then  Undersecretary  of  the  Treasury.  Those  were  very  important  and  inspiring 
negotiations,  and  we  became  friends.  I  am  proud  that  the  euro  is  as  trustworthy  as  the 
Deutsche  Mark  used  to  be.  The  promise  we  made  to  our  fellow  citizens  that  the  new 
currency would be as solid and credible as the best national currencies has been kept.  
FOCUS: What irritates you about Germany?  
Trichet: I deeply believe that the different European cultures complement each other. I was 
surprised  at  the  beginning  to  see  that  any  time  a  decision  is  taken  in  Germany,  all  the 
arguments  against  the  decision  are  meticulously  listed,  even  if  that  decision  has  already 
been  agreed  in  principle.  At  first  I  was  surprised,  because  in  many  other  cultures,  all  the 
arguments that support your conclusion are given strongly preferential treatment.  
4 
 BIS Review 7/2010
FOCUS: Is that wrong? 
Trichet:  With  time,  I  have  seen  that  this  German  method  is  a  good  way  of  ruling  out  the 
possibility of serious mistakes.  
FOCUS: Has the fact that you have learnt German helped you?  
Trichet: It certainly has. At the ECB, we mostly talk in English. But in the corridors you’re just 
as  likely  to  hear  German,  French,  Italian  or  Spanish,  and  many  other  languages  besides. 
Having some knowledge of the German language has enabled me to better understand the 
culture of the country. Oversimplifying, I would say that the French and English languages 
seem  to  be  very  much  designed  to  “communicate”.  My  understanding  of  the  German 
language is that it is very much designed to “think”, with its verbs at the end of the sentence. 
I am not surprised that it is such a good language for philosophy.  
FOCUS: Are you trying to say that Germans are not as good at small talk?  
Trichet: Not at all! I just want to say that the German language itself is particularly well suited 
to reflection. In speeches, for example, speakers let the audience think along with them. Only 
at the end of a sentence is the audience able to understand exactly what is actually meant. 
This is why it is pretty unacceptable for people in the audience to whisper during a speech.  
BIS Review 7/2010 
 5
