Jean-Claude Trichet: Global governance today 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 26 April 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a real pleasure to be back here at the Council on Foreign Relations.  
You will all be familiar with the well-worn French expression “plus ça change, plus c’est la 
même chose” – and its New York equivalent “same old, same old” – to imply a world-weary 
feeling that despite the appearance of change, things remain the same. 
Well, since my last visit three years ago, I think we will all agree that there have been the 
most  dramatic  changes  in  the  world  economy.  And  these  are  changes  that  suggest  that 
things will not and should not remain the same. 
Back in April 2007, I noted that the ever-closer integration of national economies and the rise 
in capital mobility had made the international system more vulnerable to changes in investor 
sentiment. I added that it was vital to strengthen the ability of the global economic system to 
absorb shocks to preserve global financial stability. 
But few then could have imagined the magnitude of what eventually came to pass, starting 
with the subprime crisis in the summer of 2007, turning into a full-blown global financial crisis 
in the autumn of the following year with the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and culminating in 
a devastating impact on trade, production and jobs. 
These are not entirely new phenomena – but we have to go a long way back in the history 
books for a suitable comparison. According to economic historians Barry Eichengreen and 
Kevin O’Rourke, the initial decline in global production between mid-2008 and mid-2009 was 
broadly comparable with that at the beginning of the Great Depression. The corresponding 
correction in global equity prices and the fall in global trade volumes were even larger. 
The good news is that the global economy has now turned the corner, largely thanks to the 
unprecedented support measures taken by both central banks and governments, which have 
helped  to  restore  confidence.  Yet  the  recovery  remains  somewhat  fragile  and  not  yet 
sufficiently supported by private demand; therefore, it is not the time for complacency.  
I should add that the recovery should be measured in much broader terms than focusing on 
a  resumption  of  GDP  growth.  A  full  recovery  also  implies  a  return  to  sustainable  fiscal 
positions.  It  means  a  full  restoration  of  trust  in  some  of  our  financial  institutions.  And  it 
requires a healing of the scars that the irresponsible behaviour of some financial players has 
inflicted on our societies and on the real economy.  
In  my  introductory  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  explore  some  of  the  lessons  for 
policy-makers around the world that can be drawn from the extraordinary events of the past 
three years. 
I  will  first  elaborate  on  why  we  need  a  set  of  rules,  institutions,  informal  groupings  and 
cooperation mechanisms that we call “global governance”. 
Second, I will analyse how, in hindsight, the existing system of global governance has fared 
during the crisis. 
Third, I will examine the evolution of the system in response to the crisis, in particular the rise 
of new key players in the world economy, such as the G20, the Global Economy Meeting of 
central bank governors and the Financial Stability Board.  
BIS Review 56/2010 
 1
Why we need global governance 
1.  
There are numerous definitions of global governance. In the economic and financial sphere I 
will propose that global governance comprehends not only the constellation of supranational 
institutions – including the international financial institutions – but also the informal groupings 
that have progressively emerged at the global level. Those informal forums (G7, G10, G20, 
etc.)  are  key  in  improving  global  coordination  in  all  the  areas  where  decision  making 
processes remain national – whether in helping to work out agreed prudential standards and 
codes or to facilitate where appropriate, the coordination of economic macro-policies.  
No market can survive without a set of rules. This is particularly true at the international level, 
where natural barriers to transactions are formidable. One of the global governance’s primary 
aims should be that of facilitating the proper functioning of cross-border markets and thereby 
of reducing transaction costs. 
The process of doing so is evolutionary and demands a pragmatic approach with respect to 
what arrangements may and may not work, depending on the circumstances. But the more 
complex  the  goods  and  services  exchanged  are,  the  greater  the  need  for  a  sound 
institutional  infrastructure.  In  this  respect,  finance  stands  out  as  an  arena  in  which  global 
rules may be particularly beneficial. 
More generally, the crisis has weakened the arguments of those who think that deregulation 
is always conducive to better functioning markets. We have learned once again that markets 
cannot  function  properly  without  an  effective  regulatory  and  supervisory  infrastructure. 
Governments,  central  banks,  international  institutions  and  globally  agreed  prudential 
standards and codes are the means by which we collectively seek to avail ourselves of the 
global public good of global economic stability. 
Of  course,  there  are  limits  to  what  internationally  agreed  rules  can  and  should  seek  to 
achieve. 
First, the principle of subsidiarity is essential. This principle, which is a key feature underlying 
of European Union legislative framework, says that no rule should be imposed at a global or 
supra-national  level  that  cannot  be  more  or  equally  effectively  set  at  the  national  or  local 
level. This principle might also be read as implying that the “burden of proof” should rest on 
those who want to establish global, as opposed to local, rules and institutions.  
Second, it is not straightforward to set common rules in complex and innovative fields such 
as finance. While financial liberalisation, deregulation and innovation all have the potential to 
make our economies more productive and more resilient, the financial sector must not forget 
that its purpose is to serve the real economy, not the other way around. We have painfully 
witnessed the fallout from excessive complexity of financial instruments in the current crisis. 
Finally, there is a risk that common rules are not optimal and in particular that they are too 
limited, since they have to be the minimum standards across many constituencies. This risk 
is  very  real  in  the  area  of  finance  because  of  significant  differences  across  countries  in 
financial structures, financial instruments and preferences for financial regulation.  
Overall,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  shattered  previously  held  convictions  that  “keeping 
one’s  house  in  order”  is  the  right  principle  to  ensure  global  welfare.  We  have  certainly 
become  more  aware  of  the  negative  externalities  that  financial  innovation  and  financial 
globalisation can create. Finance in its current form has become a double-edged sword for 
the real economy. 
How global governance has fared during the global crisis 
2.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  how  our  institutions  of  global  governance  in  the  financial  sphere  have 
fared during the crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2010
Central bank cooperation  
One dimension of international cooperation that I consider to have worked particularly well 
during  the  financial  crisis  has  been  that  among  central  banks  –  both  bilaterally  and 
channelled  through  the  various  Basel-based  committees.  This  institutionalised  cooperation 
has  ensured  an  unprecedented  degree  of  collaboration  in,  for  instance,  the  provision  of 
cross-border liquidity – the network of temporary currency swaps or repos set up bilaterally 
by major central banks such as the Fed and the European Central Bank.  
The Bank of International Settlement (BIS) itself has been “ahead of the curve” in terms of 
identifying  unsustainable  trends  in  the  financial  sector  and  more  generally  in  the  global 
economy  –  such  as  the  under-appreciation  of  risk  and  excessive  credit  growth  –  which 
eventually led to the crisis. It could do so based on a high degree of analytical depth and 
information sharing at a global level that the central banks’ global cooperation has been able 
to develop over time. 
These analytical contributions assisted in driving the strong and coordinated policy response 
when the crisis erupted. We have now scaled back our cross-border operations as markets 
have recovered, but the spirit of cooperation and the readiness to work together is stronger 
than ever.  
Regulatory arbitrage 
But as much as some aspects of global governance appear to have passed the severe test 
of  the  global  crisis,  we  should  remember  the  significant  shortcomings  that  may  have 
contributed to creating the conditions for the crisis to happen in the first place. 
One is the lack of coordination in financial regulation that was pervasive before the crisis and 
which encouraged financial institutions to engage in a large degree of regulatory arbitrage. 
This  was  the  unavoidable  result  of  the  fact  that  while  financial  players  were  becoming 
increasingly global, and despite the remarkable efforts of the Basel Committee in respect of 
the banking sector, financial regulation remained largely national, with only relatively weak 
coordination at the international level. 
The dramatic under-supply of the global public good of international financial stability is an 
area where reform is essential. 
Global imbalances 
Another  shortcoming  that  needs  to  be  addressed  for  the  future  was  the  insufficient 
orientation of macroeconomic policies towards medium-term stability and sustainability. This 
led  to  the  build-up  of  unsustainable  external  imbalances  between  deficit  and  surplus 
economies prior to the crisis. 
Although  warnings  had  been  voiced,  including  by  the  IMF,  about  the  risks  of  a  disorderly 
adjustment,  there  was  no  effective  mechanism  to  influence  macroeconomic  and  structural 
policies in key countries where those policies appeared unsustainable from the standpoint of 
global economic and financial stability. This must change – and it requires both the work of 
international institutions and the cooperation of national authorities.  
The evolution of global governance 
3.  
Let me turn to the question of how global governance is evolving after the crisis.  
The  scope  of  international  cooperation  has  been  significantly  broadened.  After  an  initially 
hesitant  response,  governments  implemented  broadly  coordinated  policies,  both  within  the 
EU as well as at the global level under the aegis of the G20. And central banks were able to 
take quick, decisive and coordinated action at short notice.  
BIS Review 56/2010 
 3
But the crisis also showed that gaps in the system of global governance – in terms of both 
efficiency and legitimacy – have to be filled. This can be done – indeed, it is being done – by 
strengthening  the  mandate  of  existing  international  institutions  and  adjusting  existing  or 
developing new informal forums. 
Overall,  the  system  is  moving  decisively  towards  genuine  global  governance  that  is  much 
more inclusive, encompassing key emerging economies as well as industrialised countries. 
The  significant  transformation  of  global  governance  that  we  are  engineering  today  is 
illustrated by three examples. 
First, the emergence of the G20 as the prime group for global economic governance at the 
level of ministers, governors and heads of state or government. Second, the establishment of 
the Global Economy Meeting of central bank governors under the auspices of the BIS as the 
prime  group  for  the  governance  of  central  bank  cooperation.  And  third,  the  extension  of 
Financial  Stability  Board  membership  to  include  all  the  systemic  emerging  market 
economies.  
Let me touch on each of these. 
The breakthrough of the G20 
One  distinctive  feature  of  this  crisis  has  been  that  it  erupted  at  the  centre  of  the  system. 
Although  emerging  countries  have  been  severely  affected,  taken  as  a  group,  they  have 
rapidly become a source of strength for the world economy. It is therefore not surprising that 
the crisis has led to a clear recognition of their increased economic importance and to their 
full integration into the institutions of global governance, notably with the breakthrough of the 
G20. 
The G20 has been effective in addressing the global crisis. We are now at the stage where 
this forum is making the transition from acting in a crisis resolution mode to contributing to 
crisis  prevention.  This  is,  in  particular,  the  purposes  of  the  G20  framework  for  strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  The  primary  goal  of  this  framework  is  to  collectively 
implement coherent and medium-term policy framework to attain a mutually beneficial growth 
path.  
For  this  purpose  a  Mutual  Assessment  Process  (MAP)  has  been  set  up  that  will  allow  to 
assess  whether  policies  of  individual  members  are  collectively  consistent  with  sustainable 
and  balanced  growth  trajectories. The  first  steps  in  this  MAP  have  been  presented  by  the 
IMF to the G20 Ministers and Governors last week during our spring Washington meetings. 
Guidance has been given to the IMF on the next steps in the process that will lead to policy 
recommendations  on  how  to  best  meet  the  common  goal  of  strong,  sustainable  and 
balanced growth.  
Since this process is fully owned by the G20 members, and given that it involves them not 
only  at  the  level  of  Ministers  and  Governors  but  also  at  the  level  of  Heads  of  State  and 
Government, it is confirming the strong commitment at the global level to more multilaterism 
in economic decision making.  
Further strengthening of central bank cooperation 
In  the  area  of  central  bank  cooperation,  the  main  forum  is  the  Global  Economy  Meeting 
(GEM), which gathers at the BIS headquarter in Basel. Over the past few years, this forum 
has  included  31  governors  as  permanent  members  plus  a  number  of  other  governors 
attending on a rotating basis. The GEM, in which all systemic emerging economies’ Central 
Bank governors are fully participating, has become the prime group for global governance 
among central banks.  
The GEM has become a very important forum for assessing global economic and financial 
conditions, for analysing economic and financial policy issues of common interest to central 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2010
banks. I have the privilege of chairing the GEM presently, and must say that I find the candid 
exchange of views of our bi-monthly meetings of enormous value.  
Strengthening institutions 
Among  the  new  and  strengthened  forums,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  expansion  of  the 
membership  in  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  whose  membership  is  now  largely 
overlapping that of the G20. The FSB has received an enhanced mandate to strengthen the 
international financial architecture and global financial stability. 
Collaborative efforts between the IMF and the FSB in this context are currently underway, 
including a joint early warning exercise for the identification of risks to the global economy. 
The  IMF  itself  has  overhauled  its  lending  framework  and  introduced  new  instruments  to 
assist countries in financial need, a first step in the broader discussion of its future mandate 
and internal governance. The meeting of the IMFC, two days ago in Washington, showed a 
confirmed determination to move ahead in this field.  
The crisis has also pointed to the need to enhance the framework for cooperation in financial 
regulation  and  supervision  in  Europe.  As  a  result,  micro-prudential  supervision  will  be 
reinforced with the creation of a European System of Financial Supervisors, including three 
new European supervisory authorities in banking, insurance and securities. 
Moreover,  micro-prudential  supervision  will  be  complemented  by  macro-prudential 
supervision,  focusing  on  the  prevention  of  systemic  risk.  The  financial  crisis  has  been 
revealing in many respects. It has revealed the scale of the potential fallout from the failure of 
large financial institutions. It has revealed the fragility of the financial system to features and 
trends  that  cut  across  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructures.  And  it  has  illustrated  the 
magnitude of the consequences of adverse feedback loop between the financial system and 
the real economy.  
All  three  elements  I  have  just  described  are key  features  of  systemic  risk:  first, contagion; 
second, the build-up of financial imbalances and unsustainable trends within and across the 
various components of the financial system; and third, the close links with the real economy 
and the potential for strong feedback effects.  
In short, the crisis has revealed the fundamental importance of systemic risk. The purpose of 
macro-prudential supervision is to identify sources of systemic risk and recommend remedial 
action. In the EU, this will be the task of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The 
members of the ECB’s General Council will be voting members of the ESRB, together with 
the  three  heads  of  the  envisaged  European  supervisory  authorities  and  a  member  of  the 
Commission. Moreover, the body will comprise all national supervisory authorities. The ECB, 
as an institution of the European Union as a whole, as an institution of the 27 EU Member 
States, has been invited to provide support to the ESRB. The Ecofin Council concluded that 
the ECB should provide analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support, in close 
cooperation with all the national central banks from the 27 states. The ECB is prepared to 
bring  to  the  benefit  of  the  ESRB,  with  the  participation  of  all  the  members  of  the  ECB’s 
General  Council,  the  macroeconomic,  financial  and  monetary  expertise  of  all  EU  central 
banks.  
The  legislative  proposals  are  currently  being  reviewed  by  the  European  Parliament  for  a 
decision later this year. I am confident that the ESRB can make a very important contribution 
for the overall stability and functioning of the EU’s financial system.  
Conclusions 
In conclusion I would like to stress four points.  
BIS Review 56/2010 
 5
First, global governance is of the essence to improve decisively the resilience of the global 
financial system. We avoided a major depression but it was a close call. Governments had to 
support the financial sector by putting at risk taxpayers’ money for the equivalent of around 
25 % of GDP on both sides of the Atlantic. This as unprecedented. I am convinced that, if we 
do not reinforce significantly the resilience of the financial system, our democracies will not 
accept for a second time such a very large scale of rescue operation.  
Second, a characteristic of the recent turbulences is not only that they displayed a high level 
of unpredictability but also an extreme rapidity in the succession of events characterising the 
unfolding of the crisis. Global governance today must demonstrate a capacity to coordinate 
with agility and, where necessary, to decide extremely swiftly. This is also unprecedented.  
Third,  the  crisis  has  had  some  paradoxical  effects:  on  the  one  hand  it  has  unleashed  a 
tendency to reengage in financial nationalism if not mercantilism; on the other hand it had 
contributed  to  the  recognition  that  a  very  high  degree  of  interdependencies  between 
economies  called  for  a  much  higher  level  of  cooperation.  These  two  opposing  forces  are 
presently  competing.  It  is  imperative  that  effective  global  governance  preserve  the  level 
playing  field  which  is  indispensable  to  foster  global  stability  and  prosperity.  It  is  a  major 
challenge. Both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  have  a  very  important  responsibility  in  this  respect  in 
many domains, in particular in prudential and accounting rules.  
And  fourth,  as  we  have  seen  the  crisis  has  driven  an  historic  change  in  the  framework  of 
global governance. In my view this transformation was overdue. But there are two immediate 
reasons for this change. One is positive: the emerging economies are now economically and 
financially so important and systemically so influential that they must have a full and proper 
ownership  of  global  governance.  But  the  second  reason  is  negative:  the  industrialised 
countries have proven particularly clumsy in their handling of global finance before the crisis 
at  the  time  when  their  responsibility  in  global  governance  was  obviously  overwhelming. 
There was therefore no reason to confirm their exclusive prime responsibility. This calls for 
the  industrialised  countries  to  be  now  particularly  irreproachable  in  the  delivery  of  their 
present and future contribution to the stability and prosperity of the global economy within the 
new, more inclusive framework.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2010
