Paul Fisher: Why is CPI inflation so high? 
Remarks by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director, Markets, and Member of the Monetary Policy 
Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  based  on  a  talk  to  Merseyside  Young  Professionals, 
Liverpool, 14 June 2010. 
 Annual CPI Inflation reached 3.7% in April (Chart 1). Given the Monetary Policy Committee’s 
remit to target CPI inflation of 2%, you might well want to ask “how has inflation got so high 
and what is the MPC going to do about it?”1 I intend to tackle those questions head on this 
morning and, in the process, illustrate some of the challenges the Committee faces in setting 
monetary policy. 
First we should note that inflation has become more volatile in the past few years than it has 
been at any time since the early nineties (Chart 2). CPI inflation had previously risen as high 
as 5.2%pa in September 2008 before falling back to just over 1%pa in the autumn of 2009 
and then rising to its recent peak. But historical data suggest that it was the stability of price 
inflation between 1993 and 2007 that was unusual, not the recent volatility which has been 
quite mild compared with the pre-nineties experience. 
The  rise  in  inflation  since  mid-2009  was  surprising  given  that  it  happened  against  the 
background  of  a  deep  recession  which  generated  the  biggest  fall  in  output  in  the  UK 
economy  since  at  least  the  Second  World  War  (Chart  3).  The  fall  in  output  from  peak  to 
trough was around 6% (Chart 4). And output is some 10% below where it would have been, 
had it continued to grow at its pre-recession trend (about 2 ¾ % between 1998–2008). 
                                                  
1  
May CPI data were published after the date of this talk: inflation fell back to 3.4%. 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 1
 One  might  have  expected  a  recession  of  this  depth  to  exert  considerable  downwards 
pressure  on  inflation  –  such  that  the  current  CPI  inflation  rate  could  easily  have  been 
negative. The recovery in inflation seems to reflect two factors. First, given the scale of the 
fall in demand, the downwards pressure from the recession doesn’t appear to have been as 
strong  as  it  might  have  been.  Second,  there  have  been  a  number  of  temporary  factors 
pushing upwards. 
Taking  the  impact  of  the  recession  first,  the  UK  economy  appears  to  have  behaved 
differently  during  this  downturn  than  in  previous  recessions.  The  number  of  company 
bankruptcies has been fewer than in the early nineties (Chart 5) – despite the fall in output 
being twice as big, and despite there being more than twice as many companies in existence 
now.  And  even  though  there  are  over  850,000  extra  people  out  of  work  following  the 
recession, and the unemployment rate has reached 8%, (Chart 6) a 6% fall in output could 
have  been  expected  to  generate  much  more  unemployment  than  it  has.2  Unemployment 
peaked at nearly 12% in the eighties and over 10% in the early nineties – after smaller falls in 
output. 
                                                 
2   Labour force data were published after the date of this talk: unemployment has dropped to 7.9% in the three 
months to April. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2010
 Throughout the recession we have heard many reports from firms about how they and their 
workforces have responded to recessionary pressures. Those reports are from our Agents or 
MPC members talking directly to business contacts across the regions and in all sectors – a 
truly  invaluable  source  of  information  for  the  Committee.  It  has  been  clear  that  there  has 
been an unusual response from companies and their employees. Many firms have sought to 
retain staff wherever possible, rather than shed them as in previous downturns – hours have 
been  shortened  and  wages  frozen or  even  cut  where  possible,  rather  than  making  people 
redundant. Large firms with smaller suppliers have tried to work with suppliers to keep their 
supply chains intact, which has helped smaller firms to survive. Many employees – at least in 
the  private  sector  –  have  been  willing  to  forgo  income  in  order  to  retain  their  jobs.  Tax 
officials have worked very hard with firms to give them the time for tax bills to be paid. And 
even the banks, despite the fierce criticism from some firms who did not receive the financial 
support they expected, do not seem to have been as quick to pull the plug on their borrowers 
as they were during previous downturns. 
Overall, the fall in output does not appear to have done as much damage to employment and 
firm  survival  as  one  might  have  expected.  At  the  same  time,  the  implication  of  business 
surveys is that the degree of spare capacity in firms is rather less than implied by the fall in 
output.  So  estimates  of  the  gap  between  overall  demand  and  the  economy’s  capacity  to 
produce goods and services – an indicator of inflationary pressure known as the “output gap” – 
are extremely uncertain at the current juncture. The “output gap” appears to be much smaller 
than  the  fall  in  demand  alone  would  have  suggested,  but  there  is  little  evidence  of 
widespread destruction of supply capacity. 
Whatever  the  balance  between  demand  and  supply,  it  seems  that  many  firms  have 
maintained prices, not cut them, in the face of weak demand. That may have been a rational 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 3
response.  In  order  to  survive  they  needed  to  maximise  their  present  cash  flow  and  they 
would only have cut prices if the demand response was likely to outweigh the lost revenue. 
Comparisons  with  behaviour  in  previous  post-war  recessions  are  difficult,  partly  because 
inflation was much higher during those episodes. One of the benefits from low inflation is that 
firms  can  concentrate  on  real  relativities  rather  than  decisions  being  dominated  by  the 
general rise in prices. Whatever the reason, the downwards pressure which normally arises 
from a fall in output, has not been sufficient to push inflation negative. 
The  explanations  for  these  changes  in  behaviour  and  their  inflationary  consequences  are 
likely to be many and varied. And it may be some time before we can be sure which of many 
hypotheses are correct. But one factor we know is that interest rates have been at an all-time 
historic  low  during  this  recession  (Chart  7).  And  Bank  Rate  started  to  fall  well  before  the 
trough in output. The effect of this on, for example, firms’ cash flow, has been very significant 
and  was  reinforced  by  the  effects  of  the  asset  purchase  programme  reducing  corporate 
borrowing costs. 
It  seems  a  reasonable  starting  assumption  that  behaviour  during  the  recession  should  be 
broadly symmetric during the recovery. When demand growth strengthens, output could be 
flexibly  ratcheted  up,  reversing  the  processes  seen  during  the  downturn.  If  so,  then  it  is 
unlikely that substantial inflationary pressure would be generated as the result of a recovery 
in demand: there will be plenty of capacity within firms and a ready supply of labour, both of 
which should help to keep costs subdued. But this is clearly a major uncertainty and hence a 
risk in our projections of future inflation. Not only has the UK economy behaved differently 
from  its  previous  experience,  it  has  also  behaved  differently  from  other  countries.  In  the 
United States for example, the fall in employment relative to output has been larger than in 
the United Kingdom (Chart 8). 
Weak  downwards  pressure  on  inflation  from  the  recession  can  only  go  so  far  in  helping 
understand  recent  movements  in  inflation.  It  cannot  explain  why  inflation  has  been  rising 
recently.  For  that  we  need  to  look  at  a  series  of  shocks  to  relative  prices  that  have  put 
temporary upwards pressure on CPI inflation. These shocks include the change in the VAT 
rate; changes in oil (and hence petrol) prices and changes in the prices of imports relative to 
domestic goods and services. 
 4 
 BIS Review 91/2010
Because inflation is measured as a 12-month rate, a change in the level of prices will impact 
on the inflation rate for a year. When the VAT rate was cut in December 2008, that pushed 
down the price level and the annual inflation rate. Although the precise timing and impact is 
uncertain, estimates from the ONS suggest it is likely to have reduced inflation by about ¾pp 
at that time. That effect would have fallen out of the inflation rate a year later. And when the 
VAT rate was restored in January 2010, the effect of that is likely to have pushed up on the 
price level and the inflation rate. So, just from the mathematics of the calculation, that’s likely 
to  have  generated  a  substantial  swing  in  the  measured  inflation  rate  of  the  order  of 
1 ½ percentage points between the end of 2009 and early 2010. It will also imply a boost to 
the measured inflation rate through 2010.3 Chart 9 sets out an illustration of how this might 
have affected the inflation rate. 
Changes in the relative price of oil, and hence petrol and other fuel-related transport costs, 
similarly have a big impact on the price level and the annual inflation rate. The difference is 
that we have seen several erratic swings in the price of oil – sometimes up and sometimes 
down. Recent inflation outturns have reflected a big rise in petrol prices worth perhaps nearly 
1 percentage point on the April rate (Chart 10). That reflects higher sterling oil prices, which 
rose by some 60% in the year to April. 
Some other energy prices – such as gas and electricity – have generally been falling recently 
and thus subtracting from the inflation rate, albeit at a declining rate (Chart 10). 
                                                  
3  
In addition, since the date of this talk, the Government has announced an increase in the VAT rate to 20% 
from January 2011. 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 5
 Finally, the most complicated relative price shock has been that from the depreciation of the 
sterling exchange rate (Chart 11). The effect of any exchange rate change depends crucially 
on why it has itself moved. For example, one would expect that different inflation rates across 
countries  would  lead  to  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  so  as  to  equalise  the  cost  of 
internationally  traded  goods  and  services.  If  there  had  been  a  shock  to  inflation  overseas 
there  may  be  no  additional  inflationary  consequence  for  the  UK  of  our  exchange  rate 
changing to reflect that shock. But the 25% depreciation of sterling since August 2007 in my 
view more likely reflects a re-appraisal of the UK economy given the financial crisis and the 
significance of the financial sector to the UK  (in the context of  what  was a very  large and 
growing current account deficit). In such a case, we would expect to see a large part of the 
exchange rate depreciation reflected in higher prices for goods and services imported into 
the UK and hence higher CPI inflation. The size and timing of such an effect, however, would 
be very uncertain, and would partly reflect whether firms think the lower exchange rate would 
be sustained and what they believe the monetary policy reaction might be. I think that the 
depreciation  of  sterling  since  August  2007  has  had  a  substantial  –  but  likely  temporary  – 
impact on inflation. Estimates are uncertain but my best guess is that it is probably adding 
between 1 and 2 ½ percentage points to the current inflation rate. But I also believe that, if 
the  exchange  rate  is  reacting  to  a  re-evaluation  of  real  economic  prospects  –  and  not  to 
some other inflationary shock – the effect should be a one-off change in relative prices, albeit 
spread out over time. 
It  is  important  to  stress  that  the  MPC  could  try  to  offset  all  the  price  level  effects  of  such 
shocks in order to leave the inflation rate unchanged. The problem with that idea in practice 
is  the  time  it  takes  for  Bank  Rate  to  affect  inflation.  To  counter  short-term  movements 
induced by relative price shocks would need very large and frequent changes in Bank Rate 
– including to offset the lagged responses of earlier changes. That sort of policy response 
would be very de-stabilising, likely to cause undesirable volatility in output, and be damaging 
to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  This  is  where  the  full  remit  of  the  MPC  becomes  effective  – 
requiring us to support the Government’s objectives for growth and employment. Once there 
has  been  a  shock  to  inflation,  the  Committee  have  to  decide  how  quickly  it  should  bring 
inflation  back  to  target.  To  do  that  we  have  to  judge  the  underlying  state  of  inflationary 
pressure. And we have to monitor inflation expectations to check that they are not adversely 
affected by a succession of temporary shocks to the price level. If people came to believe 
6 
 BIS Review 91/2010
that inflation was not going to be brought back to the 2% target, then Bank Rate would have 
to  change  by  a  potentially  much  larger  amount  in  order  to  ensure  that  inflation  is,  in  fact, 
returned to target. 
The  recent  high  rate  of  CPI  inflation  can  be  largely  attributed  to  a  number  of  temporary 
factors,  combined  with  weak  downwards  pressure  on  inflation  from  the  subdued  level  of 
demand. Nevertheless, given the expected degree of spare capacity in the economy over the 
next few years, and that the temporary factors should wear off, the most likely outcome is 
that inflation falls back to below target over the next couple of years as shown in the May 
Inflation Report (Chart 12). On that basis it was sensible not to try and offset the recent rise 
in inflation by tightening policy. 
 But let me be clear about the risks. Our central expectations could be wrong. Certainly the 
inflation data have tended to consistently surprise on the upside, month-by-month. What if 
spare  capacity  continues  to  exert  much  less  restraint  on  inflation  than  anticipated?  Or 
perhaps  current  data  estimates  have  significantly  underestimated  demand  and  output 
growth? Or the exchange rate effect is bigger than incorporated in the projections? We could 
also  be  wrong  in  the  other  direction:  downside  pressures  on  UK  output  growth  (Chart  13) 
could yet lead to an even bigger fall in inflation than the central case. And, of course, there 
could be further shocks in either direction. 
So it is important to use whatever cross-checks on our projections that we can. One way to 
do that is to look for any nominal indicators that might signal risks of persistently above target 
inflation in the medium term, such as money or wage growth. Underlying money growth is 
currently just over 1% on an annual basis. And underlying wage growth is around 2%. There 
are some tentative signs that money and wage growth are rising, but neither of these figures 
are even close to being consistent with above-target inflation in the medium term. 
Taking these indicators together with the degree of slack in the economy – and given some 
of  the  factors  likely  to  restrain  growth  in  the  UK  and  in  Europe  –  the  economics  of  the 
situation does suggest that inflation should fall back from its current high point. But there are 
risks on both sides. 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 7
On the one hand we need to be sensitive to the risk of tightening policy prematurely, stifling 
the nascent recovery. In that case, some of the flexible response to the recession could be 
swept away, delivering higher unemployment, more company failures and the risk of inflation 
significantly undershooting the target. The risk of deflation – which prompted the start of the 
MPC’s  asset  purchases  in  2009  –  may  have  faded,  but  it  hasn’t  gone  away  and  would 
require greater efforts to deal with, if it materialised now. 
On the other hand, should it appear likely that inflationary pressure is sustained at a higher 
level into the medium term, then it is clear what our mandate would require us to do. The 
MPC has the tools at its disposal to tighten monetary conditions, both in the form of raising 
Bank Rate and by selling the assets that we bought in 2009 as part of the quantitative easing 
programme. 
8 
 BIS Review 91/2010
