Jürgen Stark: Economic recovery and exit strategies 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  debate  on  “The  post-crisis  strategy  for  growth  and  jobs”  and  “Modernisation  of  the 
global financial architecture” between the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of 
the European Parliament and national parliaments, Brussels, 16 March 2010. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Economic situation and outlook 
In autumn 2008, the world entered the worst financial crisis and the most severe economic 
downturn  since  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War.  Since  spring  2009,  financial  market 
conditions  have  improved.  Economic  growth  has  resumed  in  most  countries,  albeit  very 
moderately in many advanced economies. These improvements have largely resulted from 
massive support measures taken by governments and central banks. 
Likewise, we have recently seen further improvements in the outlook for the global economy. 
However,  uncertainty  is  still  high,  as  both  fiscal  stimuli  and  the  inventory  cycle,  which  are 
currently supporting growth in many countries, are transitory and as there remain risks to the 
financial sector. 
In  the  euro  area,  recent  information  indicates  that  recovery  is  still  on  track.  The  global 
recovery  that  is  underway  and  the  positive  impact  of  the  policy  responses  to  the  financial 
crisis  are  the  main  drivers  behind  this  development.  However,  ongoing  balance  sheet 
adjustments in the private sector, which are necessary, are likely to weigh on growth, just as 
low capacity utilisation will weigh on investment. In the same vein, weak prospects for the 
labour market will dampen consumption growth. 
Therefore,  the  euro  area  economy  is  expected  to  grow  at  an  only  moderate  and  most 
probably uneven pace in 2010. This is in line with the latest projections by ECB staff [who 
predict real GDP growth of between 0.4 and 1.2% for this year and between 0.5 and 2.5% for 
next year]. The Governing Council views the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced. 
As regards price developments, inflation and inflationary pressures have remained low over 
recent  months.  Inflation  stood  at  0.9%  in  February.  The  outlook  for  inflation  is  in  line  with 
price  stability  and  the  risks  to  this  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced.  More  specifically,  we 
expect  inflation  to  stay  at  around  1%  in  the  near  term,  and  to  remain  subdued  over  the 
policy-relevant  horizon,  largely  on  account  of  the  abundance  of  idle  resources  and  the 
moderate recovery. This is in line with the projections by ECB staff. 
Our  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressures  over  the 
medium term, with money and credit growth remaining weak. 
All in all, inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation 
rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Monetary policy – exit from non-standard measures 
Let me now turn to monetary policy. As you know, we have taken bold action in response to 
the  crisis.  Given  subdued  inflationary  pressures  in  the  context  of  a  severe  economic 
downturn, the ECB lowered its key interest rates sharply. From October 2008 to May 2009, 
i.e.  within  a  period  of  only  seven  months,  we  brought  the  main  refinancing  rate  down  by 
325 basis  points  to  1%,  a  record  low  level  not  seen  in  the  recent  history  of  euro  area 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 1
countries. Overall, the Governing Council views the current low level of its key interest rates 
as appropriate. 
To foster financing conditions and facilitate the transmission of lower key ECB interest rates 
to money market and bank lending rates, the Governing Council also introduced a number of 
non-standard measures. Notably, the Eurosystem provided unlimited liquidity to banks at a 
fixed  interest  rate  and  at  maturities  of  up  to  one  year.  It  also  provided  liquidity  in  foreign 
currencies,  extended  the  list  of  eligible  collateral  and  purchased  covered  bonds  outright. 
Together,  our  non-standard  measures  have  helped  to  improve  financing  conditions, 
especially in the money market, thus contributing to a better flow of credit to households and 
firms than would otherwise have been the case. 
However, it is important to ensure that the non-standard measures do not remain in place for 
longer  than  is  necessary,  as  this  would  entail  the  danger  of  significantly  distorting  money 
market participants’ perceptions of actual liquidity risk and their related behaviour. Therefore, 
in view of the improvements in financial market conditions seen since last spring, we decided 
in December to begin a gradual phasing-out of some of our non-standard measures. 
In particular, we conducted the last 12-month operations in December and decided that the 
six-month  operation  coming  up  in  two  weeks  will  be  the  last.  In  addition,  on  4  March,  we 
decided to return to variable rate tenders in the regular three-month operations towards the 
end of April. 
The Eurosystem will also continue its enhanced credit approach and provide liquidity support 
to the euro area banking system at very favourable conditions in its shorter-term refinancing 
operations (that mature after one week and after approximately one month). We decided to 
do this for as long as necessary and at least until mid-October this year. 
These decisions help facilitate the provision of credit to the euro area economy. At the same 
time, the Governing Council will continue, in the context of its medium-term monetary policy 
strategy, to implement the gradual phasing-out of any extraordinary liquidity measures that 
are no longer needed, taking due account of economic and financial market conditions. 
Such  a  medium-term  orientation  is  essential  in  order  to  fulfil  the  ECB’s  mandate  of 
maintaining price stability in the euro area. 
Thus, phasing-out some of the non-standard measures to avoid risks to price stability at a 
later  stage  is  fully  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  price  stability  mandate  under  the  current 
circumstances. At the same time, the ECB will avoid too early an exit from its non-standard 
measures, as this would risk hurting the normalisation of financial markets and the recovery. 
Of course, we do not know today what post-crisis normality would look like. Nor do we yet 
know the design of the “final” post-crisis operational framework. However, when talking about 
the end-point of the phasing-out, the operational framework that prevailed prior to the start of 
the financial turmoil in August 2007 might provide a good benchmark. Should we fully revert 
to this, only a very few policy parameters remain – in particular, the tender procedures to be 
applied  in  the  main  refinancing  operations  and  the  operations  with  a  duration  of  one 
maintenance period, which is approximately one month (a return to variable rate tenders). 
The monetary policy framework 
Recently,  some  voices  have  argued  that  central  banks  should  act  as  risk  managers  by 
organising their working framework with a view to avoiding events that may lead to deflation. 
It has been further argued that, in such a working framework, central banks should relax their 
targets  and  aim  for  significantly  higher  inflation  rates.  In  this  vein  the  question  has  been 
raised as to whether it would not be appropriate to have a permanently higher inflation target 
of 4%, as this would leave more room for monetary policy to react to large, adverse shocks. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2010
I strongly oppose this notion. Any relaxing of central banks’ mandates in this direction would 
be a serious mistake. Let me explain why. 
Certainly, it may be tempting for governments to suggest higher inflation in order to monetise 
the dramatic build-up of public debt. However, calling on central banks to raise inflation rates 
permanently  takes  the  focus  away  from  the  overriding  problem,  which  is  that,  at  present, 
unsustainable  fiscal  policies  represent  a  threat  to  macroeconomic  stability  in  nearly  all 
advanced economies. If, on top of the financial uncertainties and concerns about public debt, 
the general public were to lose trust in the purchasing power of money, the consequences 
could be grave. 
Also,  higher  inflation  increases  distortions  from  taxes.  It  increases  inflation  variability  and, 
hence, uncertainty for investors. This implies higher long-term real interest rates, as investors 
would  want  compensation  for  the  increased  uncertainty.  Thus,  a  permanent  increase  in 
inflation curtails, rather than stimulates, long-term growth. Empirical evidence confirms this 
negative relationship. 
Using monetary policy to manage macroeconomic risk would avoid policy restrictions when 
benign shocks reduce inflation, as was the case when China and other low-cost economies 
started to increase their market shares some years ago, thus fostering asset price booms, 
excessive risk-taking and financial imbalances. When the asset price boom finally turns into 
a bust, such a policy would lead central banks to overreact to the negative shocks. 
So, financial stability is undermined in two ways: first, by a pro-cyclical monetary response to 
benign  disinflation  in  good  times;  second,  by  moral  hazard  in  financial  markets,  stemming 
from the expectation that the central bank will protect the markets from “tail events” in bad 
times, thus encouraging too much risk-taking. This would certainly also set wrong incentives 
for fiscal policy-makers. 
Fiscal policy 
This brings me to fiscal policy issues. The crisis began as a financial crisis and evolved into 
an economic crisis. There is now a clear risk that we will enter a third wave, a sovereign debt 
crisis in most advanced economies. Many euro area countries are faced with large budget 
deficits  and  sharply  rising  public  debt  levels.  While  it  was  right  to  also  take  extraordinary 
fiscal policy measures to avoid a 1930s-style depression, a timely exit from the fiscal stimuli 
is  now  crucial  in  the  context  of  ongoing  economic  recovery.  Any  undue  delay  will  have 
serious negative side-effects on confidence and economic welfare. 
Let me remind you that unsustainable fiscal policies complicate the task of monetary policy, 
as they might lead to higher inflation expectations and higher uncertainty about the inflation 
outlook in the medium term. As a result, upward pressure on long-term interest rates might 
lead to a crowding out of private investment, which would, in turn, be detrimental to potential 
growth  and  contribute  to  adverse  spill-over  effects.  High  debt  ratios  reduce  the  room  for 
governments  to  counter  a  new  downturn  by  letting  automatic  stabilisers  operate  or  even 
adopting discretionary stimulus measures. Indeed, with fiscal sustainability under pressure, 
fiscal multipliers can turn negative and a fiscal expansion can induce higher precautionary 
saving  and,  consequently,  an  economic  contraction.  This  underlines  the  importance  of 
reducing debt levels, and of having effective tools to counter serious downturns in the future. 
As  a  result  of  the  budgetary  loosening  in  the  context  of  the  economic  and  financial  crisis, 
many euro area countries will need to engage in ambitious fiscal consolidation to put their 
debt levels back on a declining path towards the Maastricht reference value of 60% of GDP. 
Simulation  results  suggest  that  even  with  average  annual  consolidation  efforts  of  0.5%  of 
GDP, returning to the pre-crisis euro area debt ratio would take around two decades. 
Therefore,  to  safeguard  government  solvency  and  sustainable  fiscal  positions  in  the  euro 
area  countries,  governments  must  give  fiscal  consolidation  top  priority,  taking  the  ongoing 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 3
recovery of the economy into account, and bring their deficit ratios to below 3% of GDP, in 
line with the recommendations by the Ecofin Council. Consolidation efforts will have to last 
for several years in many countries. In Europe, the Stability and Growth Pact provides the 
appropriate framework for the coordination of the necessary consolidation policies. It is now 
crucial that all governments strictly adhere to their commitments under the Pact. Supporting 
national fiscal frameworks should be strengthened wherever necessary. 
The  situation  in  Greece  shows  how  important  it  is  to  strictly  apply  credible  fiscal  rules.  A 
lesson to be learnt from the recent events is to strengthen the fiscal rules in the euro area 
and to enforce their application. 
Need for structural reform 
Healthy economic growth could alleviate fiscal strains to some extent, by reducing the size of 
existing debt relative to the size of the economy and by improving the annual budgets. This 
underlines the importance of increasing our economies’ growth potential. The starting point, 
however, is not the best. Most estimates suggest that the turmoil lowered both the level and 
the  growth  rate  of  the  euro  area’s  potential  output.  It  is  therefore  crucial  to  accelerate 
structural  reforms  that  will  reinforce  sustainable  growth  and  job  creation.  Policies  that 
enhance  competition  and  innovation  are  urgently  needed  to  speed  up  restructuring  and 
investment, and to create new business opportunities. Increased labour market flexibility is 
required  to  create  employment  and  restore  competitiveness.  Restructuring  of  the  banking 
sector, aimed at sound balance sheets, better risk management and increased transparency, 
is also of the essence. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. 
The global economy shows signs of an ongoing improvement. In the euro area, we are also 
on the road to recovery, albeit at a moderate pace. Uncertainties remain high. 
As  regards  our  monetary  policy  stance,  we  still  view  the  current  level  of  the  ECB’s  key 
interest  rates  as  appropriate,  given  continued  low  inflationary  pressures  and  our  current 
assessment of the risks to price stability over the medium term. 
At  the  same  time,  improvements  in  financial  markets  since  spring  2009  have  justified  a 
gradual  phasing-out  of  non-standard  measures.  These  decisions  help  to  avoid  distortions 
associated  with  the  maintenance  of  our  non-standard  measures  for  longer  than  they  are 
needed. 
This does not mean that the crisis is over. There is no room for complacency. We cannot rule 
out setbacks. New challenges may arise. Greece is a case in point. 
Thus, central banks need to provide an anchor of stability and confidence. Any attempt to 
weaken or even lift this anchor would be a step in the wrong direction. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2010
