Hu Xiaolian: Law on real rights of the People’s Republic of China 
Speech  by  Ms  Hu  Xiaolian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the 
Symposium on Judicial Interpretation of Law on Real Rights, Beijing, 27 May 2010. 
 I am delighted to attend the symposium on judicial interpretation of the Law on Real Rights of 
the People’s Republic of China organized by the Supreme People’s Court and the People’s 
Bank of China with the support of International Finance Corporation. We have gathered here 
today to discuss the experiences of reforming the legal system on security interest, security 
interests in personal property and innovative practices on warranty of titles, so as to promote 
the drafting of judicial interpretation of the Law on Real Rights Part Four on Security Interest.  
Secured credit accounted for more than 80 percent of China’s aggregate credit. Therefore, 
reform and innovation of legal framework concerning security interest is an important part of 
financial  infrastructure.  Security  interest  in  personal  property  is  one  of  the  most  frequently 
discussed area in property law system and it is closely related to economic development and 
restructuring. Based on the four pillars of an ideal framework of security interest in personal 
property, namely wide range of eligible collateral, a centralized registration and public display 
system, well-defined rule of priority and streamlined process for implementation, the PBC put 
forward  8  proposals,  i.e.  making  account  receivables  and  inventory  eligible  collaterals, 
establishing  a  floating  charge  system,  protecting  bona  fide  purchase,  expanding  party 
autonomy, defining the rule of priority in a clear-cut manner, designating the institution for the 
registration  of  account  receivables,  defining  the  principles  for  the  registration  of  floating 
charge  and  rules  for  the  registration  and  charging  of  security  interest,  which  have  already 
been written into the Law on Real Rights enacted on March 16, 2007. 
The launch of the Law on Real Rights is of great significance to the development of the credit 
market,  prevention  and  mitigation  of  financial  risks  and  easing  the  financing  difficulties  of 
SMEs. 
SME financing is a worldwide challenge, and it is more difficult in developing countries. Out 
of multiple problems such as large SMEs’ exposure to operational risks and lack of financial 
transparency  and  banks’  difficulties  in  managing  lending  to  SMEs,  the  lack  of  legitimate 
collateral is the real bottleneck. Approximately 70 percent of the credit collateral received by 
commercial banks in China is real estate, while more than 70 percent of the assets of SMEs 
are account receivables and inventory. It was estimated that 16 trillion yuan worth of assets 
of  SMEs  could  not  be  accepted  as  loan  collaterals.  Making  account  receivables  and 
inventory eligible collateral is an important solution to the financing difficulties of SMEs. 
The Law on Real Rights also identifies a dedicated agency for account receivables finance 
registration.  The  PBC’s  account  receivables  finance  registration  and  public  display  system 
and the financial leasing registration and public display system started to operate on October 
1st,  2007  and  July  20th,  2009  respectively.  The  registration  of  collateral  puts  collateral 
information on public display and holds third parties involved legally accountable, playing an 
important  role  in  protecting  legitimate  rights  and  interests  of  financial  institutions  as  the 
secured  party.  The  system  also  registers  factoring  business,  mitigating  legal  risks  of 
commercial banks’ factoring business with repurchase agreement attached. 
The enaction of the Law on Real Rights has largely filled in the gap in China’s legislation on 
taking  floating  charge  as  collaterals.  However,  after  the  Law  on  Real  Rights  was 
promulgated, commercial banks have explored taking a mixture of real right as collateral, and 
they  are  promoting  innovation  to  include  land  use  right  and  rural  housing  site  as  eligible 
collaterals.  What’s  more,  the  two  registration  systems  still  need  improvements  in  terms  of 
basis of registration, scope and effectiveness of the registration, underpinning the urgency of 
legal definition. These need to be clarified by legislations. 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 1
This  symposium  aims  to  understand  innovative  practices  concerning  collaterals,  discuss 
issues  to  be  solved  in  the  implementation  of  the  Law  on  Real  Rights,  so  as  to  promote 
judicial interpretations of security interest to be released as soon as possible based on latest 
developments  in  collaterals  and  serve  economic  and  financial  development  in  a  more 
effective manner. 
I wish the symposium a complete success.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2010
