Axel A Weber: The G20 agenda on financial regulation 
Dinner speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
International Conference on Financial Market Regulation, Berlin, 19 May 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
These days it is hard to find a topic that is suitable for a light-hearted dinner speech. One 
could either choose to talk about a crisis-related topic, which would mostly be unpleasant, or 
one could choose to talk about something completely different and run the risk of appearing 
slightly out of touch with reality. As a compromise, I have decided to talk about one of the 
more  positive  outcomes  of  the  crisis  –  assuming  that  “positive”  is  not  a  misnomer.  As 
devastating  as  the  crisis  has  been,  it  has  set  in  motion  a  process  of  reform  that  will 
eventually  lead  to  a  more  stable  and  resilient  financial  system  in  the  future.  Originally,  I 
wanted to give you a short overview of the state of these  reforms. And even though I will 
stick to that plan, current events have to be acknowledged and I will do this at the end of my 
speech. 
Major issues of reform at the micro and macroprudential level 
2. 
The  reform  of  financial  regulation  was  initiated  by  the  G20  during  various  meetings  in 
London,  Washington  and  Pittsburgh.  Having  devised  the  general  objectives,  the  G20  then 
commissioned  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision to draw up proposals as to how these objectives could be met. The overarching 
principle of reform is to create a financial system that is more stable, more resilient and thus 
more capable of absorbing potential shocks. 
Any attempt to achieve this objective has to begin with the individual institution – that is, at 
the microprudential level. Preventing individual institutions from failing would serve as a first 
line  of  defence  against  systemic  crises.  Regulation  at  the  microprudential  level  centres  on 
the Basel II framework, which was launched in 2004 and has been implemented by a large 
number of countries. In a nutshell, the Basel II rules require banks to provide risk-adjusted 
capital  and  liquidity  buffers.  These  buffers  serve  to  absorb  potential  losses  and  help  to 
prevent failures. Thus, an enhanced Basel II framework would further strengthen the first line 
of defence against future crises. 
Relevant  proposals  were  put  forward  in  December  2009,  including,  among  other  things, 
measures  to  raise  the  quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  the  capital  base,  a  global 
standard for funding liquidity, and the introduction of a leverage ratio. Throughout 2010 the 
proposed measures will be calibrated on the basis of an extensive quantitative impact study. 
The  fully  calibrated  set  of  measures  will  then  be  issued  by  the  end  of  2010  and  the  new 
standards will be phased in by the end of 2012 provided that economic recovery is assured. 
The proposed measures will certainly help to reduce the likelihood of individual bank failures. 
However, even though such events have proven capable of destabilising the whole financial 
system,  totally  eliminating  the  risk  of  failure  would  be  highly  detrimental  to  growth  and 
efficiency.  Regulation  at  the  microprudential  level  therefore  has  to  be  supplemented  by  a 
macroprudential  stance  that  takes  into  account  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole, thus constituting a second line of defence against systemic crises. A major concern in 
that respect is the treatment of systemically important institutions, as their failure might lead 
to system-wide disruptions. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 1
When approached at a more detailed level, the concept of systemic relevance proves to be 
rather complex. Contrary to common perception, systemic relevance is driven by more than 
the sheer size of an institution. Factors such as interconnectedness, substitutability and the 
state of the markets also determine whether the failure of an individual institution will have a 
systemic impact – the banks that played a core role in the crisis were actually often not that 
large.  Consequently,  we  need  to  put  some  effort  into  finding  a  reliable  way  of  identifying 
systemically important institutions, and we might also have to accept that systemic relevance 
is not a zero-one criterion. 
The  difficulties  do  not  stop  there.  Once  an  institution  is  defined  as  systemically  relevant, 
moral hazard problems might occur. As the institution in question would most likely be aware 
of the fact that it cannot be allowed to fail, it would have every incentive to engage in risk-
prone  behaviour  and  gamble  on  being  bailed  out  as  soon  as  it  gets  into  trouble.  Any 
measures aimed at systemically important institutions must therefore take into account the 
moral hazard dimension. 
The reform of the Basel II framework is certainly part of the solution to this problem, as it will 
help to improve the capacity of systemically important institutions to absorb losses without 
creating moral hazard. However, what is required is a more comprehensive approach which 
specifically ensures that accountability is brought back into the game. Major proposals that 
go  beyond  the  reformed  capital  and  liquidity  framework  include  capital  surcharges  for 
systemically  important  institutions,  better  resolution  regimes  and  a  strengthening  of  the 
financial infrastructure. Commissioned by the G20, the FSB is already working towards that 
goal. 
Some thoughts on the most recent backslide on the financial markets 
3. 
I  could  have  closed  my  speech  with  this  rather  positive  outlook  not  even  two  weeks  ago. 
However,  since  then  the  crisis  has  again  raised  its  head,  this  time  exposing  the  weak 
position  of  government  budgets  in  some  euro-area  countries.  At  first  sight,  the  current 
problems seem to be rather different from what we experienced during the financial crisis. 
However, a second glance reveals that the underlying causes are quite similar, and so are 
the remedies. 
Just  like  the  financial  crisis  itself,  the  current  problems  can  be  traced  back  to  a  limited 
number  of  factors.  First,  a  credit  boom  due  to  lower  interest  rates  once  the  countries  in 
question had joined the euro area. Second, insufficient or totally absent risk management in 
economic policy, which should have been much more countercyclical. And third, the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  was  not  applied  as  strictly  as  it  should  have  been,  or  was  weakened  by 
questionable accounting practices and faulty statistics. 
Given  these  similarities  with  the  root  causes  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  responses  of 
economic policy are similar, too. The first challenge has been to stabilise the situation. The 
relevant steps towards that goal were taken by the Eurosystem and the Ecofin ten days ago. 
In particular, the commitment of fiscal policy to stepping up frontloaded consolidation efforts 
shows the will of the member states to tackle the current crisis at its root. 
What must follow are structural reforms in a similar vein to those that I have just described 
with  regard  to  the  financial  sector.  It  is  essential  to  strengthen  the  existing  fiscal  rules  to 
prevent  individual  countries  from  running  into  budgetary  difficulties.  Relevant  proposals  to 
enhance  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  have  already  been  put  forward.  They  could  be 
complemented  by  national  fiscal  rules  similar  to  the  national  debt  brake  in  Germany.  In 
addition, we might – over the medium-term – also think about devising mechanisms to limit 
the  systemic  impact  of  sovereign  debt  crises  that  might  still  occur.  However,  particular 
caution is warranted in this regard given that adverse incentive effects would most likely be 
even more severe than in the financial sector. For example, a permanently available support 
scheme would only exacerbate these problems and therefore should not be a policy option. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2010
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Three years into the crisis, the necessity for a reform of financial regulation has been well 
understood  at  a  global  level.  Until  now,  a  number  of  relevant  proposals  have  been  put 
forward  by  international  bodies  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. Once implemented, the proposed measures will help to 
create  a  more  stable  and  more  resilient  financial  system.  The  events  that  reached  their 
climax ten days ago emphasised the need for ambitious consolidation efforts and reforms in 
the fiscal policy framework in order to deliver sustainable public debt levels. In both cases, 
policymakers  now  have  to  muster  the  political  will  to  take  the  necessary  steps,  however 
contested and painful they might be. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 3
