Choongsoo Kim: Global and local economic trends and challenges for 
the Bank of Korea’s monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Seoul  Financial 
Forum, Seoul, 17 August 2010. 
 Greetings 
I.  
Good Morning, 
I  am  indeed  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning  to  deliver  a  speech  at  the  “Seoul 
Financial  Forum”,  which  is  focused  on  helping  Korea  as  a  premier  international  financial 
center  in  Northeast  Asia.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  deep  thanks  to  all 
participants  in  this  forum  and  especially  to  Chairman  Kim  Ki  Hwan,  for  this  invitation  to 
address you. 
I intend to survey with you the current state of the economy at home and abroad and then to 
talk to you about the monetary policy challenges that lie ahead. 
II.  
Global and local economic trends 
The world economy 
Let me look first to developments in the world economy, which are one of the more important 
factors  in  judging  the  course  of  the  Korean  economy,  whose  growth  is  heavily  dependent 
upon trade with the world economy. 
In fact the world economy is generally deemed to be maintaining a recovery, even though 
there  are  differences  from  country  to  country  in  its  pace.  Giving  the  lie  to  initial  worries 
following  the  global  financial  crisis  that  the  economic  recession  would  prove  prolonged, 
countries around the world have found themselves on a relatively rapid recovery track. 
This  was  certainly  greatly  helped  at  least  until  the  end  of  last  year  by  the  policy  effect 
stemming from the bold and decisive monetary and fiscal policies put in place. More recently 
though,  there  have  been  stirrings  of  recovery  in  the  private  sector’s  self-sustaining  growth 
dynamism  against  the  backdrop  of  an  increase  in  the  volume  of  world  trade  and 
improvement in the labor market. 
Strikingly the global recovery is being led by the Asian emerging market countries, of which 
club  Korea  counts  itself  a  member,  with  the  rapid  growth  of  India  and  China  and  the 
consequent expansion of intra-regional trade. 
That said the picture is not without several downside risk factors. 
In the US economy, where anticipations of an economic recovery were running high early in 
the  year,  labor  and  housing  market  related  indicators  have  recently  been  coming  in  more 
subdued  than  expected  and  consumer  confidence  has  also  deteriorated.  Reflecting  these 
conditions the Federal Open Market Committee back-pedalled somewhat from its previous 
upbeat note in its appraisal of the state of economic activity in its statements of the monetary 
policy direction this June and August. Specifically, last week, on 10th of August, the FOMC 
stated  that  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  had  slowed  in  recent  months,  indicating  that  it 
would take a little longer for the US to return to the normal state. 
Similarly  the  euro-zone  faces  a  situation  in  which  the  sovereign  risk  problems  of  certain 
Southern  European  countries  have  not  yet  been  fundamentally  resolved.  Nevertheless  the 
July  23rd  announcement  of  the  results  of  the  stress  tests  carried  out  on  European  banks 
have greatly allayed concerns about the future of the euro-zone banking system. 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 1
For its part, the Chinese economy may well see its pace of growth slow from that of recent 
months as both leading and coincident indexes of economic activity have declined in line with 
the blunting of both investment and production growth while real estate prices have receded. 
Amid these uncertainties, the global financial markets may prove turbulent in the future and 
there is the likelihood of the heightened volatility of business activity in the major countries. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  nonetheless,  the  underlying  pattern  is  that  of  a  continuing  modest 
recovery  in  economic  activity  in  the  US,  albeit  its  pace  of  recovery  slowed  down  a  little 
recently, the euro-zone and other major countries along with the improving tone of the world 
economy. Principal international organizations such as the IMF and major central banks see 
little risk of the world economy drifting into a double-dip recession. 
The Korean economy 
Bolstered  by  these  improvements  in  world  economic  conditions  the  Korean  economy  is 
continuing  its  pronounced  upward  trend.  In  the  first  half  of  this  year  the  GDP  growth  rate 
came in at 7.6% year on year, driven by resilient domestic and external demand. 
Exports  led  the  economic  upswing  with  exports  for  the  whole  month  and  daily  average 
exports  chalking  up  their  highest-ever  monthly  figures.  Private  consumption  built  up 
consistently owing to increased wage payments and improved employment conditions while 
facilities investment expanded greatly in a climate of revived business confidence. 
What was particularly noteworthy was the clearly marked improvement from April onwards in 
labor  market  conditions,  which  had  largely  given  rise  to  the  lingering  concerns  about  the 
private sector’s capacity to pull itself up by its own bootstraps.  
The  number  of  persons  employed  in  the  private  sector,  i.e.  stripping  out  public-sector 
employment, expanded by 300 thousand persons year on year in April and this was followed 
up by a widening of the scale of increase to 650 thousand persons in July. The increase of 
the total number of employed persons year on year in July turned out to be 470 thousand 
persons  as  there  was  a  decrease  in  public  sector  employment  by  about  180  thousand 
persons. 
These strong growth trends of the Korean economy have certainly caught the eye of the rest 
of  the  world.  Korea  grew  at  a  rate  of  0.2%  last  year,  standing  together  with  Australia  and 
Poland  as  the  only  three  of  the  OECD’s  member  countries  to  register  positive  growth.  Its 
first-quarter growth this year (8.1% year on year and 2.1% quarter on quarter) was second 
only to that of Turkey (10.9% year on year) in the OECD. 
Going forward, from the latter half of this year onwards, the robust growth trend is expected 
to carry on at around the level of the potential GDP, led by the private sector. Actually the 
rate of GDP growth in the latter half year is forecast to drop from that of the first half, running 
at  around  0.8%  quarter  on  quarter.  But  concerns  over  this  may  be  exaggerated  as  the 
projected slowdown in the pace of growth is best interpreted as a natural reaction occurring 
after a swift burst of growth. 
Although consumer price inflation is presently holding steady at around 2.6%, upside price 
pressures are expected to build up going forward. In the course of the continued upswing in 
business  activity,  demand-pull  upward  pressures  have  been  increasing,  added  to  which 
charges for a number of public utilities have been raised. It should be particularly remarked 
that  the  rate  of  headline  inflation  is  forecast  to  move  above  the  midpoint  of  the  Bank  of 
Korea’s medium-term target from the fourth quarter of this year onwards. 
While the current account seems set to remain in the black for some time to come thanks to 
buoyant  exports,  the  scale  of  the  surplus  is  forecast  to  narrow  gradually.  The  main 
contributing  factors  here  will  be  the  greater  scale  of  the  increase  in  imports  than  that  of 
exports following the domestic demand’s recovery along with the swelling services account 
deficit  resulting,  for  example,  from  increased  outlays  for  overseas  travel.  Straight  after  the 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2010
collapse of Lehman Brothers the scale of the rises in both the Korean won’s exchange rate 
volatility and CDS premiums was very much larger than those of other countries. Taking this 
experience on board, we must count sustaining an underlying current account surplus a vital 
task  for  the  sake  of  the  stable  growth  of  the  Korean  economy,  which  is  very  much  at  the 
mercy of changes in external conditions. 
Taking an overall view in the light of the points I have just mentioned, we certainly cannot say 
that  Korean  macro-economic  variables  present  an  unsatisfactory  pattern.  But  vigilance  is 
also called for as the Korean economy confronts problems that are by no means trifling. 
Firstly  the  public  perception  of  the  actual  state  of  economic  activity  is  by  no  means  as 
flattering as conventional indicators might suggest owing to the deterioration of the terms of 
trade  and  the  severe  downturn  in  housing  market  activity.  Secondly  although  overall 
employment  conditions  are  picking  up,  youth  unemployment  is  still  running  at  a  high  level 
and the improvement in employment conditions for weaker members of society including the 
self-employed still remains inadequate. It is also very well possible that inflation expectations 
among the general public will build further as the rate of price increases accelerates. 
Challenges for BOK’s monetary policy 
III.  
Now I would like to turn to the challenges ahead of monetary policy in confronting the present 
domestic and international economic environment. 
Conducting interest rate policy efficiently 
The Bank of Korea has already begun to undertake efforts to normalize the policy stance by 
phasing out the measures adopted immediately after the global financial crisis. 
After keeping its policy Base Rate on hold for 17 straight months, the Bank of Korea raised it 
by  25  basis  points  from  2.0%  to  2.25%  on  July  9  this  year,  taking  into  consideration  the 
strong  possibility  of  inflation  pressure  increasing  in  the  latter  half  of  the  year  with  the 
continuation of the economic upswing. As all of you are aware, the Bank of Korea decided to 
maintain the Base Rate at 2.25% in August. 
Ahead  of  this,  on  June 24  this  year,  it  cut  down  the  Aggregate  Credit  Ceiling  for  the  third 
quarter this year by 1.5 trillion won. This had been increased in two steps by 3.5 trillion won 
to 10 trillion won following Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy. 
In this way Korea has joined the ranks of those countries around the world that have raised 
interest rates along with Canada, Australia, Norway and Sweden and so on. In fact the IMF 
and the OECD had advised a preemptive hike of interest rate for Korea in order to counter 
upward price pressures. 
Although the policy rate has been adjusted upward, the scale of the increase in interest rates 
was not very large and, as it had to some extent been factored in, it is likely to have only a 
limited  impact  on  the  financial  and  housing  markets  and  on  the  household  and  corporate 
sectors. What is more, despite the hike in the policy rate, the current monetary policy stance 
is still deemed highly accommodative, given the situation of the real economy in terms such 
as the potential growth and inflation rates. 
Looking  ahead,  in  carrying  out  monetary  policy,  we  will  take  into  overall  consideration  the 
influences that risk factors at home and abroad exercise on business activity, prices and the 
financial  market  situation.  We  will  conduct  monetary  policy  in  such  a  way  as  to  help  the 
economy  maintain  price  stability,  while  sustaining  sound  growth  under  the  accommodative 
policy stance. 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 3
Strengthening the economic fabric 
Strengthening  the  economic  fabric  constitutes  the  second  policy  challenge.  It  is  absolutely 
vital to strengthen the basis for domestic demand so that the Korean economy can attain a 
well-balanced  growth  path  without  being  excessively  affected  by  changes  in  the  external 
environment. 
Toward this end, the role of households as consumers and that of small and medium-sized 
enterprises  (SMEs)  as  the  main  source  of  job-creation  are  very  important  for  balanced 
economic growth. But the current situation of both households and SMEs is only fragile. 
For  households  there  is  not  enough  capacity  for  spending  because  of  the  weight  of  their 
accumulated debts and lower saving rates. On the other hand, for SMEs, a large proportion 
are found wanting in terms of both efficiency and profitability. In particular, over the 30% of 
SMEs registered an interest coverage ratio of below 100% last year, which means that even 
their interest payments were not covered by their operating income. 
I think that monetary policy has some role to play in strengthening the economic fabric. As 
the central bank, we have a responsibility not to hit weak sectors such as households and 
SMEs too hard by raising interest rates. On the other end, we must also be on our guard 
against households and SMEs having an incentive to delay strengthening their fabric due to 
excessive dependence on low interest rates environment. 
Structural reform, rather than being seen as just a negative concept involving the laying off of 
workers and the elimination of marginal firms, should be taken as a development concept: by 
shifting 
to  heighten 
firms’ 
competitiveness and bring a renewed expansion of employment and economic growth. 
to  sectors  with  high  productivity 
resources 
it  serves 
Global financial reform: themes and prospects 
As the last of the policy challenges I will address today, I should like to talk about the global 
financial reform presently underway.  
The current discussion worldwide concerning financial sector reform was precipitated by the 
latest global financial crisis. In wake of the present financial crisis, a variety of measures for 
financial reform have been discussed to prevent  a future financial crisis and to bolster the 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  While  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Bank  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  other  setters  of  international  standards  are 
leading this discussion, major central banks around the world have taken an active part in it. 
In  contrast  to  the  past,  the  present  debate  on  financial  reform  is  taking  place  within  a 
framework of close international cooperation under the aegis of the G20, and also the scope 
of financial reform is becoming wider and more embracing. 
We  may  say  that  there  are  four  items  on  the  agenda  for  financial  reform  now  under 
discussion. 
Firstly  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank  Supervision  is  leading  the  discussion  on  the 
strengthening  of  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  regulations.  The  background  to  this  is  the 
criticism that, as the recent financial crisis unfolded, the existing scheme of capital regulation 
under Basel II was simply not up to its function as a tool for crisis prevention. Let me give you 
an  example.  Even  banks  with  satisfactory  capital  adequacy  ratios  under  Basel  II  became 
distressed. The expansion of excessive leveraging served as a factor in ramping up financial 
system instability.  
Secondly, in addition to strengthening the existing micro prudential regulations, this item on 
the  agenda  sets  out  to  construct  a  framework  of  macro  prudential  regulation  to  deal  with 
systemic risks. Spurred on by the financial crisis, the importance of macro prudential policy 
has  come  to  be  emphasized  as  the  missing  pillar  within  the  existing  edifice  of  financial 
stability. To put it another way, macro prudential policy for the management of overall risk 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2010
within the financial system is needed because the micro prudential soundness of individual 
financial institutions alone cannot guarantee the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
Among  macro  prudential  regulations,  the  main  focus  is  directed  to  those  targeting 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). In line with the question of being “too big 
to  fail”  that  arises  in  the  case  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  this  proposal 
needs to be pursued to avoid financial system stability being put at risk by moral hazard. 
Third  on  the  agenda  is  enlarging  the  objects of  regulation  from  financial  institutions  alone. 
This involves strengthening the regulation of over-the-counter derivatives markets and hedge 
funds, whose riskiness was highlighted by the latest financial crisis, and also that of credit 
rating agencies. 
The last item on the agenda is to build a global financial safety net (GFSN), which is part of 
the “Korea Initiative” as it was put forward by Korea. 
The financial crisis that erupted in the United States and other advanced countries inflicted 
serious damage on a number of countries for no-fault of their own as the crisis spread out 
willy-nilly  to  engulf  the  emerging  market  countries.  In  particular  Asian  emerging  market 
countries including Korea whose economic fundamentals were sound could not escape the 
influence of the crisis, even though they had built up foreign exchange reserves as a buffer 
against external shocks. 
To  address  this  problem,  at  a  meeting  of  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors  in  Washington  this  April,  the  question  of  the  construction  of  a  GFSN  was  put 
forward successfully by Korea for inclusion on the official agenda. 
A  GFSN  should  be  a  tightly-woven  multi-layered  network  of  facilities  with  their  respective 
strengths. The GFSN could have three layers: bilateral, regional and global. An example of 
the bilateral layer is the swap lines between the central banks. The second layer is built up of 
regional  financial  safety  nets  such  as  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralisation  (CMIM). 
Lastly,  various  liquidity  provision  facilities  of  the  IMF  make  up  the  global  level  layer  in  the 
GFSN. 
For emerging market countries including Korea, the GFSN will, it is anticipated, contribute to 
warding  off  crises  preemptively  and  to  reining  in  subsequent  post  facto  propagation  by 
underpinning the foreign exchange reserves that constitute a form of national self insurance. 
Among  the  items  mooted  for  inclusion  on  the  discussion  agenda,  strengthening  of  banks’ 
capital  and  liquidity  regulations  and  addressing  systemically  important  financial  institutions 
are expected to be confirmed as final proposals to be put to the G20 Seoul Summit Meeting 
this November. In particular, agreement was reached to place a substantive framework for 
BCBS capital and liquidity reform  on the agenda at the meeting of Group of Central Bank 
Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) on July 26 this year. This issue is now being 
actively pursued with a view to its introduction before the end of year 2012. 
Closing remarks 
IV.  
In  the  wake  of  the  present  financial  crisis,  I  must  admit  to  some  misgivings  as  to  the 
usefulness of what we experienced and learned in the past. 
For  example  if  the  central  bank  should  pursue  price  stability  only,  then  does  it  ensure  the 
stability of the economic system as a whole? Again, does the dispersal of risk by means of 
financial derivatives result in the underestimation of actual risk? Does it, in fact, encourage 
overly risky investment? 
It  is  in  this  context  that,  once  the  crisis  has  been  overcome,  I  believe  the  world  economy 
should pursue a post-crisis economic paradigm rather than returning to the pre-crisis state. 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 5
In tackling the global financial crisis, countries around the world have, in contrast to the past, 
emphasized  the  attainment  of  international  policy  coordination  so  as  to  reduce  market 
uncertainties.  It  had  generally  been  perceived  that  international  policy  coordination  was 
theoretically possible in the textbooks, but almost impossible in the real world. 
However,  at  the  time  of  Lehman’s  collapse  and  the  Greek  fiscal  crisis,  policy  coordination 
efforts among countries around the world were directed to diminishing market uncertainties. 
Due to these efforts, the global financial unrest was eased significantly. 
In this process, which was without past precedent, a new system of international consultation 
for the G20 was borne and Korea has taken an important role in this new system. 
The  Bank  of  Korea,  as  the  central  bank  of  the  G20  chair  country,  will  continue  to  take  a 
leading  part  in  discussions  on  the  reorganization  of  the  international  financial  order  for 
strong, sustainable and balanced growth and for preventing any future repetition of the global 
financial crisis. 
Thank you very much for listening so attentively. 
6 
 BIS Review 108/2010
