Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Labour market experiences – towards more 
efficient labour markets 
Opening speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
high-level  seminar  on  Labour  market  experiences:  towards  more  efficient  labour  markets, 
International Monetary Fund (IMF)–Banco de España, Madrid, 11 May 2010. 
 this 
topic,  namely  academia, 
Let me first thank you all for accepting the invitation to participate in this high-level seminar 
on “labour market experiences: towards more efficient labour markets”. In particular I would 
like  to  thank  Olivier  Blanchard,  chief  economist  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  for 
participating in this event and accepting to share with me these introductory remarks.  
In fact, the idea of organising this seminar was originally from the IMF, which last autumn 
suggested staging this event, mindful as it was of the potential role played by the Spanish 
labour  market  institutions  in  explaining  some  of  the  specific  inefficiencies  of  our  economy. 
The Fund viewed the conference as a way of promoting discussion about possible avenues 
of reform. The Research Department of the Banco de España then took up the IMF’s baton, 
drawing on its long tradition of sound economic research and deep analysis on this topic. 
We are certainly proud to have been able to assemble such an eminent and diverse group of 
professionals on the occasion of this event in Madrid. The range of participants and audience 
at this conference is precisely something I would like to stress, the main goal of the seminar 
being to promote an exchange of views and flow of ideas and thinking among the various 
groups  having  a  say  on 
international  organisations, 
policymakers, social agents and the private sector. Only by covering all the different aspects 
and by sharing the different country experiences on this matter can we expect to make the 
right  diagnosis  of  the  problems  and  facilitate  the  acceptance  and  implementation  of  the 
reforms that might be needed.  
As  you  may  be  aware,  I  myself  have  repeatedly  been  suggesting  the  need  for  a  labour 
market  reform  in  Spain.  But  it  is  not  the  goal  of  this  conference  to  act  as  a  platform  for 
announcing or defending the views of the Banco de España. On the contrary, its spirit is to 
incorporate  different  views  into  the  discussion  and  promote  mutual  learning.  I  should  like 
particularly to stress the importance of grounding and testing our opinions and proposals in 
rigorous analytical and empirical economic research. 
The main idea I would like to convey in these introductory remarks is that if during the crisis 
economic  policies  have  concentrated  –  with  some  justification  –  on  measures  that  are 
intended  to  have  a  short-term  impact,  the  time  has  come  to  shift  the  focus  onto  reforms 
which are designed to have only medium and long-term effects but that, through a change in 
expectations can provide a shot of confidence, a key ingredient for resuming a sustainable 
growth path. 
The  global economy  is  certainly  recovering  from  its  deepest  downturn  since  World  War  II. 
We  have  witnessed  a  period  of  crisis  in  which  economic  policies  have  reacted  in  an 
unprecedented manner, focusing on countering in the short run the highly adverse economic 
and financial situation. Major central banks reacted decisively by providing abundant liquidity 
to  financial  systems  and  substantially  cutting  their  key  interest  rates.  These  standard 
monetary policy measures were later complemented by other, non-conventional measures, 
to avert the threat of a drastic loss of liquidity in the financial system as a whole and support 
the flow of credit to firms and households. Fiscal authorities, in turn, put in place a number of 
measures aimed, first, at supporting financial  systems and, further, at stimulating demand. 
And  there  is  broad  consensus  that  this  policy  reaction  was  warranted  and  has  played  a 
crucial role in halting the risk of collapse and containing the crisis.  
BIS Review 65/2010 
 1
After the foundations for a potential turnaround became discernible, the policy debate turned 
to the appropriate exit strategies from these expansionary policies. In the case of monetary 
policy,  the  central  banks  of  the  main  developed  countries  have  already  announced  –  and 
begun to implement in some cases – plans to withdraw their unconventional liquidity-support 
measures.  In  the  case  of  fiscal  policy  the  challenge  is  successfully  to  apply  fiscal 
consolidation.  That  will  require  a  significant  effort  if  public  finances  are  to  be  set  on  a 
sustainable path. 
However, it is also time to shift our focus from the short to the medium and long run and start 
to address the structural problems of our economies. There are several arguments justifying 
this need for a shift in policy perspective.  
First, the historical evidence suggests that output may remain well below pre-crisis trends in 
the medium run. The associated losses in capital, employment and total factor productivity 
during  the  crisis  could  be  long-lasting,  leaving  an  enduring  imprint  on  productive  capacity. 
And medium-term output dynamics may also be affected. In particular, investment has fallen 
dramatically in the crisis, resulting in a slowdown in the rate of accumulation of productive 
capital. This, when combined with higher rates of capital obsolescence, is lowering potential 
growth in the short to medium run. In addition, these adverse effects could persist in the long 
run if there is a permanent step-up in the cost of capital due to changes in attitudes towards 
risk among investors. These developments may also affect the rate of technological progress 
in the long run if, for example, they lessen the incentive to engage in innovative activities. 
And we cannot forget the risk of the observed increase in unemployment translating into a 
parallel  increase  in  structural  unemployment,  an  issue  I  will  deal  with  later  in  my  speech. 
Therefore, structural reforms appear to be the only available tool to avert the risk of the crisis 
exerting  more  permanent  effects  on  both  the  level  of  output  and  the  growth  rate  of  the 
economy. 
Second,  structural  reforms  cannot  be  seen  in  isolation  from  the  other  measures  that  are 
needed,  in  particular  those  stemming  from  the  exit  strategies,  but  rather  as  a  necessary 
complement to them. As an example, the dramatic increase in fiscal deficits and government 
debt  levels  during  the  crisis,  exacerbating  fiscal  sustainability  concerns  for  a  number  of 
economies,  would  worsen  if  output  losses  were  permanent  and  constrained  government 
revenues  and  expenditures  in  the  future.  By  the  same  token,  growth-enhancing  structural 
reforms may smooth acceptance of the fiscal adjustment or even reduce its magnitude if they 
prove to be effective. 
Past experience shows that structural reforms are often adopted in times of economic crisis 
or prolonged episodes of slow or negative growth. This contrasts with the generalised view 
that it is easier to cope with these reforms, since their costs are generally less painful, and 
distributional effects less visible, when the economy is strong and income is growing rapidly. 
And the reasons for this cyclical pattern of structural reforms seem to be related to the fact 
that crises unmask weaknesses that were hidden by cyclical buoyancy, and these increase, 
at least partly, the social support for change.  
The  labour  market  is  clearly  first  among  the  structural  reforms  that  are  needed.  For  one 
thing,  labour  markets  play  a  key  role  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  in  particular  as  a 
mechanism  for  adjustment  in  the  face  of  adverse  shocks.  And  their  functioning  has 
implications  for  competitiveness  and  productivity,  two  variables  crucial  for  the  long-term 
growth  of  any  economy  and,  in  particular,  for  those  countries  participating  in  a  monetary 
union,  as  is  our  case.  Likewise,  there  is  sufficient  evidence  that  labour  market  institutions 
play a key role as determinants of their sound functioning. In particular, we have evidence 
that  labour  markets  have  been  pivotal  in  the  response  of  the  different  economies  to  the 
current crisis. And they can play a central role in the persistence of the negative effects of the 
financial crisis in the medium and long run. 
During the current recession output and unemployment responses differed markedly across 
the advanced economies. For instance, the peak-to-trough increase in unemployment during 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2010
the crisis was around 7.5 percentage points in Ireland and Spain, while output dropped by 
more  than  8%  in  Ireland  and  only  half  as  much  in  Spain.  In  the  same  vein,  the 
UK unemployment  rate  increased  by  only  2.5%  although  output  fell  close  to  6%  and 
Germany  underwent  a  decline  in  output  of  about  7%,  but  its  unemployment  rate  actually 
decreased.  This  suggests  that  labour  market  mechanisms  for  adjustment  in  the  face  of 
adverse shocks are not working correctly in Spain, as employment is bearing the brunt of the 
adjustment  and  this  entails  a  high  cost,  in  terms  of  long-term  economic  growth  and  social 
well-being. These differences are not only seen in periods of recession, but also in economic 
upturns,  in  the  form  of  diverse  levels  of  unemployment,  and  of  productivity  and  real  wage 
developments.  
And  we  know  that  there  are  major  differences  among  countries  as  regards  labour  market 
institutions, thus suggesting that such different unemployment or productivity outcomes may, 
at least partly, be driven by regulatory differences. This is why it is important to look at the 
experiences  of  other  countries  in  order  to  share  experiences  and  to  try  to  draw  some 
conclusions on the pros and cons of the different institutional settings. 
The medium-term effects of the crisis I mentioned before are also particularly dependent on 
the  functioning  of  the  labour  market.  First,  the  crisis  may  imply  the  need  for  a  substantial 
reallocation of labour across sectors, something that may take time and increase medium-
term frictional unemployment. Labour market institutions may, of course, play a key role in 
galvanising  or  impeding  this  process.  Think,  for  example,  of  a  wage-setting  mechanism 
allowing  for  sectoral  differences  versus  one  that  imposes  uniform  wages  across  sectors. 
Second,  long  unemployment  spells  may  cause  permanent  destruction  in  human  capital, 
giving  rise  to  the  process  of  “hysteresis”  and  leading  to  an  increase  in  the  structural 
unemployment  rate.  The  concept  of  “hysteresis”  being  identified,  among  the  first  authors, 
precisely by Olivier Blanchard in 1986 in a joint paper with Larry Summers. Of course, this 
effect may be larger if rigid labour market institutions complicate the task of finding a new job, 
while  the  literature  also  finds  that  the  level  of  the  tax  wedge  or  the  inadequate  design  of 
unemployment  benefits  are  important  drivers  of  structural  unemployment.  In  addition,  a 
protracted recession may also reduce the potential labour force by discouraging vulnerable 
workers from seeking a job. This effect is again not independent of policies, since there might 
be social and financial incentives to stay away from the labour force, and the development in 
the past of early retirement schemes for older workers subsidised by governments in some 
countries is a good example.  
Overall, looking at the research published, three elements of the labour market institutional 
setting seem particularly worth looking at as possible determinants of the different outcomes 
across countries: first, the legislation on types of employment contracts and unemployment 
protection  schemes;  further,  the  institutional  design  of  collective  bargaining;  and  finally, 
active  labour  market  policies  and  labour  market  intermediation  mechanisms.  These  three 
elements broadly correspond to the current structure of this seminar, and will therefore be 
treated in one way or another. 
Let me conclude with two final points on the link between labour market reform  and other 
policy  measures.  First, 
the 
complementarities with the exit strategies needed are most obvious. If we take the Spanish 
case  as  an  example,  we  can  see  that  unemployment  benefits  amounted  to  around  3%  of 
GDP  in  2009.  And  the  employment  losses  associated  with  this  increase  in  unemployment 
have also had a significant negative impact on public revenues. Thus, a non-negligible part 
of  the  huge  increase  in  the  deficit  in  the  past  two  years  is  directly  or  indirectly  related  to 
labour  market  trends.  Preventing  this  increase  in  unemployment  from  becoming  structural 
would greatly smooth the fiscal consolidation process.  
That leads to me to emphasize a second point: it is important that different reforms should be 
pursued in unison, and in particular that labour market reforms be accompanied by product 
and  services  market  reforms.  In  this  regard,  it  is  vital  to  push  through  structural  reforms 
the  best  case  where 
labour  market  reform 
is  also 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 3
providing  for  the  elimination  of  obstacles  to  effective  competition  and  of  those  that  may 
hamper the reallocation of productive resources. Indeed, only with competitive and flexible 
product and services markets, would labour market reforms translate into higher activity and 
employment rather than higher rents. Also this broad comprehensive reform approach can 
help create the consensus that is needed for reform, as different actors perceive more clearly 
the benefits of a comprehensive reform package, and not only the costs to them of specific 
reforms. Some good examples of the benefits of this comprehensive approach are Denmark 
or the Netherlands, countries that adopted a mix of labour market, public finance and product 
market reforms that complemented and reinforced one another.  
I do not want to take up any more of your time with these opening remarks. Let me simply 
thank you once again for sharing your thoughts with us. Here’s wishing every success for the 
conference. Now Professor Blanchard will complete these introductory remarks. Olivier, the 
floor is yours. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2010
