Caleb M Fundanga: Review of Zambia’s economy  
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Zambia 
Association of Manufacturer’s Annual General Meeting, Lusaka, 16 April 2010.  
 The President of ZAM – Mr Chance Kabaghe 
The Vice Presidents (North and South) – Mr Sebastian Kopulande and Mr Eugen Appel  
The ZAM Executive Committee  
Captains of Industry  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I feel greatly honoured to officiate at this Annual General Meeting for the Zambia Association 
of Manufacturers (ZAM). The Bank of Zambia and the Zambia Association of Manufacturers 
have a long standing relationship which is intertwined in more ways than one. I am sure that 
without making appropriate policies to support key sectors such as manufacturing, we would 
be robbing the country of the development that it deserves. I am reliably informed that ZAM 
has been going through restructuring in the last two years and has achieved a lot in terms of 
the establishment and making itself relevant not only to its members but to the Government 
and other stakeholders. It therefore gives me pleasure to stand before you to discuss issues 
that  are  pertinent  to  manufacturing.  I  am  hopeful  we  will  be  able  to  understand  the 
challenges and identify plausible ways of overcoming them for the sector to forge ahead and 
make a meaningful contribution to the economy.  
Mr President, the performance of the Zambian economy in 2009 was favourable. Although 
projections of GDP growth for 2009 had been revised downwards to 4.3% on account of the 
effects  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  melt-down,  preliminary  data  indicates  that  the 
economy posted a real GDP growth rate of 6.3% compared with the 5.7% recorded in 2008. 
Almost all key sectors of the economy recorded positive growth except for restaurants and 
hotels which saw negative growth due to lower tourist and business travel arrivals during the 
financial crisis.  
Annual overall inflation slowed down, reverting to single digit level of 9.9% in December 2009 
from  the  16.6%  recorded  in  December  2008,  and  was  in  line  with  the  original  end-year 
target1 of no more than 10%. This outturn was attributed to the decline in both annual food 
and non-food inflation.  
In  the  external  sector,  Zambia’s  external  position  showed  remarkable  improvement  as 
reflected in the build-up of gross international reserves to 5.1 months of import cover in 2009 
from 2.1 months of import cover in 2008.  
Zambia’s overall balance of payment position is expected to remain favourable in 2010 due 
to the rebound of copper prices on the international market as well as the expected increase 
in copper production as some mines increase production to full capacity and the resumption 
of production at some mines.  
The rebound in the international price of copper in the second half of 2009 and the return of 
foreign portfolio flows resulted in an appreciation of the exchange rate of the Kwacha by 4% 
at the end of the year.  
However,  fiscal  performance  in  2009  was  weak,  mainly  due  to  the  global  economic  crisis, 
which  reduced  domestic  revenues.  Despite 
the 
programmed domestic financing for the year.  
this,  Government  remained  within 
                                                 
1  December-2009 inflation revised to 12.0% in the Budget Speech for 2010 presented to Parliament on October 
9, 2009. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 1
Distinguished  Members,  the  financial  sector has  remained  resilient despite  the effects  of 
the recent global financial crisis. Currently, the Zambian financial sector is characterized by 
high liquidity levels, reflecting tighter lending standards in the wake of the lessons from the 
global  financial  crisis  leading  to  marked  decline  in  private  sector  lending.  As  a  result,  the 
demand for the relatively risk free Government securities has increased causing a decline in 
yield rates on Government securities. The decline in Government securities yield rates and 
relatively  low  inflation  experienced  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  should  contribute  to  a 
decline in banks lending rates and thus stimulate borrowing by the private sector.  
I  am  aware  that  the  high  interest  rates  in  the  country  pose  a  very  big  challenge  for  our 
manufacturers  to  borrow  for  recapitalisation  and  expansion  of  their  businesses.  Access  to 
finance is essential for the economy to grow and therefore it is necessary that we find ways 
that could reduce the cost of borrowing to allow key sectors to expand.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  to  reiterate  that  the  economic  fundamentals  point  to  a 
reduction  in  lending  rates.  In  a  liberalised  financial  market  environment,  the  central  bank 
contributes  to  the  reduction  in  lending  rates  by  reducing  inflation.  The  Government  also 
contributes by implementing prudent fiscal policy, thus limiting the incidence of crowding out 
of the private sector by the Government. As a result, yield rates on Government securities 
fall.  As  inflation  and  yield  rates  on  Government  securities  decline,  lending  rates  are  also 
expected to decline in the medium to long term as the two provide the relevant opportunity 
cost of lending to the private sector.  
Another factor that commercial banks take into consideration in determining lending rates is 
the default risk arising from the poor credit culture in the economy in general. In resolving the 
problem of poor credit culture, the Central Bank through the Financial Sector Development 
Plan, facilitated the establishment of a credit reference bureau which collects information on 
borrowers to be used by credit providers.  
Furthermore, in order to increase competition in the financial sector the Bank of Zambia has 
registered  a  number  of  commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to  operate  in 
Zambia. In 2009, the number of registered banks increased from 14 to 17.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  developing  a  framework  to  migrate  from  the  use  of 
monetary  aggregates  as  the  anchor  of  inflation  expectations  to  the  use  of  interest  rates. 
Inflation expectations are fundamental to the process of interest rate determination and low 
inflation expectations are entrenched not only by the implementation of appropriate monetary 
and fiscal policies at any given time, but also by past inflation developments. Low inflation 
expectations were becoming entrenched in 2008 following two consecutive years of single 
digit  inflation  in  2006  and  2007.  However,  towards  the  end  of  2008,  the  increase  in  food 
prices and the impact of the global financial crisis caused inflation to increase to a double 
digit  figure  of  16.6%.  In  spite  of  this,  the  prospects  for  low  inflation,  now  look  positive, 
creating an appropriate environment for interest rate reduction.  
Mr President, as you may have noticed from the newspapers in the recent days, a number 
of banks have reduced their lending base rates though not as much as we would like to see. 
We hope that this is just a start, and that banks will continue adjusting their rates downwards 
consistent with developments in other macroeconomic indicators.  
Distinguished  Members,  allow  me  to  comment  on  the  statutory  instrument  regarding  the 
US$5000 over the counter limit on deposits. These regulations are meant to encourage the 
use of the banking system in order to assist in curbing money laundering. Doing away with 
this would deprive the Central Bank of a mechanism for detecting fraudulent activities and 
create a healthy environment for money to be laundered in our financial system.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia recognises the importance of long term finance 
for growth. We are also aware of the important role that the Development Bank of Zambia 
and others institutions that provide long term finance can play in this process. It is for this 
reason that the Bank of Zambia monitors the performance of these institutions to ensure that 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2010
they  are  financially  viable  to  be  able  to  play  this  important  role.  Rather  than  thinking  of 
Government recapitalising these institutions, we should think more in terms of developing the 
capital markets to enable these institutions raise resources for long term financing from the 
private sector.  
On the issue of the foreign exchange market, I wish to emphasise that we have a flexible 
exchange rate regime that has served us well after doing away with exchange controls in the 
early  90s.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  other  international  currencies  has 
enjoyed  relative  stability  since  2003  when  the  interbank  foreign  exchange  market  system 
(IFEM)  was  introduced.  With  this  system,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  intervenes  in  the  market 
mainly  to  smoothen  fluctuations  and  to  build  international  reserves.  The  exchange  rate  is 
expected to be driven by economic fundamentals such as the terms of trade. An attempt to 
fix  the  exchange  rate  would  have  disastrous  effects  especially  when  the  fundamentals 
suggest  that  the  rate  should  depreciate  as  this  would  wipe  out  all  the  reserves  we  have 
struggled  to  build  over  the  recent  past.  In  such  circumstances,  the  Bank  intervenes  to 
moderate short term volatility of the exchange rate but not to change the direction dictated by 
the  fundamentals.  On  the  other  hand,  an  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  provides  an 
opportunity for the Bank of Zambia to build reserves as it smoothens the rate of appreciation.  
Finally, Mr President, I wish to congratulate you on the contribution made by manufacturing 
sector to the GDP growth in 2009. The performance of the sector was favourable, recording 
a  real  growth  of  2.5%  compared  with  1.8%  in  2008.  I  am  confident  that  as  the  economic 
fundamentals  continue  to  improve,  banks  are  expected  to  increase  lending  to  the  private 
sector at reduced rates. We therefore expect the sector’s contribution to growth in 2010 to 
increase. In order to assist the country’s diversification process away from copper, I wish to 
implore  you  to  seek  ways  of  enhancing  productivity  in  your  various  sectors  as  a  means 
improving competiveness of your products for exports.  
Mr. President, one way by which your members can contribute to increased GDP is through 
participation  in  the  Multi-Facility  Economic  Zones  (MFEZs)  for  which  the  Government  has 
approved  establishment  of  three.  You  may  wish  to  note  that  the  construction  of  the 
Chambishi  MFEZ  on  the  Copperbelt  has  reached  an  advanced  stage  while  work  on  the 
Lusaka  South  MFEZ  is  underway.  Several  enterprises  with  significant  investments  are 
already  being  established  at  the  Chambishi  MFEZ.  There  is  also  a  proposal  for  the 
establishment of the Lumwana MFEZ in North-western province. These zones are expected 
to enhance the country’s efforts of promoting value addition to raw materials which will in turn 
boost the manufacturing sector. They are also consistent with the budget themes for 2009 
and  2010  of  “Enhancing  Growth  through  Competitiveness  and  Diversification”.  In 
collaboration with the development partners, Government will provide the necessary support 
institutions, infrastructure and services conducive to efficient and competitive manufacturing. 
I  would  like  to  strongly  encourage  Zambian  firms  particularly  members  of  ZAM  to  take 
advantage of the opportunities created under this initiative.  
Mr President, as I conclude my remarks, I wish you and your members a prosperous 2010.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 3
