Daniel K Tarullo: Equipping financial regulators with the tools necessary 
to monitor systemic risk 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance, 
Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate,  Washington  DC, 
12 February 2010. 
 Chairman Bayh, Ranking Member Corker, and other members of the Committee, thank you 
for inviting me to testify today. I also want to thank all of you for taking the time to explore a 
subject that is easily overlooked in the public debate around financial reform, but that will be 
central to ensuring a more stable financial system in the future.  
The recent financial crisis revealed important gaps in data collection and systematic analysis 
of institutions and markets. Remedies to fill those gaps are critical for monitoring systemic 
risk and for enhanced supervision of systemically important financial institutions, which are in 
turn necessary to decrease the chances of such a serious crisis occurring in the future. The 
Federal Reserve believes that the goals of agency action and legislative change should be 
(1) to ensure that supervisory agencies have access to high-quality and timely data that are 
organized  and  standardized  so  as  to  enhance  their  regulatory  missions,  and  (2)  to  make 
such data available in appropriately usable form to other government agencies and private 
analysts  so  that  they  can  conduct  their  own  analyses  and  raise  their  own  concerns  about 
financial trends and developments.  
In my testimony this morning I will first review the data collection and analysis activities of the 
Federal  Reserve  that  are  relevant  to  systemic  risk  monitoring  and  explain  why  we  believe 
additional data should be collected by regulatory authorities with responsibility for financial 
stability. Next I will set forth some principles that we believe should guide efforts to achieve 
the two goals I have just noted. Finally, I will describe current impediments to these goals 
and suggest some factors for the Congress to consider as it evaluates potential legislation to 
improve the monitoring and containment of systemic risk.  
The Federal Reserve and macro-prudential supervision 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  considerable  experience  in  data  collection  and  reporting  in 
connection  with  its  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  monetary  policy 
deliberations, and lender-of-last-resort responsibilities. The Federal Reserve has made large 
investments in quantitative and qualitative analysis of the U.S. economy, financial markets, 
and  financial  institutions.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  has  recently  initiated  some  new  data 
collection and analytical efforts as it has responded to the crisis and in anticipation of new 
financial and economic developments.  
For supervision of the largest institutions, new quantitative efforts have been started to better 
measure  counterparty  credit  risk  and  interconnectedness,  market  risk  sensitivities,  and 
funding and liquidity. The focus of these efforts is not only on risks to individual firms, but 
also  on  concentrations  of  risk  that  may  arise  through  common  exposures  or  sensitivity  to 
common shocks. For example, additional loan-level data on bank exposures to syndicated 
corporate  loans  are  now  being  collected  in  a  systematic  manner  that  will  allow  for  more 
timely  and  consistent  measurement  of  individual  bank  and  systemic  exposures  to  these 
sectors.  In  addition,  detailed  data  obtained  from  firms’  risk-management  systems  allow 
supervisors to examine concentration risk and interconnectedness. Specifically, supervisors 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 1
are  aggregating,  where  possible,  the  banks’  largest  exposures  to  other  banks,  nonbank 
financial  institutions,  and  corporate  borrowers,  which  could  be  used  to  reveal  large 
exposures  to  individual  borrowers  that  the  banks  have  in  common  or  to  assess  the  credit 
impact of a failure of a large bank on other large banks. Additional time and experience with 
these  data  will  allow  us  to  assess  the  approach’s  ability  to  signal  adverse  events,  and 
together  they  will  be  a  critical  input  to  designing  a  more  robust  and  consistent  reporting 
system.  
Furthermore, we are collecting data on banks’ trading and securitization risk exposures as 
part of an ongoing, internationally coordinated effort to improve regulatory capital standards 
in  these  areas.  Moreover,  analysis  of  liquidity  risk  now  incorporates  more  explicitly  the 
possibility of marketwide shocks to liquidity. This effort also is an example of the importance 
of context and the need to understand the firms’ internal risk models and risk-management 
systems in designing data collection requirements. Data that only capture a set of positions 
would not be sufficient since positions would not incorporate behavioral assumptions about 
firms, based on information about firms’ business models and practices.  
The Federal Reserve’s responsibilities for monetary policy are also relevant for systemic risk 
monitoring.  Systemic  risk  involves  the  potential  for  financial  crises  to  result  in  substantial 
adverse  effects  on  economic  activity.  As  the  nation’s  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve 
assesses  and  forecasts  the  U.S.  and  global  economies  using  a  wide  variety  of  data  and 
analytical  tools,  some  based  on  specific  sectors  and  others  on  large-scale  models.  In  the 
wake of the crisis, research has been expanded to better understand the channels from the 
financial sector to the real economy. For example, building on lessons from the recent crisis, 
the Federal Reserve added questions to the Survey of Professional Forecasters to elicit from 
private-sector  forecasters  their  subjective  probabilities  of  forecasts  of  key  macroeconomic 
variables,  which  provides  to  us,  and  to  the  public,  better  assessments  of  the  likelihood  of 
severe macroeconomic outcomes.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  made  substantial  investments  in  data  and  analytical  staff  for 
financial  market  monitoring.  Each  day,  the  Trading  Desk  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York analyzes and internally distributes reports on market developments, focusing on 
those  markets  where  prices  and  volumes  are  changing  rapidly,  where  news  or  policy  is 
having a major effect, or where there are special policy concerns. Those analyses begin with 
quantitative data, supplemented with information obtained through conversations with market 
participants and reviews of other analyses available in the market. Over the past few years, 
the Desk has worked closely with our research staff in developing new quantitative tools and 
new data sources.  
This  ongoing  monitoring  requires  continual  evaluation  of  new  data  sources  and  analytical 
tools to develop new data as new markets and practices develop. For example, information 
on market volumes and prices can be collected from new trading platforms and brokers, data 
on  instruments  such  as  credit  default  swaps,  or  CDS,  are  provided  by  vendors  or  market 
participants, and fresh insights are gained from new methods of extracting information from 
options data. In some cases, publication of data by the private sector may be mandated by 
legislation  (such  as,  potentially, 
trade 
repositories);  in  other  cases,  the  Federal  Reserve  or  other  government  agencies  or 
regulators require or encourage the gathering and publication of data.  
Our experiences with supervision, monetary policy, and financial market monitoring suggest 
that  market  data  gathering  and  market  oversight  responsibilities  must  continuously  inform 
one another. In addition, efforts to identify stresses in the system are not a matter of running 
a  single  model  or  focusing  on  a  single  risk.  Rather,  it  is  the  assembly  of  many  types  of 
analysis in a systematic fashion. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) for 
large financial institutions – popularly known as the “stress test” when it was conducted early 
last year – illustrates the importance of combining analysis by credit experts, forecasts and 
from  over-the-counter  derivatives 
trade  data 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2010
scenario design by macroeconomists, and hands-on judgments by supervisors in assessing 
the financial condition and potential vulnerabilities of large financial institutions.  
While  considerable  steps  have  been  made  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal 
Reserve  intends  to  do  a  good  deal  more.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  will  continue  to 
strengthen  and  expand  its  supervisory  capabilities  with  a  macro-prudential  approach  by 
drawing on its considerable data reporting, gathering, and analytical capabilities across many 
disciplines. In the areas in which we are collecting data through the supervisory process on 
measures  of  interlinkages  and  common  exposures  among  the  largest  financial  firms  we 
supervise, we are developing new analytical tools that may lead us to change our information 
requests from supervised firms. The Federal Reserve is exploring how to develop analytically 
sophisticated  measures  of  leverage  and  better  measures  of  maturity  transformation  from 
information that we can collect from the supervised firms in the supervisory process and from 
other available data and analysis. We envision developing a robust set of key indicators of 
emerging  risk  concentrations  and  market  stresses  that  would  both  supplement  existing 
supervisory  techniques  and  assist  in  the  early  identification  of  early  trends  that  may  have 
systemic significance and bear further inquiry. This kind of approach will require data that are 
produced  more  frequently  than  the  often  quarterly  data  gathered  in  regulatory  reports, 
although not necessarily real-time or intraday, and reported soon after the fact, without the 
current,  often  long,  reporting  lags.  These  efforts  will  need  to  actively  seek  international 
cooperation as financial firms increasingly operate globally.  
institutions.  However, 
The potential benefits of additional data 
Improved  data  are  essential  for  monitoring  systemic  risk  and  for  implementing  a  macro-
prudential  approach  to  supervision.  The  financial  crisis  highlighted  the  existence  of 
interlinkages  across  financial  institutions  and  between  financial  institutions  and  markets. 
Credit  risks  were  amplified  by  leverage  and  the  high  degree  of  maturity  transformation, 
especially  outside  of  traditional  commercial  banking  institutions.  Moreover,  supervision 
traditionally has tended to focus on the validity of regulated firms’ private risk-management 
systems, which did not easily allow comparisons and aggregation across firms.  
One key feature of the recent crisis was the heavy reliance on short-term sources of funds to 
purchase long-term assets, which led to a poor match between the maturity structure of the 
firms’  assets  and  liabilities.  Such  maturity  transformation  is  inherently  fragile  and  leaves 
institutions  and  entire  markets  susceptible  to  runs.  Indeed,  a  regulatory,  supervisory,  and 
insurance  framework  was  created  during  the  Great  Depression  to  counter  this  problem  at 
depository 
in  recent  years  a  significant  amount  of  maturity 
transformation took place outside the traditional banking system – in the so-called shadow 
banking system – through the use of commercial paper, repurchase agreements, and other 
instruments. Our ability to monitor the size and extent of maturity transformation has been 
hampered by the lack of high-quality and consistent data on these activities. Better data on 
the sources and uses of maturity transformation outside of supervised banking organizations 
would greatly aid macro-prudential supervision and systemic risk regulation.  
Another feature of the recent crisis was the extensive use of leverage, often in conjunction 
with  maturity  transformation.  The  consequences  of  this  combination  were  dramatic.  When 
doubts arose about the quality of the assets on shadow banking system balance sheets, a 
classic  adverse  feedback  loop  ensued  in  which  lenders  were  increasingly  unwilling  to  roll 
over  the  short-term  debt  that  was  used  as  funding.  Liquidity-constrained  institutions  were 
forced  to  sell  assets  at  increasingly  distressed  prices,  which  accelerated  margin  calls  for 
leveraged actors and amplified mark-to-market losses for all holders of the assets, including 
regulated  firms.  Here,  too,  government  regulators  and  supervisors  had  insufficient  data  to 
determine the degree and location of leverage in the financial system.  
More generally, the crisis revealed that regulators, supervisors, and market participants could 
not fully measure the extent to which financial institutions and markets were linked. A critical 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 3
lesson  from  this  crisis  is  that  supervisors  and  investors  need  to  be  able  to  more  quickly 
evaluate the potential effects, for example, of the possible failure of a specific institution on 
other large firms through counterparty credit channels; financial markets; payment, clearing, 
and settlement arrangements; and reliance on common sources of short-term funding.  
A better system of data collection and aggregation would have manifold benefits, particularly 
if  the  data  are  shared  appropriately  among  financial  regulators  and  with  a  systemic  risk 
council if one is created. It would enable regulators and a council to assess and compare 
risks  across  firms,  markets,  and  products.  It  would  improve  risk  management  by  firms 
themselves by requiring standardized and efficient collection of relevant financial information. 
It also would enhance the ability of the government to wind down systemically important firms 
in  a  prompt  and  orderly  fashion  by  providing  policymakers  a  clearer  view  of  the  potential 
impacts of different resolution options on the broader financial system.  
Additional  benefits  would  result  from  making  data  public  to  the  degree  consistent  with 
protecting firm-specific proprietary and supervisory information. Investors and analysts would 
have  a  more  complete  picture  of  individual  firms’  strengths  and  vulnerabilities,  thereby 
contributing  to  better  market  discipline.  Other  government  agencies,  academics,  and 
additional interested parties would be able to conduct their own analyses of financial system 
developments and identify possible emerging stresses and risks in financial markets.  
One  area  in  which  better  information  is  particularly  important  is  the  web  of  connections 
among  financial  institutions  though  channels  such  as  interbank  lending,  securities  lending, 
repurchase  agreements,  and  derivatives  contracts.  Regulators  also  need  more  and  better 
data on the links among institutions through third-party sponsors, liquidity providers, credit-
support providers, and market makers. Knowledge of such network linkages is a necessary 
first  step  to  improve  analysis  of  how  shocks  to  institutions  and  markets  can  propagate 
through the financial system.  
Principles for developing a system of effective data and analytical tools 
Moving from the recognition of the need for more data to an efficient data system is not an 
easy  task.  Data  collection  entails  costs  in  collection,  organization,  and  utilization  for 
government agencies, reporting market participants, and other interested parties. Tradeoffs 
may  need  to  be  faced  where,  for  example,  a  particular  type  of  information  would  be  very 
costly to collect and would have only limited benefits. The Internet and other applications of 
information  technologies  have  made  us  all  too  aware  of  the  potential  for  information 
overload, a circumstance in which relevant information is theoretically available, but the time 
and expense of retrieving it or transforming it into a usable form make it unhelpful in practical 
terms. Collection of more data just for its own sake also can raise systemic costs associated 
with moral hazard if investors view data collection from certain firms, products, and markets 
as  suggesting  implicit  support.  It  is  thus  particularly  worth  emphasizing  the  importance  of 
having data available readily and in a form that is appropriate for the uses to which it will be 
put. With these considerations in mind, we have derived a number of guiding principles for a 
system  of  new  data  and  analytical  tools  for  effectively  supervising  large  institutions  and 
monitoring systemic risk.  
First, the priorities for new data efforts should be determined by the nature of regulatory and 
supervisory  missions.  In  particular,  the  data  need  to  be  sufficiently  timely  and  to  cover  a 
sufficient  range  of  financial  institutions,  markets,  instruments,  and  transactions  to  support 
effective  systemic  risk  monitoring  and  macro-prudential  supervision,  as  well  as  traditional 
safety-and-soundness  regulation.  The  events  of  the  past  few  years  have  painfully 
demonstrated that regulators, financial institutions, and investors lacked ready access to data 
that  would  have  allowed  them  to  fully  assess  the  value  of  complex  securities,  understand 
counterparty risks, or identify concentrations of exposures.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2010
The data needed for systemic risk monitoring and supervision are not necessarily “real-time” 
market  data  –  information  about  trades  and  transactions  that  can  be  reported  at  high 
frequency  when  the  events  occur  –  but  certainly  data  would  need  to  be  “timely”.  What  is 
considered to be “timely” will depend on its purpose, and decisions about how timely the data 
should be should not ignore the costs of collecting and making the data usable. For many 
supervisory needs, real-time data would be impractical to collect and analyze in a meaningful 
way and unnecessary. For example, while supervisors may indeed need to be able to quickly 
value  the  balance  sheets  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  very  frequent 
updates  as  transactions  occur  and  market  prices  change  could  lead  to  more  volatility  in 
values than fundamental conditions would indicate and would be extraordinarily expensive to 
provide and maintain. Certainly, real-time data could be needed for regulators responsible for 
monitoring  market  functioning,  and  daily  data  would  be  helpful  to  measure  end-of-day 
payment settlements and risk positions among the largest firms. But for supervising market 
participants,  real-time  market  data  could  require  enormous  investments  by  regulators, 
institutions,  and  investors  in  order  to  be  usable  while  yielding  little  net  benefit.  As 
policymakers consider redesign of a system of data collection, the goal should be data that 
are timely and best suited to the mission at hand.  
A second principle is that data collection be user-driven. That is, data on particular markets 
and institutions should be collected whenever possible by the regulators who ultimately are 
responsible  for  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  institutions  or  for  the  functioning  of  those 
markets.  Regulators  with  supervisory  responsibilities  for  particular  financial  firms  and 
markets are more likely to understand the relevance of particular forms of standardized data 
for risk management and supervisory oversight. For example, supervisors regularly evaluate 
the ability of individual firms’ own risk measures, such as internal ratings for loans, and of 
liquidity  and  counterparty  credit  risks,  to  signal  potential  problems.  As  a  result,  these 
supervisors have the expertise needed to develop new reporting requirements that would be 
standardized across firms and could be aggregated.  
Third, greater standardization of data than exists today is required. Standardized reporting to 
regulators  in  a  way  that  allows  aggregation  for  effective  monitoring  and  analysis  is 
imperative. In addition, the data collection effort itself should encourage the use of common 
reporting systems across institutions, markets, and investors, which would generally enhance 
efficiency and transparency. Even seemingly simple changes, such as requiring the use of a 
standardized unique identifier for institutions (or instruments), would make surveillance and 
reporting substantially more efficient.  
Fourth,  the  data  collected  and  the  associated  reporting  standards  and  protocols  should 
enable  better  risk  management  by  the  institutions  themselves  and  foster  greater  market 
discipline  by  investors.  Currently,  because  the  underlying  data  in  firms’  risk-management 
systems are incomplete or are maintained in nonstandardized proprietary formats, compiling 
industry-wide data on counterparty credit risk or common exposures is a challenge for both 
firms and supervisors. Further, institutions and investors cannot easily construct fairly basic 
measures  of  common  risks  across  firms  because  they  may  not  disclose  sufficient 
information. In some cases, such as disclosure of characteristics of underlying mortgages in 
a securitized pool, more complete and interoperable data collection systems could enhance 
market  discipline  by  allowing  investors  to  better  assess  the  risks  of  the  securities  without 
compromising proprietary information of the lending institution.  
Fifth, data collection must be nimble, flexible, and statistically coherent. With the rapid pace 
of financial innovation, a risky new asset class can grow from a minor issue to a significant 
threat  faster  than  government  agencies  have  traditionally  been  able  to  revise  reporting 
requirements. For example, collateralized debt obligations based on asset-backed securities 
grew  from  a  specialized  niche  product  to  the  largest  source  of  funding  for  asset-backed 
securities  in  just  a  few  years.  Regulators,  then,  should  have  the  authority  to  collect 
information  promptly  when  needed,  even  when  such  collections  would  require  responses 
from  a  broad  range  of  institutions  or  markets,  some  of  which  may  not  be  regulated  or 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 5
supervised.  In  addition,  processes  for  information  collection  must  meet  high  standards  for 
reliability, coherence, and representativeness.  
Sixth,  data  collection  and  aggregation  by  regulatory  agencies  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
process for making the data available to as great a degree as possible to fellow regulators, 
other  government  entities,  and  the  public.  There  will,  of  course,  be  a  need  to  protect 
proprietary  and  supervisory  information,  particularly  where  specific  firm-based  data  are  at 
issue. But the presumption should be in favor of making information widely available.  
Finally,  any  data  collection  and  analysis  effort  must  be  attentive  to  its  international 
dimensions  and  must  seek  appropriate  participation  from  regulators  in  other  nations, 
especially  those  with  major  financial  centers.  Financial  activities  and  risk  exposures  are 
increasingly  globalized.  A  system  without  a  common  detailed  taxonomy  for  securities  and 
counterparties  and  comparable  requirements  for  reporting  across  countries  would  make 
assembling a meaningful picture of the exposures of global institutions very difficult. Efforts to 
improve  data  collection  are  already  under  way  in  the  European  Union,  by  the  Bank  of 
England  and  the  Financial  Services  Authority,  and  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  has 
expressed support for developing a unified international system of taxonomy and reporting. 
The Financial Stability Board, at the request of the G-20, is initiating an international effort to 
develop  a  common  reporting  template  and  a  process  to  share  information  on  common 
exposures and linkages between systemically important global financial institutions.  
Barriers to effective data collection for analysis 
Legislation  will  be  needed  to  improve  the  ability  of  regulatory  agencies  to  collect  the 
necessary  data  to  support  effective  supervision  and  systemic  risk  monitoring.  Restrictions 
designed  to  balance  the  costs  and  benefits  of  data  collection  and  analysis  have  not  kept 
pace with rapid changes in the financial system. The financial system is likely to continue to 
change rapidly, and both regulators and market participants need the capacity to keep pace.  
Regulators  have  been  hampered  by  a  lack  of  authority  to  collect  and  analyze  information 
from unregulated entities. But the recent financial crisis illustrated that substantial risks from 
leverage  and  maturity  transformation  were  outside  of  regulated  financial  firms.  In  addition, 
much  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  collection  of  data  is  based  on  voluntary  participation.  For 
example,  survey  data  on  lending  terms  and  standards  at  commercial  banks,  lending  by 
finance companies, and transactions in the commercial paper market rely on the cooperation 
of  the  surveyed  entities.  Moreover,  as  we  have  suggested,  the  data  collection  authority  of 
financial regulators over the firms they supervise should be expanded to encompass macro-
prudential considerations. The ability of regulators to collect information should similarly be 
expanded  to  include  the  ability  to  gather  market  data  necessary  for  monitoring  systemic 
risks. Doing so would better enable regulators to monitor and assess potential systemic risks 
arising  directly  from  the  firms  or  markets  under  their  supervision  or  from  the  interaction  of 
these firms or markets with other components of the financial system.  
The  Paperwork  Reduction  Act  also  can  at  times  impede  timely  and  robust  data  collection. 
The  act  generally  requires  that  public  notice  be  provided,  and  approval  of  the  Office  of 
Management and Budget (OMB) be obtained, before any information requirement is applied 
to  more  than  nine  entities.  Over  the  years,  the  act’s  requirement  for  OMB  approval  for 
information  collection  activity  involving  more  than  nine  entities  has  discouraged  agencies 
from undertaking many initiatives and can delay the collection of important information in a 
financial crisis. For example, even a series of informal meetings with more than nine entities 
designed  to  learn  about  emerging  developments  in  markets  may  be  subject  to  the 
requirements  of  the  act.  While  the  principle  of  minimizing  the  burdens  imposed  on  private 
parties  is  an  important  one,  the  Congress  should  consider  amending  the  act  to  allow  the 
financial supervisory agencies to obtain the data necessary for financial stability in a timely 
manner when needed. One proposed action would be to increase the number of entities from 
which  information  can  be  collected  without  triggering  the  act;  another  would  be  to  permit 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2010
special  data  requests  of  the  systemically  important  institutions  could  be  conducted  more 
quickly and flexibly.  
The global nature of capital markets seriously limits the extent to which one country acting 
alone  can  organize  information  on  financial  markets.  Many  large  institutions  have  foreign 
subsidiaries that take financial positions in coordination with the parent. Accordingly, strong 
cooperative  arrangements  among  domestic  and  foreign  authorities,  supported  by  an 
appropriate  statutory  framework,  are  needed  to  enable  appropriate  sharing  of  information 
among relevant authorities. Strong cooperation will not be a panacea, however, as legal and 
other restrictions on data sharing differ from one jurisdiction to the next, and it is unlikely that 
all  such  restrictions  can  be  overcome.  But  cooperation  and  legislation  to  facilitate  sharing 
with foreign authorities appears to be the best available strategy.  
Significant practical barriers also exist that can, at times, limit the quality of data collection 
and analysis available to support effective supervision and regulation, which include barriers 
to  sharing  data  that  arise  from  policies  designed  to  protect  privacy.  For  example,  some 
private-sector databases and bank’s loan books include firms’ tax identification (ID) numbers 
as  identifiers.  Mapping  those  ID  numbers  into  various  characteristics,  such  as  broad 
geographic location or taxable income measures, can be important for effective analysis and 
can be done in a way that does not threaten privacy. However, as a practical matter, a firm 
may have multiple ID numbers or they may have changed, but the Internal Revenue Service 
usually cannot share the information needed to validate a match between the firm and the ID 
number,  even  under  arrangements  designed  to  protect  the  confidentiality  of  the  taxpayer 
information obtained.  
In addition, a significant amount of financial information is collected by private-sector vendors 
seeking to profit from the sale of data. These vendors have invested in expertise and in the 
quality of data in order to meet the needs of their customers, and the Federal Reserve is a 
purchaser  of  some  of  these  data.  However,  vendors  often  place  strong  limitations  on  the 
sharing of such data with anyone, including among federal agencies, and on the manner in 
which such data may be used. They also create systems with private identifiers for securities 
and firms or proprietary formats that do not make it easy to link with other systems. Surely it 
is important that voluntary contributors of data be able to protect their interests, and that the 
investments  and  intellectual  property  of  firms  be  protected.  But  the  net  effect  has  been  a 
noncompatible web of data that is much less useful, and much more expensive, to both the 
private and the public sector, than it might otherwise be.  
Protecting privacy and private-sector property rights clearly are important policy objectives; 
they  are  important  considerations  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  current  data  collection  and 
safeguarding.  Protecting  the  economy  from  systemic  risk  and  promoting  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  financial  institutions  also  are  important  public  objectives.  The  key  issue  is 
whether  the  current  set  of  rules  appropriately  balances  these  interests.  In  light  of  the 
importance  of  the  various  interests  involved,  the  Congress  should  consider  initiating  a 
process  through  which  the  parties  of  interest  may  exchange  views  and  develop  potential 
policy options for the Congress’s consideration.  
Organization structure for data collection and developing analytical tools 
In  addition  to  balancing  the  costs  and  benefits  of  enhanced  data  and  analytical  tools,  the 
Congress  must  determine  the  appropriate  organizational  form  for  data  collection  and 
development  of  analytical  tools.  Budget  costs,  production  efficiencies,  and  the  costs  of 
separating data collection and analysis from decision-making are important considerations. 
Any  proposed  form  of  organization  should  facilitate  effective  data  sharing.  It  also  should 
increase  the  availability  of  data,  including  aggregated  supervisory  data  as  appropriate,  to 
market  participants  and  experts  so  that  they  can  serve  the  useful  role  of  providing 
independent perspectives on risks in the financial system.  
BIS Review 16/2010 
 7
The current arrangement, in which different agencies collect and analyze data, cooperating 
in  cases  where  a  consensus  exists  among  them,  can  certainly  be  improved.  The  most 
desirable  feature  of  collection  and  analysis  under  the  existing  setup  is  that  it  satisfies  the 
principle  that  data  collection  and  analysis  should  serve  the  end  users,  the  regulatory 
agencies.  Each  of  the  existing  agencies  collects  some  data  from  entities  it  regulates  or 
supervises, using its expertise to decide what to collect under its existing authorities and how 
to analyze it. Moreover, the agencies seek to achieve cost efficiencies and to reduce burdens 
on the private sector by cooperating in some data collection. An example is the Consolidated 
Reports of Condition and Income, or Call Reports, collected by the bank regulatory agencies 
from both national and state-chartered commercial banks. The content of the reporting forms 
is  coordinated  by  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council,  which  includes 
representatives of both state and federal bank regulatory agencies.  
A standalone independent data collection and analysis agency might be more nimble than 
the current setup because it would not have to reach consensus with other agencies. It might 
also  have  the  advantage  of  fostering  an  overall  assessment  of  financial  data  needs  for  all 
governmental purposes.  
However,  there  would  also  be  some  substantial  disadvantages  to  running  comprehensive 
financial data collection through a separate independent agency established for this purpose. 
A new agency would entail additional budget costs because the agency would likely need to 
replicate many of the activities of the regulatory agencies in order to determine what data are 
needed. More importantly, because it would not be involved directly in supervision or market 
monitoring,  such  an  agency  would  be  hampered  in  its  ability  to  understand  the  types  of 
information  needed  to  effectively  monitor  systemic  risks  and  conduct  macro-prudential 
supervision. Data collection and analysis are not done in a vacuum; an agency’s duties will 
inevitably reflect the priorities, experience, and interests of the collecting entity. Even regular 
arms-length  consultations  among  agencies  might  not  be  effective,  because  detailed 
appreciation of the regulatory context within which financial activities that generate data and 
risks  is  needed.  The  separation  of  data  collection  and  regulation  could  also  dilute 
accountability if supervisors did not have authority to shape the form and scope of reporting 
requirements by regulated entities in accordance with supervisory needs.  
An alternative organizational approach would be available if the Congress creates a council 
of financial regulators to monitor systemic risks and help coordinate responses to emerging 
threats, such as that contemplated in a number of legislative proposals. Under this approach, 
the supervisory and regulatory agencies would maintain most data collection and analysis, 
with  some  enhanced  authority  along  the  lines  I  have  suggested.  Coordination  would  be 
committed to the council, which could also have authority to establish information collection 
requirements beyond those conducted by its member agencies when necessary to monitor 
systemic risk.  
This  approach  might  achieve  the  benefits  of  the  current  arrangement  and  the  proposed 
independent agency, while avoiding their drawbacks. The council would be directed to seek 
to  resolve  conflicts  among  the  agencies  in  a  way  that  would  preserve  nimbleness,  and  it 
could recommend that an agency develop new types of data, but it would leave the details of 
data  collection  and  analysis  to  the  agencies  that  are  closest  to  the  relevant  firms  and 
markets. And while this council of financial supervisors could act independently if needed to 
collect information necessary to monitor the potential buildup of systemic risk, it would benefit 
directly  from  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  financial  supervisors  and  regulators 
represented on the council. The council could also have access to the data collected by all its 
agencies  and,  depending  on  the  staffing  decisions,  could  either  coordinate  or  conduct 
systemic risk analyses.  
8 
 BIS Review 16/2010
Conclusion 
Let me close by thanking you once again for your attention to the important topic of ensuring 
the availability of the information necessary to monitor emergent systemic risks and establish 
effective macro-prudential supervisory oversight. As you know, these tasks will not be easy. 
However,  without  a  well-designed  infrastructure  of  useful  and  timely  data  and  improved 
analytical tools – which would be expected to continue to evolve over time – these tasks will 
only  be  more  difficult.  We  look  forward  to  continued  discussion  of  these  issues  and  to  a 
development of a shared agenda for improving our information sources. I would be happy to 
answer any questions you might have. 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 9
