Jean-Claude Trichet: Recovery, reform and renewal – Europe’s economic 
challenge 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “The ECB and Its Watchers” XII, Frankfurt am Main, 9 July 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be with you in this 12th edition of the ECB Watchers’ Conference. Today, I 
would  like  to  consider  where  we  are  in  the  financial  crisis  and  the  economic  recovery;  to 
describe the emerging contours of the post-crisis order both in Europe and the wider world; 
and to reflect on what has been achieved by the global policy response to the crisis and what 
remains to be done. 
Where do we currently stand in the crisis? 
1. 
We are now almost three years into the crisis. The development of the crisis was marked by 
a  progressive  collapse  of  confidence:  a  seizing  up  of  markets,  dramatic  financial  events 
impacting  the  global  financial  system,  a  sharp  decline  in  trade  and  a  freefall  in  economic 
activity in the industrial world. We can all feel relief that the collective international efforts to 
avert catastrophe in the winter of 2008/09 have been successful. 
But events over the past few months have made clear that it is still too early to declare the 
crisis over. And, just as they have done throughout the crisis, governments and central banks 
in  Europe  and  around  the  globe  continue  to  respond  to  shifting  economic  and  financial 
circumstances with swift, decisive and effective action.  
In early May 2010, the gravity of the situation was such that public authorities in Europe had 
to step in, with unprecedented actions in terms of quantity and quality, to restore a sense of 
direction and renew confidence. 
Over the past three years much has been achieved; but much remains to be done. Restoring 
confidence and a clear sense of direction does not mean going back to business as usual – 
the crisis has shown that we need to make fundamental changes to the way we manage our 
financial  systems,  our  public  budgets  and  the  interactions  between  the  national  and 
international institutions that oversee the world economy. 
There  is  a  very  strong  unity  of  purpose  among  the  world’s  policy-makers:  to  eliminate  the 
fragilities of the global financial system and the global economy in order to achieve strong, 
balanced and sustainable economic growth. 
We are now at a stage in which we have to finalise new rules and regulations that will help to 
make our economies more resilient in the future. This means that we are now in the time of 
implementation of decisions already taken and in the ultimate preparation of the new rules 
and regulations. It is a very important phase and it requires our full attention.  
I see three areas at the core of efforts that will contribute to shaping the contours of the post-
crisis order: 
First,  institutions.  As  the  Nobel  laureate  Douglass  North  said  20  years  ago,  “Institutions 
exist to reduce uncertainty in the world.” That message remains true today. We need strong 
institutions  with  clear  responsibilities  and  which  offer  a  framework  for  dialogue  and  formal 
agreement.  
This is all the more important at the global level. The scope of international cooperation is 
broadening significantly as our economies become increasingly connected. This is reflected 
in  current  efforts  to  strengthen  the  mandates  and  governance  structures  of  existing 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 1
international institutions. At the same time, existing informal fora are being adjusted and new 
fora developed.  
Examples  are  manifold.  The  G-20  has  emerged  as  the  prime  group  for  global  economic 
governance.  The  Global  Economy  Meeting  of  central  bankers  acts  as  the  main  forum  for 
central bank cooperation. And the Financial Stability Board now represents all systemically 
important emerging market economies, and its mandate has been enhanced to strengthen 
the  international  financial  architecture.  These  are  encouraging  developments  and  we  must 
continue to pursue this path.  
The second area at the core of our efforts concerns reforms of the financial sector. 
This  is  also  an  area  where  further  progress  is  needed.  The  extent  of  the  financial  crisis 
leaves no doubt that tighter regulations and supervision are required to overhaul the financial 
system. We know that the crisis originated mainly in institutions that had moved away from 
traditional banking and which increasingly relied on non-interest sources of income and non-
deposit-funding.  
Reforms should be designed in a way that internalises the social responsibility that financial 
institutions bear for savers and society as a whole. How can this be achieved? The answer 
can  be  summed  up  in  four  dimensions:  more  transparency,  better  regulation,  less  pro-
cyclicality and less short-termism: 
1. 
More transparency is needed to ensure that financial market participants return to 
their prime mission of assessing the quality of investment. Securitisation lessened 
lenders’  incentives  for  prudent  screening  and  steady  monitoring.  Risk  could  be 
bundled, sliced and re-bundled for further sale. Risk management became difficult 
because information was unavailable to investors, buried in financial structures that 
were  not  transparent.  Reform  must  ensure  that  sellers  of  securitised  products 
disclose all information about the underlying loan structures so that both investors 
and rating agencies can correctly price the risks embedded in these products. 
Better – that is, more effective – regulation will ensure that no financial product and 
no financial market participant can escape the eyes of supervising authorities. Many 
financial players with high leverage have gone unchecked by our regulatory system. 
Better regulation will expose the risks inherent in the financial system and make the 
system  more  stable.  Needless  to  say,  highly  leveraged  institutions  should  be  part 
and parcel of this process.  
Less pro-cyclicality of the financial system will reduce market volatility. Regulation 
should  attempt  to  limit  the  risks  that  banks  assume  by  imposing  higher, 
countercyclical capital requirements, thus limiting leverage. Financial institutions will 
be asked to raise the quality and quantity of their capital base to ensure they have 
adequate buffers against future market disruptions.  
Less  short  termism:  the  promise  of  significant  returns  in  the  short  term  was  often 
linked  to  a  misjudgement  of  underlying  risk.  At  the  level  of  individual  institutions, 
compensation  schemes  must  be  adjusted  to  avoid  encouraging  excessive  risk-
taking  on  the  basis  of  relatively  small  amounts  of  capital.  Instead,  the  incentive 
structure should encourage profitability over the medium to longer term. At the same 
time, on Wednesday, the European Parliament approved significant curbs on bank 
bonuses as part of wider efforts to reform the financial sector. EU finance ministers 
are set to endorse the law next Tuesday with the curbs taking effect from the start of 
next  year.  At  the  level  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  we  need  to  improve 
decisively  the  prevention  of  build-up  of  risks,  including  systemic  risk.  Macro-
prudential oversight will help to prevent the building up of imbalances.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
The  third  area  of  work  concerns  fiscal  consolidation.  This  affects  all  industrial 
economies.  Governments  must  send  a  clear  message  to  markets  –  a  message  of 
determination  and  commitment  to  sound  macroeconomic  policies.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2010
bold government actions including large capital injections in support of the financial sector 
helped to cushion the impact of the financial crisis. These measures were courageous and 
important in avoiding an even worse economic downturn.  
But many countries in the industrial world have reached the limits of fiscal expansion. Rising 
debt levels and large fiscal deficits have raised concerns among financial market participants 
about the longer-term sustainability of public finances.  
Just  like  consumers  and  countries,  governments  cannot  live  beyond  their  means  forever. 
Fiscal authorities need to look beyond the current cyclical upturn. There is no alternative to 
that. Let me remind you of an often forgotten remark by John Maynard Keynes from 1937, in 
the  aftermath  of  the  Great  Depression,  when  he  said:  “Just  as  it  was  advisable  for  the 
government to incur debt during the slump, so for the same reasons it is now advisable that 
they should incline to the opposite policy”.1 
Fiscal  consolidation  and  growth  are  not  mutually  exclusive.  I  disagree  with  the  view  that 
reducing  public  expenditures  will  hinder  economic  growth.  On  the  contrary,  prudent  fiscal 
management  provides  the  basis  for  balanced  and  sustainable  growth.  Stability-orientated 
fiscal policies will foster confidence among households, entrepreneurs and investors, which 
will ultimately increase our welfare by creating new jobs. 
How should we address European modalities of today’s global challenges? 
2. 
I  have  outlined  three  key  areas  for  efforts  to  shape  the  contours  of  the  post-crisis  world 
 – reform of the institutions of global governance, reform of the financial system and reform of 
public finances.  
These are global challenges affecting in particular the industrial economies. I would now like 
to explain how Europe specifically is responding to these challenges. An ambitious agenda 
lies  before  the  continent.  It  is  not  only  a  visionary  agenda:  it  has  to  be  pursued  with 
determination right now. We have to demonstrate the same spirit with which the European 
Union was progressively developed over the past half-century: setting objectives, agreeing 
deadlines and mobilising the necessary political will within Parliaments. 
Europe’s governments are committed to pursue fiscal consolidation. Those within the euro 
area have formally declared that they will take “all measures needed to meet fiscal targets 
this year and the years ahead in line with excessive deficit procedures” (Euro area heads of 
state or government declaration of 7 May 2010). Some of them have made precise additional 
commitments to accelerate fiscal consolidation and ensure the sustainability of their public 
finances. 
Fiscal consolidation is being put in place at the same time as we strengthen the resilience of 
the  European  banking  sector.  Publication  of  the  detailed  results  of  a  harmonised  pan-
European  stress  test  is  an  important  step  in  the  right  direction.  These  tests  will  increase 
transparency and enhance investors’ confidence in Europe’s banking sector. They will also 
contribute to restoring the important intermediation role of the interbank market in channelling 
funds within Europe.  
Where next?  
3. 
So  where  do  we  go  from  here?  As  I  have  indicated,  collectively  as  European  and  global 
policy-makers,  we  need  to  ensure  economic  recovery  and  renewed  confidence,  while 
reducing  fiscal  deficits  and  remaking  the  financial  system  into  one  that  supports  the  real 
economy. This needs to be our clear sense of direction.  
                                                 
1  Keynes (1937), “How to avoid a slump”, Article in The Times, 12 January 1937. 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 3
Sound public finances and a stronger and more resilient banking sector will strengthen the 
fundamentals of the European economy. Already prior to the crisis, the euro area was among 
the least volatile economies in the world. Volatility of both inflation and output growth were 
significantly  lower  than  in  other  industrial  countries  and  inflationary  expectations  remained 
remarkably stable.  
  4 
   BIS Review 97/2010
Once enacted and implemented fully, the new measures of fiscal consolidation and financial 
reform  will  help  foster  these  sound  fundamentals  and  turn  the  current  cyclical  upturn  into 
sustained growth.  
The  latest  signs  that  we  are  receiving  from  the  economy  are  encouraging.  Exports  are 
recovering  at  a  steady  pace.  Industrial  production  is  rising  and  employment  is  stabilising. 
This  fundamentally  distinguishes  the  current  situation  from  the  situation  that  we  faced  last 
year.  
But as I have said, the crisis is not yet over. For the ECB’s role as the guardian of the euro, 
this means, first of all, to remain faithful to its primary mandate of delivering price stability in 
the medium term, in line with its definition.  
In the exceptional financial market circumstances that we  are experiencing since 2007 we 
have  decided  some  non-standard  measures  to  help  restoring  a  more  appropriate  market 
functioning and a better transmission of our monetary policy. But our monetary policy stance 
has  always  been  to  deliver  price  stability  and  be  credible  in  this  delivery  with  a  solid 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  The  Securities  Markets  Programme  is  fully  in  line  with 
this  approach.  The  Governing  Council 
is  constantly  and  carefully  monitoring  all 
developments and stands ready to do all that is necessary to maintain price stability.  
 Later today, Jürgen Stark will present the outcome of our enhanced monetary analysis that 
enlarges our toolkit to pursue this aim.  
Beyond our role as guardians of the euro, we also have to deliver on our responsibilities as 
part of European and global economic governance. In this context, I would like to touch on 
the  work  programme  of  the  Van  Rompuy  Task  Force,  which  was  established  by  the 
European  Council  in  March  2010  and  in  which  I  am  participating.  Vítor  Constâncio  and 
Lorenzo Bini Smaghi will go into greater detail, and I will highlight a few elements of the task 
ahead.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 5
First,  national  fiscal  reforms  –  to  which  I  alluded  before  –  need  to  find  an  anchor  and  a 
collective  guarantee  in  renewed  and  strengthened  institutions  for  multilateral  budgetary 
surveillance. National fiscal frameworks will receive a blueprint of good practice, which will 
ensure that commitments to fiscal prudence are internalised first and foremost in the national 
Parliaments. A new code for statistical reporting will support the legislatures in enforcing their 
fiscal  plans.  This  will  be  the  first  line  of  defence  against  the  accumulation  of  fiscal 
imbalances. 
We will have a second line of defence at the level of the EU27, and in particular within the 
euro  area.  Here,  a  more  stringent  implementation  of  rules  and  procedures  to  check  and 
correct excessive deficits and debts will be essential, among other things by increasing the 
automaticity and speed of procedural steps. Ultimately, the process needs also to comprise 
non-pecuniary forms of deterrence. In the most severe cases of persistent non-compliance, a 
limitation or suspension of voting rights should be considered.  
The second area of institutional reform tackles one further aspect of the crisis: the fact that 
seemingly sound public budgets can sometimes reflect an overheated economy. When rising 
asset  prices  boost  revenues  from  financial  and  housing  market  transactions,  the  budget 
looks sound; but when asset prices fall, the budget can go into profound distress.  
So  for  all  its  critical  importance,  reinforced  fiscal  surveillance  is  not  enough.  We  need 
reinforced  macroeconomic  surveillance.  There  is  one  indicator  that  can  reveal  underlying 
weaknesses  as  they  are  forming:  losses  of  competitiveness.  Within  a  monetary  union,  the 
relative competitiveness of economies measures the sustainability of national price and cost 
developments,  the  compatibility  of  national  nominal  trends  with  those  that  are  likely  and 
appropriate for the union as a whole.  
The third area of institutional reform will be a crisis management framework. This framework 
has to respect strict conditionality and minimise moral hazard. It is an issue that has not yet 
been addressed in the task force itself.  
We have a great deal of work to do on these three issues in the months ahead, and I am 
confident that when bold reforms in these areas are undertaken, we will have achieved the 
necessary quantum leap in euro area governance.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 97/2010
