 Ardian Fullani: Economic and political challenges of regional cooperation 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  round  table  entitled 
“The economic and political challenges of regional cooperation”, Tirana, 8 September 2010. 
 Honourable guests, 
Dear participants, 
I feel honoured to open today this roundtable. Before anything else I want to welcome our 
colleagues  from  Oxford  University,  who  have  undertaken  an  important  mission  for  Albania 
and the region: contributing to the growth of research capacity, of sapience, and to building 
of  a  sustained  long-term  response  to  the  growth  challenges  we  come  through  on  our 
common ways, similar but unique, towards the European Union.  
It is a great pleasure for me and for the Bank of Albania to have the opportunity to begin a 
series  of  studies  about  the  domestic  and  regional  economic  policy,  which  will  assist  the 
scientific debate about the economic growth model, also backed by a regional point of view 
at social, economic and political level. 
You may ask yourself, why Bank of Albania is so much interested in the economic growth 
and the economic policies overall, as the main target of the central bank is the stability of 
prices. In the following minutes I shall try to deal with some of the main points of the Bank of 
Albania’s agenda in recent years.  
In  this  respect,  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy,  the  importance  of  internal  and  external 
economic  anchors,  the  building  up  of  research  capacities  for  the  purpose  of  implementing 
our policies, as well as public communication and education. The right addressing of these 
issues  is  indispensable  for  the  monetary  policy  and  its  crucial  role  for  the  economic 
prosperity.  
The  successful  central  banks,  whose  main  target  is  inflation,  are  increasingly  giving  more 
importance to the economic activity, also to the other indicators of real economy. This trend 
is not only based on the fact that inflation is directly impacted by the fluctuation of economic 
activity and unemployment in the short-run, but also on the theory of monetary economics, 
accordingly the central bank should pay attention to the potential economic growth over the 
long run as well.  
In addition, the argument about economic growth is the key target of the economic policies. 
Therefore, the decisions of the central bank in the filed of monetary policy, of supervision and 
of  the  financial  stability,  should  interact  and  be  harmonised  with  this  central  target,  thus 
guaranteeing the macroeconomic and financial stability of the country.  
The  Central  Bank,  in  this  respect,  tries  that  its  policies,  neither  increase  the  short-term 
volatility  of  the  economic  activity,  nor  impede  the  potential  economic  growth  over  the  long 
run.  
The monetary policy of the Bank of Albania policy is similar to the policy implemented by the 
European  Central  Bank;  it  is  based  on  two  pillars:  the  first  is  the  monetary  analysis,  and 
second  the  economic  analysis.  The  second  pillar  has  a  considerable  importance  for 
inflation’s performance, particularly in the long-run.  
Inflation, in general, is a monetary phenomenon and as such, it depends considerably on the 
money supply and the pace this latter increases relative to the Gross Domestic Product. The 
right tie which exists between these variables imposes that the growth of monetary supply in 
the long-term not be faster than the growth of the economic activity, thus the central bank 
and its monetary policy not lead to inflation.  
BIS Review 117/2010 
 1
 Having the maintaining of prices stability and the financial stability as main priorities, 
the Bank of Albania is determined to make all endeavours to encourage and play an active 
role in the convergence process of the country with the European standards.  
One  of  the  steps  to  be  made  immediately  in  this  direction  is  the  compilation  of  a  new 
economic growth model, which should avoid the weakness of the current model built on the 
increase and expansion of lending and consumption high levels rates. In May of this year, 
Bank of Albania held a scientific round table, which was concentrated in the identification of 
the economy sectors which may provide a stable economic growth in the future. The meeting 
concluded that the next model of the economic growth imposes the designing of a national 
strategy  for  the  economic  development.  at  home  The  next  model  should  be  based  on  the 
upsurge of output factors in all sectors of the economy.  
Given a small-sized and open economy, the increase and stability of exports is of outmost 
importance. Therefore, the research work, the reforms and the strategic decisions should be 
adopted  in  line  with  this  target.  In  this  respect,  the  role  of  banking  systems  acquires  a 
particular importance, which should carefully identify the primary and profitable sectors and 
should provide their ongoing financing. Banking credit has been and remains one of the main 
instruments which shall provide the sustainable performance of the economic and financial 
activity at home.  
For this strategy to be successful, it must include as one of its substantial constituents the 
philosophy and priorities of the Western Balkan regional development. This need does not 
only derive upon the competition requirements and the achieving of the economy of scale, 
but also upon our common target for the European integration.  
During  the  recent  years,  I  have  continuously  highlighted  that  the  key  of  the  successful 
integration  in  the  European  Union  is  the  regional  cooperation.  There  are  many  reasons 
backing the conclusion that our models of growth must be seen as complementary and not 
competitive to each-other. It is indispensable that the complete process of structural reforms 
takes  place  quickly  and  in  a  coordinated  way,  which  precedes  the  membership  to  the 
European Union.  
Only in this way the whole region will converge naturally, avoiding episodes of misbalances 
within the bosom of the European family upon the membership.  
This will be a real contribution to the long-term sustainability of the European developments.  
The  whole  region  is  going  through  a  political,  economic  and  social  consolidation  process. 
The policy-makers, the decision-makers, the examiners and almost everybody declare that 
their priority is the adherence to the European Union.  
The question to ask is if: 
 
we  have  either  to  converge  towards  the  European  economic  zone  with  small  and 
fragmented  economic  structures  competing  with  each  other  for  European  markets 
and opportunities,  
or embrace a model:  
 
 
gaining from the economies of scale, 
encouraging  and  exploiting  the  advantages  of  the  current  competitive 
positions; 
that  grows  the  economic  prosperity  of  the  whole  region  and  of  each 
individual economy? 
  Personally I think that the second alternative is the contemporary approach that our region 
should  embrace  with  no  hesitation.  The  success  of  this  process  shall  depend  on  all  our 
attempts and devotion to see which our competitive advantages are and to build up the right 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 economic, financial, legal and physical infrastructure to use and increase these advantages 
to become competitive in the global economy. 
Therefore,  its  is  significantly  important  that  the  study  of  the  growth  model  takes  place  not 
only from a regional point of view, but to be an approach directed deeply towards the future. 
The region in itself provides a lot of important advantages:  
 
 
labour markets amongst the Asiatic countries and of the EU member countries;  
the possibilities of high return profit investments against capital, in real estate and 
infrastructure are huge and attractive for the developed markets;  
the  region  has  a  population  of  higher  than  20  million  inhabitants  sharing  pleasant 
demographic characteristics;  
the regional tourism is potentiality indispensable as a product of different climacteric 
combination to geographical features and various ethnical and cultural traditions.  
     Preliminary  results  of  empiric  researches  in  the  Bank  of  Albania  show  that  the  economic 
possibilities to exploit from regional countries are huge.  
Our analysis of external trade, based on gravity models, reveal that external trade of Albania 
with EU partners stays at optimum levels, while trade with the region is under its potentiality.  
 
 
 
What does hamper our regional trade to achieve the potentiality?  
What do we need to undertake coordinated structural reforms at regional level?  
Are we encountering a weakening in coordinating the policies, information sharing, 
the  establishment  of  institutions,  the  current  legal  infrastructure,  or  lobbing  in 
European structures?  
How  much  possible  is  the  synchronisation  of  the  efforts  for  more  effective  and 
efficient convergence and the integration process?  
Which are the main economic and political fields where we may find larger space for 
the achievement of common regional polices?  
How  has  the  last  global  financial  and  economical  crisis  impacted  the  Albanian 
economy, the regional economy and more priority the convergence process?  
Can we afford it? 
 
All these are very important issues on which I think we should stop and study in deep. They 
are  subject  of  research  work,  whose  findings  shall  light  the  orientation  of  economic  and 
structural reforms. 
Given that, the Bank of Albania has joint the forces with the University of Oxford to carry out 
a  scientific  research  dedicated  to  the  finding  of  the  answers  for  the  above  questions  and 
other similar.  
Answers to these fundamental issues benefit not only Albania and its regional partners, but 
also the EU and its political and economical structures. 
I am confident that the European Commission may exploit the outcomes of these scientific 
researches to build up new anchors, as economic and political incentives in order to increase 
the efficiency of all regional sources.  
These studies shall help us to better see that: What and how should be done to return EU, its 
Pre-adhering  Economic  Programs  and  Fiscal  Economic  Programs  into  stronger  external 
anchors for the national and regional policies.  
However, it is important to realise that international restrictions can not support the long-term 
sustainable prosperity in absence of internal anchors.  
BIS Review 117/2010 
 3
 Obligations that may be imposed from Brussels or from other international organisations are 
indispensable as long the internal anchors are fragile. Therefore, it is necessary the society 
itself  and  international  institutions  support  the  establishment  and  strengthening  of  internal 
anchors.  
Which would be an efficient internal anchor?  
I think that the best internal anchor is a technician who thinks independently, proud of what 
he does, conscious for the results and the consequences of the proper actions.  
In  other  words,  this  implies  the  establishment  of  professional  capacities  as  one  of  the 
cornerstones  of  long-term  successful  polices. The  scientific  education  and  research  in  this 
direction have an important and inalienable role.  
All the issues mentioned so far, as:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The new strategic model of economic growth;  
The effective, efficient and consistent monetary policies with the economic growth; 
The necessity for coordinated structural reforms in the region; 
The challenges to European integration;  
The common political economy of the region in the future;  
The  importance  of  internal  anchors  and  the  study  and  research  of  external  ones, 
and;  
The need for establishing capacities;  
 
are included in the research work’s agenda of the Bank of Albania.  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  that  we  already  have  the  possibility  to  cooperate  with  a  remarkable 
partner as Oxford University, a distinguished institution for the high-level research in political 
and economic sciences.  
For this collaboration, I hope and I believe that many issues I discussed above would have 
an answer, partial or a complete one. The one thing I strongly desire is the involvement of as 
many domestic and regional researchers.  
I would like to guarantee all the interested persons that we are open in this direction. On the 
other  hand,  I  am  confident  that  the  collaboration  we  made  official  today,  shall  provide  a 
sensitive contribution towards the education and establishment of professional capacities at 
national level.  
Please allow me to close my speech returning once more to the argument of professional 
technicians. I still think that  
 
 
 
On the other hand, the building of capacities is not an “individual” issue; it is an institutions’ 
issue; in fact it is a process independent from human resources.  
This because capacities should be based on “processes” and not on people, for long-living. 
The good anchors are not used only from institutions which relate policies with them. They 
are  instruments  in  the  hand  of  public,  as  strong  arguments  to  encourage  government’s 
agencies towards the compilation and implementation of long term sustainable polices.  
I believe that the European values may play decisive role in this direction, by strengthening 
and  supporting  the  establishment  of  respected  institutions,  where  the  criticism  occurs 
We need to educate our technicians;  
Furthermore, we should make them independent financially and politically; 
And afterwards, we should educate them again.  
4 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 independently from the political processes and targets. That is the reason we have chosen 
the collaboration with the Oxford University.  
BIS Review 117/2010 
 5
