Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Financial inclusion in Malaysia 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Financial Inclusion Advisers Programme, Kuala Lumpur, 18 January 2010. 
 Introduction 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Financial Inclusion Advisers (FIA) Programme. While 
the global financial landscape is experiencing fundamental changes and as the discussions 
for  financial  reforms  are  being  deliberated,  of  equal  importance  is  the  due  attention  to  the 
financial  inclusion  agenda.  This  is  vital  to  achieve  balanced  sustainable  economic  growth 
and broad based job creation.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  most  honoured  to  host  and  to  jointly  organise  this  Financial 
Inclusion Advisers Programme with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). This 
programme aims to provide practitioners from the financial services industry with a platform 
to  share  experiences  in  the  development  of  successful  business  models  for  financial 
inclusion. It is also an opportunity for regulators to share knowledge and the experience on 
how  to  improve  the  enabling  environment  for  financial  inclusion  including  the  institutional 
arrangements and ensuring its soundness and stability, thereby ensuring its sustainability. 
Challenges in achieving financial inclusion 
The  global  financial  crisis  and  the  consequent  global  economic  slowdown  in  2009  had 
implications  on  the  financial  inclusion  agenda.  Disruptions  in  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets  has  brought  the  focus  of  attention  on  financial  stability  issues.  In  addition,  the 
collapse  in  demand  following  the  financial  crisis  in  the  major  economies  resulted  in  a 
contraction in world trade. The synchronized recession which ensued has made it even more 
urgent not only to ensure that our financial systems are resilient and able to absorb external 
shocks  but  that  sufficient  attention  and  resources  are  also  available  for  achieving  the 
financial inclusion agenda.  
We are now entering a period of improved international economic and financial conditions. 
However, even in times of economic stability, financial inclusion is a demanding endeavour. 
Firstly, the outreach needs to be comprehensive to include the low income and underserved 
segments, given that that they are generally geographically dispersed and have low levels of 
financial literacy. Secondly, micro finance institutions need to generate sufficient sustainable 
returns to cover the high costs involved in providing such services and the lack of potential 
for economies of scale so as to remain viable. Thirdly, such financial institutions also face the 
challenges of obtaining sustainable and competitive funding.  
Recognising  the  challenges  in  addressing  these  issues  to  achieve  financial  inclusion,  this 
programme, which started more than two years ago, is an outcome of a proposal I made at 
the  Langkawi  Commonwealth  Partnership  for  Technology  Management  (CPTM)  Heads  of 
Government  meeting  in  2007,  which  discussed  the  subject  of  poverty  eradication  through 
human  capital  development.  The  purpose  of  the  Financial  Inclusion  Advisers  programme 
was  to  provide  practitioners  and  regulators  in  the  area  of  financial  inclusion  with  practical 
ideas  via  the  sharing  of  knowledge  and  experiences  on  developing  institutional  structures, 
creating  an  enabling  environment  and  enhancing  financial  literacy.  The  ideas  and 
experiences  shared  could  then  be  contextualised  to  the  prevailing  local  conditions  to 
enhance financial inclusion. This proposal was welcomed by the  members and resulted in 
the first Financial Inclusion Advisers programme conducted in Lusaka, Zambia in April 2009. 
The success of this inaugural programme hosted led us to this second programme hosted 
here in Malaysia with the support of JICA. JICA has long been involved in capacity building in 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
the  African  continent,  and  we  look  forward  to  collaborating  in  the  future  in  this  area  of 
building more inclusive financial systems. 
The Malaysian experience on the financial inclusion agenda  
In Malaysia, the commitment to the financial inclusion agenda is reflected in the new Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  2009  which  incorporates  financial  inclusion  as  an  objective  of  the 
Central  Bank.  With  the  enactment  of  the  Act  in  November  of  2009,  the  Central  Bank  has 
imbedded in the legislation the financial inclusion agenda to ensure that future generation of 
central  bankers  will  continue  to  direct  efforts  to  building  an  inclusive  financial  system. 
Additionally, the Central Bank in the process of formulating a new blue print for the financial 
sector  for  the  next  decade.  This  blueprint  would  also  ensure  the  development  of  a  more 
inclusive financial system. 
The results of the financial inclusion measures thus far have shown positive results. In 2009, 
the  penetration  of  deposit  accounts  and  loan  accounts  in  Malaysia  are  3,300  deposit 
accounts per 1,000 adults and 1,100 loan accounts per 1,000 adults respectively, which is 
amongst  the  highest  in  the  world.  This  high  level  of  financial  inclusion  is  the  result  of 
conscious  policies  to  build  a  progressive  and  inclusive  financial  system.  The  strategies 
implemented have generated six characteristics of the financial system. 
First,  a  business  environment  that  allows  a  diverse  range  of  financial  service  providers  to 
thrive  and  compete.  This  environment  has  led  to  the  creation  of  commercial  financial 
institutions  with  differentiated  strategies  based  on  their  strengths  and  the  delivery  of  a 
broader  range  of  products  and  services  that  meet  the  diverse  needs  of  consumers  and 
businesses. The financial system also includes foreign financial institutions through a series 
of  sequenced  liberalisation  measures  as  well  as  development  financial  institutions, 
cooperatives and Government agencies that complement the domestic commercial banking 
institutions. This approach leverages on the innovation and the implementation capabilities of 
the private sector and the diversity and dynamism of competitive markets. At the same time, 
it has allowed the Government to have a complementary role in serving the segments that 
are under served by the private sector. 
Second, basic banking products and services that are made available at reasonable costs. In 
February 2005, Bank Negara Malaysia issued a guideline that required all banks to provide 
such basic banking services. This guideline provided the definition of the features of basic 
savings and basic current accounts that had to be made available by the commercial banking 
institutions.  This  was  aimed  at  ensuring  that  all  segments  of  society  had  access  to  basic 
deposit and transaction services at a reasonable cost. Further, a framework for microfinance 
was  also  formulated  to  enable  the  provision  of  micro  financing  by  financial  institutions  to 
micro enterprises. Micro financing rates are not capped to allow for it to be commensurate 
with the higher administrative costs involved in providing such services to micro borrowers. 
This is to allow financial institutions to remain viable and to remain sustainable.  
Third, a diverse set of delivery channels have been introduced to ensure widespread access 
to  financial  services.  The  Central  Bank€™s  branching  policy  has  encouraged  financial 
institutions  to  establish  an  extensive  branch  network  across  the  country  to  ensure 
widespread physical access to financial services. In 2008, there were 9 bank branches per 
1,000  square  kilometres  and  24  ATMs  per  1,000  square  kilometres  in  Malaysia.  In 
comparison, the global median is 7 bank branches per 1,000 square kilometres and 15 ATMs 
per 1,000 square kilometres respectively. Financial institutions are also encouraged to apply 
technology  to  further  enhance  the  delivery  of  financial  services.  The  increased  usage  of 
internet and mobile banking has also accelerated the migration to electronic payments and 
has widened the access of financial services in the more remote areas. 
Fourth,  is  the  enhanced  financial  literacy  and  consumer  protection.  With  greater  financial 
literacy  and  awareness,  consumers  will  be  protected  from  being  exploited  by  predatory 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
lending and investment scams, and will be able to make better informed financial decisions. 
To protect the rights of consumers, a Consumer Protection Framework has been developed 
to enhance the disclosure standards of financial products and services, the various dispute 
resolution mechanisms and to institute fair practice amongst the financial service providers. 
The  Central  Bank  has  also  established  a  one-stop  service  centre  for  the  public,  providing 
advisory services on financial matters. Finally, a Credit Counselling and Debt Management 
Agency has been established to provide counselling related to credit and debt management 
for individuals as well as to inculcate responsible money management habits. 
Fifth, the supporting financial infrastructure to facilitate the operations of financial institutions 
is an important feature of the financial system. A hurdle to access to financing is the lack of 
credit  history.  In  this  regard,  credit  bureaus  have  been  established  to  enhance  access  to 
financing  by  encouraging  borrowers  to  build  such  credit  records.  In  Malaysia,  the  Central 
Credit  Reference  Information  System  or  CCRIS,  has  provided  credit  information  via  an 
on-line system since 2001. More recently in July 2008, the SME Credit Bureau commenced 
operations to assist SMEs to build track records thereby providing a balanced profile of the 
credit standing of SMEs thus, enhancing access to financing on more favourable terms.  
Sixth, sufficient well trained finance professionals is vital to the performance of the financial 
sector.  Financial  services  is  an  industry  that  is  dynamic  and  complex,  with  rapid  product 
innovation. To excel and produce results in a more challenging environment, practitioners of 
financial services need to be highly qualified and equipped with technical finance calibre and 
knowledge. Recognising the importance of human capital development  in the industry, the 
Central  Bank  has  established  several  centres  of  excellence  for  learning  for  the  overall 
financial services sector, including covering the  areas of corporate governance, leadership 
development and Islamic finance. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my remarks. This Financial Inclusion Advisers programme is an example of 
the  smart  partnership  advocated  by  the  CPTM  movement.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to thank CPTM and JICA as well as the participating resource institutions – Bank 
Rakyat Indonesia, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) of India, 
Amanah Ikhtiar Malaysia (AIM), SIRIM Berhad, Agro Bank and the Non-Aligned Movement – 
Centre for South-South Technical Cooperation (NAM-CSSTC) for contributing to this event. I 
also  wish  to  welcome  the  members  of  the  microfinance  community  from  Kenya,  Malawi, 
Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia to this programme. 
On  that  note,  I  wish  you  a  very  successful  learning  experience  and  a  pleasant  stay  in 
Malaysia. Thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 3
