Michael C Bonello: Nexus of Basel II and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  Annual 
Seminar of the Institute of Financial Services (IFS), Floriana, 14 May 2010. 
 I would first like to thank the Institute for inviting me to their Annual Seminar, which this year 
focuses  on  the  topical,  but  complex  subject  of  risk,  capital  and  financial  stability  after  the 
financial  crisis.  My  remarks  will  concentrate  on  the  lessons  learned  and  on  some  open 
questions being addressed by international standard setters.  
In the introduction to his recent book “Good value”, Stephen Green, the Group Chairman of 
HSBC Holdings plc, recalls his thoughts one day in April 2008 on the shores of Lake Como 
against the background of an unfolding global financial crisis. He describes that time as one 
of those moments in history when it seems as if the tectonic plates are shifting, striking at the 
roots of what we had taken for granted for a quarter of a century. In his words, “There has 
been  a  massive  breakdown  of  trust:  trust  in  the  financial  system,  trust  in  bankers,  trust  in 
business, trust in business leaders, trust in politicians, trust in the media, trust in the whole 
process  of  globalization  –  all  have  been  severely  damaged,  in  rich  countries  and  in  poor 
countries alike.” 
When I had addressed your annual dinner in November of that same year I expressed the 
view that the crisis would not be over until confidence and trust were restored and the credit 
channel started to function again. We are not there yet. We are still confronted by the far-
reaching consequences of the sub-prime episode, which now include a full-blown sovereign 
debt crisis. 
It is now clear that risks had been building up over a number of years. Some derived from the 
fact  that  corporate  governance,  risk  management,  market  infrastructures  for  derivative 
products as well as supervisory practices and regulatory frameworks had not kept pace with 
the  process  of 
innovation.  Others  have  been  associated  with  an  overly 
accommodative monetary policy at the global level, particularly in the United States. There is 
no doubt, however, that financial regulation and supervision proved inadequate.  
The  initial  trigger  of  the  crisis  was  the  securitisation  of  sub-prime  mortgages  and  the 
associated  originate  and  distribute  model.  These  products  found  ready  buyers,  but  there 
were significant misaligned incentives underlying the model. There were manifest conflicts of 
interest,  originators  and  brokers  had  limited  interest  in  ensuring  continued  monitoring  of 
products  and  credit  ratings  were  inflated,  conveying  a  false  sense  of  security.  A  euphoric 
bubble  thus  developed,  based,  in  Alan  Greenspan’s  words,  on  “the  complexity  of  the 
interactions  of  asset  markets  and  the  economy”,  and  which  concealed  a  massive  global 
under-pricing of risk.  
Market  participants  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the  growing  risks  but  were  unwilling  to 
retrench. You might recall Citibank’s Chuck Prince’s memorable words during the onset of 
the crisis that “as long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still 
dancing”.  Market  players  failed  to  appreciate  the  speed  at  which  demand  could  evaporate 
and  risk  aversion  could  increase.  This  soon  resulted  in  record-high  risk  premia,  seized-up 
interbank markets, acute liquidity and credit shortages, bank failures and a widespread loss 
of confidence. 
Meanwhile  the  high  degree  of  financial  market  integration  had  created  the  premise  for  a 
simultaneous  build-up  of  systemic  risk.  Financial  institutions  did  not  internalise  the  costs 
arising  from  the  too-big-to-fail  and  too-interconnected  syndrome.  Central  banks  had  been 
monitoring  these  trends,  but  it  turned  out  that  the  regulatory  tools  were  not  designed  to 
address systemic risk. Neither was the strength of the feedback loop between the financial 
financial 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 1
system  and  the  economy  fully  anticipated.  Unfortunately,  these  all  proved  to  be  critical 
weaknesses. 
In  response  to  the  unfolding  crisis,  Governments  and  central  banks  adopted  aggressive 
measures,  including  fiscal  stimulus  packages,  bank  recapitalisations  and  the  provision  of 
government guarantees, and injections of huge amounts of liquidity. It was also important to 
critically review the legislative and regulatory framework in order to pre-empt the recurrence 
of, or at least better manage, similar situations. The de Larosière Report, mandated by the 
European Commission (EC) and published in February 2009, set the scenario for reforms at 
a European level. Similar work was undertaken at the global level by the Financial Stability 
Board (FSB) and by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 
This  work  has  clearly  showed  that  the  Basel  II  capital  requirements  did  not  ensure  an 
adequate buffer to sustain an institution on a going concern basis. Confidence in regulatory 
capital waned and the market started to assess bank robustness using other tools. Liquidity 
measurement,  for  example,  had  been  largely  excluded  from  Basel  II.  Some  internal  risk 
models were based on short-term statistical horizons that failed to capture periods of stress. 
The potential of the regime to exert a strong pro-cyclical bias also became manifest.  
In its efforts to address identified weaknesses, the BCBS issued two consultation documents 
in December 2009, one on “Strengthening the resilience of the banking sector” and another 
on  an  “International  framework  for  liquidity  risk  measurement,  standards  and  monitoring”. 
Concurrently, the EC is proposing amendments to the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) 
in order to align it with the recommendations of the BCBS.  
According to these proposals the Tier 1 capital base should be sufficiently strong to ensure 
that  banks  are  in  a  better  position  to  absorb  losses  on  both  a  going  concern  and  a  gone 
concern  basis.  The  revised  capital  framework  will  strengthen  the  capital  requirements  for 
counterparty  credit  risk  exposures  arising  from  derivatives,  repos  and  securities  financing 
activities.  As  the  existing  regulatory  ratios  did  not  prevent  institutions  from  taking  on 
excessive leverage, moreover, the proposed leverage ratio should be a welcome addition to 
the  regulatory  toolkit.  The  ongoing  deleveraging  by  banks  is  indeed  having  an  adverse 
impact  on  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  real  economy,  accentuating  the  pro-cyclical  effect. 
Financial institutions will, therefore, be required to build-up robust capital buffers during good 
times,  which  can  be  drawn  down  during  periods  of  stress.  The  proposals  also  promote  a 
more forward-looking provisioning to provide for future credit losses, and thus lessen the pro-
cyclical  effect  of  the  current  “incurred  loss”  method.  Finally,  the  introduction  of  a  global 
minimum  liquidity  standard  is  foreseen  that  includes  a  stressed  30-day  liquidity  coverage 
ratio requirement as well as a long-term structural liquidity ratio. 
Moves are also underway to correct what is considered to be insufficiently transparent and 
accountable  behaviour  by  credit  rating  agencies.  After  having  underestimated  the  risks  of 
mortgage-related  bonds  in  the  sub-prime  saga,  the  agencies  have  recently  featured  in  a 
perverse dynamic characterised by dysfunctional markets for certain sovereign securities in 
which  prices  do  not  reflect  fundamentals,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  predictable  rating 
downgrades, on the other. EU regulations due to take effect later this year will require credit 
rating agencies seeking to operate in Europe to register and be supervised by the proposed 
European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). 
Concurrently  with  the  significant  work  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system, 
important  changes  are  also  being  considered  to  improve  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework. Of particular significance is the creation, proposed by the de Larosière Report, of 
the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which will exercise macro-prudential supervision 
and monitor systemic concerns, and, at the micro-prudential level, of the European System 
of Financial Supervisors (ESFS). This consists of a network of national financial supervisors 
working  with  the  new  European  Supervisory  Authorities,  namely  the  European  Banking 
Authority, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and the European 
Securities and Markets Authority. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2010
Complementary  proposals  emerged  from  the  G20  London  Summit  of  April  2009,  which 
launched  a  global  plan  for  recovery  and  reform  and  mandated  the  FSB  to  ensure  the 
consistent  implementation  of  the  G20  road-map.  Ongoing  work,  which  is  expected  to  be 
completed in the coming months, includes an impact assessment of the BCBS capital and 
liquidity proposals; the development of tools to reduce the probability and impact of failure of 
systemically  important  institutions;  measures  to  reduce  the  potential  of  OTC  derivatives 
markets to act as channels of contagion; proposals to restart securitisation on a sound basis; 
and  promoting  the  full  national  implementation  of  the  FSB  Principles  and  Standards  on 
compensation. 
At  the  same  time,  improvements  are  also  being  contemplated  to  the  existing  crisis 
management  tools.  This  entails  not  only  ensuring  that  relevant  and  timely  information  is 
available,  through  such  mechanisms  as  the  colleges  of  supervisors  and  the  cross-border 
stability groups, but also a resolution regime that minimises the costs to the taxpayer and the 
development of internationally consistent firm-specific recovery and resolution plans. The EC 
is  working  on  a  framework  for  cross-border  crisis  management  covering  aspects  such  as 
early intervention, the reorganisation of ailing banks and insolvency procedures for winding 
up failed banks. The possibility of introducing a levy on the financial sector for the creation of 
a resolution fund, based on the polluter pays principle, is also being discussed in different 
fora. 
Taken  together,  the  numerous  proposals  currently  on  the  table  represent  the  coming 
together of an ambitious regulatory reform effort designed to strengthen the resilience of the 
financial  sector  that  could  have  far-reaching  implications.  It  has  been  a  commendable 
example  of  broad  consultation  and  deep  reflection,  and  consequently  deserving  support. 
Going forward, the impact assessment study results, due this summer, should provide useful 
guidance as to the optimal timing and sequencing of these reforms. In this regard, care must 
be taken to avoid any risk of undermining the incipient recovery, which is already threatened 
by the current sovereign debt crisis. It will also be important to aim for a level-playing field 
and to minimise the potential for arbitrage through harmonization, particularly in the case of 
the proposed bank levy. 
At the same time, we must ensure that banks, especially the larger ones, go back to their 
core business of extending credit to the real economy and refrain from engaging in the kind 
of risk-taking that gave rise to the recent crisis. Priority must, therefore, be given to the one 
measure  that  is  most  likely  to  influence  the  banks’  ability  to  take  risk,  that  is  the  BCBS 
proposals on bank capital. Capital buffers must henceforth be commensurate with the degree 
of risk undertaken. It is no longer acceptable that profits are privatised and losses socialised. 
In  a  broader  context,  another  important  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  systemic  risks  are 
addressed  without  unduly  constraining  financial  innovation  and  integration.  Finally,  the 
opportunity provided by the current period of reflection should also be used to examine the 
possible  consequences  of  some  of  the  reform  proposals  for  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets  and  for  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  and  by  extension  also  for  the  real 
economy. 
References 
1. 
European Central Bank, The Incentive Structure Of The “Originate And Distribute” 
Model, 2008. 
Francis  Boyer  Lecture  of  The  American  Enterprise  Institute  for  Public  Policy 
Research, “The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society”, 1996. 
http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSN0132320120071003 
The High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the EU, 2009.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 3
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
4 
 Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “Strengthening  the  resilience  of  the 
banking sector”, 2009. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “International framework for liquidity risk 
measurement, standards and monitoring”, 2009. 
Directive  2009/111/EC  of  The  European  Parliament  And  Of  The  Council  of 
16 September 2009 amending Directives 2006/48/EC, 2006/49/EC and 2007/64/EC 
as  regards  banks  affiliated  to  central  institutions,  certain  own  funds  items,  large 
exposures,  supervisory  arrangements,  and  crisis  management.  OJ,  L  302, 
17.11.2009, p. 97. 
European  Commission  Public  Consultation  regarding  further  possible  changes  to 
the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (“CRD”).  The  consultation  was  closed  on 
4 September 2009. 
European  Commission  Public  Consultation  regarding  further  possible  changes  to 
the Capital Requirements Directive (“CRD”) – launched on 26 February 2010. 
European  Commission  Public  Consultation  regarding  an  EU  framework  for  Cross-
Border Crisis Management in the Banking Sector. 
Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, Has the financial sector grown too big? 2010. 
Lucas  Papademos,  European  Central  Bank  Vice  President,  “Financial  Integration, 
development  and  stability:  Lessons  from  the  crisis”,  speech  delivered  on  12  April 
2010  at  the  conference  on  “Financial  integration  and  stability:  the  legacy  of  the 
crisis”. 
Jean-Claude  Trichet,  European  Central  Bank  President,  ceremonial  address  at 
“100 years of Confindustria” delivered at Parma, Italy on 10 April 2010. 
Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  “Monetary  Policy:  Recent  experiences  and  future  directions”,  speech 
delivered at the Bank of Canada, Toronto, 9 April 2010. 
Group of Twenty “Declaration of the Global Plan for Recovery and Reform”, London, 
2 April 2009. 
Group  of  Twenty  “Declaration  on  Strengthening  the  Financial  System”,  London, 
2 April 2009. 
Financial Stability Board “Progress since the St. Andrews meeting in Implementing 
the G20 Recommendations for Strengthening Financial Stability”, 19 April 2010. 
Regulation  (EC)  No  1060/2009  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of 
16 September 2009 on credit rating agencies. OJ, l 302, 17.11.2009, p. 1. 
Proposal  for  a  Regulation  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 
establishing  a  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority.  Brussels,  23.09.2009, 
COM(2009)503 Final. 
BIS Review 67/2010
