Amando M Tetangco, Jr: In praise of BSP’s top performers 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the 2009 BSP Praise Awarding Ceremony, Manila, 27 July 
2010. 
 Magandang  tanghali  sa  inyong  lahat!  Fellow  central  bankers  and  special  guests,  it  is  my 
pleasure  to  be  part  of  today’s  Praise  Awarding  Ceremony  where  we  celebrate  service 
excellence at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! 
In  particular,  we  should  be  proud  of  our  rich  harvest:  this  year  we  have  more  than 
400 awardees  and  nominees.  Indeed,  our  initiatives  to  advance  employee  performance 
continue to pay off. Once again, therefore, let us salute all the nominees and winners under 
our 2009 Praise Awards with a well-deserved round of applause!  
Let  us  also  congratulate  for  a  job  well  done  all  those  who  worked  on  our  2009  selection 
process  under  the  Praise  Committee  headed  by  Deputy  Governor  Andy  Suratos  and 
Assistant Governor Juan de Zuñiga! Palakpakan din po natin sila.  
I understand that the interviews and evaluation of the nominees for all award categories have 
been quite intensive. That is because we truly have many BSPers who deserve recognition 
and awards. Tama ba ako?  
Tama!  
Let us also salute our ISO awardees and reward them with a round of applause!  
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  BSP.  I  have  been  a  BSPer  for  36  years  now.  In  my 
3 ½ decades as a central banker, it has always been clear to me that the singular source of 
strength of the Bank is its people. In fact, long before the lifting of the salary standardization, 
many  BSPers  could  be  depended  upon  to  render  excellent  work.  And  so,  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  let  us  also  salute  central  bankers  past  and  present  who  under  the  salary 
standardization regime rendered praiseworthy service! Palakpakan po natin sila! 
Clearly, the commitment to serve our people and our country in the best way possible is a 
constant and strong motivation goal for all BSPers. 
And now, with better incentives, better employee development programs, and continuously 
improving work conditions we are seeing broader and deeper commitment to always excel. 
I  see  this  all  around  at  the  BSP:  whether  it  is  related  to  the  performance  of  our  core 
functions,  institutional  celebrations,  employee  activities,  social  programs,  and  even  fund-
raising  projects  by  the  BSP  Employees  Association!  Just  to  be  sure,  let  me  ask  you: 
nag-level up na ba tayo? Tama!  
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  at  the  BSP  remain  faithful  to  the  continuous 
improvement process. 
This is as it should be. As a wise person once said, the path to excellence has no finish line. 
The moment we become complacent the moment we stop trying to improve ourselves is the 
moment when we start deteriorating.  
As the institution mandated to provide stability to our economy through appropriate monetary 
and banking policies, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas have the responsibility to make 
sure we render excellent work, at all times.  
This  means  we  have  to  be  prepared  to  work  well  in  all  types  of  operating  environment  in 
good times and in bad. We have to retool and reinvent the way we do things as we work in a 
constantly  changing  and  challenging  surroundings.  In  this  connection,  let  us  acknowledge 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 1
the members of the Monetary Board. They have been supportive of our continuing efforts to 
enhance  employee  performance  through  various  incentives  and  employee  development 
programs. Palakpakan po natin sila. 
This  is  the  rationale  that  underpins  our  awards  theme:  “Embracing  Change,  Empowering 
People.”  
And so ladies and gentlemen, let us once again commit to work together to provide excellent 
service to our country and our people. Let this be our unifying goal!  
BSPers, maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2010
