Njuguna Ndung’u: Increasing access to credit 
Keynote address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
official launch of the first licensed Credit Reference Bureau – CRB Africa Limited, Nairobi, 
4 March 2010. 
 Chairman, CRB Africa – Mr. Michael Karanja;  
Chief Executive Officer, CRB Africa – Mr. Wachira Ndege; 
Board Members, CRB Africa, here present; 
Chair, KBA – Mr. Martin Oduor-Otieno; 
Executive Director, KBA – Mr. John Wanyela;  
Chair, Vision 2030 Delivery Board – Dr. James Mwangi;  
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  pleased  to  join  CRB  Africa  and  the  banking  fraternity  in  the  launch  of  the  first  ever 
licensed Credit Reference Bureau in Kenya. The launch marks a new dawn in the Kenyan 
banking  sector.  It  is  the  first  and  most  important  step  towards  building  information  capital. 
The second step will be for the banks and the public to share this information; and the third 
step will be to use the information to develop the market and to make appropriate decisions. 
I  would  like  to  commend  the  Board  and  Management  of  CRB  Africa  for  their  enterprising 
efforts  culminating  in  their  being  licensed  as  the  pioneering  Credit  Reference  Bureau  in 
Kenya. This is a landmark achievement worthy of congratulations from each one of us. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The main objective is to increase access to credit. We know the 
benefits of credit access and cost effectiveness of that credit to development at the firm level 
and  at  the  household  level.  Allow  me  to  focus  briefly  on  the  benefits  which  CBK  sees  as 
accruing from the adoption of credit information sharing in Kenya. 
First, credit information sharing will facilitate the development of information capital. The risk 
premium  associated  with  information  asymmetry  will  henceforth  be  eroded.  This  will  allow 
cost  of  credit  to  decline  substantially.  Second,  information  capital  will  change  the  current 
collateral  technology.  Credit  by  the  banking  sector  in  Kenya  has  to  a  large  extent  been 
underwritten by physical collateral such as land and buildings and costs of evaluating that 
collateral – with inappropriate definition of property rights. Borrowers without access to such 
collateral have been constrained from accessing credit. Credit information sharing will thus 
enable  borrowers  to  build  a track  record  (reputational capital)  that  they  can  use  to  access 
credit.  This  will  especially  be  pertinent  to  those  borrowers  in  the  informal  and  Small  and 
Medium  Enterprises  (SMEs)  who  have  a  track  record  and  good  performance  to  use  their 
reputational capital to access credit. The SME sector is very important to the development of 
this country as envisaged in Vision 2030. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The third benefit is to enhance information symmetry and support 
financial development. The existing state of information asymmetry between borrowers and 
banks  is  a  constraint  to  innovation  and  financial  sector  development.  Two  important 
outcomes in information asymmetry are the moral hazard problems from the borrowers and 
adverse  selection  from  the  banks.  These  two  problems  punish  the  economy  with  low 
provision of credit. Information asymmetry has also led to severe adverse selection among 
banks themselves.  
Fourth, in a segmented market like ours, some segments remain untapped because banks 
do not have adequate information to price suitable products. In part this has also contributed 
to the high cost of credit. Borrowers have had to bear a “risk premium” because of this lack of 
information.  It  is  therefore  the  Central  Bank’s  expectation  that  savings  arising  from  the 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 1
increased credit information shall translate to lower cost of credit. In turn, more Kenyans will 
be able to access credit from banks.  
As you all know, the Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC’s) efforts since September 2009 to 
signal  to  the  market  the  need  to  expand  credit  to  the  private  sector  at  affordable  interest 
rates has not yielded the desired results. Banks have continuously cited structural rigidities 
as impeding their wish to lower interest rates. With the launch of credit information sharing, 
we believe it signals the seriousness with which their concerns are being addressed. Banks 
should  henceforth  pass  the  accruing  benefits  to  the  Kenyan  public  through  appropriate 
reductions in the cost of credit.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  current  level  of  interest  rates  is  a  combination  of  costs  (like 
information search costs); risk premium most of it unrealized goes to profits; our legal system 
with delays and lack of clear enforcement of contracts; and of course banks’ profit margin. 
High interest rates increase the level of default risks. With good credit track records, the risk 
premiums  and  search  costs  imposed  on  customers  will  ideally  shrink.  In  this  regard,  we 
expect that credit information sharing will be an incentive for good credit behaviour that will 
attract competitive pricing of credit facilities. The message to Kenyans is that now more than 
ever before, there will certainly be benefits accruing from adhering to the contractual terms of 
loans. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In summary, credit information sharing will increase vibrancy in the 
market  for  borrowers  and  lenders.  Borrowers  will  be  able  to  access  enhanced  facilities  at 
competitive  prices,  as  they  grow  their  credit  histories  and  track  records.  Conversely  credit 
providers will be able to develop new and competitive products that will tap into previously 
unserved and underserved market niches with the power of available information. This can 
only  impact  positively  on  the  banking  sector  and  the  Kenyan  economy  as  a  whole.  The 
vibrancy of the credit market implies availability of resources for the productive sectors of the 
economy to exploit the otherwise moribund opportunities. 
But  we  should  also  not  forget  it  is  the  end  of  the  road  for  serial  defaulters  who  took 
advantage  of  information  search  costs  and  information  asymmetry  to  defraud  banks  and 
individuals – including bouncing cheques for lack of funds. 
Having said all that – Ladies and Gentlemen: Let me now take this opportunity to thank our 
development  partners  and  donors,  in  particular,  the  Financial  and  Legal  Sector  Technical 
Assistance  Project  (FLSTAP),  Financial  Sector  Deepening  (FSD)  Kenya  and 
the 
International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC),  for  their  unwavering  support  over  the  more  than 
4 years  we  have  committed  our  efforts  to  developing  an  appropriate  credit  reporting 
mechanism for Kenya. I would also wish to recognise the efforts put forward by the market 
players  led  by  KBA  who  unreservedly  partnered  with  CBK  in  developing  the  regulatory 
framework and in hosting the Kenya Credit Information Sharing Initiative (KCISI) which has 
put in place the modalities of operationalising the initiative. 
I urge all banks to support the ongoing pilot run by KCISI aimed at ensuring that all banks are 
fully  prepared  to  as  seamlessly  as  possible  participate  in  the  sharing  of  their  credit 
information. The ability of all banks to participate in the initiative is the only way they will reap 
maximum benefits. The project manager and his team at the KCISI have assured me that 
they are ready and available to assist all banks to ensure compliance.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  role  of  easily  accessible  and  affordable  credit  in  economic 
development  need  not  be  overemphasized.  However,  most  banks  finance  their  credit  with 
short term deposits which constrains their credit structures to mainly short term. This is even 
more  punishing  because  the  overdraft  facilities  for  working  capital  are  also  short-term  and 
very costly. We thought with a vibrant bond market, this traditional mismatch would go away! 
In an effort to address the mismatch, a Technical Committee has been formed by the CBK to 
look  at  proposals  for  Development  Banking  Products  or  development  loans  with  longer 
tenors  than  the  current  term  loans  in  commercial  banks.  Supply  of  long  term  funds  will 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2010
in  Kenya.  Recommendations 
support  this  line  of  development.  The  key  target  markets  for  the  Development  Banking 
Products are the SMEs with huge growth potential.  
To further address the structural rigidities in pricing of credit, CBK will later in March 2010 
launch a study report on collateral system and associated costs in Kenya. The study, jointly 
commissioned by KBA, CBK and FSD Kenya, is aimed at establishing the current status on 
creation,  perfection  and  enforcement  of  collateral 
to 
overcoming any existing obstacles are expected to be detailed in the study report.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  As  I  draw  to  a  close,  I  would  like  to  assure  you  that  the  CBK  in 
collaboration  with  the  Government  and  the  market  players  will  enhance  its  efforts  in 
addressing other structural rigidities that contribute to market inefficiencies – for this reason, 
we would also like to hear from the market as well – to take stock of developments as well as 
other emerging constraints. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  CBK  believes  that  the  banking  sector  credit  information  sharing 
initiative  should  serve  as  a  model  for  other  credit  and  utilities  providers.  CBK  will  engage 
other players to ensure that we move with speed to rope in other financial and non financial 
credit providers. To this end the Microfinance Act was amended vide the Finance Act, 2009 
to  permit  credit  information  sharing.  Inclusion  of  all  credit  providers  and  utility  service 
providers  will  allow  the  full  benefits  of  credit  information  sharing  to  permeate  through  the 
whole economy. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  It  now  remains  for  me  to  wish  CRB  Africa  all  the  best  as  they 
commence their operations. We do believe that the licensing of CRB Africa and other CRBs 
in future will go a long way in positively altering the Kenyan banking sector landscape. We 
want to build strong institutions in the financial sector and information capital is one of the 
pillars of a strong institution. As I have emphasized, strong institutions define the appropriate 
incentives (punishments) that encourage prudent behavior.  
With these few remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and pleasure to declare 
CRB Africa officially launched.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 3
