Stanley Fischer: Challenges confronting the Bank of Israel and  
the economy 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  President’s 
residence on the occasion of his appointment for a second term as Governor of the Bank of 
Israel, Jerusalem, 2 May 2010. 
 Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, Madam President of the Supreme Court, the Minister of 
Finance, members of the Government, members of the Knesset, Honorable Ambassadors, 
former  Governors  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  leaders  of  Israel’s  banking  and  business  sectors, 
members of the management and staff of the Bank of Israel – my colleagues and friends, 
representatives of the media, members of our family, friends and honored guests: 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Prime  Minister,  the  Minister  of  Finance,  and  the  government  for 
nominating me for a second term as Governor of the Bank of Israel, and thank the President 
for agreeing to the nomination, and for his warm words. I am grateful to the government and 
especially the Prime Minister for the trust they have placed in me. 
It continues to be an honor and a privilege for me to lead the Bank of Israel, and to represent 
our country at home and abroad. 
I  would  like  to  express  thanks  to  many  others  who  have  played  an  essential  role  in  the 
operation  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  over  the  past  five  years:  to  the  dedicated  and  highly 
professional management and staff of the Bank of Israel, without whom the Israeli economy 
would  not  have  come  through  the  global  economic  crisis  as  well  as  it  has,  and  whose 
capacities and outstanding professionalism are recognized world wide; to the many citizens 
of Israel who have expressed their support in different and often touching ways; to friends 
and family who have made living in Israel a pleasure for Rhoda and me; and above all to 
Rhoda, who has shared in the ups and downs of each day’s events in the Bank of Israel and 
in  the  country,  and  whose  love  and  support  have  sustained  me  in  this  period,  as  in  the 
previous forty years. 
Five years and one day ago, standing in this same place, as a new immigrant, I said that the 
history  of  Israel’s  economy  is  fundamentally  a  success  story.  After  the  ceremony  several 
friends politely told me that I didn’t understand the real situation. In some respects they were 
right. But not about the strength of our economy. Between the middle of 2003 and the middle 
of  2008,  we  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  over  5  percent.  Then  we  were  struck  by  the  worst 
global  crisis  in  80  years,  and  as  everyone  knows,  we  came  through  it  relatively  well.  The 
most recent data confirm the strength of the recovery taking place in our economy. 
This success is based on two factors: a sound economic policy framework; and a vibrant and 
innovative private sector. The economic framework combines the basic approach of integration 
into  the  world  economy  –  in  light  of  the  fact  that  a  small  open  economy  like  ours  has  no 
chance of succeeding on its own – with an understanding of the need to maintain a sound 
macroeconomic  framework,  through  fiscal  discipline  and  a  monetary  policy  dedicated 
primarily  to  maintaining  price  stability  and  thus  the  purchasing  power  of  the  shekel.  With 
regard  to  fiscal  discipline,  I  want  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  to  his 
predecessors, as well as to the professional staff of the Treasury, who can be relied on to 
fight  for  sound  budgets,  and  whose  efforts  have  been  essential  to  the  successful 
development of the economy. 
The private sector has been the engine of growth of the economy for the last quarter century, 
and  the  success  of  Israeli  innovation  and  enterprise  is  the  envy  of  many  countries.  The 
private sector does not need much from the government in order to succeed – primarily it 
needs a clear and predictable market-oriented economic framework in which to operate, and 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 1
a  set  of  incentives  that  encourages  the  entrepreneurs  and  the  professionals  who  are 
essential to our success to work and invest in Israel. 
There has been a great deal of attention in recent weeks to the very high incomes that are 
earned in parts of the private sector. Some incomes in some sectors, including the banking 
industry, do seem to be too high, but we need to be very careful in dealing with the problem, 
for we can all too easily exaggerate and cause severe damage to the Israeli economy. The 
Supervisor of Banks has sent instructions to the banks on salaries, and is closely monitoring 
their  implementation  and  the  need  for  additional  measures  to  deal  with  the  pay  of  senior 
management. With regard to other public companies, we must find a way of strengthening 
the supervision of managers’ salaries by Boards of Directors. 
Our economic success is the basis for our possible acceptance later this year into the OECD, 
the  organization  of  the  most  advanced  economic  countries.  These  achievements  are 
essential not only to the economic wellbeing of Israelis, but also to the existence of the state 
of Israel, the Jewish state, our hope of two thousand years. Over the longer term, we need to 
be economically successful no less than we need to be able to defend ourselves militarily. 
These  two  factors  –  the  economic  and  the  military  –  are  intertwined,  and  their 
interconnections are very complex, too complex to begin to discuss today. 
To describe our success to date is not to say that all is well in the economy and the society. 
For much is not well, and we face many challenges. I start with the challenges confronting 
the  Bank  of  Israel,  the  first  of  which  is  the  implementation  of  the  new  Bank  of  Israel  law, 
passed  recently  by  the  Knesset.  The  law  is  designed  to  protect  the  independence  of  the 
Bank  of  Israel,  within  a  framework  that  will  revolutionize  decision-making  processes  in  the 
Bank,  and  further  increase  our  transparency  and  accountability  to  the  Knesset,  the 
government,  and  the  public.  In  the  last  five  years  we  have  gone  a  long  way  in  increasing 
transparency,  including  by  publishing  the  minutes  of  the  meetings  in  which  interest  rate 
decisions  are  made.  In  addition,  the  law  clearly  defines  the  policy  goals  and  the 
responsibilities  of  the  Bank,  and  clarifies  working  relationships  between  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and the Bank of Israel in areas where we overlap. 
The new law sharply constrains the power of the Governor of the Bank. Today, and for the 
last  fifty  six  years,  the  Governor  alone  has  made  both  the  policy  and  the  managerial 
decisions  in  the  Bank.  Under  the  new  law,  monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  made  by  the 
Monetary Policy Committee, which has six members, three of them external to the Bank, with 
the  Governor  as  chairman  and  with  a  double  vote  in  cases  of  a  tie.  Major  administrative 
decisions will need the approval of the Board of Directors, which has seven members, five of 
them external, with one of the external members being appointed as Chairman. 
Why  did  we  propose  these  new  arrangements?  Because  experience  and  research  have 
shown that on average committees make better decisions than a single individual. For that to 
happen,  the  members  of  both  committees  have  to  be  chosen  for  their  professional 
capabilities, and not on a political basis. The appointments process specified in the new law 
for  choosing  the  members  of  the  two  bodies  is  designed  to  prevent  political  factors  from 
influencing the choice of their members. Further, I neither expect nor want either internal or 
external members to vote as a bloc – insiders versus outsiders. Rather each member should 
exercise her or his independent professional judgment on the issues at hand. 
The most important non-policy task confronting the Bank of Israel in the next few years is to 
make  the  new  system  of  governance  of  the  Bank  work  effectively  for  the  good  of  the 
economy and the citizens of Israel. That will not be easy, but we know that what we do now 
will  establish  the  decision-making  processes  of  the  Bank  until  the  next  law  of  the  Bank  of 
Israel is passed, somewhere around 2066. So we had better get it right. 
Implementing  the  new  law  requires  the  Bank  of  Israel  to  achieve,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
goals  of  monetary  policy  as  set  out  in  the  law:  first,  to  maintain  price  stability;  second,  to 
support  the  other  goals  of  government  economic  policy  –  particularly  growth,  employment 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2010
and the narrowing of social gaps, so long as this does not conflict with price stability over the 
course of time; and third, to support the stability of the financial system. 
In implementing the new law, we will have to draw the lessons of the global crisis, the Great 
Recession.  Among  the  most  important  lessons  are  those  being  drawn  about  the  structure 
and  regulation  of  the  financial  system.  The  Supervisor  of  Banks  is  carefully  following  the 
regulatory reforms in the area of corporate governance and risk management suggested by 
the  newly  established  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee,  and  where 
relevant, is adapting them and requiring their implementation in the Israeli banking system. In 
addition, we are studying the new topic of macroprudential surveillance, and considering its 
implementation. 
We will also have to take another look at the overall system of financial sector supervision in 
Israel. Our financial system emerged from the crisis in relatively good shape, but the crisis 
nevertheless revealed several weaknesses that need to be corrected. 
The  second  set  of  challenges  I  want  to  discuss  are  those  confronting  the  economy  and 
society outside the direct policy responsibility of the Bank of Israel, those that relate to the 
role of the Governor as the economic adviser to the government. Many of these issues are 
analyzed in the Bank of Israel’s Annual Report for 2009, which was published recently. 
Broadly speaking, the two wider economic challenges that confront us are to maintain and 
even  accelerate  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy,  and  to  reduce  poverty  and  social  gaps. 
These two goals are closely related, for the most important way of reducing absolute poverty 
is  through  sustained  economic  growth,  even  though  in  the  short  term  there  may  be  a 
trade-off between growth and the reduction of social gaps. 
The  government  has  already  announced  ambitious  plans  for  infrastructure  –  especially 
transportation  –  projects  to  be  undertaken  starting  in  the  near  future.  These  and  other 
projects in the water, electricity, and ports areas are essential for growth to be sustained in 
the long term. 
The educational system and our educational achievements are critical to the achievement of 
sustained  growth,  and  trends  in  this  area  are  extremely  worrying.  We  do  not  have  one 
educational  system,  we  have  many.  There  is  no  core  curriculum  that  ensures  that  every 
student  learns  the  basic  skills  that  are  needed  to  compete  in  the  ever-changing  global 
economy.  Our  results 
International  Student 
Assessment) tests are woeful, and we are falling in the international rankings. 
We cannot build the nation and our future if we do not educate our people – all our people – 
to equip them to live in the modern world. At some point, the sooner the better, we have to 
confront the separate educational systems and their political context, and stop and reverse 
the deterioration of our educational standards. 
We are all concerned about the growing social gaps in our society. Naturally we think of the 
gaps between the very top salaries and those at the bottom of the salary scale. Those trends 
too are worrying, and they are not easy to deal with, though improving the educational system 
will  surely  contribute  to  creating  a  more  just  society.  But  in  thinking  about  social  gaps,  we 
need to recognize that the biggest gaps are between different groups in our society – among 
the Arab sector and the haredi sector in which poverty is concentrated – and the remainder of 
our  society.  So  we  need  also  to  focus  our  attention  on  increasing  the  educational 
achievements and the labor force participation of those groups – and this is an even more 
difficult, but no less essential, task. 
The  notable  successes  of  the  Israeli  economy  and  Israeli  science,  signified  by  the  Nobel 
Prizes  awarded  to  Israeli  scientists  this  decade,  are  based  on  the  educational  system  of 
Israel of thirty to forty years ago. We need to restore the quality of both the school system 
and the system of higher education if we are to maintain the qualitative edge on the basis of 
which the Israeli economy has thrived and on which Israel’s future depends. 
the  OECD’s  PISA  (Programme 
for 
in 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 3
In  this  context  we  have  recently  seen  the  first  signs  of  positive  reform  in  the  educational 
system, and we hope this will continue and yield the desired results. 
Improving the educational system will require both reforms and financing. The government 
has recently passed a new fiscal rule to determine the growth rate of government spending, 
accompanied  by  a  declining  path  for  the  budget  deficit  and  the  government  debt  to  GDP 
ratio.  The  government  has  also  announced  its  intention  of  continuing  to  cut  marginal  tax 
rates,  with  the  goal  of encouraging  growth.  Provided  the economy  can  return  to growth  at 
about 5 percent – which looks somewhat ambitious at present – both the deficit and the tax 
rate cutting targets can be met. But if growth is slower, the government will have to decide 
whether to cut the growth rate of government spending, or rather forgo some of the planned 
tax rate decreases, or to do some of both. This will be a difficult decision. In making it the 
government will have to weigh the benefits of maintaining government programs in a variety 
of areas, including education, against the benefits of cutting taxes. 
In  international  comparisons,  Israel  is  typically  somewhere  around  25–30  in  the  country 
rankings as a place in which to do business. We seem to be unusual in the variance of the 
rankings of the individual components of the indices: we do well on the ease of financing and 
the openness of the economy; we do not well on the complexities of the tax system; and we 
do very badly on bureaucracy. I fear also that in years to come we will do much worse on the 
corruption index. If we are to sustain growth, we need to reduce bureaucracy and fight the 
corruption that so often accompanies it. These too are not easy tasks, but they are essential 
for the wellbeing of Israeli society. 
Israel’s economic record is all the more remarkable for having been achieved despite our not 
being  at  peace  with  all  our  neighbors.  Even  in  the  last  five  years,  we  have  twice  fought 
limited wars against neighbors. This economy, with its dynamism and creativity, could grow 
much faster if we were to achieve peace with our neighbors – and there are of course much 
better reasons than economic growth to hope and work for peace with our neighbors. 
This is an ambitious agenda. If we were to achieve it, we could within one or two decades 
find ourselves living in one of the most advanced economies in the world. 
Is it possible? Yes, entirely. If you wish it, it is no legend – but it will take extremely hard work 
and determination to turn the wish into reality. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2010
