Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Der Spiegel 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in Der Spiegel, 
Germany, conducted by Messrs Thomas Tuma and Christoph Pauly on 13 May 2010 and 
published on 17 May 2010. 
 SPIEGEL: Mr Trichet, how have you been sleeping these last few days? 
Trichet: I always sleep well! 
SPIEGEL: Not had any nightmares? 
Trichet: No. 
SPIEGEL: Nevertheless, the financial world has changed since the weekend before last. The 
countries of the euro area have put together a previously unimaginable rescue package with 
a value of over €700 billion in order to save reeling Member States from default. Even your 
institution has relented on a few of its firmest principles and now intends to purchase even 
poorly rated government bonds. 
Trichet: No, we have not relented on our principles. Price stability is our primary mandate 
and compass. That being said, it is clear that since September 2008 we have been facing the 
most  difficult  situation  since  the  Second  World  War  –  perhaps  even  since  the  First  World 
War. We have experienced – and are experiencing – truly dramatic times. 
SPIEGEL: That’s been evident from the way that you and others have been behaving over 
the last few days. 
Trichet: At times like these, you have to keep your composure and analyse the situation as 
lucidly as possible. Back in August 2007, we were the first major institution in the world to 
correctly judge what was happening on the capital markets with the start of the turbulence. 
And we reacted swiftly. 
SPIEGEL: What exactly happened between Thursday and Sunday of the week before last, 
when  Europe’s  Heads  of  State  and  Government  launched  the  largest  financial  rescue 
package in the history of Europe? 
Trichet: On Thursday afternoon and throughout Friday we had a continuous deterioration of 
the situation in the financial markets, both in Europe and, as a consequence, at the global 
level. On Friday markets closed and number of important indicators, spreads on sovereign 
bonds in Europe, CDS spreads and the situation in the interbank market were signalling the 
spreading of severe tensions. I made those points to the Heads of State and Government on 
Friday  evening.  That  is  what  happened  between  Thursday  morning  and  Friday  evening. 
Being permanently alert is of the essence when you have important responsibilities. 
SPIEGEL: Hedge funds and other speculative investors currently manage assets with a total 
value of USD2.6 trillion. But even an unimaginable sum like that should not really be enough 
to bet against the euro area. So, do you think that we’re vulnerable? 
Trichet: Not if we do our job, properly. 
SPIEGEL: The speculators just exacerbate existing problems? 
Trichet:  One  has  to  put  one’s  own  house  in  order  first.  These  big  and  highly  leveraged 
institutions are a major issue to be addressed at the global level. 
SPIEGEL: So, what was in danger? Just the banks? The euro? The European Union? 
Trichet:  We  are  now  experiencing  severe  tensions,  which  are  coming  after  the  events  of 
2007–08.  At  that  time,  private  institutions  and  markets  were  about  to  collapse  completely. 
BIS Review 68/2010 
 1
That triggered a very bold and comprehensive financial support by governments. And now 
we see the signature of some governments put into question. This is a problem for almost all 
industrialised countries. In the G7, the major economies have a yearly deficit of around 10 % 
of GDP. In the euro area as a whole it averages 7% of GDP. In this situation with extremely 
elevated deficits across the globe, the markets have singled out a weak link: Greece. Also 
taking into account the fact that its statistics were incorrect at one time, market pressure was 
concentrated there and a drastic adjustment programme was necessary. 
SPIEGEL: Apparently it was not only Greece that came under attack. Portugal was next… 
Trichet: In the market, there is always a danger of contagion – like the contagion we saw 
among the private institutions in 2008. And it can occur quickly. Sometimes it is a question of 
half days. This is an issue for the industrialised world as a whole. 
SPIEGEL: Allegedly, even Asian central banks have lost confidence in the euro. And they 
are key players. 
Trichet: A currency which keeps its value fully in line with its definition of price stability – with 
annual inflation rate of less than 2%, close to 2% – over almost 12 years is a currency which 
inspires confidence. 
SPIEGEL:  In  the  case  of  Greece,  the  debate  in  Berlin  just  a  few  weeks  ago  was  about 
providing assistance to the tune of €3 billion. Now talk is of three-figure sums. What has the 
Federal Government’s hesitation over Greece cost us? 
Trichet:  There  is  much  more  to  this  story.  The  Greek  government  took  too  long  to 
acknowledge the extent of the problem and take the necessary measures. We at the ECB 
were loud and clear in our warnings that the government must act quickly and decisively. In 
very demanding times, in times of severe tensions deciding swiftly and decisively is of the 
essence. 
SPIEGEL: The financial markets were not impressed by the first aid package for Greece. 
Trichet: As I said the situation was already starting to get worse on Thursday afternoon and 
throughout Friday of the week before last. A number of markets were no longer functioning 
correctly;  it  looked  somewhat  like  the  situation  in  mid-September  2008  after  the  Lehman 
Brothers’ bankruptcy. 
SPIEGEL: Was the attack on the euro not more dramatic for Europe than the Lehman affair? 
Trichet:  It  is  not  an  attack  on  the  euro.  It  is  an  issue  for  the  states’  signatures  and,  as  a 
consequence,  of  the  financial  stability  of  the  euro  area.  It  is  clear  that  it  is  the  primary 
responsibility  of  the  Europeans  to  take  the  appropriate  measures  in  order  to  counter  the 
present severe tensions which have erupted in Europe. 
SPIEGEL: In the course of the crisis, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank 
decided,  for  the  first  time,  to  buy  the  government  bonds  of  troubled  EU  countries  –  thus 
breaking  a  taboo.  The  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Axel  Weber,  his  Dutch 
counterpart and the ECB’s chief economist, Jürgen Stark, voted against this move. Seldom is 
there so much dissent within the highest decision-making body for the euro. 
Trichet:  As  you  know,  I  never  comment  on  individual  views.  Our  measures  are  explicitly 
authorised by the Treaty. We are not embarking on quantitative easing. We are helping some 
market segments to function more normally. And as I said, we will take back all the additional 
liquidity that we will supply in our Securities Markets Programme. 
SPIEGEL: The general public has gained the impression that the governments pressured the 
ECB to take this decision. That would be an appalling signal in terms of its independence 
and credibility. 
Trichet: That is ridiculous! We take our decisions completely independently and have a track 
record of taking positions contrary to those of the Heads of State and Government – in 2004 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2010
in refusing to decrease rates, in 2005 in increasing rates against their wishes, and throughout 
this period in fiercely defending the Stability and Growth Pact including defending it against 
the German Chancellor of the time. Just who has been weak over the past few months? It 
was  not  the  ECB.  The  governments  with  their  high  debts  were  weak.  Was  I  weak  myself 
when I explained to all floor leaders in the German Bundestag just why it was important to 
decide  rapidly?  Was  I  weak  when  I  informed  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  in  full 
independence  that  the  situation  was  grave  and  that  they  had  to  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities? We took our decision on Sunday in full independence. 
SPIEGEL: Thus far, the ECB has been strong and independent because it had repeatedly 
rejected  demands  from  the  political  domain  for  lower  interest  rates  or  too  expansionary  a 
monetary policy. You have now consented for the first time. 
Trichet:  We  have  consented  nothing  to  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government.  We  always 
take our decisions taking into account only our own assessment of the situation and not the 
“recommendations” of governments, markets or social partners. We decided on 9 of August 
2007 to supply €95 billion of liquidity in a few hours because our money market was being 
disrupted. And I could give many such examples. As I have already said, if there has been 
any  direction  of  influence,  it  has  been  more  in  the  opposite  direction,  from  the  ECB  to 
governments, when making recommendations to them. And, let me tell you that those who 
took very significant responsibilities were those not applying the spirit and the letter of the 
Stability and Growth Pact. And neither were those who did not carry out their surveillance as 
they should have, and as we constantly asked them to do. 
SPIEGEL: In a talk he gave to the Spiegel a few months ago, Jürgen Stark, the ECB’s chief 
economist, said that the ECB was not permitted to buy government bonds. Who is right? 
Trichet: I have already said that this is explicitly authorised by the Treaty. Over the past 11½ 
years,  we  have  ensured  price  stability  in  Europe  and  have  successfully  met  our  target  of 
keeping inflation below, but close to, 2%. We have done a good job fully in line with what the 
best  central  banks  in  Europe  were  doing  before  the  euro.  Those  who  believe  –  or,  even 
worse, are suggesting – that we will tolerate inflation in the future are making a grave error. 
The Governing Council of the ECB did not hesitate to increase rates in July 2008 in a period 
of financial turbulence in order to ensure price stability. We were criticised at the time by the 
markets. This is a measure of our inflexible determination. 
SPIEGEL: The Germans react particularly sensitively because the Bundesbank had always 
refused, even in times of crisis, to purchase government bonds. Can you understand these 
specific German concerns? 
Trichet: I fully understand the particular sensitivity of my German friends. But facts are facts: 
inflation in Germany has never been as low as it has been over the past 11 ½ years. The 
German fellow citizens can see that the euro has indeed been a good store of value over 
time. 
SPIEGEL: But people are concerned about the future. They fear that inflation will return and 
that their savings will lose value. 
Trichet: At one time the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve decided to embark on 
“quantitative  easing”,  namely  the  purchase  of  public  bonds  in  order  to  supply  as  much 
liquidity as possible to the market. What we are doing at present is totally different. We will 
withdraw all the additional liquidity that we supply. 
SPIEGEL:  Many  Germans  also  fear  that  their  government  is  becoming  the  paymaster  of 
Europe. 
Trichet: I understand the Germans’ fear of inflation, and their anxiety about their budget and 
their contribution to Europe. In France, I have occasionally been called the “Ayatollah of the 
Franc Fort” … 
SPIEGEL: … what has two meanings: Frankfurt and a strong euro … 
BIS Review 68/2010 
 3
Trichet: …. because I advocate a strong currency policy. Inflation is destructive for societies 
and democracy. Inflation is a tax on the poor and the weak. That is my very firm conviction. 
SPIEGEL: There is always a great temptation for politicians to spend more money than they 
have. Inflation helps them to reduce their debt. 
Trichet:  Of  course,  we  must  now  demand  extensive  adjustment  programmes  from  the 
governments, which the Heads of State and Government committed to the Friday before last. 
They are committed to accelerating the consolidation of their budgets. They know what is at 
stake now. 
SPIEGEL:  Would  it  not  be  good  if  a  country  such  as  Greece  were  able  to  leave  the  euro 
area? 
Trichet: No. This is excluded. If a country joins the euro area, it shares a common destiny 
with the other members. There is a need for a quantum leap in the governance of the euro 
area. There need to be major improvements to prevent bad behaviour, to ensure effective 
implementation of the recommendations made  by “peers”  and to ensure real and  effective 
sanctions in case of breaches. The ECB is calling for major changes, and I will explain this in 
the task force chaired by Mr. van Rompuy. 
SPIEGEL: What makes you so sure that Europe’s top politicians will not now use the ECB as 
a money printing machine permanently? 
Trichet: Again, we will take all the additional liquidity that we are bringing into the system 
back  out.  Our  monetary  policy  stance  is  unchanged.  We  have  never  hesitated  for  one 
second  to  take  the  decisions  needed  in  order  to  ensure  price  stability,  without  taking  into 
account any pressure groups. 
SPIEGEL: But the banks, too, are being spoilt by the ECB. As part of your so-called non-
conventional  measures,  you  have  again  made  it  possible  for  them  to  borrow  countless 
billions. In doing so, are you not handing out even more play money to the financial markets? 
Trichet: Again, we do what we believe we have to do in all consciousness in order to be able 
to deliver price stability over the medium term. We do not take into account pressure groups 
and lobbies. We supply liquidity to the banks so that they can finance the real economy and 
support the recovery, they know that. 
SPIEGEL: Have you made any individual mistakes in the last few weeks? 
Trichet: This is not for me to judge. History will do that. Last week Helmut Schmidt described 
the performance of the ECB as flawless. 
SPIEGEL: Mr Trichet, thank you for talking to us. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2010
