Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Team BSP – gearing up for an even better year 
in 2010 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  flag-raising  ceremony, 
Manila, 4 January 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, magandang umaga at masayang 
bagong taon sa ating lahat!  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I stand before you today to lead the start 
of our first working day at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in 2010.  
Now,  I  want  to  ask  all  of  you:  are  we  ready  to  do  the  best  we  can  as  central  bankers  in 
2010!? I am very happy to hear that! Like you, I also believe that the men and women of the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas are prepared to meet the challenges that will come our way in 
2010. I say this because we have statistics and the data to back me up.  
Fellow central bankers. I want to say this for the record. Given one of the most difficult years 
for central banks across the globe, we did quite well in terms of the three pillars of central 
banking:  a stable  price  environment  marked  by  low  and  stable  inflation;  a  safe  and  sound 
banking system that has kept credit flowing to productive sectors; and a secure and reliable 
payments  and  settlement  system  that  has  minimized  systemic  risks  and  enhanced 
confidence in our financial system. 
In turn, manageable inflation has given us ample leeway to maintain low interest rates that 
support continued economic growth. We also implemented liquidity-enhancing measures to 
help relieve possible stresses in the financial system coming from the global downturn. At the 
domestic  front,  we  helped  ease  the  destructive  effects  of  typhoons  “Pepeng”  and  “Ondoy” 
with  a  special  rediscounting  facility  and  a  set  of  temporary  regulatory  relief  measures  for 
affected banks and bank borrowers. 
In addition, our external position remains favorable with a surplus in our balance of payments 
and record high gross international reserves. And the peso is firm and stable. 
In  other  words,  responsible,  timely,  and  disciplined  monetary  and  financial  policies  helped 
keep our economic engines rolling and growing amidst global turbulence.  
Ladies and gentlemen of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. Lahat tayo, all of us contributed to 
this success. Sure, it was not a perfect year, but it was successful, nevertheless, based on 
our key metrics. We focused on our priorities, worked long hours, and remained united as a 
team. We did not drop the ball, so to speak. And so, fellow central bankers, let us celebrate 
the success of Team BSP in 2009 with a well-earned long round of applause.  
But  beyond  traditional  central  banking  functions,  Team  BSP  also  made  remarkable 
accomplishments. Let me cite a few: 
 
The BSP in cooperation with local banks successfully worked on further reductions 
in bank remittance charges for overseas Filipinos and their dependents; 
The  BSP’s  pioneering  regulations  for  mobile  money  transfers  have  gained 
international recognition for its potential to reach out to the unbanked and become a 
useful and efficient channel for inclusive banking;  
 BIS Review 1/2010 
 1
     The BSP’s regulatory environment for the microfinance sector has been recognized 
as the best in the world;  
The  BSP’s  Credit  Surety  Fund  program  enhanced  access  of  micro,  small,  and 
medium enterprises to collateral-free loans;  
Our continuing and full commitment to global standards under various certification 
programs;  
The BSP’s legal breakthroughs in its fight against erring banks and bankers which 
gained support from the Department of Justice and the Supreme Court; and  
The  BSP’s  consumer  protection  and  financial  education  program  continues  to 
broaden and deepen its reach, attracting global recognition in the process. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we have been able to carry out all these and more, because we have 
world-class  central  bankers  and  various  human  resource  development  programs  that 
continue  to  enhance  the  capabilities  and  expertise  of  more  BSPers.  We  have  also 
streamlined our organization, improved our work processes, re-engineered our planning and 
budgeting  processes,  and  adopted  a  BSP  Citizens  Charter  and  a  Code  of  Ethics  for  BSP 
Personnel. 
What makes me even prouder is that BSPers are not only excellent central bankers, you are 
also socially responsible Filipinos.  
For  instance,  in  the  wake  of  the  destruction  wrought  by  “Ondoy”  and  “Pepeng,”  BSPers 
immediately went into action to share their time and resources to prepare and bring relief to 
thousands  of  displaced  families.  BSPers  also  chose  to  cancel  the  annual  bank-wide 
Christmas celebration to donate its budget to Filipinos who are in need. This is, indeed, a 
little sacrifice for a big cause. 
Ladies and gentlemen. This is what I call sama-samang pagpu-punyagi. The collective drive 
to succeed, to excel, tenacity in the face of challenges, the constant striving based on the 
firm belief that honest work will get its just reward. I believe this is the reason behind BSP’s 
success.  
This is the same theme of BSP’s 2010 wall and desk calendars, copies of which have been 
distributed  to  all  of  you.  Pagpu-punyagi.  Let  us  keep  this  to  heart  as  we  start  serving  our 
country and our people in 2010 through the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
Fellow central bankers. Today, we are halfway in the commemoration of National Banking 
Week – which is from January 1 to January 7. This weeklong celebration was declared to 
honor the anniversary of central banking in the Philippines which started on January 3, 1949. 
Thus, today, January 4 is not only our first working day in 2010, it is also the first working day 
as we begin 61 years of central banking in the Philippines.  
60  years  in  2009,  61  years  in  2010.  Indeed,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  is  what  it  is 
today because of the collective efforts of central bankers of the past and the present.  
To celebrate the first 60 years of central banking in the Philippines and to share the lessons 
we have learned along the way, we have published a book entitled “Central Banking During 
Challenging  Times:  The  Philippine  Experience.”  We  will  launch  this  book  on  Friday, 
January 8.  I  hope  you  will  take  the  time  to  read  this  book  written  by  present-day  central 
bankers and edited by Dr. Valdepenas, who served as Member of the Monetary Board for a 
total of 14 years. 
Fellow central bankers, as we  make a fresh start in 2010, let us always be  mindful of the 
weight of both responsibility and history upon us. And to guide us, let us always remember 
the  values  we  have  committed  to  live  by  as  BSPers:  patriotism,  integrity,  excellence, 
dynamism and solidarity.  
2 
 BIS Review 1/2010
While  we  came  to  our  institution  as  individuals,  we  have  come  together  as  professional 
central bankers under Team BSP united to fulfill our mandate in the service of our economy, 
our country and our people. For this, I and the other Members of the Monetary Board thank 
all of you. And because we are united, I am confident that we will overcome the challenges 
that will come our way in 2010. 
Finally, on behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board as well as my wife and family, I take 
this opportunity to greet all of you a successful, happy, and prosperous 2010! 
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! Mabuhay ang ating bansang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!  
BIS Review 1/2010 
 3
