John Murray: Is there a commodity curse? Lessons from the past 
Remarks by Mr John Murray, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the University of 
Alberta  Institute  for  Public  Economics  and  C.D.  Howe  Institute,  Edmonton,  Alberta, 
6 May 2010. 
 Good evening. Thank you for inviting me to this significant and topical event. It’s fitting that 
this conference is dedicated to Bradford Reid. He will be missed by so many former students 
and colleagues: as a friend, a dedicated teacher, and an insightful researcher. His particular 
research interests included fiscal policy and public-debt management, and their implications 
for  the  macroeconomy.  These  would  certainly  fit  well  with  our  discussions  here  today  and 
tomorrow.  
As  the  title  of  the  conference  suggests,  we  have  seen  many  boom-and-bust  cycles  in  the 
commodity sector. This raises one obvious and central question: How can we avoid them in 
the future? More specifically, how can Canada and Alberta get out of this seemingly endless 
cycle  of  feast  or  famine?  The  answer,  regrettably,  is  that  it  isn’t  possible  to  eliminate  the 
cycle entirely. The best that we can hope to do is to dampen its effects by learning from past 
experience. History, it has been said, is a good teacher, but policy-makers are not always 
good students. Tonight, I’ll present a few thoughts on how we might make better use of these 
sometimes painful lessons. 
Alberta and Canada are different from the rest  
Canada’s economy is different from most other advanced economies. Primary commodities 
– resources – account for a much larger share of our national GDP. The estimated size of 
the  sector  varies  according  to  how  it  is  defined,  but  using  a  reasonably  conservative 
approach,  one  finds  that  resource  production  represents  about  10  per  cent  of  Canada’s 
GDP, 5 per cent of total employment, and 45 per cent of export sales.1 The share of resource 
production in U.S. GDP, by comparison, is only 5 per cent. Canada is a large net exporter of 
raw  materials,  unlike  the  United  States,  which  is  a  large  net  importer.  In  this  respect,  the 
United  States  is  similar  to  most  other  advanced  economies.  Countries  such  as  Canada, 
Australia, and Norway, on the other hand, are the exceptions. 
                                                 
1   Statistics Canada. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 1
 Alberta is also different when compared with most – but not all – of the nine other provinces 
in  Canada.  In  2006,  the  last  year  for  which  Statistics  Canada  has  comparable  figures, 
resources accounted for roughly 32 per cent of Alberta’s GDP. This was lower than the figure 
for  Newfoundland  and  Labrador  (at  40  per  cent)  and  only  slightly  higher  than  that  for 
Saskatchewan (at 29 per cent.) But it was far above that of the other provinces. In British 
Columbia, for example, natural resources accounted for less than 10 per cent of GDP, while 
in Ontario – not surprisingly – it was barely 2 per cent. The bottom line, simply stated, is that 
Canada is different, and Alberta is more different still, from many of its counterparts. 
 2 
 BIS Review 63/2010
Special challenges of a commodity-based economy 
Canada’s natural resources are a tremendous gift. They have brought us enormous material 
benefits – higher incomes and greater economic security than in many other countries. Most 
other  countries  would  gladly  trade  places  with  us,  should  we  ever  grow  tired  of  our  rich 
resource endowment. Indeed, there are probably several provinces that would gladly trade 
places with Alberta.  
This  isn’t  to  say  that  being  a  commodity-based  economy  is  problem  free.  In  fact,  this 
conference  is  largely  about  the  problems  or,  more  positively,  the  challenges  that  our 
dependence on commodities sometimes creates. Some economists have gone so far as to 
say  that  there  is  a  “commodity  curse.”2  They  suggest  that  rich  resource  endowments  are 
actually  inimical  to  economic  development.  Comparing  the  experiences  of  a  large  set  of 
countries, they observe that commodity-based economies tend, on average, to have slightly 
lower growth rates, as well as lower income levels, than their resource-poor counterparts. 
 Before you become overly concerned or take strong objection to this claim, I should add that 
the statistical relationship that I have just shown you is rather weak, and is dominated by the 
results  for  a  large  number  of  developing  countries  for  which  the  conservatorship  of  their 
resources  has  proven  to  be  more  of  a  challenge.  The  evidence  for  advanced  resource-
producing countries, such as Canada, is typically much more positive. Once again, we are 
the exception. 
The reasons that have been put forward by way of explaining the so-called commodity curse 
have  both  a  political  and  an  economic  dimension.  Researchers  have  found  that  many 
countries  with  rich  resource  endowments  suffer  from  weak  governance  and  a  democratic 
deficit. The governments are often despotic, and the countries prone to armed conflict and 
civil unrest. Property rights aren’t respected, and institutional arrangements are weak. 
                                                 
2   For  a  detailed  survey,  please  see  Jeffrey  A.  Frankel,  “The  Natural  Resource  Curse:  A  Survey.”  Faculty 
Research Working Paper Series, Harvard Kennedy School, February 2010. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 3
This, obviously, is not an accurate characterization of countries like Canada, Australia, New 
Zealand, and Norway. Nevertheless, Canada and all other commodity-based countries are 
subject  to  serious  economic  challenges,  linked  primarily  to  the  extreme  volatility  of 
commodity prices. 
The long and short of price volatility 
Some countries are large enough commodity producers (or consumers) that their actions can 
materially influence global commodity prices. Saudi Arabia might be an example. But these 
are certainly the exception. For the most part, commodity producers are price-takers. They 
sell a fairly homogeneous product in a highly competitive market, and their actions have little 
effect on the price that they receive.  
Unfortunately, for countries like Canada and provinces like Alberta, these prices are typically 
volatile, and highly uncertain. This volatility is caused, in large part, by the unusual nature of 
the  short-run  demand  and  supply  curves  associated  with  most  commodity  markets.  The 
products  that  commodity-based  economies  sell  typically  have  extremely  low  short-run 
demand elasticities (i.e., demand is not very responsive to price changes.) Supply is similarly 
inelastic, since it often takes time to bring new production online if prices suddenly rise, or to 
reduce production if prices suddenly drop.3 Any move in either of these curves, therefore, is 
likely to lead to outsized changes in global prices. 
This erratic behaviour is evident in the movement of most commodity prices through time. 
Commodity prices are typically much more volatile than those of other goods or services – 
and one of the most volatile commodity prices of all is that of oil. This is bad news for energy 
producers, and clearly complicates the task of planning and investment. Oil and natural gas 
now account for the majority of Canada’s commodity production. 
                                                  
3   Some commodities are also subject to frequent supply disruptions that accentuate price volatility. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2010
  Another important feature worth noting is that the long-run demand and supply elasticities for 
most  commodities  are  typically  much  higher.  If  commodity  prices  remain  high,  consumers 
find ways to economize on their use, or find substitute products. New supplies also gradually 
come  online.  All  of  these  factors  work  to  push  prices  lower.  In  this  sense,  there  is  a  self-
correcting mechanism at play. Indeed, over the very long run – and here, I am referring to 
decades  –  the  average  real  price  of  most  commodities  has  been  surprisingly  stable.4 
Economists  refer  to  this  as  “mean  reversion.”  If  we  knew  that  this  sawtooth  pattern  would 
                                                 
4   Don Coletti, “The long-run behaviour of key Canadian non-energy commodity prices: 1900 to 1991.”Bank of 
Canada Review (Winter 1992–1993): 47–56. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 5
always be repeated – short-run spikes followed by an overshoot on the down side and an 
eventual  return  to  the  long-run  mean  –  it  would  save  a  lot  of  unnecessary  cost  and 
disappointment. 
  But  hope  springs  eternal,  and  many  of  the  price  movements  last  just  long  enough  to 
convince  investors  and  governments  that  “this  time  it  is  different.”  And  there  is  always  a 
chance that some day it will be different. In the intervening period, long-range investments 
may  have  been  set  in  train,  new  facilities  built,  and  workers  relocated  –  all  initiatives  that 
have  to  be  reversed  once  prices  correct.  This  is  not  always  a  problem,  however.  If  prices 
stay high (or low) for a sufficiently long time, these reallocations of capital and labour could 
well be warranted and yield valuable returns, even if prices eventually revert to trend.  
6 
 BIS Review 63/2010
The  trouble  is  that  businesses,  households,  and  policy-makers  often  get  caught  out.  They 
overreact  and  have  difficulty  engineering  a  smooth  course  correction  once  conditions 
change. The inherent difficulty associated with predicting how long a boom (or bust) might 
last, and how high (or low) prices might go, makes the process extremely risky. Critics worry 
that  a  commodity-based  economy  will  constantly  find  itself  in  motion,  never  quite  settling 
down.  When  this  constant  churning  is  combined  with  volatile  price  changes,  the  ongoing 
costs and probability of a significant miscalculation can be high.  
The policy-maker’s Hippocratic Oath: first, do no harm 
One of the most important things that policy-makers can do is to avoid making the situation 
worse.  Helpful  lessons  can  be  learned  in  this  regard,  by  looking  at  Canada’s  experience 
during the 1970s. Although every boom and bust is in some way unique, there is sufficient 
commonality across commodity cycles that this period is still instructive.  
Fiscal authorities in the 1970s assumed that the commodity boom would last forever, or at 
least for a very long time. They believed that the elevated revenues that they were suddenly 
receiving  in  the  form  of  higher  royalties  and  tax  receipts  would  continue  to  grow.  New, 
ambitious government programs were launched, which exacerbated the dramatic economic 
upturn that was already in progress, and nothing was saved for a rainy day. 
Monetary authorities at the time didn’t have the benefit of a policy framework anchored on an 
explicit  inflation  target.  They  also  underestimated  the  effect  that  the  run-up  in  commodity 
prices would have on demand conditions, and compounded the errors by overestimating the 
supply  potential  of  the  economy.  More  specifically,  they  failed  to  appreciate  the  serious 
negative effects that higher commodity prices – principally, energy prices – would have on 
the economy’s production capacity. The generalized price increases that were subsequently 
observed across the economy were at first dismissed as one-off effects that would soon pass 
out of the inflation numbers. 
The exchange rate appreciation that was triggered by the improvement in Canada’s terms of 
trade  over  this  period,  and  that  would  have  helped  contain  inflationary  pressures,  was 
actively resisted for fear of what it might do to other sectors of the economy and employment. 
The result, when commodity prices subsequently collapsed, was a continuing spiral of rising 
government deficits and double-digit inflation, both of which took many years to resolve. The 
ultimate cost in terms of lost output and employment was enormous. 
What can policy-makers do to improve the situation? 
Now,  let  me  turn  from  Canada’s  experiences  in  the  1970s  to  some  of  the  broader  policy 
lessons that can be drawn. Policy-makers can learn from past mistakes and help to ensure 
better outcomes in three important ways. First, fiscal authorities should avoid behaving in a 
procyclical  manner,  exaggerating  the  boom  with  aggressive  increases  in  spending  and 
stimulative  tax  reductions.  Additional  infrastructure  may  be  needed  to  support  private 
investment  in  certain  areas,  but  by  strengthening  their  fiscal  positions  in  good  times, 
governments can help to relieve inflationary pressures and smooth consumption. This is the 
motivation  for  Alberta’s  Sustainability  Fund  and  the  Heritage  Savings  Trust  Fund.  Fiscal 
strengthening can also help to relieve upward pressure on the exchange rate.  
The second way in which authorities can help is by maintaining a disciplined monetary policy. 
Monetary authorities must stay focused on their primary mission of preserving price stability, 
helping businesses and households to see through the cycle and promoting better decision 
making  by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  This  is  what  Canada’s  monetary 
policy framework now provides: greater focus, greater accountability, and greater discipline. 
The two key elements of our current framework are (i) an explicit monetary policy goal – the 
2 per cent target for inflation – and (ii) a flexible exchange rate.  
BIS Review 63/2010 
 7
the  Bank  of  Canada 
flexible  exchange  rate  gives 
the  monetary  policy 
Canada’s 
independence  that  is  required  to  successfully  pursue  and  attain  its  inflation  objective.  The 
flexible exchange rate also serves as an automatic buffer, helping to cushion the economy 
and  dissipate  the  effects  of  the  commodity  shock.  Trying  to  resist  these  exchange  rate 
movements  typically  imposes  even  greater  costs  on  the  economy,  since  the  underlying 
pressures don’t disappear, they simply manifest themselves in other ways. These take the 
form of much higher wages and domestic prices in the case of a commodity price boom and, 
ultimately, lower employment and output. Necessary adjustment is delayed, and leads to a 
more exaggerated cycle in the overall economy.  
Another  important  lesson  that  has  been  learned  relates  to  the  production  capacity  of  the 
economy. The Bank of Canada is now more sensitive to the negative supply effects that are 
associated with large relative price movements and the economic restructuring that follows, 
adjusting its estimates of potential output appropriately to avoid inadvertently overstimulating 
the economy. 
The  third  and  final  way  that  governments  can  help  the  economy  to  cope  with  commodity 
cycles  is  through  structural  reform.  In  normal  times,  the  Canadian  economy  generally 
performs quite well, but it is still subject to unhelpful frictions and barriers. These affect the 
resilience of the economy and its ability to weather shocks, making it difficult to reallocate 
resources  in  a  flexible,  efficient  manner.  Canada  has  made  good  progress  over  the  past 
three decades in allowing goods and services to move more easily. Further efforts to reduce 
interprovincial trade barriers would be welcome, for instance, extending the excellent Trade, 
Investment  and  Labour  Mobility  Agreement  (TILMA)  and  the  New  West  Partnership 
initiatives. 
Governments,  of  course,  are  not  the  only  ones  responsible  for  ensuring  a  well-functioning 
economy.  They  are  not  even  the  most  important  players.  That  role  rests  with  the  private 
sector, which must take responsibility for its actions, looking through the boom-bust cycles 
and curbing any excessive exuberance or pessimism. 
How have we been doing lately? 
The  past  few  years  have  been  extraordinary  in  many  ways  and,  if  nothing  else,  have 
provided  a  useful  check  on  whether  the  prescriptions  that  I  have  just  described  are  being 
applied.  A  super-cycle  in  commodity  prices,  followed  by  the  biggest  financial  crisis  of  the 
postwar period, represents a significant stress test. Fortunately, the preliminary results are 
encouraging.  
The 1970s and the 2000s differ in significant ways. The boom-bust experience in the 1970s 
was  triggered  by  an  unprecedented  supply  shock  and  exacerbated  by  overly  stimulative 
fiscal and monetary policies. Interest rates had to be boosted to over 20 per cent in the early 
1980s  and  combined  with  aggressive  budget  tightening  in  the  early  1990s  to  bring  the 
macroeconomy  under  control.  In  contrast,  the  boom  portion  of  the  commodity  cycle  from 
roughly 2006–2008 was the result of increased demand for commodities – much of it coming 
from Asia. It was also fuelled by excessive leverage and elevated asset prices in financial 
markets. Commodity prices collapsed when the asset bubble burst, and policy-makers had to 
move with unprecedented speed and co-operation to deal with the fallout. 
Unlike  the  situation  in  the  1970s,  CPI  inflation  through  the  past  five  years  has  remained 
relatively stable, despite the size of the shocks that hit the economy during the recent global 
economic crisis. Inflation expectations also remained well anchored during the crisis and, as 
a result, the Bank of Canada was able to ease monetary policy aggressively without losing 
the confidence of private agents. The ultimate costs of the crisis in terms of unemployment 
and  lost  output,  although  serious  and  painful,  were  nevertheless  smaller  than  many  had 
feared. 
8 
 BIS Review 63/2010
 The  Bank’s  measure  of  core  inflation,  CPIX,  proved  to  be  an  invaluable  tool  in  this  regard. 
CPIX strips away eight of the most volatile components – including several commodity prices – 
in  the  total  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  giving  the  Bank,  as  well  as  businesses  and 
households, a more reliable measure of how strong or weak underlying inflation pressures 
might be. 
The  flexible  exchange  rate  has  also  been  allowed  to  do  its  job  over  this  period.  Although 
some of the short-term movements in the exchange rate may have been excessive, such as 
the run-up to US$1.10 in November 2007, on balance Canada’s flexible exchange rate has 
helped  to  cushion  the  economy  on  the  way  up  and  on  the  way  down  –  an  appreciation 
followed by a depreciation. Fiscal authorities at the federal and provincial levels also acted 
responsibly in the years preceding the “bust” of late 2008 and early 2009, taking some of the 
edge off the boom and leaving adequate fiscal headroom when extra stimulus was required. 
Encouraging steps, as noted earlier, have also been made with regard to structural reforms, 
although much more still needs to be done in this area. 
Where are commodity prices headed now? 
So, where might things be going now, as we look ahead? I’d like to end my presentation by 
saying a few words about the near-term behaviour of commodity prices and the projection 
that the Bank released two weeks ago as part of its April Monetary Policy Report.  
Before discussing our commodity price projections, I must admit that we regularly make use 
of  some  simplifying  assumptions.  Absent  a  more  reliable  guide,  we  typically  base  our 
projections  for  many  commodities  on  the  prices  embedded  in  futures  curves.5  This  is 
particularly true for oil and natural gas. We realize that these curves are not a very reliable 
forecasting  tool.  But  we,  and  other  forecasters,  have  yet  to  find  a  better  alternative.  The 
curves do provide a measure of what knowledgeable agents are expecting and are willing to 
                                                 
5   R.  Alquist,  and  I.  Kilian.  “What  Do  We  Learn  from  the  Price  of  Crude  Oil  Futures?”  Journal  of  Applied 
Econometrics 25 (4). Forthcoming, June 2010. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 9
put  their  money  on.  Every  institution  and  investor  that  tries  to  anticipate  commodity  price 
developments  experiences  similar  challenges.  Commodity  prices,  as  noted  earlier,  are 
inherently volatile and difficult to predict. 
You might ask, then, what are the futures curves and the Bank projecting now? The Bank left 
its  base-case  projections  for  commodity  prices  in  the  April  Report  largely  unchanged  from 
what  it  had  projected  in  the  January  Report.  Oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  as  judged  by  the 
profiles of the futures curves for these commodities, are projected to rise quite modestly over 
the next three years, while non-energy prices are projected to increase by a cumulative 30 
per cent. These increases are driven by the strengthening global recovery, most notably in 
China  and  other  Asian  emerging-market  economies  (EMEs.)  Indeed,  most  of  the  upward 
pressure  on  commodity  prices  over  the  past  10  years  has  come  from  the  EMEs.  These 
economies  are  expected  to  keep  growing,  barring  any  unforeseen  shock.  Does  this  mean 
another commodity super-cycle?  
 It is tempting to look at recent developments and extrapolate into the future. China and India 
alone account for more than 40 per cent of the world’s population. If these two economies 
continue to grow at annual rates of 8 to 10 per cent, as we have seen recently, they will soon 
overtake  even  the  largest  advanced  economies,  and  their  prospective  demand  for 
commodities could be enormous. Couple this with the fact that many of the world’s resources 
are non-renewable or are in limited supply, and you have a recipe for something that’s surely 
breathtaking. It’s enough to make us all Malthusians. 
Before we race to this conclusion, however, we need to remember the problems that have 
arisen  in  the  past  when  we  assumed  that  commodity  prices  would  rise  continuously,  or  at 
least  would  stabilize  at  a  much  higher  level.  It’s  always  tempting  to  think  that  the  next 
commodity  cycle  will  be  different.  Where  have  we  heard  that  before?  The  scenario  that  I 
have just outlined is not implausible. That is what makes it so seductive. I can’t say definitely 
that  commodity  prices  won’t  rise  to  unprecedented  levels,  but  if  history  is  any  guide, 
continuous rapid upward movement in real (inflation-adjusted) prices – oil or otherwise – is 
unlikely, as is a large permanent increase in the real price level. History suggests, therefore, 
that we should proceed with caution and, to use a rather corny commodity cliché, not count 
our chickens before they hatch. 
10 
 BIS Review 63/2010
In  closing,  let  me  mention  that  tomorrow,  we  will  be  releasing  a  new  Bank  of  Canada 
commodity  price  index  (BCPI.)  This  is  noteworthy  because,  as  we’ve  just  discussed,  the 
price  of  commodities  in  Canada  has  important  implications  for  the  economy,  and  the 
interpretation of developments in commodity markets is important to the conduct of monetary 
policy.  Clearly,  we  need  the  most  accurate  measure  of  movements  in  overall  commodity 
prices  possible.  This  new  BCPI,  which  incorporates  a  new  methodology,  will  be  more 
accurate, representative and flexible.  
BIS Review 63/2010 
 11
