Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s economy and banking sector 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 4th Bank of Albania 
Forum with the Albanian Banking System, Tirana, 14 April 2010. 
 Dear commercial bank managing directors, 
Dear guests, 
I would like to welcome you to this periodic meeting, which aims at providing a platform for 
the exchange of ideas and presentation of viewpoints related to the developments affecting 
banking  and  financial  activity  in  general,  and  which  are  focal  to  the  financial  system’s 
stability.  
Yesterday  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  approved  the  Financial Stability 
Report for the year 2009. This is the third issue of the Financial Stability Report and it is my 
pleasure to state today that now we do have a consolidated product, which aims at being in 
full compliance with the best standards. The conclusions derived from this report confirm that 
the Albanian banking system experienced an unusual liquidity situation in 2009 and has now 
entered a period of full recovery.  
The satisfactory growth rate of deposits, in particular over the recent months, attests to the 
restoring  of  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system.  Moreover,  the  conclusions  of  this 
scientific  research  confirm  that  the  Albanian  banking  system  is  sound  and  stable  and 
provides full guarantee for the mobilization of the public savings and their channelling into 
boosting economic activity in home. I avail myself of this opportunity to invite all participants 
in this meeting, the decision-making and governmental authorities, the media and the public 
at  large  to  address  to  this  report.  Only  in  this  way  you  will  better  understand  the  current 
situation, the achievements made so far and the challenges to be faced in the future.  
In what follows, I would like to provide an overview of the economic situation at home, and 
later dwell upon the banking sector’s present situation and outlook for 2010. Credit quality 
and banks’ transparency to their customers are two issues I particularly chose to focus on.  
According to INSTAT’s preliminary assessments, Albania posted a positive economic growth 
of  3.3  percent  during  2009,  despite  the  impact  of  the  international  financial  and  economic 
crisis. The financial system, dominated by the banking sector, was stable and the fiscal and 
monetary  stimulus  mitigated  the  difficulties  of  the  real  sector  of  the  economy.  This  growth 
rate is very close to the early 2009 projections made public by the Bank of Albania. 
Among the factors that boosted economic growth over the course of 2009 we can mention 
the public authorities’ measures to rapidly restore public confidence in the financial system 
and the banking sector, and the monetary and fiscal stimulus provided through the cut of the 
key interest rate, the injection of liquidity and the increase of public expenditure. 
Among the factors that led to lower economic growth rate we can mention:  
 
 
the trade balance deficit sustainability; 
harder times for the entrepreneurship due to lower foreign demand and contraction 
of banking sector lending; and 
lower dynamics in household consumption. 
 
Banking sector’s assets grew to ALL 886.3 billion, posting an annual growth of 6.3 percent 
relative  to  year-end  2008.  The  performance  of  the  financial  system’s  financial  resources, 
revenue  and  capital  was  affected  by  the  international  financial  crisis  and  its  impact  on 
Albania’s  real  economy.  As  far  as  the  banking  sector  is  concerned,  the  decline  of  public 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 1
deposits terminated at the end of the first quarter, and their return to banks progressed at 
stable rates during the rest of 2009. 
However,  the  changes  in  the  liquidity  situation,  the  exchange  rate  devaluation  and  the 
difficulties  encountered by  the  real sector  of  the  economy  gave  rise  to  slower  lending  and 
deteriorated loan quality. As at end 2009, lending, including the accrued interests, accounted 
for about 50.8 percent of total banking sector’s assets or as much as 40 percent of GDP. In 
the meantime, the ratio of non-performing loans to total loan portfolio rose to 10.5 percent. 
The need to increase the reserve funds for coping with the credit risk from banks led to the 
decline of the banking sector’s financial result, which however ended positive for about ALL 
3.5 billion. Business capitalization was adequate during 2009, as a result of lower high-risk 
bank investments, injection of new capital by the shareholders and the preservation of a net 
positive result. As at end 2009, capital adequacy ratio was 16.2 percent.  
The public authorities took several measures in 2009 to support the financial system and the 
banking sector in particular. Among these measures, I could mention the approval of the law 
which  increased  the  insurance  amount  of  public  deposits,  and  the  decisions  of  the 
Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  limit  banks’  exposure  to  foreign  banking 
groups  and  to  suspend  the  allocation  of  banks’  profit  in  2008  and  2009.  Along  with  these 
decisions,  during  2009  a  number  of  other  Bank  of  Albania  decisions  taken  since  the  last 
quarter of 2008 continued to be implemented. These decisions related to the establishment 
of  more  facilitating  conditions  as  far  as  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  the  interbank  market  is 
concerned. The Bank of Albania decisions in January and October, which cut the key interest 
rate  by  1  percentage  point  to  5.25  percent,  contributed  further  to  increasing  the  banking 
sector’s opportunities to provide liquidity at a lower cost.  
Economic development at home during 2010 will be supported by a more favourable global 
economic situation, which will provide a better setting for foreign investments and will better 
boost  the  demand  for  the  Albanian  exports.  In  the  domestic  economy,  the  developments 
noted  during  2009  as  regards  the  increase  of  budget  deficit  and  domestic  debt,  the  lower 
banking sector lending, and a more rigid situation in production and consumption, need to be 
addressed through quick and decisive actions and in the course of an adequate time span.  
It is therefore indispensable to keep the budget deficit for 2010 under check and at levels that 
guarantee  the  observance  of  the  targets  outlined  in  the  Medium-term  Macroeconomic 
Framework  as  regards  budget  deficit  and  public  debt  level.  The  consolidation  of  public 
finances,  reflected  through  the  restoring  of  budget  deficit’s  downward  trend  is  of  great 
importance in terms of the decline of its financing cost. 
It will also lead to improved liquidity situation in the financial market, releasing more financial 
resources  into  the  system,  the  use  of  which  will  boost  the  private  sector  lending.  The 
entrepreneurship  and  households  need  to  assess  the  expected  outlook  of  the  Albanian 
economy for 2010 realistically. This period should be used by the entrepreneurship to control 
the costs and take the necessary measures for restructuring the activity in order to enhance 
the  efficiency.  In  general,  these  actions  of  the  fiscal  authority  and  the  private  economic 
agents  are  in  the  short-term  necessary  to  provide  a  more  adequate  environment  that  will 
enable  the  undertaking  of  other  measures  for  increasing  the  contribution  of  production  to 
economic growth and increasing the domestic savings in a longer-term.  
During 2010, the banking sector will expand its activity at higher rates than in 2009, however 
less than the average long-term annual growth. The expansion of activity will likely be more 
rapid in the second half of the year. As regards the financial resources, the banking sector 
will  benefit  from  the  stable  growth  of  public  deposits.  The  growth  of  ALL  deposits  will 
continue to be supported by the more stable savers’ flows, the positive real return and the 
expectation for greater exchange rate stability. The growth of foreign currency deposits will 
reflect the seasonal performance, hence being higher during summer.  
The maturity structure of deposits is not expected to display any significant changes from the 
present situation; however the average maturity term of deposits is expected to be higher in 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2010
2010 relative to 2009. The extent of this change will be determined by the performance of 
depositors’ income and the stimuli set by banks to orient the structure of savings.  
The Bank of Albania will continue to provide the necessary liquidity to the interbank market. 
As far as the financing lines and shareholders’ capital are concerned, the Bank of Albania will 
continue to require from banks that they maintain the necessary amounts not only in order to 
carry  out  a  normal  banking  business  and  comply  with 
framework 
requirements, but also in order to support the recovery of banking business at well-controlled 
risks. With regard to bank investments, the Bank of Albania expects higher lending rates by 
the banking sector in 2010 relative to 2009, with the largest part of growth expected to take 
place in the second half of the year. 
In  terms  of  risk  assessment,  in  the  short-term,  the  banking  sector’s  financial  situation  has 
benefited positively from the following developments: 
a) 
the  regulatory 
Substantial  improvement  of  liquidity  situation  against  a  background  of  public 
confidence recovery and stable deposit growth. It is assessed that during 2009, the 
annual  growth  of  public  deposits  was  7.6  percent,  rising  to  ALL  694.3  billion. 
Presently  speaking,  the  deposit  level  has  exceeded  that  of  end  September  2008, 
prior to the beginning of the deposit withdrawal. The growth rate of public deposits 
would  have  been  higher  if  the  situation  in  the  real  sector  of  the  economy  had 
improved and the banking sector lending had recovered.  
Lower  growth  rate  of  the  banking  sector’s  risk-weighted  assets.  During  2009,  the 
growth  of  the  banking  sector’s  risk-weighted  assets  reduced  substantially,  owing 
mainly to the much lower growth rate of lending and the lower expansion of banking 
business  in  general.  In  fact,  during  2009  the  banking  sector  increased  lending  by 
about  13.2  percent,  compared  to  the  growth  by  about  35.7  percent  in  2008.  It  is 
assessed that ALL loans grew about 23 percent, while foreign currency loans grew 
about 9 percent. However, in real terms, the real growth of foreign currency lending 
was negative.  
The devaluation of the national currency exchange rate during 2009 is assessed to 
have been at a reasonable rate and extent, providing the banking sector and other 
economic  agents  with  the  necessary  time  to  take  adequate  and  protective 
measures.  There  are  great  expectations  for  a  stable  exchange  rate  during  2010. 
However, the movements in the exchange rate against a background of a flexible 
regime are normal and should be an expected phenomenon by the economic agents 
and which they should be prepared for.  
b) 
c) 
In  the  medium  term,  the  banking  sector  should  cope  with  the  impact  that  the  loan  quality 
performance has on its activity. Lending grew by about 13.2 percent in 2009. ALL lending 
provided the major contribution to the overall growth, supported by the gradual increase of 
public deposits and the injection of liquidity by the Bank of Albania.  
Lending  in  foreign  currency  was  stagnant,  against  a  background  of  reduced  availability  of 
free  foreign  currency  funds  by  banks  and  limited  demand  for  loans  as  a  result  of  the 
exchange  rate  devaluation.  Another  reason  for  the  slowdown  in  lending  owes  to  the  more 
cautious  lending  policies  adopted  by  banks  against  a  background  of  higher  credit  risk 
resulting from the higher difficulties in the real sector of the economy. More specifically, the 
ratio of non-performing loans rose to 10.5 per cent at year-end. Its rise persisted in the early 
months  of  the  present  year  though  at  a  slower  rate.  As  a  result  of  the  deteriorated  loan 
quality, the entire banking sector has doubled the respective reserve funds, hence providing 
a negative contribution to the banking sector’s financial result. The latter was in 2009 half as 
much as the value in 2008 and had a greater concentration.  
The Bank of Albania has for long been vocal as regards the recovery of lending, which will 
not only boost the economy and customers, but also the banks themselves. The economic 
setting  definitely  remains  challenging  and  the  return  to  the  2008  lending  growth  rates  is 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 3
unrealistic, indeed undesirable. But we do believe that there exist opportunities – particularly 
in terms of the deposit growth performance – that the growth of lending will be better in 2010 
relative to the previous year. Based on the early months’ survey carried out by the Bank of 
Albania  for  this  purpose,  the  same  expectation  seems  to  be  supported  by  you  as  well. 
However, though the recovery of lending is a desirable development, it should be carried out 
on  the  basis  of  a  prudential  analysis,  monitoring  carefully  the  loan  quality  performance.  In 
more practical terms, it is necessary that banks fully reflect the size of non-performing loans 
for the existing loans and create appropriate reserves for covering the risk of loan losses.  
As far as non-performing loans are concerned, banks must identify customers with temporary 
and  surmountable  problems,  and  should  set  up  policies  that  provide  support  to  these 
customers in exchange to additional elements that hedge the bank against such credit risk in 
the future. As regards the customers assessed as having low creditworthiness, banks should 
without hesitation follow the procedures for the execution of the collateral and other forms of 
collateral,  in  order  to  recover  as  large  as  possible  amount  of  credit.  The  entire  decision-
making  in  this  process  should  be  clear  and  documented,  and  should  be  based  on  the 
analysis  of  specialized  bank  structures.  Without  carrying  out  this  process  first,  the 
implementation of general regulatory measures for a temporary sorting out of this problem 
would result premature and indeed counterproductive.  
With  respect  to  new  loans,  taking  into  account  the  experience  of  banks  faced  with  loan 
portfolio  problems,  there  should  be  a  better  sectoral  distribution  and  a  more  reasonable 
balance  between  public  and  private  investment  projects,  between  customers  representing 
business  or  household  undertaking,  between  the  forms  of  lending  in  ALL  or  in  foreign 
currency, etc.., orienting lending in order to reduce the exposure to more problematic forms 
and  the  concentration  of  lending  in  general.  Assessing  first  of  all  the  borrowers’ 
creditworthiness  and  lending  safety,  the  Bank  of  Albania  considers  that  there  is  sufficient 
room  for  commercial  banks  –  depending  on  their  size  and  opportunities  –  to  support  the 
SMEs with  more lending and provide greater funding opportunities in ALL. In addition, the 
monitoring of the loan quality performance will necessarily require the prudential monitoring 
of  the  situation  at  individual  banks,  which  may  display  a  different  performance  from  the 
average of the sector. 
The performance of loan portfolio quality will continue to exert pressure on banks’ financial 
result. In this context, the prudential monitoring of banking activity capitalization rates is of 
great importance, despite its current sufficient levels. I would like to note that this is another 
process  that  puts  to  test  the  capability  of  banks’  managing  structures  in  managing  the 
situation  carefully,  with  integrity  and  professionalism.  Moreover,  this  process  requires  from 
banks’  shareholders,  who  increased  their  investment  and  profit  value  during  the  credit 
“boom”, to stand by banks in order to meet their eventual needs for capital or other forms of 
financing. 
Allow me now to touch upon another issue, which I consider paramount and that relates to 
banks’ transparency to customers. Despite the overall improvements in this regard I would 
like to focus on banking service-related issues. 
The Bank of Albania has received frequent complaints from citizens, regular or casual users 
of banking services, in relation to the costs that banks apply for the services they provide. It 
comes out that in many cases citizens are left with no options as regards the obligations to 
the bank for the service provided to them, without first being notified of the reason and size of 
obligation. In other cases, the user of the service cannot find the necessary and convincing 
explanation  from  the  bank  about  the  “why”  of  the  obligation  and  the  way  the  latter  is 
calculated. I cannot exclude here the cases when the problem stands in the limited financial 
understanding of the citizen himself; however it seems that the work of the banks’ staff to 
ensure transparency to the customer is superficial and at times deficient. In a broader and 
technical  concept,  the  method  the  costs  are  determined  by  banks  for  the  services  they 
provide remains unclear. 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2010
for 
to  encourage 
the  establishment  of  a  standard 
Based on a recent analysis made by the Bank of Albania on the level of various commissions 
applied by the banking sector, it results that the banks have not made any documented cost 
analysis for the services they provide to the customers and have not set up any methodology 
for  setting  the  respective  commissions/fees.  Moreover,  there  are  not  any  standards  of  the 
form, composition and designation of the commissions for similar services in different banks, 
hence making it difficult for the customers to make any interbank comparison and raising the 
confusion  among  the  public.  In  addition,  the  transactions  between  customers  of  different 
banks  are  penalized  by  the  relatively  high  commissions,  hence  burdening  the  making  of 
payments  through  banks  and  providing  undesirable  consequences  for  the  performance  of 
cash in economy.  
Regarding the way the commissions are set, banks are guided by the competitive institutions 
in  the  market  and  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  active  and  visionary  banking  services 
development  policies,  supportive  to  the  increase  of  the  number  of  users  that  may  easily 
become potential bank customers. It is not accidental that the income from banking service 
commissions accounts for only 5.5 percent of their total income. According to us, it shows 
that  banks  are  not  active  in  using  all  their  potential  for  raising  their  income  through 
competitive  policies  in  this  area.  I  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  to  require  your  utmost 
commitment to address this issue aiming at making a thorough improvement in this regard. 
The Bank of Albania will examine the possibility to require through the regulatory framework 
the  setting  up  and  implementation  of  documented  methodologies  for  banking  service 
commissions,  as  well  as 
the 
presentation/disclosure of commissions and the way they are monitored.  
Dear commercial bank managing directors,  
The Bank of Albania has constantly shown that it is a responsible and visionary institution. 
Withstanding the difficult situation was not merely casual. Our measures and actions of the 
last four years, pre- and post-crisis, were paramount. We are evaluating the measures and 
actions that will characterize the months to follow at the same level of responsibility. I refer, 
inter  alia,  to  the  so-called  exit  strategy,  which  refers  to  the  gradual  withdrawal  of 
extraordinary political and regulatory measures established in order to withstand the effects 
of the crisis.  
Noting that the liquidity situation in the banking system has improved and public confidence 
has restored, the Bank of Albania has started to implement the exit strategy.  
More concretely, in the beginning of the present year, the Bank of Albania changed the form 
of its main refinancing instrument auction from fixed price to limited amount auction. It is with 
pleasure  that  I  inform  you  that  this  change  has  been  comprehended  well  by  the  market, 
given  the  stable  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market.  Similarly,  the  securities’  market 
responded  positively  with  the  12-month  T-bill  interest  rates  going  down  by  about 
1 percentage point in 2010.  
As part of this strategy, the Bank of Albania has restored the relationships of bank investors 
with the profit on their investment in Albania to normal levels. Resetting the free movement of 
capital regime, besides being an obligation for Albania in the framework of the international 
conventions, provides a positive impact on Albania’s perception as a reliable destination of 
investment and on pushing the entry of foreign direct investments into our financial system. 
Moreover, along with the development of the banking system, the increase of the interbank 
market’s role and the enhancement of our political and analytical institutional capacities, the 
Bank  of  Albania  is  planning  to  improve  our  system’s  refinancing  operations.  We  are 
assessing  the  possibility  of  changing  the  operational  objectives  from  quantitative  to 
qualitative ones, expressed in the form of short-term interbank market interest rates. 
In  my  speech  I  tried  to  touch  upon  the  issues  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  considers  that 
constitute  our  near  and  distant  future  objectives.  However,  I  would  like  to  highlight  once 
again what I consider as constituting our major challenge for 2010. The economy needs to 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 5
be financed in order to ensure a stable development. Financial intermediation is the purpose 
of banking activity. To this purpose, I once more draw your attention to be more active in this 
regard.  The  return  of  deposits  has  now  provided  room  for  the  recovery  of  lending  to  the 
economy.  
The  motto  of  the  banking  system  for  2010  will  be:  every  added  deposit  in  ALL  should  be 
converted into a new ALL-denominated loan to the economy.  
In conclusion, taking advantage of this forum with the banking system, I would like to address 
to the Albanian public at large as well.  
The last crisis that hit the world economy highlighted an important element of the philosophy 
that  characterizes  the  day-to-day  life  of  every  nation.  Regardless  of  the  similar  recipes 
applied  by  individual  nations,  what  is  noticeable  was  the  appeal  on  public’s  national 
awareness and the patriotic response of the latter. I avail myself of this opportunity to make 
this appeal to the Albanian public, which with the rational behaviour shown so far, has shown 
that it is prudent and responsible.  
What I would appeal once again is simple. We should have:  
 
 
 
 
 
After all, this is the real convergence with the European Union. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  note  that  the  year  2009  was  a  relatively  hard  one  for  the 
banking  sector.  Although  the  year  2010  is  expected  to  be  a  better  one,  some  banking 
activity-related  issues  such  as  loan  quality,  its  recovery,  the  shareholders’  commitment  to 
providing  more  support  to  the  banking  activity  and  the  strengthening  of  risk  management 
structures require your utmost attention.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  committed  to  acting  in  full  compliance  with  the  legal  and 
regulatory  framework  requirements  that  establish  the  norms  for  the  conduct  of  banking 
activity.  Therefore,  your  co-operation  and  professionalism  are  particularly  important  to  this 
process. 
more confidence in our currency;  
more confidence in our banking system;  
more confidence in our analysis and conclusions;  
more deposits mean more loans; 
more loans mean more prosperity. 
6 
 BIS Review 59/2010
