DeLisle Worrell: Reviewing economic research in Barbados and the 
Caribbean 
Address  by  Dr  DeLisle  Worrell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  to  the  Central 
Bank of Barbados’ Research Review Seminar, Bridgetown, 26 July 2010. 
 This  seminar  had  its  origins  as  a  development  tool  for  economists  in  the  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados’ Research Department, many years ago, when I was Director of the Department. 
We came up with the idea of a forum to be held each year when all our economists would 
share their research, at whatever stage it had reached, so that we could help each other with 
ideas  and  suggestions, and  benefit  as  well  from  the  comments  of  the  wider  community  of 
economists  in  Barbados  and  the  Caribbean.  The  idea  worked  spectacularly  well,  and  the 
seminar  quickly  grew  into  a  leading  incubator  for  academic  research  in  the  Eastern 
Caribbean. Over the years, we have built up a loyal following of attendees, whose research 
has  benefitted  from  their  participation  in  the  seminar.  The  seminar  has  maintained  its 
character as a catalyst in the professional development of Central Bank economists, while at 
the  same  time  facilitating  research  and  debate  on  Caribbean  economic  performance  and 
policy among the wider community of economists. 
The Research Department of the Central Bank has sustained an enviable record of research 
and publication, much of it reflected in some form in the presentations made at the annual 
review seminar. For many years we published these working papers once a year in a volume 
of  collected  papers,  for  the  convenience  of  our  colleagues.  Nowadays  they  are  published 
online, in electronic form. The breadth and depth of its research and published work, much of 
it  in  regional  and  international  journals,  is  a  foundation  on  which  the  Central  Bank’s 
reputation  for  authoritative  economic  opinion  is  formed.  The  insights  gained  have  enabled 
the Bank to make persuasive arguments for its policy recommendations, and to defend its 
views in discussions with the IMF, World Bank and other international bodies. There can be 
no doubt that this has helped us to implement better policies, over the years. 
Building  on  the  foundation  of  this  proud  record  of  achievement,  the  Central  Bank’s  policy 
research and publication are on the cusp of fundamental change, occasioned by remarkable 
innovations in the professional environment of economics, finance and accounting, as well as 
new  challenges  facing  the  discipline  of  economics  itself.  The  changes  in  the  professional 
environment include: 
– 
– 
The evolution of the internet, now the principal research tool of economists; 
Electronic  publication,  which  has  become  the  main  channel  of  discussion,  debate 
and sharing of information among economists, finance professionals, policy makers, 
international institutions, and the local and international business community; 
The proliferation of working papers, which have replaced published articles as the 
essential vehicle for the cross fertilisation of ideas; and 
The  limitless  possibilities  for  cooperation  and  collaboration  among  economists, 
finance professionals and policy makers, using the internet. 
  The new challenges are: 
– 
The  collapse  of  what  has  been  referred  to  as  the  “traditional  paradigm”  of 
economics; and 
The  need  for  research  which  gives  practical,  implementable  answers  to  the 
questions businesses and governments have to address. 
 BIS Review 102/2010 
 1
A few words about the way the internet and electronic publication have fundamentally altered 
the way we work. Many of you will remember my old office on the 7th floor of the Central 
Bank building, when I was Deputy Governor of the Bank. Entire walls were lined from floor to 
ceiling with books, journals, articles and other reference materials, including big box files of 
handwritten notes on books and papers I’d read, and research materials on projects that I’d 
worked on. I invite you to visit my office today; the walls are hung with artwork, and the office 
is entirely free of bookshelves; there are at most half a dozen books on my desk, including 
the dictionary, and not a single journal. Just before I left Central Bank for the IMF in 1998, 
whenever I was too busy to get to the library, the library came to me, in the form of piles of 
incoming journals, tied together with a routing slip on the top copy. When I got to the IMF, I 
found at my disposal perhaps the most powerful economics library in the world, the Bank-
Fund Library. I used its services extensively, but in the 10 years that I worked for the IMF, I 
can recall actually visiting the library only once. I still use hard copies more often than not, 
but they are copies that I print myself, read and then send for recycling. 
The Internet has also dethroned the peer-reviewed journal, now that everyone can put their 
own  ideas  up  on  the  worldwide  web  for  anyone  to  access.  The  implications  of  this  really 
struck  home  to  me  when  I  began  to  realise  that,  outside  of  the  Caribbean,  I  had  become 
better known as an economist through my working papers issued by the IMF, than as a result 
of  any  formally  published  paper  of  mine.  Although  universities,  central  banks  and  other 
institutions  still  insist  on  formal  publication  in  a  peer-reviewed  journal,  or  by  a  respected 
publisher, as the criterion for advancement in the discipline, in practice nowadays papers are 
invariably read and cited as working papers issued for comment, not as the published work, 
which typically appears with a considerable lag, if at all.  
The Internet has fundamentally changed how we work; the collapse of the accepted theories 
of economic behaviour will fundamentally alter what we work on, in ways that we have only 
just begun to discern. In my recent address to the BES, I spoke of my growing disillusion with 
the direction in which economic theory and practice have gone in the last three decades or 
more,  with  an  orthodoxy,  which  seemed  bent  on  rushing  down  a  path  to  irrelevance. 
Thankfully, within the last decade there have been signs of intelligent life in the economics 
profession, with the emergence of the online journal Real World Economics, the burgeoning 
of  research  on  happiness,  and  the  hypothesis  that  the  economy  evolves  according  to 
universal laws of evolution – laws which are also seen in operation in biology. The challenge 
for us in the Caribbean is to find ways to use these new ideas to guide the design of our 
research.  We  have  made  a  start  in  this  direction,  with  a  project  on  price  formation  about 
which I will say a few words later. 
A  second  challenge  relating  to  the  content  of  our  work  is  to  design  projects  which  can 
provide answers to the questions policy makers need to address. Too much of the analysis 
we  do  is  of  no  practical  use  for  decision  making.  If  the  exchange  rate  in  Carjackistan 
depreciates, we start trying to estimate demand and supply for foreign exchange, when we 
know full well the reason for the depreciation is capital flight, because people no longer trust 
the Carjack government. We do a review of the economy of Outer Slobbovia, a country to 
which  tourists  are  flocking  in  droves,  and  find  that  prices  are  rising  fast  because  of  the 
excess demand for hotels and services. We calculate the real effective exchange rate, which 
is  appreciating,  and  conclude  that  Outer  Slobbovia  is  not  competitive,  no  matter  that  it  is 
stealing market share from all its competitors. This kind of misperception problem is related 
to the previously mentioned mistaken paradigm. Because our framework for thinking about 
the  problem  is  wrong,  we  ask  the  wrong  questions,  set  up  the  wrong  thought  experiment, 
assemble irrelevant data, and come to meaningless conclusions. 
All, however, is not lost. We have already begun work that may herald a paradigm shift. Last 
Friday, at the Accra Beach, the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance, assisted by the 
Caribbean  Technical  Assistance  Centre,  convened  a  conference  on  a  Caribbean  regional 
project on price formation, a project which is led by Professor Roland Craigwell of the UWI, 
who  is  an  associate  of  the  CCMF.  The  novel  feature  of  the  project  is  that  it  measures 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2010
observed behaviour of prices of specific items over time, reporting on how frequently prices 
change, whether they go down as well as up, and what are the magnitudes of change for 
different items. This contrasts with the orthodox approach to price, which seeks to determine 
a demand and a supply, and to find a point of equilibrium.  
We need to take eclectic approaches to empirical work, acknowledging that economic theory 
can  lead  us  in  the  wrong  direction,  and  economic  measurement  and  testing  is  at  best  a 
makeshift process. In our universities we teach aspiring economists to ask whether research 
has theoretical foundations; rather, they should be asking themselves whether the research 
makes sense, and follows sound principles of logic. The reality is that economics knows of 
no overarching theories that stand up to all tests, and we must therefore admit to a variety of 
small theories, to be understood, not as the laws of the Medes and Persians, but as clues to 
aid us in the search for deeper insight into the way the economy works. 
We must also admit that our statistics and our tests are very fragile. We make statements 
like  “the  economy  grew  by  5  percent”  with  the  same  assurance  as  the  statement  that 
“DeLisle Worrell is 5’5” tall”. Those are not comparable statements of fact. My height can be 
established with certainty; the GDP of the country is an educated, informed guesstimate. The 
machinery  simply  does  not  exist  to  survey  every  company  and  individual  who  produce  a 
good or service for sale, compute the total value of all those goods and services, deduct the 
value of all the materials and goods they bought, the electricity and input services they used, 
and adjust all those calculations for the changes in prices of all inputs and outputs. So we 
have to approximate. 
Our econometric tests are laden with assumptions that we often seem to forget. The most 
basic is that the future will be like the past, an assumption which we know to be more and 
more unwarranted, the further out we go. To give just one illustration: it is not reasonable to 
make inferences about the international economic crisis of 2008 from research on the stock 
market  crash  of  1929.  In  2008  the  world  featured  a  network  of  shared  information  and 
finance, with instantaneous links right around the globe, and billions of ordinary people were 
involved directly in financial transactions, from small individual depositors and mortgagees to 
giant  financial  conglomerates.  In  1929  only  a  handful  of  people  in  industrial  nations  were 
involved with financial institutions in any way, and the average worker who found himself on 
the  breadline  would  have  had  no  notion  whatsoever  of  the  cause  of  his  sudden 
unemployment. We live in a completely different world, and it is hard to understand why we 
would expect modern economies to behave as the economies of the early 20th century did. 
The moral of this story is that, although empirical tests are fundamental to good economic 
practice,  we  must  be  conscious  of  the  assumptions  we  make,  and  qualify  our  inferences 
accordingly.  
Because our methods and data are so lacking in robustness, economists need to approach 
their work like good detectives, digging deep behind the numbers for explanations and clues. 
We  need  to  practise  forensic  economics,  disaggregating  totals  to  search  out  the 
components,  and  incorporating  local  knowledge  of  each  economic  activity,  especially  the 
insights  of  the  real  people  who  are  out  there  buying  and  selling  goods  and  services.  The 
Central Bank is well equipped to do such analysis, using the impressive archive of monthly, 
quarterly and annual data that we have collected over 35 years or more.  
I believe we are on the cusp of the emergence of a new paradigm in economics. We are not 
yet clear what the new paradigm will look like. The most intriguing suggestion I have come 
across  is  the  notion  that  the  economy  evolves  according  to  the  same  laws  that  govern 
biological evolution. There are other notions abroad, such as the replacement of the evasive 
economic concept of “welfare” with “happiness” as the objective of economic transactions. In 
spite of the uncertainty about the future path of our discipline, there are some indications of 
how we need to improve economic practice, and we have already taken first steps in the right 
direction.  
BIS Review 102/2010 
 3
Many years ago Muriel Saunders and I did a detailed study of the provision of government 
services, and the budgetary cost of providing services. Sadly, it is the only study of its kind 
that I know of in the Caribbean. Updates and similar studies are urgently needed; they are of 
practical  importance,  and  can  serve  to  inform  priorities  in  the  allocation  of  government 
expenditure,  especially  important  in  these  difficult  times.  We  have  rich  troves  of  data  on 
household  and  company  credit,  including  maturities  and  interest  rates,  broken  down  by 
activity;  detailed  information  on  the  ownership  of  deposits;  information  on  the  holders  of 
government paper; information on tax yields, import breakdowns, agricultural yields, etc, etc. 
We should mine this data for practical insights about how our economy works. 
We  need  to  address  the  data  with a  variety  of  parametric  techniques,  ranging  from  charts 
and tables to econometric modelling, and covering the whole gamut of tools and approaches. 
We  should  avoid  over-emphasis  on  technique,  and  we  must  devote  more  resources  to 
structural models of the economy, such as the Central Bank still employs for forecasting, and 
less to simplistic models which reduce complex economies to a handful of equations. 
We need to be flexible in our approaches, and to develop a greater humility in our analysis. 
We  must  stop  saying  that  this  or  that  theory  has  been  “proven”,  or  this  or  that  policy  has 
“worked”. In the physical sciences, where they actually have methodologies that can prove 
things,  they  acknowledge  that  the  proof  is  valid  only  until  evidence  that  contradicts  it 
emerges; proofs in the physical sciences are not forever. In economics, where we have no 
tools  to  prove  anything,  we  are  too  fond  of  ex  cathedra  pronouncements.  We  must  stop 
saying that the world is what our theory tells us, and learn to see things as they really are.  
There is exciting new research in economics which draws on the knowledge and insights of 
other disciplines, including finance, psychology, ethics, law, cognitive sciences, and others. 
Hopefully  we  will  also  see  a  resurgence  of  interest  in  philosophy  and  epistemology.  We 
should all seek to broaden our own research into areas such as these in search of useful 
insights and guidance for policy. In the case of the Central Bank, I hope this will be reflected 
in increasing contributions to this seminar from members of all departments of the bank, not 
only the Research Department, and in joint research that crosses disciplinary boundaries. 
These are exciting times for economics, and for economists and central bankers. We have a 
chance to contribute to the changes in approach to research and analysis for policy, we have 
a rich store of data from which to draw insight, and relevant analytic expertise is increasingly 
spread across the bank, and in disciplines outside of economics. Let us maintain our focus 
on policy, and let us draw on the knowledge and expertise of our colleagues throughout the 
bank,  and  in  related  disciplines,  to  help  in  the  search  for  deeper  insight  into  our  evolving 
economies. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2010
