Lim Hng Kiang: Opening of the Norges Bank Investment Management’s 
Singapore office 
Remarks by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  in  celebration  of  the  opening  of  the  Norges  Bank 
Investment Management’s Singapore office, Singapore, 1 July 2010. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  to  celebrate  the  opening  of  Norges  Bank  Investment 
Minister Sigbjørn Johnsen, 
Governor Svein Gjedrem, 
Ambassador Janne Julsrud, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good evening. 
1. 
Management’s (“NBIM”) Singapore office. 
2. 
The  opening  of  NBIM’s  investment  office  here  is  an  affirmation  of  the  growing 
importance of Asian markets in the portfolios of many long-term investors like NBIM. It also 
reflects Singapore’s role as a key location to manage Asian investments. Your presence here 
will not only bring you closer to the markets you invest in but also help form stronger ties with 
partners in this part of the world.  
3. 
Among  the  Sovereign  Wealth  Funds  or  SWFs  around  the  world,  NBIM  is  widely 
regarded as a role model for transparency and governance. Being one of the earliest SWFs, 
NBIM has built up a strong reputation of excellence and leadership in investment and risk 
management, governance and talent management practices. NBIM has stayed focused on 
its  objective  to  preserve  and  grow  wealth  for  the  future  generations  of  Norwegians  by 
diversifying its investments internationally and developing a talented investment team. Your 
track record has been most enviable. 
Here  in  Singapore,  as  we  develop  GIC  to  invest  our  national  reserves,  we  have 
4. 
always looked towards NBIM in maintaining a close professional exchange of views and in 
mutual  learning  from  one  another.  Over  the  past  12  years,  the  two  organisations  have 
actively  exchanged  best  practices  across  a  full  spectrum  of  investment,  risk  management, 
operational and governance issues; the professional ties extend across many levels between 
the  two  organisations.  These,  I  am  told,  have  included  a  regular  dialogue  between  GIC’s 
senior management and Governor Gjedrem of Norges Bank and his management team at 
NBIM. 
5. 
This  partnership  extends  into  the  international  arena.  In  particular,  the  work 
undertaken  by  the  International  Working  Group  or  IWG  ,  IMF’s  grouping  of  SWFs  which 
includes  both  Norway  and  Singapore,  has  important  relevance  to  the  global  community.  I 
believe NBIM and Singapore’s GIC and Temasek share many common views of SWF best 
practices and serve as thought and practice leaders in the area of SWF investments.  
6. 
I am pleased to note that the IWG has since advocated a meaningful and credible 
set of principles in the form of the Generally Accepted Principles and Practices or GAPP, for 
short. These principles serve to underpin the strategic investments of the SWF community. 
This is an important development because SWFs have become a significant investor group. 
According to the IWG, since 2005, at least 17 funds were created. There are now 38 SWFs. 
Last  year,  SWFs  collectively  managed  over  US$3  trillion  of  assets.  Over  the  next  three 
years, this pool is expected to grow to US$7 trillion. 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 1
With such vast investment capacity, SWFs will play increasingly important roles in 
7. 
the  international  financial  system.  John  Lipsky  of  the  IMF  noted  that  in  the  recent  crisis, 
SWFs have been a positive and stabilizing force in providing capital to economies. 
Closing 
8. 
The opening of NBIM’s Singapore office represents the start of a new chapter to the 
strong  friendship  and  good  relations  between  Singapore  and  Norway  and  to  even  closer 
cooperation between our investment agencies. 
9. 
The Singapore office will certainly place NBIM in the heart of Asia; bringing NBIM 
closer  to  developments  within  the  Asian  markets  and  in  the  assessment  of  investment 
opportunities in the region. 
10. 
Congratulations on your office opening! Have an enjoyable evening ahead! 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2010
