Már Guðmundsson: The Icelandic pension system and the financial 
crisis 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the opening 
dinner of the European Pension Convention 2010, Reykjavík, 2 May 2010. 
 Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  address  you  here  tonight,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
organisers for inviting me to do so. This is due not least to my past interest in and work on 
the  Icelandic  pension  system  and,  more  generally,  my  interest  in  the  optimal  design  of 
pension systems. 
During my tenure as Chief Economist of the Central Bank of Iceland from 1994–2004, I was 
convinced  that  the  pension  system  that  had  developed  in  Iceland,  partly  by  historical 
accident,  was  one  of  the  strengths  of  Iceland’s  economy.  This  conviction  had  taken  root 
earlier, when I was involved with pension reform and served for a while as the chairman of 
the board of a pension fund that has long been among the top ten in Iceland in terms of size. 
However, this view was reinforced around the turn of the century, when I made an in-depth 
study of the Icelandic pension system and tried to analyse its effects on the economy and the 
financial sector.1 
I subsequently tried to propagate the virtues of the system abroad. I remember that the last 
thing I did in this respect, before I went to the Bank for International Settlements in Basel to 
focus  on  other  things,  was  to  try  to  sell  the  system  to  a  Russian  audience  that  was 
considering pension reform in their own country.2 
On what was this view based? In order to answer that, I must first remind us of the attributes 
of a good pension system. Of course it is obvious that it must be a mechanism for saving for 
retirement. But in order to be an efficient such mechanism, it must take due account of the 
lifetime risks facing individuals, as well as the economic and financial risks facing society as 
a  whole.  These  are,  for  instance,  risks  related  to  life  expectancy,  ability  to  work, 
demographics,  the  productivity  of  labour,  and  the  rate  of  return  on  financial  assets. 
Furthermore, some at least would make the demand that the system have a certain degree 
of  income  equalisation  built  into  it,  and  most  would  accept  that  it  should  at  least  not  be 
regressive. Then we would want the pension system to have some degree of flexibility and to 
provide scope for individual choice. Finally, we want the pension system to be designed so 
as  to  promote  economic  performance;  that  is,  saving,  growth,  and  financial  sector 
development. 
This is a tall order, of course, and in practice there are bound to be trade-offs between these 
goals.  However,  when  I  was  writing  about  these  issues  there  seemed  to  be  a  significant 
consensus  that,  in  order  to  meet  these  demands,  at  least  in  part,  a  good  pension  system 
should be based on three pillars: first, a tax-financed public plan that provides a flat-rate or 
means-tested  basic  pension;  second,  a  mandatory  occupational  or  private  (but  publicly 
regulated) funded pension scheme; and third, a voluntary pension saving scheme, often with 
tax incentives. Three pillars, rather than one, are needed in order to accommodate the trade-
offs between goals, make the overall system more resilient to different types of shocks, and 
                                                 
1   The  main  article 
referred 
http://www.sedlabanki.is/uploads/files/mb011_5.pdf. 
to  can  be 
found  on 
the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland  website: 
2   The 
speech 
can 
be 
found 
on 
the 
Central 
Bank 
of 
Iceland 
website: 
http://www.sedlabanki.is/uploads/files/MB041_7.pdf. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 1
provide  for  flexibility  and  choice.  This  is,  of  course,  familiar  to  most  of  you  here,  and  an 
excellent  –  by  now,  almost  classic  –  presentation  can  be  found  in  the  1994  World  Bank 
publication: Averting the Old Age Crisis. 
By  the  turn  of  the  century,  the  Icelandic  pension  system  had  taken  on  many  of  these 
attributes.  The  public  pension  system  provided  a  low  basic  pension  but  a  much  higher 
supplementary pension that was, however, means-tested, also against pensions from other 
sources. This meant that, as the occupational or second-pillar pension funds matured, the 
public pension would dwindle in relative terms. At the time, pension payments from the public 
system were still somewhat larger than those from the occupational pension funds, but the 
difference was slight and, as the total pensions paid out by the occupational pension funds 
were  growing  much  faster,  they  did  overtake  the  public  system  in  subsequent  years.  It  is 
instructive in this regard that, according to OECD, the balance between public and private 
provision  of  mandatory  pensions  is  heavily  in  favour  of  the  private  provision  in  Iceland,  or 
84%,  which  is  the  highest  rate  amongst  OECD  countries.  As  a  result,  public  pension 
spending in Iceland is 2% of GDP, compared to the OECD average of 7.2%. 
The  occupational  pension  funds  have  grown  very  fast  in  the  last  few  decades,  through 
mandatory contributions from all wages and salaries, low operational costs, and long spells 
of good returns. Around the turn of the century, they were the third-largest in EU and EFTA 
countries in terms of assets as a share of GDP, at around 80%, after Switzerland and the 
Netherlands.  Shortly  before  the  international  financial  crisis  struck,  Iceland  had  overtaken 
even  these  countries.  The  funds  were  bound  to  grow  much  more,  as  they  were  far  from 
reaching maturity in the sense that most of those receiving pensions had not accumulated 
rights  based  on  their  lifetime  earnings.  The  clearest  measure  of  this  was  the  fact  that  the 
pension burden, or pensions as a share of contributions, was still below 50%. At that time, it 
was estimated that, at maturity, the funds would amount to 1½ times GDP. They came close 
to that just before the financial crisis, but this was not “real”, as I will come to later. 
It is noteworthy that the funds do not obey simple classifications. Some of the funds have an 
employment  guarantee  and  would  be  characterised  as  defined-benefit  funds,  where  the 
employer bears the investment risk, but in Iceland only the government, municipalities and 
banks can guarantee pension funds. But the rest are not pure defined contribution funds. The 
investment risk is borne collectively by the members, and there is some scope for smoothing 
changes in benefits and for some risk-sharing among generations. This can matter when you 
have  a  once-in-a-lifetime  shock  to  returns,  as  we  experienced  during  the  international 
financial crisis. 
The third pillar of the pension system entered the stage rather late here in Iceland. It was 
only  in  1998  that  legislation  on  tax  incentives  for  voluntary  private  pension  saving  was 
adopted,  but  these  incentives  were  subsequently  increased.  Voluntary  private  pensions 
saving then increased by leaps and bounds, reaching 10% of GDP in 2002 and 15% of GDP 
in 2007. This saving has proven to be an important cushion during the current crisis, as early 
repayment was temporarily allowed. So far, these early repayments have amounted to 2½% 
of GDP. This is akin to a fiscal stimulus and has supported private consumption this year and 
last. 
Let me now say a few words about the economic and financial effects of the pension system 
that we have built up here in Iceland. The first thing to note is that it is always those who are 
economically active today who support today’s pensioners, irrespective of the system. In this 
sense  there  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  pay-as-you-go  systems  and  funded 
systems. In a small, open economy, however, the design of the pension system can affect 
this burden in at least four ways: first, through its effects on the labour participation rates of 
the  elderly;  second,  through  its  effects  on  the  size  of  the  capital  stock  and  thus  on 
productivity of labour; third, through accumulation of foreign assets that constitute a claim on 
the output of those economically active in other countries; and fourth, through contributing to 
financial sector development, which in turn might result in more efficient allocation of capital. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2010
Although we see some of these favourable effects rather clearly in the Icelandic case, the 
jury  is  still  out  on  some  of  the  others.  Negative  incentives  for  labour  participation  of  the 
elderly  are  much  less  in  evidence  than  in  many  other  countries,  as  the  retirement  age  is 
relatively  high  and  the  system  is  mostly  neutral  vis-à-vis  early  retirement.  However,  the 
effects  on  the  growth  rate  through  higher  savings  and  investment  rates  have  so  far  been 
difficult to ascertain, and the national savings rate was unusually low in the build-up to the 
financial crisis. As regards foreign assets, however, the picture is clear, as the pension funds 
have indeed built up a very significant stock of these through the years, amounting to 26% of 
their total assets at the end of 2007. They amounted to 7% of total foreign assets and 29% of 
foreign  securities  owned  by  Icelandic  residents  as  recorded  in  Iceland’s  international 
investment  position.  In addition  to shifting  part  of  the  future  pension  burden  abroad,  these 
assets proved to be important reserves when Iceland faced a sudden stop of capital inflows 
during the financial crisis. 
The clearest effects of the accumulation of the pension funds have been on financial market 
developments, where the funds contributed very significantly to the growth of these markets. 
At some points, there were even concerns that the funds were becoming too predominant. 
Thus their share of marketable bonds was almost 40% at the end of 2002. For a while, the 
overgrowth  of  the  Icelandic  banks  laid  any  such  concerns  to  rest,  but  when  the  dust  has 
settled after their collapse, these concerns might come back. However, at the moment, with 
capital controls having temporarily stopped further foreign investment by the pension funds, 
they play an important role in the heretofore relatively easy domestic financing of the large 
fiscal deficit amounting to 13.5% of GDP last year and projected at 10.2% of GDP this year. 
You  might  have  noticed  that  I  have  spoken  mostly  in  the  past  tense  when  assessing  the 
strengths and weaknesses of the Icelandic pension system. The reason is, of course, that 
the view I had on the system around the turn of the century was formed before one of the 
biggest stress tests of all time, when almost 90% of the banking system in Iceland collapsed 
in  the  autumn  of  2008  in  the  wake  of  the  post-Lehman  intensification  of  the  international 
financial crisis. So do I still have the same view? I will have to hold you a little bit longer in 
suspense on that question, as I should first discuss briefly how the financial crisis has played 
out  here  in  Iceland.  For  more  detailed  account,  I  refer  you  to  numerous  publications, 
including a thorough and informative report of the parliament-appointed Special Investigation 
Commission, which reported last month on the causes of the financial crisis in Iceland.3 
To paint with a broad brush, we can say that economic and financial developments in Iceland 
during the last decade or so are a combination of two separate but interrelated stories. On 
the  one  hand,  there  is  Iceland’s  boom-bust  cycle  and  problems  with  macroeconomic 
management in small, open and financially integrated economies. This is a well-known story 
that has played out in Iceland and other countries several times. On the other hand, we have 
the  story  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  three  cross-border  banks  operated  on  the  basis  of  EU 
legislation (the European “passport”) – banks that were mishandled by the owners and the 
bankers,  and  underregulated  and  undersupervised  by  Icelandic  authorities.  That  story,  at 
least for smaller countries, is somewhat more unique than the first. 
However,  it  must  be  remembered  that  although  these  two  stories  differ,  they  interact  in 
important  ways.  Thus  the  unsustainable  boom  that  Iceland  experienced  during  the  years 
2005–2007 was fuelled by a combination of favourable external conditions, macroeconomic 
mismanagement, and aggressive domestic bank lending. 
                                                 
3   An English version of the SIC report summary can be found on the Althingi website: http://sic.althingi.is/. For 
my  views  on 
this  year: 
http://www.sedlabanki.is/lisalib/getfile.aspx?itemid=7592 and my speech at the Annual General Meeting of the 
Central Bank of Iceland: http://www.sedlabanki.is/lisalib/getfile.aspx?itemid=7699. 
in  Bergen  early 
to  a  speech 
the  subject, 
refer  you 
I  made 
I 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 3
As  so  often  occurs  in  great  tragedies,  the  two stories converged  in  a grand  finale  in  early 
October 2008, when nearly nine-tenths of Iceland’s banking system collapsed when its three 
large  cross-border  banks  –  Glitnir,  Landsbanki,  and  Kaupthing  –  were  taken  into  special 
resolution regimes on the basis of the emergency legislation that had just been passed by 
Parliament. This added significantly to the recessionary forces that were already at play in 
the Icelandic economy as the macroeconomic imbalances created in 2005–2007 subsided. 
However, the question of cause and effect is still open; i.e., what is the specific contribution 
of  the  banking  collapse  over  and  above  an  international  recession  and  a  domestic 
macroeconomic adjustment? The fact of the matter is that the contraction in 2009 proved to 
be significantly smaller than originally predicted, with the fall in GDP turning out to have been 
7½%, as opposed to the 10% forecasted earlier in the year. 
There are probably several explanations for this. Automatic fiscal stabilisers were allowed to 
work more or less freely in 2009, with fiscal consolidation taking hold this year. Icelanders 
were allowed early withdrawal from their third-pillar pension funds, which last year and this 
year is equivalent to 2½% of annual GDP, as I mentioned earlier. The financial restructuring 
of  corporations  and  households  has  been  delayed  and,  although  this  is  detrimental  for 
medium-term recovery, it has postponed some of the pain. The depreciated exchange rate 
has  stimulated  the  traded  goods  sector.  Finally,  although  the  destruction  of  wealth  that 
Iceland has experienced as a result of the collapse of the Icelandic banks is enormous, it is 
not proportionate to the size of the banks, as foreign creditors will lose much more. 
But we will continue to pay the price this year, as GDP will contract further between 2009 and 
2010, but unfortunately I cannot give you much new detail on the prospects for 2010, nor can 
I  discuss  monetary  policy,  as  I  have  entered  the  seven-day  silent  period  before  the 
announcement  of  the  interest  rate  decision  and  the  issuance  of  a  new  forecast  next 
Wednesday. What I can say, though, is that as many other countries are already in recovery, 
Iceland’s is now only expected to begin in the second half of this year. 
But there are already several indications that Iceland is on the right path to recovery. We are 
on  an  IMF  programme  with  three  key  elements:  exchange  rate  stability,  sustainable  fiscal 
position, and rebuilding the financial sector. The exchange rate has been stable since last 
summer  and  has  appreciated  lately,  with  the  support  of  capital  controls  but  without 
supporting intervention by the Central Bank since early November. The fiscal consolidation 
programme has been progressing as planned. The functioning domestic banking system has 
been resurrected, and the final steps in the financial restructuring of the savings banks are 
being taken. 
With  the  Second  Review  of  the  IMF  programme  just  finished,  Iceland  will  gain  access  to 
foreign  currency  loans  in  sufficient  amounts  to  dispel  any  concerns  that  it  will  be  able  to 
refinance  large  foreign  currency  sovereign  debt  payments  coming  due  in  2011  and  2012. 
Furthermore, with the dust settling after the collapse, it seems that Iceland’s net foreign debt 
will be below 80% of GDP, including the estimated Icesave debt. This is similar to GDP in 
2005; it is sustainable, and it is not on the top of the international debt league table. In short, 
Iceland  does  not  face  a  sovereign  debt  crisis.  It  faced  a  foreign  liquidity  crisis  and  lack  of 
access  to  foreign  capital  markets.  The  conditions  for  opening  up  that  access  are  rapidly 
being created in the wake of the Second Review of the IMF programme, as is witnessed by 
the development of the credit default swap spread of the Icelandic sovereign and the fact that 
the rating outlook has improved. 
But what about the pension funds? They were hit very badly, of course, as their equity stakes 
in  the  fallen  banks  became  worthless  overnight,  the  value  of  bank  bonds  collapsed,  and 
asset prices of all kinds tumbled. The result was that the real rate of return on the funds was 
negative to the tune of 22% in 2008, and their assets as a share of GDP fell from 134% in 
2007  to  119%  last  year.  But  let  us  remember  that  part  of  this  is  a  correction.  The  asset 
values of the boom and the associated rates of return on pension funds, as well as banks, 
had a significant element of froth. To some extent, they were never real. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2010
We  always  knew  that  this  kind  of  shock  was  the  major  risk  facing  fully  funded  pension 
systems. But the system is still here. It took a hit, but it withstood the shock. So my basic 
belief in the strengths of the Icelandic pension system and similar systems around the world 
is still intact. But that is provided that we learn the lessons of the financial crisis and make it a 
once-in-a-lifetime event. We need to learn the lessons on incentives and risk management. 
We need to learn the lessons on accounting and valuations. We need to learn the lessons on 
regulation and supervision. We need to learn the lessons on macroeconomic management 
and the interplay between the macroeconomy and the financial sector. 
I am still optimistic on all of these points. There is a major international effort under way to 
reform regulation and supervision, also regarding cross-border banking. In the wake of the 
Special Investigation Commission report that I mentioned earlier, I hope that Icelanders now 
turn  to  the  task  of  facing  head-on  where  they  went  wrong  on  top  of  all  the  international 
failures. And finally, I note with pleasure that the pension funds are going to draw their own 
lessons  on  where  they  might  have  done  better;  for  instance,  by  being  more  critical  going 
forward, as indeed we all must be. 
In  closing,  let  me  welcome  you  to  Iceland  and  wish  you  an  enjoyable  stay  and  fruitful 
deliberations  during  your  convention.  We  need  to  learn  from  our  different  countries’ 
experiences  and  seek  out  the  common  challenges  that  we  face.  In  spite  of  the  financial 
crisis, the world will remain full of interconnections and spillovers, as we can see from the 
spread of cash and ash across borders. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 5
