Zeti Akhtar Aziz: A milestone towards a more efficient and internationally 
integrated global Islamic financial system 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  global 
launch of Thomson Reuters Islamic Finance Gateway, Kuala Lumpur, 22 February 2010. 
 In  this  more  challenging  global  economic  and  financial  environment,  Islamic  finance  has 
remained dynamic with a steady pace of innovation and fast growing as its expansion gains 
further  momentum.  This  has  demonstrated  not  only  its  viability  and  resilience  but  also  its 
ability to remain competitive. This decade has also seen the increased internationalisation of 
Islamic  finance  as  it  extends  it  outreach  to  serve  the  global  community.  The  accelerated 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  markets  and  the  supporting  international  Islamic 
financial architecture as well as the trend towards greater liberalisation have increased the 
integration of Islamic finance into the international financial system. 
Today’s launch of the Islamic Finance Gateway by Thomson Reuters is indeed a welcome 
development.  The  timely  access  to  a  broad  range  of  key  information  on  Islamic  finance 
including on the products terms, structures and Shariah rulings will contribute to enhanced 
transparency in the Islamic financial markets. As a platform that allows for price discovery, it 
will contribute towards the more efficient functioning of the various Islamic financial markets 
across the world. It will also foster a greater international understanding of Islamic financial 
practices in the various Islamic financial markets. 
I  have  been  informed  that  this  Gateway  will  also  include  in  its  content,  the  Shariah 
resolutions  database  of  the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  (ISRA)  following  the 
signing of the memorandum of understanding between Thomson Reuters and ISRA that is 
scheduled  today.  ISRA  was  established  in  2008  to  provide  a  platform  for  greater 
engagement amongst practitioners, scholars, regulators, academicians in the area of Shariah 
and to promote applied research contemporary issues in Islamic finance. Their efforts have 
contributed  to  the  harmonisation  of  Shariah  interpretations  and  thus  the  standardisation  of 
Shariah applications and practices is Islamic finance. ISRA has now become an important 
repository of knowledge for Shariah views or fatwas. The Reuters Islamic Finance Gateway 
thus has the potential to become an important vehicle for worldwide dissemination of high 
quality information on Islamic finance. 
In performing the function as an aggregator of information on Islamic finance, the Gateway 
will  showcase  the  dynamic  pulse  of  the  global  Islamic  financial  services  industry.  This 
increased  information  flow  across  borders  in  real  time  will  also  reinforce  the  trend  of  the 
internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance.  There  is  already  an  increasing  level  of  foreign 
participation in the Islamic financial markets resulting in the increase of cross border flows in 
the international Islamic financial system. The increased information flow would allow for the 
raising of funds in different jurisdictions and for the investor base to be broadened further. 
Liberalisation has also brought greater foreign institutional presence in national jurisdictions 
resulting  in  diversity  of  players  in  the  Islamic  financial  systems.  Cumulatively,  these 
developments have strengthened further the international financial linkages between different 
jurisdictions and have contributed towards the more efficient allocation of resources across 
borders. 
This  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  the  risks  associated  with  financial 
globalisation. Equally important in the process of internationalisation is therefore the quality 
of this financial globalization in Islamic finance. Let me touch on two aspects of the financial 
globalisation of Islamic finance. Firstly, that Islamic finance has been more inclusive in terms 
of  its  outreach  to  not  only  the  participation  from  the  developed  world  but  also  from  the 
emerging world, particularly from Asia and the middle-East. This leads to diversification and 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 1
avoids  risk  arising  from  over  concentration  in  particular  jurisdiction.  Moreover,  with  the 
relatively  better  growth  prospects  in  the  emerging  world,  strengthening  the  economic  and 
financial inter-linkages among the emerging world would mutually reinforce these prospects. 
The  increasing  role  of  Islamic  finance  in  bringing  together  different  parts  of  the  emerging 
world,  and  enhancing  its  links  with  the  developed  world  would  facilitate  further  this 
globalisation process. 
The second aspect relates to the current increased global engagement by the international 
community to drive the financial reform agenda. As part of this process, it is important for this 
engagement to be extended to the prudential standard setting entities for Islamic finance as 
Islamic  finance  becomes  a  growing  component  of  the  international  financial system.  While 
there  needs  to  be  recognition  of  the  prudential  standards  that  have  been  issued  by  the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  there  also  needs  to  be  awareness  by  the  international 
community of the implications of the new standards that is being introduced on the Islamic 
financial system. This is important given the common interest of global financial stability. 
Let me conclude by saying that today’s launch of the Islamic Finance Gateway by Thomson 
Reuters  marks  another  important  milestone  in  the  international  development  of  Islamic 
finance.  Such  a  comprehensive  information  and  trading  portal  for  foreign  and  domestic 
participation  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  will  contribute  towards  its  efficiency  and 
effectiveness  as  a  form  of  financial  intermediation.  On  this  note,  I  wish  to  congratulate 
Thomson  Reuters  on  the  occasion  of  the  official  global  launch  of  this  Islamic  Finance 
Gateway. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2010
