Andrew Bailey: Financial reform 
Remarks by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of 
the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s City Banquet, London, 21 September 2010. 
 My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen. Can I thank you Lord Mayor on behalf of the Bank of 
England for inviting us to contribute to your regulatory Banquet. Adair and I first met in our 
current roles when he was literally I think in his first day on the job, which was incidentally the 
weekend of the resolution of Bradford and Bingley. It is a great relief that the experience of 
that  weekend  did  not  cause  him  to  have  second  thoughts,  because  we  have  all  benefited 
from  the  leadership  that  he  has  provided  since  then.  On  the  subject  of  the  time  of  year,  I 
should add that being here in September, enjoying your hospitality Lord Mayor is a distinct 
improvement on some recent Septembers when we were recovering banks. An evening at 
Mansion House beats the pizza and all night session at the Bank of England by a very long 
way.  
I  am  going  to  speak  tonight  about  why  the  public  interest  in  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system matters to all of us. Calmer times are the necessary environment for the task of re-
building financial stability. It is a task that belongs to all of us, and it is certainly not just the 
task of regulators, central banks, or the authorities more generally. We cannot achieve and 
maintain financial stability on our own. Above all, it requires recognition of the public interest 
in financial stability.  
Thirteen years ago, at the annual banquet for the Bankers and Merchants of the City, in June 
1997, just over a month after the Election of that year, commenting on the new regulatory 
arrangements,  the  then  Governor  of  the  Bank,  Eddie  George,  said  that  the  direction  of 
financial services regulation was driven in part “by a rising tide of public expectations in terms 
of  both  the  prudential  and  the  behavioural  standards  required  of  financial  intermediaries”. 
Eddie George was undoubtedly correct that the public will and should expect more in terms 
of the standard of business of firms. But history now tells us – painfully – that on the way to 
higher standards there was a terrible lapse in which too many people in our industry forgot 
that  preserving  financial  stability  is  the  duty  that  we  all  owe  to  the  public.  The  fact  of  the 
matter is that the public has every right to expect us to act in their interest.  
This means that we cannot have attitudes which put short-term gain first on the basis that the 
stability of the financial system can be tomorrow’s objective, for the next person. But in order 
to  achieve  this,  we  need  to  be  very  clear  on  the  benefits  of  financial  stability.  One  of  the 
questions  I  get  asked  most  frequently  is  how  we  will  ensure  that  the  lessons  of  the  crisis 
stick. We can only achieve this if the case for financial stability is well understood. There is a 
very clear parallel here with monetary policy. The success of monetary policy is founded on 
public acceptance of the benefits of sustained low inflation. That did not come easily, as the 
experiences  of  the  1970s  taught.  But  once  that  public  acceptance  and  interest  started  to 
become embedded, the task of monetary policy became easier – not easy, but easier. In this 
important  sense,  no  such  policy  making  apparatus  can  be  independent  of  the  will  and 
interest  of  the  public.  And  nor  is  the  task  of  ensuring  public  acceptance  ever  finished. 
Monetary  policy  has  demonstrated  that  a  firmly  established  and  lasting  institutional 
framework for policy making is a necessity.  
But exactly what is the public interest in financial stability? This can be a harder question to 
answer than for monetary policy, because financial stability cannot be so readily summarised 
in a statistical series. There is a temptation to generalise that you certainly know it when it 
isn’t  there.  I  think  there  are  at  least  four  things  that  the  public  should  want  as  part  of  the 
overall stability of the financial system. First, that they can have confidence in the safety and 
soundness of the institutions that hold their money and savings and write policies to protect 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 1
them against risks. Second, that those institutions have the capacity to undertake the stable 
and sound provision of financial services to the economy, including of course lending. Third, 
that the system does not do business and exist on the basis of an implicit commitment that 
the State will have to use public money, the public’s money, to bail out firms that get into 
trouble.  And  fourth,  that  the  public  can  place  trust  in  firms  and  markets  based  on  their 
reputations and the transparency of their dealings. Regulation is important and it can help to 
foster that trust, but it cannot substitute for the trust that the public needs to have, in firms 
and markets. The State is not there to support the industry, and regulators are not there to 
substitute for trust in and the reputation of firms and markets.  
Some  important  principles  follow  from  the  identification  of  the  public  interest  in  financial 
stability.  First,  a  competitive  financial  system  can  only  exist  if  it  is  rooted  in  stability: 
competition and stability cannot be traded off in a binary sense. Second, the public should 
not define financial stability as preventing all financial firms from failing. In other sectors of 
the economy firms fail without putting at risk the funds of the public or taxpayers’ money. We 
will not truly have solved the too big or important to fail problem and thus the public money 
problem until we have tools at our disposal which enable us to resolve large institutions if 
they  get  into  trouble.  This  will  create  the  right  incentives  for  risk  management.  And  third, 
regulators must use their judgement to mount a robust challenge to stop dangerous business 
models  and  investment  practices.  This  last  point  is  vital.  Financial  services  is  an  industry 
where arbitraging rules and regulations is habitual, even addictive. Money is made this way. 
We have no desire unduly to suppress enterprise and innovation, but doing the right thing 
and preserving financial stability means accepting the spirit of the rules. This is not a small 
change.  Let  me  give  you  one  important  example.  The  new  Basel  agreement  emphasises 
loss-bearing capital – capital that can bear losses outside insolvency. It must stay that way, 
and not be chipped away under the banner of arbitrage masquerading as innovation. I have 
been asked a number of times in the last week whether I think that the new Basel agreement 
sets capital requirements high enough. My answer is that if the capital buffers are in future 
genuinely loss bearing capital with no tricky wrinkles, and we keep to this outcome, we have 
taken a good step forward. Sadly, that was not the case with Basel 1 in the late 1980s when I 
started out as a banking supervisor.  
The consultation document on regulatory reform in the UK published by the Government at 
the end of July emphasised the need for a judgement-focused approach by regulators “so 
that  business  models  can  be  challenged,  risks  identified  and  actions  taken  to  preserve 
stability”. What does this mean?  
A primary focus of the new Prudential Regulation Authority will be on determining whether 
the  business  models,  governance  and  systems  and  controls  of  firms  will  enable  them  to 
satisfy the public interest in financial stability in future states of the world. That requires both 
a macro and micro prudential view, and for the two to come together to reach forward-looking 
judgements  on  whether  financial  stability  is  likely  to  be  preserved  in  a  range  of  plausible 
future  outcomes.  This  range  of  outcomes  is  important,  and  it  also  underlines  the  need  to 
build up the role of stress testing. Such testing is an important mechanism for describing the 
forward-looking  view  though  it  should  continue  to  evolve  from  a  binary  pass-fail  world  into 
one  where  it  is  a  toolkit  to  test  a  range  of  possible  future  states  of  the  world  and  thereby 
judge the wider resilience of firms.  
The PRA will exercise judgement in the supervisory actions it takes, so that firms are likely to 
be able to meet its objectives, policies and rules over the medium term horizon. Firms will 
need  to  demonstrate  to  the  PRA  that  they  are  robust  to  a  variety  of  states  of  the  world, 
including unanticipated stress scenarios. However, since it is not possible for any forecast to 
cover all possible outcomes, there will always be some probability of firms failing. Working 
with the Bank of England’s Resolution team, the PRA will need closely to integrate recovery 
and  resolution  planning  within  its  supervision;  and  in  my  view  should  embed  a  proactive 
intervention  framework  akin  to  the  US  Prompt  Corrective  Action  within  its  supervisory 
approach to deal with the inevitable situations where firms get into the danger zone. Above 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2010
all,  these  tools  should  support  competition  in  the  industry,  by  accepting  that  there  will  be 
winners and losers.  
In two years’ time, we will have a new system of financial regulation in the UK. Those of us 
involved can assure you that the transition is not a small task, but I can also assure you that 
the Bank is fully committed to working with the FSA to ensure a smooth transition.  
There is a great deal to be done to implement the new system of regulation, to articulate and 
build the public interest in financial stability, and thereby to improve the stability of the system 
itself. Basel III, macroprudential tools, countercyclical buffers, are all things that Adair and I 
get excited about. They are important foundations of good policy. But on their own they don’t 
win the public interest argument for financial stability. To do that, we have to build the case 
that the industry will serve the needs and interest of the public. The authorities cannot do this 
alone. Building confidence in the financial system takes effort and time. It is a common goal 
and in the interest of everyone.  
Lord  Mayor,  the  government  of  the  City  of  London  is  an  important  part  of  the  fabric  of 
financial services, and we appreciate all that you do to support the industry and the objective 
of stability in the financial system. It is therefore my great pleasure to propose a toast to the 
Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress. 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 3
