Svein Gjedrem: Business cycles, crises and public finances –  
will governments be able to honour their debts? 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, Bergen, 24 September 2010. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 Imbalances and financial crisis 
1. 
The financial crisis had its origins in an abundant supply of credit, market participants who 
took  steadily  higher  risk  and  a  lack  of  oversight  on  the  part  of  banks,  companies  and 
authorities.  
The  global economy  entered  a  severe  downturn.  The  acute  crisis  in  financial  markets  has 
been succeeded by substantial labour market and fiscal imbalances in countries around us. 
Severe shortcomings in the management of public finances in several advanced economies 
have also been revealed. 
How public finances are managed in these countries will also be important to Norway.  
In the period from 1993 to 2008, global output expanded by more than 60 per cent, or an 
annual rate of just under 4 per cent. At the same time, inflation remained low.  
This period in the Norwegian economy could be described as two golden decades. 
But imbalances were building up in Europe and North America. With strong income growth 
and easy access to loans, the number and size of homes purchased by households grew. 
House  prices  surged  in  many  countries.  The  building  industry  and  the  financial  sector 
expanded more than other segments of the economy.  
Many governments allowed their expenditure to rise in pace with higher tax revenues. Like 
the banks, many governments also moved some expenditure off the balance sheet, through 
public private partnership (PPP) agreements, for example.  
The bubble was allowed to expand. Households borrowed too much, house prices were too 
high,  banks  and  the  building  industry  were  too  big  and  government  expenditure  and  debt 
grew too rapidly. The imbalances gradually surfaced. The problems arose initially in the US 
housing market and spread in earnest when money and capital markets abruptly dried up in 
September 2008.  
Once the crisis had become a reality, the authorities responded rapidly. To begin with, they 
provided  support  where  the  financial  markets  had  failed,  by  providing  guarantees,  offering 
liquidity and funding and purchasing securities. Central bank key rates were aggressively cut. 
The crisis in the 1930s had shown that the cost of failing to implement such measures was 
very high. (See Chart: Sovereign debt to GDP in the G7.) 
The rescue packages moved private debt onto government and central bank balance sheets. 
In  addition,  tax  revenues  declined  and  social  security  expenditure  increased.  In  the  next 
phase,  governments  had  to  counteract  falling  corporate  and  household  demand  for  goods 
and services by increasing public consumption and investment. Many countries entered the 
crisis  with  deficits  and  a  relatively  high  level  of  debt.  Public  debt  in  the  major  advanced 
economies is now as high, as a share of GDP, as it was after the Second World War, when 
high  military  spending  had  been  financed  by  borrowing.  (See  Chart:  Government  bond 
yields.) 
In late autumn 2009, fears arose in financial markets that some countries would be unable to 
pay their debts. The unrest was triggered when Greece announced that its public finances 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 1
were in poor shape. Government bond yields rose markedly in Greece, Spain, Portugal and 
subsequently  Ireland  compared  with  German  bond  yields.  Sovereign  credit  ratings  were 
downgraded and the price of insurance against sovereign debt default soared. (See Chart: 
Credit risk on sovereign debt.) 
Sovereign debt has been regarded as the safest form of investment in advanced economies 
since the Second World War. Until recently, sovereign risk premium differentials in Europe 
have been small. This has changed. It now costs more to insure against a sovereign debt 
default by Spain and Italy than to insure against default by Latin American countries such as 
Brazil and Mexico. (See Chart: Bond yields.) 
States  in  southern  Europe  also  have  to  pay  higher  interest  rates  than  sound  private 
borrowers in the euro area. There are also examples of states paying higher interest rates 
than the soundest of private borrowers in the same country. 
In  spring  2010,  Greece  encountered  acute  payment  problems.  On  2  May,  agreement  was 
reached between Greece, the IMF and the other euro area countries on a three-year loan 
package with a maximum limit of EUR 110 billion. The agreement included a comprehensive 
IMF adjustment program. Greece has borrowed approximately EUR 30 billion from the IMF 
and the euro area countries since May. 
Other European countries with weak public finances were also being scrutinised and there 
was  a  risk  of  contagion  to  the  banking  system  in  Europe,  which  was  behind  many  of  the 
loans.  On  10  May  the  EU  and  the  European  Central  Bank  announced  extensive  support 
measures  for  EU  countries,  including  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility,  which  can 
provide  loans  to  countries  in  difficulty  up  to  a  total  limit  of EUR  500  billion,  with  additional 
loans  of  up  to  EUR  250  billion  made  available  by  the  IMF  through  its  program  facilities. 
Countries  may  draw  on  these  loan  facilities  provided  that  taxes  are  increased  and 
expenditure cut so as to enable the country to gradually become self-supporting. At the same 
time,  the  European  Central  Bank  began  to  buy  government  bonds,  which  had  become 
difficult  to  trade  on  the  market,  enabling  markets  and  monetary  policy  to  function  more 
effectively.  
Economic history shows that periods of surging corporate and household debt and sharply 
rising  property  prices  often  precede  banking  crises.  The  fates  of  banks  and  states  are 
inextricably linked. Banking crises usually lead to fiscal crises. Similarly, weak government 
finances will undermine banks’ financial position.1  
Crises are costly. A historical study of financial crises shows that annual economic growth 
has  been  about  1  per  cent  lower  in  the  decade  following  a  crisis  than  in  the  decade 
preceding it.2 Unemployment also typically remains higher throughout the decade following 
the crisis.  
We should perhaps not be surprised by these results. Since the activity level is usually high 
and  unemployment  low  just  before  a  crisis,  we  cannot  expect  economic  growth  to  be  as 
strong after the crisis as it was in the preceding period. 
Crises can have their advantages. In Norway,  and in the other Nordic countries, the crisis 
years around 1990 brought changes in regulation, more open markets and the restructuring 
of public and private enterprises. In the crisis, the foundations were laid for the two golden 
decades that followed for the Norwegian economy.  
                                                 
1   Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2010): “From Financial Crash to Debt Crises” NBER Working 
Paper No, 1579, March 2010. 
2   Carmen  M.  Reinhart  and  Vincent  R.  Reinhart  (2010):    “After  the  fall”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  16334, 
September 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2010
Why should governments repay debt? 
2. 
Governments  borrow  and  save  in  order  to  smooth  income  and  expenditure  over  time. 
Sovereign  debt  can  be  denominated  in  domestic  or  foreign  currency,  and  can  be  issued 
domestically or abroad. The Norwegian government relied on foreign funding in the 1970s to 
develop Norway’s oil industry and welfare state. Since that time, North Sea oil revenues have 
been substantial, and today the Norwegian government invests its large surpluses in equities 
and bonds in other countries.  
Sovereign debt differs from private debt. Private debt is protected by the law in the country 
where the loan is contracted. The creditor can recover debt by legal means in the event of 
default.   Similar  mechanisms  do  not  in  principle  exist  for  sovereign  debt.  There  is  no 
supranational body that can recover government debt when a government defaults.3 
If a government does not consider itself to be legally obliged to repay its creditor, it might be 
tempting to default. In the economic literature the question has therefore been raised: Why 
should a government repay debt? This question begs another: If governments can turn their 
backs on commitments, why do investors lend them money? 
We observe that most countries choose to repay debt. This must mean that there are costs 
associated with default.  
Even if the creditor has no legal recourse for collecting debt, there are forms of costs that can 
be imposed on the debtor.  
First,  creditors  can  refrain  from  providing  new  loans  to  a  government  in  default.  When  a 
government  is  in  debt  negotiations,  it  is  naturally  difficult  to  raise  new  capital.  But  recent 
history shows that it does not take long before creditors are again willing to provide loans.  
Second, borrowing costs may increase. Funding rates rise when fears of sovereign default 
spread through the markets. For 30 countries that have defaulted on sovereign debt in recent 
decades, the interest rate on government bonds was 4 percentage points higher than normal 
one year after default and 2.5 percentage points higher the second year.4 Thereafter, interest 
rates fell rapidly to more normal levels.  
Third, a creditor can impose sanctions, such as trade blockades, seizure of foreign assets or 
choose even more severe measures.  
At the end of the 19th century, England took control of Egypt’s government finances because 
of  the  country’s  payment  problems.  Egypt  had  raised  a  number  of  loans  to  finance  the 
construction  of  the  Suez  Canal.  The  administration  established  by  the  British  government 
restored order to Egypt’s government finances and remained in the country for 40 years.  
It  is  likely  that  economic  incentives  also  play  a  part  in  today’s  armed  conflicts,  but  such 
instruments are not used to recover sovereign debt. The most effective weapon available to 
a creditor today is probably to take legal action to seize the debtor’s foreign assets. In the 
past 30 years, creditors have won several such cases.  
Several  studies  of  sovereign  debt  crises  over  the  past  century  have  shown  that  creditors’ 
actions have not resulted in particularly high costs for the debtor state. A state soon regains 
access to capital markets after default and borrowing costs fall back fairly rapidly.  
If the costs of default are transient, defaulting could be a profitable proposition. When a loan 
matures, it may therefore be tempting for a government to renege on its promise to repay the 
                                                 
3   See Carl August Fleischer (2005): Folkerett (International law). 
4   Eduardo Borensztein and Ugo Panizza (2009): “The Costs of Sovereign Default”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 56, 
No. 4. 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 3
debt. In economic policy this is known as a time-inconsistency problem. It can be profitable to 
make lofty promises, but turn your back on them once you have cashed in the benefits. 
Why  do  countries  not  renege  on  commitments  in  stable  times?  We  observe  that  they  do 
honour  their  commitments,  but  the  economic  literature  does  not  provide  us  with  a  good 
explanation  for  why  this  is  the  case.  Countries  want  to  preserve  a  good  reputation. 
Governments that default do so in adverse times, but only after sharp fiscal retrenchment to 
avoid that fate. 
Countries default more frequently than we believe 
3. 
It is no new phenomenon that some countries live beyond their means and fail to settle the 
bill. History shows that many countries have defaulted on sovereign debts. This has occurred 
during  emerging  phases.  From  1500  to  1900,  Spain  defaulted  on  its  sovereign  debt 
14 times.5 France defaulted nine times in the same period, while the states that later became 
Germany defaulted six times. England also defaulted once, but as far back as in 1594. (See 
Chart: Sovereign debt default.) 
The Norwegian government has not always managed to settle its debts, but by little fault of 
its  own  as  Norway  was  left  with  considerable  government  debt  after  the  secession  from 
Denmark in 1814. The government had no Treasury or liquid assets. Attempts to increase 
tax revenues failed. Moreover, Norway had little creditworthiness. At the beginning of 1816 
the government was not in a position to service its debt. After more than four years, the debt 
was negotiated down from 6 to 3 million speciedaler. The entire principal was to be repaid 
over a ten-year period. In January 1820, Norway concluded a loan contract with the finance 
company Benecke Brothers in Berlin.6 It was positive for a young nation to be able to borrow, 
but the terms of the loan were generally perceived as being poor, and the loan was popularly 
referred  to  as  “tyvelånet”  (highway  robbery).  All  government  property  and  current  customs 
revenues were required as collateral. After a period, the “tyvelån” was replaced by a loan on 
more favourable terms.  
After  the  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s,  many  European  states  struggled  with  debt 
problems. Government debt was written down in Austria, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Romania 
and  Turkey  in  the  1930s  and  1940s.  Germany  was  not  able  to  pay  war  reparations  after 
World War I.  
Since  World  War  II  sovereign  defaults  have  only  occurred  in  developing  countries  and 
emerging  economies,  particularly  in  the  period  between  1980  and  2000.  Many  of  the 
countries pursued a policy that resulted in high inflation. It became increasingly difficult for 
these countries to raise loans in domestic currency, particularly loans with long maturities. 
Attempts were made to keep inflation and the magnitude of foreign debt in check by pegging 
the domestic currency to the US dollar. But fiscal mismanagement often triggered currency 
crises, a fall in the value of domestic currency and a surge in foreign debt. This is when the 
government gave up and stopped servicing debt.  
The degree of losses incurred by creditors in connection with sovereign default has varied. 
The  most  recent  default  episodes  have  left  creditors  with  losses  ranging  between  an 
estimated 30 and 75 per cent.7 These experiences will probably influence interest rates on 
sovereign loans when a country’s debt-servicing capacity is in question.  
                                                 
5   Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009): This Time is Different. Eight centuries of Financial Folly. 
6   Sverre Steen (1954): “Krise og avspenning”, Det Frie Norge Vol 3. 
7   Panizza  et  al  (2009):  “The  Economics  and  Law  of  Sovereign  Debt  and  Default”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature 47. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2010
A forum was established, the Paris Club, which meets regularly to find solutions to bilateral 
debt  problems.  The  Paris  Club  consists  of  19  creditor  governments,  including  Norway.  A 
solution is contingent on the implementation of reforms in the debtor country as part of an 
adjustment  program  supported  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  Since  1956,  the 
Paris Club has negotiated 417 debt reduction agreements with 87 countries. The Paris Club 
primarily  negotiates  debt  relief  with  countries  –  often  poor  countries  –  that  do  not  have 
access to traditional international funding markets.  
There  is  no  supranational  body  for  debt  negotiations  for  countries  that  have  borrowed  in 
international  capital  markets.  Some  years  ago,  the  IMF  attempted  to  draw  up  a  regulatory 
framework  for  governments  and  creditors,  but  did  not  receive  the  necessary  support  from 
member countries. The IMF’s work has, however, led to more frequent inclusion of clauses in 
international loan agreements that facilitate constructive debt negotiations.8  
In our economic system, the bankruptcy system is a useful instrument. It enables businesses 
to put earlier mistakes behind them and reemploy real capital and labour. Debt arrangements 
for  governments  can  play  a  similar  role  and  counteract  downward  spirals.  (See  Chart: 
Inflation.) 
There are two forms of debt default. Breach of contract is one form where the borrower fails 
to  honour  the  contractual  obligations,  as  illustrated  in  the  example  here.  For  debt 
denominated  in  domestic  currency,  the  state  can  also  default  by  pursuing  an  inflationary 
economic  policy,  reducing  the  real  value  of  the  loan.  Over  the  past  100  years  inflation  in 
Norway  surged  during  the  two  world  wars  and  during  the  Korean  War.  The  last  period  of 
soaring inflation was in the 1970s and 1980s, which resulted in a sharp fall in the real value 
of the bonds issued in the 1950s and 1960s.  
I would also like to cite a curious example from our own monetary history9: The Norwegian 
state  took  advantage  of  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money  when  it  was  to  redeem  government 
bonds  issued  between  1896  and  1909.  France  was  one  of  the  primary  bondholders.  The 
bonds were issued during the gold standard period when the value of the krone was directly 
linked  to  the  value  of  gold.  The  lenders  were  promised  repayment  in  “monnaie  d’or”  (gold 
coins). When the bonds fell due, the Norwegian government insisted on repaying the debt 
using banknotes that had lost a substantial share of their value. France took legal action. The 
case was brought before the Norwegian Supreme Court in 1962, and the Court invoked a 
law  from  1923  stipulating  that  the  gold  clause,  i.e.  repayment  in  gold  coins,  did  not  apply 
when  the  redemption  obligation  was  suspended,  which  it  was  definitively  in  1931.  The 
Supreme  Court  also  invoked  “society’s  vital  interests”  in  its  argumentation  behind  the 
decision. The cost of repaying the gold coins that were borrowed 60 years earlier would have 
been excessively high for Norwegian state.  
The ruling is probably an example of the limited benefit to be gained by a creditor when such 
a case is tried by the debtor country’s legal apparatus.  
For Nicolai Rygg, governor of Norges Bank from 1920 to 1946, the value of money was a 
moral issue. The aim of the policy of gold parity in the 1920s was to bring the krone back to 
the value prevailing before World War I: 
“Our monetary regime is enshrined in law. (…) The regime is anchored in our legal system, 
which we cannot break down. Inherent therein is a moral obligation to restore the monetary 
                                                 
8   For  more  discussion  of  the  IMF  proposal,  see  Pål  Winje  (2002):  “Gjeldsordning  for  land  (Sovereign  debt 
restructuring)”, Penger og Kreditt 4/2002, Norges Bank. 
9   Henrik  Bahr  (1962):  “  Høyesteretts  dom  i  gullklausulsaken  (The  Supreme  Court’s  ruling  in  the  gold  clause 
case)”, Lov og Rett, Norsk Juridisk Tidsskrift, No. 5. See also Jan F. Qvigstad (2008): “On keeping promises”, 
11 November 2008. 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 5
system  to  its  previous  condition.  (…)  This  is  a  question  of  fundamental  importance  to  the 
nation through time. 
The  difficulties  that  arise  in  connection  with  the  transition  to  normal,  legal  conditions  are 
transient.  No  one  can  close  his  eyes  to  the  fact  they  are  very  serious.  But  the  life  of  the 
people is eternal and this involves a decision of significance across generations.”10  
What is a sustainable sovereign debt load? 
4. 
A  debt  level  that  is  high  in  one  country  can  be  sustainable  for  another.  When  Norway 
experienced payment difficulties in 1816, government debt stood at 6 million speciedaler, or 
about NOK 700 million at today’s value of the krone, and was probably considerably smaller 
than annual GDP in the country at that time.  
Germany  met  its  tolerance  threshold  after  World  War  I.  The  Treaty  of  Versailles  obliged 
Germany to pay war reparations to the allies after the war. The total sum of reparations was 
estimated at twice Germany’s national income at the time. The annual payments, which were 
linked  to  export  revenues,  came  to  5–6  per  cent  of  Germany’s  national  product.  The 
economist John Maynard Keynes argued that it was impossible for the country to make these 
payments and that the reparations demanded would have fatal consequences, not only for 
Germany, but for all of Europe.  
“I believe that the campaign for securing out of Germany the general costs of the war was 
one of the most serious acts of political unwisdom for which our statesmen have ever been 
responsible.”11  
The  countries  that  have  defaulted  on  debt  in  the  past  two  decades  have  systematically 
experienced problems when debt has reached around 50 per cent of GDP. Today, average 
sovereign debt for advanced economies is around 80 per cent of GDP. Japan’s gross public 
debt – one of the world’s wealthiest nations – is almost 220 per cent of GDP, but given its 
considerable assets net debt is about 110 per cent of GDP.12  
Sustainability of government debt is to a large extent determined by a country’s governance 
system, tax system and growth capacity. Developed democracies with sound public financial 
management and solid institutions have a considerable capacity to collect taxes to service 
debt. In developing countries and emerging economies, where tax collection and institutions 
are weaker, debt tolerance is lower. In addition, borrowing costs tend to be higher. On the 
other hand, they have greater scope for growing out of high debt. (See Chart: Debt at the 
time of default.) 
When  the  euro  area  was  established,  the  Growth  and  Stability  Pact  stipulated  that  a 
country’s  budget  deficit  should  not  exceed  3  per  cent  of  GDP  and  that  debt  should  not 
exceed 60 per cent of GDP. When France and Germany were among the first countries to 
breech  the  criteria  in  2003,  the  rules  of  the  game  were  changed.  This  influenced  the 
discipline of the other member states. It would almost seem that several countries viewed the 
limits as a floor rather than a ceiling.   
                                                 
10   Sejersted,  Francis  (1973):  Ideal,  teori  og  virkelighet.  Nicolai  Rygg  og  pengepolitikken  i  1920-årene  (Ideals, 
theory and reality. Nicolai Rygg and monetary policy in the 1920s). 
11   J. M. Keynes (1919): The economic consequences of the peace. Keynes probably based his argument on the 
assumption that the payments would constitute a far larger share of the national income than indicated here. 
12   International Monetary Fund (2010): “Navigating the Fiscal Challenges Ahead”, Fiscal Monitor. 
6 
 BIS Review 123/2010
The crisis set in motion a dangerous debt dynamic, which can be illustrated by the following 
simple formula13:  
 
  
where changes in public debt (on the left) are determined by the variables on the right: the 
interest rate on the debt, nominal economic growth in the country and the budget surplus or 
deficit excluding interest expenses, referred to as the primary balance. 
If the changes in debt (left side) are set at zero, the right side of the formula yields various 
conditions that must be met to achieve stable sovereign debt. If the interest rate is equal to 
GDP  growth,  the  debt  will  be  stable  when  the  government  budget  excluding  interest 
expenses is in balance. If the interest rate is higher than the rate of growth, the debt burden 
will be heavier and the government budget will have to be settled in surplus before interest 
payments. If GDP growth is higher than the interest rate, the country’s economy can grow 
out  of  its  problems  and  sovereign  debt  will  remain  stable  even  with  some  degree  of  fiscal 
deficit.  
The formula also provides an answer to the question of why sovereign debt rose so rapidly in 
many  countries.  The  term  indicated  by  the  circle  is  known  as  the  snowball  effect  and 
depends on the difference between the interest rate level and GDP growth. Low growth or a 
fall in GDP results in a rising debt burden. When debt approaches an unsustainable level, 
investors  will  demand  higher  compensation  for  new  loans  and  interest  rates  on  loans  will 
rise, hence the snowball effect. (See Chart: Fiscal deficit and Public debt.) 
Large deficits have a direct impact on sovereign debt. From 2007 to 2010, fiscal deficits in 
euro area countries rose from 0.6 per cent of GDP to 6.6 per cent. In the same period, public 
debt  rose  from  66  per  cent  of  GDP  to  85  per  cent,  and  there  are  prospects  that  debt  will 
approach 100 per cent of GDP in the next few years. Fiscal deficits in the UK and the US will 
reach 11–12 per cent this year and public debt is rising rapidly to high levels. 
In order to rein in this development, fiscal tightening must be implemented and government 
budgets must be brought into surplus. This can be particularly costly in downturns. Several 
European  countries  have  recently  announced  tax  increases  and  cuts  in  expenditure.  This 
typically involves raising the retirement age, broad-based wage reductions and lower welfare 
spending. These sharp measures may well boost growth capacity in these countries in the 
long term, but in the short run they will result in lower demand for goods and services and 
probably lower activity. Since several countries are tightening fiscal policy at the same time, 
export  markets  may  also  shrink.  However,  reduced  fiscal  deficits  will  hopefully  restore 
confidence in economic policy so that growth in household and corporate consumption and 
investment resumes. (See Chart: Sweden and Finland in the 1990s.) 
There are examples of heavily indebted countries that have stopped the snowballing process 
before it led to default. The banking crisis in the early 1990s left Sweden with a substantial 
fiscal  deficit.  Lower  tax  revenues,  increased  social  security  expenditure  and  rescue 
measures for banks brought the deficit close to 11 per cent of GDP in 1993. Sweden’s public 
debt  rose  to  80  per  cent  of  GDP.  Fiscal  consolidation  continued  for  several  years  and 
resulted in stabilisation of government debt and provided room for its eventual reduction. The 
                                                 
13   See Michael Hoel and Jan F. Qvigstad (1986): “Statsgjelden – et problem når veksten er lav og renten er høy 
(Public debt – a problem when growth is low and interest rates high)”, Sosialøkonomen, and Unni Larsen and 
Bente  Støholen  (2010):  “Public  finances  –  the  difficult  path  back  to  sustainable  levels”,  Economic 
Commentaries 2/2010, Norges Bank. 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 7
UK and Finland conducted a similar process in the 1990s. The Nordic countries in crisis at 
that time learned their lesson and have kept public finances in order during this crisis. 
The  euro  area  countries  are  in  a  special  position.  They  have  a  common  currency  and  a 
common monetary policy. Governments raise loans in the area’s single currency. Monetary 
policy – management of the euro’s value – is a common policy, conducted by the European 
Central  Bank  with  a  view  to  maintaining  price  stability.  The  countries  have  common 
guidelines for fiscal policy, but as mentioned earlier, these have not been followed. On the 
contrary, lack of discipline has been inherent in the system.  Confidence in monetary policy 
and general economic policy has been strong in the area and thanks to this confidence – and 
as free riders –  countries have been able to raise loans at low interest rates. A committee 
headed  by  Herman  Van  Rompuey,  President  of  the  European  Council,  is  assessing  how 
coordination and monitoring of EU economic policy in the various countries can be improved. 
The goal is to reduce deficits and at the same time ensure that conditions are favourable for 
future economic growth.  
Without  stretching  the  comparison  too  far,  management  of  public  finances  in  euro  area 
countries  can  perhaps  be  compared  to  the  management  of  Norwegian  counties  and 
municipalities. Under the law, they cannot go bankrupt. The government stands behind them. 
They  have  access  to  funding  markets  and  can  make  use  of  the  Norwegian  central 
government’s creditworthiness. There is an obvious temptation here to borrow too much – to 
act as free riders – that is reminiscent of the temptation faced by the euro area states. But 
the Norwegian system is balanced. If local government administrations in Norway borrow too 
much,  the  central  government  intervenes.   Municipalities  and  counties  with  a  budget 
imbalance  must  apply  to  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Regional  Development  for 
approval  when  decisions  are  made  on  borrowing  or  long-term  leasing  agreements.  The 
county governor, as representative of the state, supervises the municipalities. About 10 per 
cent  of  Norwegian  municipalities  are  currently  in  this  position  and  are  on  the  Norwegian 
ROBEK list.14  
A firm hand such as this is lacking in the euro area.  
The Norwegian government’s long-term obligations 
5. 
The Norwegian government’s financial position contrasts sharply with developments abroad. 
While  government  debt  in  Europe  is  approaching  100  per  cent  of  GDP,  the  Norwegian 
government has net financial assets exceeding 100 per cent of GDP. We have been lucky 
because we discovered oil and gas. The Norwegian state with its large territory – or should 
we  say  territorial  waters  –  has  been  adept  at  reaping  the  economic  rent  from  petroleum 
activities and managed to set aside a large portion of our petroleum revenues. 
Although the Norwegian government is not in a net debt position, it does have obligations 
under welfare schemes. These are not liabilities in the same legal sense as debt, but nor are 
they schemes that can easily be changed. The Supreme Court has established that future 
national  insurance  entitlements  are  protected,  in  principle,  by  Article  97  of  the  Norwegian 
Constitution  prohibiting  legislation  with  retroactive  effect,  but  that  changes  to  national 
insurance  entitlements  will  only  be  in  contravention  of  the  Constitution  if  they  are  “clearly 
unreasonable  or  unjust”.15  This  gives  the  political  authorities  the  freedom  to  adjust  their 
obligations.  Public  occupational  pension  schemes  seem 
to  enjoy  slightly  stronger 
constitutional  protection  than  national  insurance  pensions,  but  the  Supreme  Court  has 
                                                 
14   ROBEK – register of all municipal and county authorities  subject to approval  pursuant to Section 60  of the 
Local Government Act. 
15   See discussion in Appendix 5 to the Report of the Pension Commission (NOU 2004:1). 
8 
 BIS Review 123/2010
repeatedly  stressed  the  authorities’  need  for  freedom  of  action  when  it  comes  to  making 
changes to pension schemes.  
The  Norwegian  national  insurance  scheme  is  a  pay-as-you-go  system.  This  means  that  a 
given  year’s  pension  payments  from  the  scheme  are  covered  by  government  budget 
revenues  that  year.  When  the  national  insurance  scheme  was  introduced  in  1967,  a  fund 
was established to provide for an expected reduction in private saving. However, pensions 
were still included in the central government budget at an early stage and financed by current 
tax revenues. Transfers to the National Insurance Fund were soon discontinued.  
Nevertheless, confidence in the pension system has actually remained intact, reflected in a 
low  level  of  household  saving,  primarily  through  home  investment.  Perhaps  there  is  some 
element  of  miscalculation  here.  A  fall  in  value  may  occur  if  many  homeowners  free  up 
housing capital to cushion old age. (See Chart: Government Pension Fund Global.) 
It was only when transfers to the Petroleum Fund were introduced in 1996 that funds were 
accumulated that could also be used to cover future pension payments. The Fund, which has 
since  changed  its  name  to  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  (GPFG),  has  grown  to 
almost NOK 3 000 billion. Its rapid growth was neither expected nor planned and was due to 
the  sharp  improvement  in  government  finances  during  the  economic  upturn  from  the  late 
1990s. After the turn of the millennium, the rise in oil prices also provided a boost.  
The size of the Fund is now equivalent to approximately 18 months’ mainland GDP and may 
double in the next five to ten years. Total public expenditure is equivalent to less than half of 
total  GDP.  If  the  government  spends  4  per  cent  of  the  Fund  annually  –  the  expected  real 
return  –  this  will  finance  close  to  20  per  cent  of  public  expenditure  ten  years  ahead.  The 
return on the Fund will by then have become such an important source of funding that it is 
difficult  to  imagine  that  the  government  authorities  would  find  any  sound  arguments  for 
drawing  on  the  accumulated  capital.  It  is  also  a  flow  of  revenues  that  does  not  have  an 
adverse  effect  on  private  sector  production  capacity,  unlike  taxes.  (See  Chart: Pension 
obligations and the Government Pension Fund.) 
However,  only  a  share  of  future  pension  payments  will  be  matched  by  revenues  from  the 
Government Pension Fund. The Government Pension Fund is estimated to cover around half 
of  the  national  insurance  scheme’s  retirement  and  disability  pension  obligations.16  (See 
Chart: Pension costs and expected fund returns.) 
Over the next few years, the return on the Pension Fund is expected to rise roughly in line 
with government expenditure on retirement pensions through the national insurance scheme. 
Revenues from petroleum activities will nonetheless gradually decline, pulling down growth in 
the  Fund.  Over  time,  therefore,  the  national  insurance  scheme’s  retirement  pensions  will 
grow considerably faster than the expected real return on the Fund. (See Chart: Generational 
account.) 
However, it is wrong simply to compare the Pension Fund and obligations under the national 
insurance  scheme.  The  government  has  the  option  of  taxing  households  and  businesses, 
and this naturally also has a considerable net present value. Generational accounts allow for 
this. These accounts show whether there is a need to raise taxes or lower expenditure for the 
government budget to balance in the long term, based on forecasts for benefit and pension 
payments and oil revenues. The generational accounts reveal that there is currently a need 
for fiscal tightening equivalent to 10 per cent of GDP or of the order of NOK 200 billion. Long-
term forecasts from the Ministry of Finance, that also take the pension reform into account, 
show a shortfall of around 6 per cent of mainland GDP. Calculations by professors Alf Erling 
Risa and Erling Vårdal here in Bergen paint a similar picture. The need for fiscal tightening 
roughly  corresponds  to  current  spending  of  oil  revenues.  Estimates  of  this  kind  are  highly 
                                                 
16   Revised National Budget 2010. 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 9
uncertain by their very nature and, as we can see, have varied over time. Although Norway is 
in a stronger starting position than other industrialised countries, with considerable wealth at 
the  government’s  disposal,  these  calculations  show  that  there  are  certainly  clouds  on  the 
horizon.  
Increases in oil revenue spending cannot be sustained for much longer. Production of oil and 
gas  will  decline.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  been  through  a  period  where  the  need  for 
welfare services has been relatively stable. The dependency ratio has shown little change. 
Demographic developments will not be as favourable in the coming decades. Although we 
have built sound institutions for the management of our petroleum wealth, it is too early to 
say whether Norway is managing its wealth soundly. It could easily slip. And although there 
has now been considerable pressure to increase oil revenue spending, there is good reason 
to believe that future generations will feel that we could have set aside even more.  
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS Review 123/2010
 BIS Review 123/2010 
   11
   12 
 BIS Review 123/2010
 BIS Review 123/2010 
   13
   14 
 BIS Review 123/2010
 BIS Review 123/2010 
   15
   16 
 BIS Review 123/2010
 17
BIS Review 123/2010 
 