Erkki Liikanen: Economic policy and economic theory facing challenges 
after the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Finnish  Economic 
Association annual meeting, Tampere University, Tampere, 5 February 2010. 
 The subject of this event is so wide-ranging and the time reserved to deal with it so limited 
that,  in  my  short  discourse,  I  am  only  able  to  scratch  the  surface.  At  the  same  time,  the 
subject is of great importance. The financial crisis and the economic crisis that followed have 
forced economists and economic policymakers to reconsider some basic issues. 
Only a couple of years ago the “Great Moderation” was in the headlines of numerous articles. 
It  was  once  again  believed  that  cyclical  fluctuations  could  be  managed  much  better  than 
before. Many thought that increasing securitisation had helped to diversify risks and made 
the  international  financial  system  more  stable.  Although  US  domestic  demand  growth  was 
expected  to  slow  down  gradually,  it  was  thought  that  stronger  growth  in  Asia  would  more 
than take up the slack. All in all, the outlook for world economic growth was, if not rosy, at 
least good. 
But things turned out otherwise. 
If  we  are  to  learn  some  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis,  we  must  first  get  a  grip  on  the 
elements that finally led to the crisis. 
Anatomy of a crisis  
Several books have already been written on the various stages of the crisis and its causes, 
including  some  good  ones.1  These  provide  a  picture  of  an  intricate  web  of  profligate  risk-
taking, human greed, short-sightedness and policy errors. I will try to simplify this scenario by 
concentrating on four crisis elements. 
The  first  crisis  element  relates  to  the  global  macroeconomy  and  its  imbalances.  Even 
before the financial crisis, there was much talk of global economic imbalances, and for many 
years  the  management  of  these  was  the  focus  of  statements  coming  out  of  international 
economic  conferences.  It  was  debated  whether  Chinese  export-driven  growth  policy  or 
irresponsible US debt accumulation was behind the imbalances. 
Even so, the fact is that, with increasing global imbalances, the demand for financial assets 
grew worldwide: as a result, interest rates fell, and prices in equity and property markets shot 
up. 
Meanwhile, inflation remained subdued especially for industrial products. This was due to the 
low  production  costs  of  emerging  Asian  economies.  In  an  environment  of  low  inflation, 
monetary policy remained lax and interest rates low, from short-term money market rates to 
long-term  government  bond  yields.  The  low  interest  rates  had  an  impact  on  investor 
behaviour.  In  particular,  many  institutional  investors  were  bound  by  nominal  or  real  return 
objectives. 
                                                 
1  
Including Acharaya, Viral V, Richardson, Matthew: Restoring Financial Stability New York 2009; Fox, Justin: 
The Myth of the Rational market, New York, 2009; Tett, Gillian: Fool´s Gold: London 2009;Wessel, David: In 
Fed  We  Trust,  New  York  2009,  see  also  Gylfason,  Holmström,  Korkman,  Söderström,  Vihriälä;  Nordics  in 
Global Crisis, Vulnerability and resilience, Helsinki 2010. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 1
As it was no longer possible to achieve these objectives by means of traditional investment 
instruments,  investors  began  to  look  for  higher-yielding  assets.  Insurance  companies, 
pension  funds  and  other  institutional  investors,  public  and  private  alike,  reverted  to  riskier 
investments. As the demand for riskier investments grew, risk premia fell to historic lows. 
So, money was cheap, nor was much compensation demanded for risk. 
The second element underlying the crisis was a lack of financial market transparency. 
Interest rates were low and financial markets full of money looking for higher yields. Because 
there was an inadequate supply of traditional, safe investment options, financial innovations 
– especially securitisation – came to rescue of investors. Securitisation was the Midas touch 
that turned even low-grade raw materials, such as subprime credits, into securities with the 
top ratings. 
In part as a consequence of securitisation, in part on account of capital adequacy regulation, 
increasing  use  was  made  of  another  type  of  financial  innovation,  ie  derecognition  and 
transfer of securities from financial institutions’ balance sheets to special purpose vehicles. 
The “shadow banking sector” ballooned. 
Securitisation  and  special  purpose  vehicles  weakened  the  regulation  of  banks’  capital 
adequacy and the quality of available information on financial markets. Investors were unable 
to  adequately  assess  the  risks  inherent  in  securitised  assets,  and  risks  were  not  always 
widely understood inside the banks either. Similarly, bank balance sheets shed less light on 
banks’  real  exposures,  as  the  bulk  of  the  risks  had  been  transferred  to  special  purpose 
vehicles. 
Impaired  information  quality  led  to  the  third  element  of  the  financial  crisis,  a  variety  of 
agency  problems  and  moral  hazard.  Because  of  the  inability  to  assess  the  risks  of 
securitised loans, the discipline needed to enforce credit criteria was weakened. Meanwhile, 
banks’  executive  management  and  risk  management  staff  were  in  a  weaker  position  to 
evaluate  and  control  the  operations  of  portfolio  managers.  Ratings  assigned  by  rating 
agencies  to  exotic  products  were  not  called  into  question,  despite  the  raters’  own  agency 
problems. 
Supervisors were also less able to scrutinise bank balance sheets and understand the risks. 
Overall, controls in financial markets slackened and risk-taking at others’ expense flourished. 
Distorted  incentives  sped  up  the  process.  Later,  in  depths  of  the  crisis,  when  financial 
institutions  encountered  problems, 
transparency  prevented  an 
understanding of the scope and nature of the systemic links between financial institutions. 
Decisions on rescue operations had to be made in a hurry and often in blindfolds. 
The fourth and final element was a permissive supervisory environment, which allowed 
all this to happen. One factor was international competition: more lax regulation with the aim 
of  strengthening  the  competitive  position  of  a  country’s  own  financial  centre.  A  tighter 
supervisory regime would impair a country’s position in global competition for the location of 
financial institutions and securities trading. 
Another,  perhaps  even  more  important  factor  was  the  general  atmosphere.  There  was  a 
widespread  belief  in  the  markets’  ability  to  manage  risks.  Advocates  of  this  view  included 
many  economists,  economic  and  monetary  policy  decision-makers  and  even  supervisors. 
Even  if  an  individual  supervisor  would  have  seen  a  built-up  of  risks,  the  threshold  for 
concrete measures was high, with no other supervisor seemingly aware of problems in the 
offing. 
As a consequence, supervision of financial institutions in key financial centres was too often 
limited to passive application of the rules. People did not know how – or were unwilling – to 
ask whether the rules provided adequate safeguards in the new circumstances. Behind this 
passiveness were many quite understandable factors. One was supervisors’ uncertainty of 
their  legal  powers  to  intervene  in  the  operations  of  financial  institutions  on  a  discretionary 
basis. 
the  same 
lack  of 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2010
Macroeconomic  imbalances,  the  increased  complexity  of  the  financial  innovations  and 
weaker transparency, disincentives and agency problems, including a permissive supervisory 
environment,  together  created  an  explosive  situation  that  eventually  set  off  the  financial 
crisis. The ultimate trigger was the reversal of the uptrend in US housing prices in 2006. In 
August 2007, confidence in the markets for bonds based on securitised housing mortgages 
collapsed  and  the  crisis  began.  But  it  took  well  over  a  year  before  the  crisis  hit  the  real 
economy  with  full  force,  after  the  banking  sector  problems  surfaced  in  autumn  2008. 
Although  international  cooperation  helped  to  keep  the  banking  system  operational,  world 
trade  shrank  by  20–30%  within  a  few  months  and  unemployment  and  government  deficits 
went on the rise. 
The challenges for economic policy and economic thinking 
The financial crisis forced economists and economic policymakers to reconsider some basic 
issues: how to get through the crisis, and how to avoid a replay. The challenges are many, 
but I will pick upon just three of them. The first is to correctly understand the root causes of 
the  financial  crisis  and  to  prevent  their  recurrence.  The  second  challenge  is  to  repair  the 
damage the crisis has done to the public finances, and the third relates to the need to draw 
the right conclusions for economic analysis. 
So, the first challenge is to prevent similar crises in the future. The financial crisis taught 
policymakers  many  things  –  perhaps  most  importantly  the  holes  in  our  understanding  of 
systemic risk. The concept of systemic risk is not new as such, but the crisis revealed some 
new dimensions of systemic risk. Before the crisis, it was not understood how multifaceted 
the links are between the global financial markets and that a sufficiently wide disruption could 
paralyse the markets. Global financial markets did not collapse in October–November 2008. 
But the collapse was so near that such a risk could no longer be tolerated. 
Efforts are now under  way on numerous fronts  to get systemic risk under control. On one 
hand, important revisions to the supervision of financial institutions are in process. The Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  recently  published  its  first  consultation  papers  on  the 
matter. These are truly significant initiatives – as evidenced by the scale of resistance to the 
proposed changes on the part of banks. 
Another  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  that  supervision  of  individual  financial  institutions  is  not 
enough. Financial markets must also be supervised and regulated at the systemic or macro 
level. Macroprudential supervision has already been under discussion for some 20 years, but 
it is only now that the tools and institutions for macroprudential supervision are being set up 
for  the  first  time.  The  EU  Council  has  reached  an  agreement  on  the  establishment  of  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  and  the  European  Parliament  is  expected  to  consider  the 
matter  before  next  summer.  There  has  been  lively  debate  in  various  fora  on  the  best 
instruments for controlling systemic risks. 
This  discussion  includes  the  possible  role  of  monetary  policy.  There  is  talk  about  “leaning 
against  the  wind”.  This  idea  meets  with  two  types  of  opinions  within  the  central  banking 
community. On one hand, there is wide agreement that monetary policy should take greater 
account  of  certain  monetary  phenomena,  such  as  sharp  rises  in  asset  prices  and  credit 
stock, as well as the pricing of risk. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  concern  that  monetary  policy  is  being  burdened  with 
responsibilities  it  is  unable  to  bear.  Central  bankers  are  generally  sceptical  as  to  how 
effectively monetary policy can curb excesses in the financial markets. A particular concern 
is whether effective leaning against the wind is possible without jeopardising the anchoring of 
inflation expectations. 
The name of the former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, is often 
attached  to  a  doctrine  according  to  which  the  identification  of  asset  bubbles,  ie  their 
separation from price rises that are warranted in terms of the real economy, is so difficult that 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 3
they should not be suppressed by interest rate policy – especially considering that, when a 
bubble finally bursts, the damage can always be repaired by monetary policy action. 
This  view  has  also  been  severely  criticised,  because  it  is  assumed  to  lead  to  asymmetric 
monetary  policy  which  is  too  expansionary  on  average:  it  does  not  constrain  asset  price 
rises, but is expansionary when these prices decline. Following the crisis, there are naturally 
more  advocates  of  the  idea  that  monetary  policy,  besides  regular  monitoring  of  inflation, 
should  also  pay  increasing  attention  to  asset  prices.  But  if  this  is  to  be  done  without 
weakening the control over inflation, new monetary policy tools will be needed. As the well-
known Tinbergen rule states, the simultaneous pursuit of two objectives requires at least two 
separate instruments. 
Partly  for  this  reason,  central  banks  have  actively  participated  in  discussions  on  the 
development  of  macroprudential  guidance.  The  more  effective  the  tools  in  place  for  the 
control of financial risks, the less the pressure on monetary policy. These discussions may at 
best significantly alter the economic policy toolkit. It has been proposed, for example, that we 
need to create an instrument that works like interest rate policy in regulating financial sector 
incentives for balance sheet expansion. As signs of overheating appear and systemic risks 
increase, the instrument could be adjusted so as to tighten lending possibilities. This is an 
interesting thought. However, more research and analysis are needed before a final stand 
can be taken. 
One  basic  problem  in  the  current  discussions  is  that  economics  does  not  provide  clear 
guidance  as  to  what  types  of  instruments  could  be  used  to  conduct  this  type  of  stability 
policy. While the traditional toolkit of monetary policy, namely interest rate policy and money 
supply analysis, is firmly entrenched at the core of the economics discipline, the integration 
of financial markets and financial mediation into macroeconomic analysis is still in its infancy, 
and the relevant approaches are not yet established. This presents a definite challenge for 
economics in the coming years. 
The  second  major  economic  policy  challenge  is  the  repair  of  the  crisis  damages  to 
public finances. Following the financial crisis and resultant economic crisis, public finances 
have  generally  deteriorated  and  unemployment  has  increased,  in  some  countries  quite 
sharply. The weakening of general government finances partly reflects the effects of financial 
system  support,  automatic  stabilisers  and  various  stimulus  measures,  but  perhaps  even 
more  the  fact  that  the  collapse  of  GDP  levels  has  led  to  a  marked  erosion  of  the  public 
revenue base. The revenue base is expected to remain smaller than previously envisaged in 
many countries, as the crisis is estimated to have reduced their output potential. 
The condition of public finances has rapidly deteriorated, in Finland as elsewhere. According 
to  the  Bank  of  Finland’s  forecast  in  September  last  year,  Finland’s  budget  balance  is 
weakening  considerably,  by  almost  10  percentage  points  relative  to  GDP  in  the  period  
2008–2011.  The  budget  balance  is  projected  to  be  about  5%  of  GDP  in  2010–2011. 
Meanwhile,  general  government  debt  will  grow  by  about  20  percentage  points  relative  to 
GDP, to more than 55% in 2011. 
The  pronounced  and  rapid  weakening  of  our  general  government  finances  is  a  tough 
challenge  for  economic  policy.  The  situation  is  made  increasingly  difficult  by  population 
ageing, the effects of which begin to be gradually felt more broadly in pension expenditure, 
demand  for  publicly  subsidised  health  and  care  services  and  in  the  labour  supply. 
Accordingly,  the  present  trend  in  public  finances  and  the  adjustment  required  cannot  be 
reviewed in isolation from the ageing issue. 
Long-term plans have been put in place in Finland to deal with the expenditure pressures of 
population ageing. This has been reflected not only in public expenditure planning, but also 
in  the  pension  reform  and  public-sector  productivity  programmes.  The  aim  has  been  to 
reduce  central  government  indebtedness  and  thereby  to  provide  room  for  the  short-term 
costs  of  structural  reforms  and  for  the  long-term  upward  pressures  of  expenditures.  Other 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2010
goals  have  been  to  extend  the  number  of  years  people  spend  in  working  life  and  to  raise 
productivity in the provision of basic public services. 
The  ongoing  deep  recession,  however,  is  forcing  a  rethink  of  the  present  strategy  for 
ensuring  the  sustainability  of  general  government  finances  in  the  future.  In  the  context  of 
increasing indebtedness, expenditure growth and a decline in the output level , the capacity 
of general government finances to meet the expenditure and other pressures of population 
ageing  is  much  weaker  than  earlier  anticipated.  The  challenges  of  sustainability  of  public 
finances  have  been  analysed  comprehensively  in  the  recently  published  report  by  the 
Ministry of Finance2 Calculations of the long-term trend in public finances carried out at the 
Bank of Finland3 reinforce the outcome of the Ministry of Finance’s analysis: there is now a 
pressing need to readjust the public finances. Estimates made at the Bank also indicate that 
the  extent  of  the  adjustment  will  depend  largely  on  the  types  of  policy  measures  taken  to 
reduce the deficit. Of the various possible alternatives, policies that impact the labour market 
will be particularly expensive. A notable tightening of earned income taxation would weaken 
the employment situation and increase the costs of public service provision, and thereby their 
GDP contribution. 
From  the  perspective  of  the  economy,  it  is  not  irrelevant  how  public  finances  are 
consolidated  and  how  their  long-term  sustainability  is  secured.  One  particularly  effective 
means of reducing the adjustment required for public finances would be an enhancement of 
public-sector  productivity.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  Bank  of  Finland  calculations  I 
mentioned  earlier.  Productivity  performance  should,  however,  materially  change  from  the 
trends of the last few decades. 
Besides boosting productivity, other measures are also needed. They concern, among other 
things,  the  need  to  extend  the  number  of  years  people  spend  in  working  life.  Particular 
attention should be focused on measures that would induce young people to complete their 
educations and enter working life earlier than at present. Older employees’ later retirement is 
another  effective  way  of  reducing  the  adjustment  in  public  finances.  These  effects  are, 
however, channelled mainly via central and local government finances. Because the funding 
of the pension scheme is weighted towards the final years of working life, the effect of these 
years on the scheme’s sustainability will be minor. 
In  addition  to  improving  productivity  in  public  services  and  extending  the  number  of  years 
people  spend  in  working  life,  other  measures  are  needed  to  bring  about  the  necessary 
adjustment. It will probably be impossible to avoid higher taxes and a reassessment of public 
expenditure. 
The third challenge relates to basic issues in economics. In early autumn last year, Paul 
Krugman  asked  in  his  already  popular  column:  “How  did  economists  get  it  so  wrong?”4 
Krugman’s  central  argument  was  that  the  economics  profession  had  gone  astray.  The 
fascination for analytical elegance and mathematical acrobatics had locked economics into 
an  ivory  tower  of  frictionless  markets  and  rational  economic  agents  while  marginalising 
attempts to understand the economy as it actually is. 
Some esteemed economists defended Krugman. Others hastened to explain that there was 
no problem, as Krugman had simply overlooked the economic analysis of the last couple of 
decades.  Without  taking  a  stand  on  who  is  right  here,  the  dispute  that  ensued  from 
Krugman’s  column  shows  that  he  managed  to  raise  an  important  issue.  It  could  be  that 
                                                 
2   Finland’s Public Finances at a Crossroads, Ministry of Finance, 1 February 2010. 
3   Kinnunen,  H.  &  Kostiainen,  J.:  Julkisen 
tarkasteluja 
politiikkavalinnoista (Sustainability of public finances after the recession: policy choices under scrutiny). BOF 
Online , 4 February 2010. 
talouden  kestävyys 
taantuman 
jälkeen: 
4   Krugman, Paul: How did the economists get it so wrong?, 6 September 2009, New York Times. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 5
economists and economic policymakers have lost touch with their own science and need a 
more humble approach to their own expertise. And it could also be that achieving a balance 
between  mathematical  elegance  and  understanding  real  economic  phenomena  will  indeed 
require reconsideration. 
The “Great Depression” of the 1930s gave birth to Keynesian economics. In March 2008, I 
asked Federal Reserve Governor, Professor Rick Mishkin about his long-standing research 
colleague Ben Bernanke and Bernanke’s important research collection “Essays on The Great 
Depression”5: “Is it so that the Great Depression and the experiences gained from it provide 
the  key  frame  of  reference  against  which  Bernanke’s  research  work  and  activity  at  FED 
should be assessed?” “Not his work alone, but the work of all of us”, was Mishkin’s reply. 
The stagflation experience of the 1970s, in turn, put expectations at the core of economics 
and laid the basis for modern macroeconomics. 
Does the current “great recession” give a new direction to economics? One thing is for sure: 
economics once again faces interesting challenges for years to come. 
                                                 
5   Bernanke, Ben: Essays on the Great Depression, Princeton, New Jersey, 2000. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2010
