Alan Bollard: Keeping inflation anchored during economic recovery 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  and  Mark 
Blackmore,  Special  Adviser,  Economics  Department, 
the  Taranaki  Chamber  of 
Commerce, New Plymouth, 19 August 2010. 
to 
 The main theme of my commentary today is inflation during the recovery, what we expect to 
happen with the forthcoming increase in GST and what it means for monetary policy. 
The New Zealand economy is into its second year of recovery with much of the ground lost 
during the recession already made up.  
The  economy  has  been  growing  since  the  June  quarter  of  2009  and  we  are  now  in  this 
September quarter in the sixth quarter of growth. Initially growth was very muted but it picked 
up a little momentum towards the end of last year. 
 Compared with some past recoveries this is certainly not a fast or robust one. So far, it is 
comparable with the initial slow rebound from the 1991 recession. It lags behind the 1998/99 
recovery from the East Asian crisis, which is probably freshest in most peoples’ minds. 
We should not really be surprised by the gradual nature of the recovery. The global shock 
that hit us was, something like a once-in-a-generation event. We also still have to work off 
some  of  the  excesses  of  the  past  expansion,  such  as  high  levels  of  private  indebtedness 
along with reducing the fiscal deficit. These will remain a drag on growth for some time yet, 
as they are in a number of OECD countries. As a result the recovery still has some fragility 
about it.  
We  do,  however,  expect  GDP  growth  to  continue,  with  the  emphasis  on  export  growth  as 
household and business spending remain subdued. This outlook and the associated policy 
implications  will  be  reviewed  over  coming  weeks  as  we  prepare  the  September  Monetary 
Policy Statement. 
 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 1
What does this imply for inflation? Inflation has been well contained recently, with consumer 
prices increasing 1.8 percent in the 12 months to the June quarter this year. This marks five 
consecutive quarters where annual consumer price inflation has been at or close to the mid-
point of the Reserve Bank’s 1 to 3 percent inflation target. 
 It  is  worth  noting  that  this  contained  inflation  picture  comes  after  a  period  of  very  strong 
growth in the prices of domestic assets and international commodities. Both played a major 
part in the strong inflation pressures New Zealand experienced in the mid-2000s.  
How does this inflation performance compare with other countries? 
 2 
 BIS Review 108/2010
 Globally, consumer price inflation has reduced as a result of the financial crisis. It actually 
went negative in the US and Euro area for several quarters on the back of lower energy and 
food prices, but it has since rebounded a little. Measures of so-called “core” inflation in these 
countries have been trending down since the start of the crisis.  
The inflation record in Australia has been similar to New Zealand, except over the past few 
years as their economy avoided recession and some price pressures continued. 
In New Zealand there have already been several government policy developments that have 
affected  prices:  the  amended  Emissions  Trading  Scheme  coming  into  effect  on  1  July, 
changes to tobacco and excise taxes and ACC charges all have had significant effects on 
inflation. Despite this, consumer price inflation is likely to be close to 2 percent again in the 
September 2010 quarter. 
BIS Review 108/2010 
  3
However, the most significant event is the increase in the rate of GST on 1 October. This will 
push  headline  inflation  substantially  higher.  This  mainly  involves  direct  effects  of  GST  on 
goods and services purchased. 
The  figure  shows  the  forecasts  we  published  in  the  June  Monetary  Policy  Statement, 
implying some price pressure this quarter and a 2 percent price shock next quarter. Since 
then  our  expectation  of  the  peak  in  inflation  has  eased  back  to  around  5  percent  or  just 
below.  
The  figure  shows  that  the  spike  in  inflation  is  expected  to  be  short-lived.  The  inflationary 
effects should be largely out of the system by later next year. 
Our industry intelligence to date suggests that the GST increase is not being treated as a big 
disruptive  event  by  the  retail  industry.  Pre-stocking  does  not  appear  major,  nor  does  pre-
purchasing, and a last quarter sales fall-off is not expected. The spending effects of the GST 
increase are counter-balanced by the income tax reduction. 
As  the  economy  grows,  employment  levels  are  expected  to  increase,  and  plant  and 
equipment will be worked harder. As this occurs underlying inflationary pressures are likely to 
gradually increase, but consumer price inflation is forecast to remain comfortably inside the 
target band in the second half of our forecast horizon.  
Higher headline inflation would obviously pose a challenge for monetary policy. There have, 
of  course,  been  periods  in  the  past  when  inflation  moved  temporarily  outside  the  Bank’s 
target band. The Policy Targets Agreement with the Government deliberately gives the Bank 
the ability to “look through” temporary inflation spikes.  
The  Agreement  defines  the  Bank’s  price  stability  target  in  terms  of  the  Consumers  Price 
Index. However, it also instructs us to focus on the medium-term trend in inflation, and lists 
changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  significant  government  policy  that  directly  affect  prices  as 
specific reasons why inflation might vary around its medium-term trend.  
As such, monetary policy will not attempt to offset the immediate direct inflation impact of the 
coming policy changes. 
Given the staggered nature of the indirect tax increases and the progressive introduction of 
various sectors to the Emissions Trading Scheme, there is an additional risk that the coming 
spike  in  inflation  causes  consumers  and  businesses  to  reassess  their  expectation  of 
medium-term inflation.  
The degree to which monetary policy can “look through” temporary inflation spikes depends 
crucially on the extent to which New Zealander’s inflation expectations are impacted by such 
spikes.  Of  late,  inflation  expectations  have  risen  from  the  lows  seen  at  the  trough  of  the 
recession but they remain contained. Two-year-ahead inflation expectations initially lifted late 
last  year,  when  there  was  some  talk  of  the  housing  market  gaining  significant  momentum 
again and the economy had clearly moved out of recession.  
Subsequent to that we saw excise taxes rise, the ETS-related charges become more definite 
and the announced rise in GST. All of these are likely to have played some part in inflation 
expectations  staying  up,  even  as  the  housing  market  has  eased  off  and  the  pace  of  the 
recovery has remained moderate. 
However, the Reserve Bank does not expect the forthcoming price spike to have a lasting 
impact on inflation expectations. (In support of this, the just-released AON survey shows that 
longer-term  inflation  expectations  have  not  moved  as  a  result  of  the  impending  GST 
increase.) 
The  GST  increase  in  1989  did  not  materially  affect  inflation  expectations,  and  again  we 
expect this to be the case in 2010. As in 1989, personal income taxes will be reduced on 
1 October, offsetting the impact on disposable incomes coming from the GST increase.  
4 
 BIS Review 108/2010
 Other temporary spikes in inflation have also not generally fed into inflation expectations and 
the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  able  to  “look  through”  the  immediate  impacts  of  the  price 
change. This is one of the big pay-offs of keeping inflation well anchored.  
Nonetheless, the price and wage setting behaviour of firms and households will be monitored 
for evidence of indirect and second-round effects on inflation. For now, it is assumed that the 
coming policy changes will have only limited impact on perceptions of future inflation. 
The key to ensuring no significant effect on inflation expectations is for businesses, labour 
groups  and  households  not  to  use  the  GST  increase  as  a  veil  to  increase  margins  and 
wages. Doing so would simply spread inflation and harm the recovery. 
The extent of indexation in the economy is much less than it was decades ago, but there are 
still some  wage  and  price  adjustments  that  are  unavoidably  linked  to  the  consumers  price 
index.  
The 1 October income tax reductions mean most people are already compensated for the 
effects of the GST increase. Given this, there is less argument for one-off CPI-indexed wage 
increases. 
A particular message of restraint is for those parts of the economy, both public and private, 
that have a record of increasing prices by more than the rate of economy-wide inflation.  
We  expect  to  see  relative  prices  change  in  a  well  functioning  economy.  In  a  competitive 
market  they  represent  an  important  signal  for  resources  to  move  around  the  economy  in 
search  of  more  profitable  opportunities.  A  good  example  is  the  agricultural  transformation 
that has occurred with the rise in dairy prices. There may also be public policy reasons why 
some prices move more than others. 
But there are also examples of persistent price increases in sectors that have not suffered 
persistent  cost  increases,  and  these  have  an  inflationary  effect.  The  diagram  shows  the 
impact of excise tax increases on alcohol and tobacco industries, and that the energy and 
local authority sectors have recorded persistently high price pressures. 
Given the fragility of the recovery it is important that firms base their pricing decisions on low 
underlying inflation, and not the forthcoming temporary spike. 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 5
Monetary policy would need to respond if inflation expectations and prices were ratcheted up 
significantly.  The  result  would  be  higher  interest  rates  and  a  dampening  of  the  economic 
recovery. We are hopeful this will not need to be the case, so that monetary policy can play 
as full a part as possible in supporting economic growth. 
 6 
 BIS Review 108/2010
