Caleb M Fundanga: Zambia’s economic overview and its accountancy 
profession 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 2010 Zambia 
Institute of Chartered Accountants Annual Ball, Lusaka, 24 April 2010. 
 The President – Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants (ZICA),  
Mr. Chintu Mulendema 
The President – Eastern, Central and Southern African Federation of Accountants, 
Mr. Koos Du Toit  
The President International Federation of Accountants, Mr. Robert Bunting  
The Secretary & Chief Executive – Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants, 
Mr. Hapenga Kabeta  
The Chief Executive Officer – Eastern, Central and Southern African Federation of 
Accountants, Mr. Vickson Ncube  
Distinguished Members of ZICA  
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am greatly honoured to have the opportunity to join you this evening and to say a few words 
on the important role that the accountancy profession plays in our economy. The importance 
of  the  accountancy  profession  has  indeed  been  highlighted  following  the  recent  global 
financial crisis in which a lack of appropriate governance arrangements and clarity about the 
inherent  risks  taken  by  financial  institutions  contributed  to  the  near  collapse  of  financial 
markets in the developed economies. Clearly the accountancy profession has an important 
role to play in ensuring that the regulatory response to the crisis leads to more robust and 
transparent financial institutions that serve the needs of households and firms and avoids the 
build-up of systemic risks.  
May I take this opportunity to commend ZICA for the tremendous progress it has made in the 
development  of  the  accountancy  profession  in  Zambia.  I  am  aware  that  the  number  of 
qualified  accountants  in  the  country  has  continued  to  grow  with  ZICA  boasting  a  total  of 
3,606 members as at December 2009 compared to 2,938 in the previous year. This is no 
doubt a testimony to the growing number of institutions that are offering quality accountancy 
training  courses.  The  growing  number  of  accountants  is  also  a  reflection  of  the  economic 
achievements  the  country  has  scored  in  the  recent  past.  It  is  worth  noting  that  as  the 
economy continues to post positive economic growth, the country’s need for accountants will 
also increase.  
Distinguished Members, allow me at this moment to briefly highlight the performance of the 
economy  in  2009.  Although  projections  of  GDP  growth  for  2009  had  been  revised 
downwards  to  4.3%  on  account  of  the  effects  of  the  global  financial  and  economic 
melt-down,  preliminary  data  indicates  that  the  economy  posted  a  real  GDP  growth  rate  of 
6.3%  compared  with  the  5.7%  recorded  in  2008.  Almost  all  key  sectors  of  the  economy 
recorded positive growth except for restaurants and hotels which saw negative growth due to 
lower tourist and business travel arrivals during the financial crisis.  
Annual overall inflation slowed down, reverting to single digit level of 9.9% in December 2009 
from the 16.6% recorded in December 2008, and was in line with the original end-year target 
of  no  more  than  10%.  This  outturn  was  attributed  to  the  decline  in  both  annual  food  and 
non-food inflation. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 1
this,  Government  remained  within 
In  the  external  sector,  Zambia’s  external  position  showed  remarkable  improvement  as 
reflected in the build-up of gross international reserves to 5.1 months of import cover in 2009 
from 2.1 months of import cover in 2008. 
Zambia’s overall balance of payment position is expected to remain favourable in 2010 due 
to the rebound of copper prices on the international market as well as the expected increase 
in copper production as some mines increase production to full capacity and the resumption 
of production at some mines. 
The rebound in the international price of copper in the second half of 2009 and the return of 
foreign portfolio flows resulted in an appreciation of the exchange rate of the Kwacha by 4% 
at the end of the year. 
However,  fiscal  performance  in  2009  was  weak,  mainly  due  to  the  global  economic  crisis, 
which  reduced  domestic  revenues.  Despite 
the 
programmed domestic financing for the year. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  financial  sector  has  remained  resilient  despite  the  adverse 
effects  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  Currently,  the  Zambian  financial  sector  is 
characterised by high liquidity levels, reflecting tighter lending standards in the wake of the 
lessons from the global financial crisis leading to marked decline in private sector lending. As 
a result, the demand for the relatively risk free Government securities has increased causing 
a decline in yield rates on Government securities. The decline in Government securities yield 
rates  and  relatively  low  inflation  experienced  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  should 
contribute  to  a  decline  in  banks  lending  rates  and  thus  stimulate  borrowing  by  the  private 
sector.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  critical  role  the  accounting  profession  plays  in  enhancing 
economic  development  cannot  be  over-emphasized.  One  of  the  most  important  role  the 
profession plays in any organization is to provide accurate, reliable and high quality financial 
information  which  communicates  an  organization’s  operating  results,  its  overall  health,  as 
well as raise the transparency of its various operating activities. The other role is the audit 
function, both internal and external, which provides independent assurance of the information 
produced by accountants and also reviews the control environment in which this information 
is produced.  
In a growing economy like ours, the need for high quality financial information is very critical. 
Financial  information  provides  the  basis  for  all  financial  decision  making  at  all  levels  of 
economic activity, from households to large international organizations. Remember, there is 
no  high  quality  information  without  the  work  of  accountants  and  that  is  one  reason  why 
accountants  play  such  a  critical  role  in  today’s  global  financial  system  and  the  global 
economy.  You  provide  financial  information  that  helps  businesses  and  governments  run 
properly. You provide investors and creditors with reliable information for decision making. 
You also provide assurance services founded on integrity and independence.  
Distinguished  Members,  the  vision  of  this  country  is  to  become  a  prosperous  middle 
income country by the year 2030. In order for us to attain this vision, we need to improve the 
financial  infrastructure  in  Zambia.  The  Government  intends  to  achieve  this  through  the 
implementation  of 
financial 
infrastructure will result in efficient capital and money markets which will in turn attract foreign 
investment into our economy. However, in order to attract and retain foreign investment, we 
need  to  have  the  ability  to  provide  investors  with  transparent  information  that  will  result  in 
efficient  investment  decisions,  higher  returns  and  greater  investor  confidence.  Without 
confidence,  investors  will  simply  find  somewhere  else  to  invest  their  money.  High  quality, 
investor  oriented  and  transparent  financial  reporting  attract  both  seekers  and  providers  of 
capital.  This  is  where  accountants  come  in,  to  ensure  the  provision  of  reliable  and 
transparent  financial  information  to  potential  investors  and  other  users  of  financial 
statements.  
the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan.  An 
improved 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2010
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  certain  that  as  members  of  ZICA  you  take  pride  in  helping 
improve the financial sector in Zambia. This is done through standard setting. I recognize the 
fact  that  Accounting  standards  provide  the  foundation  for  the  production  of  high  quality 
financial  information.  I  am  aware  that  ZICA  has  adopted  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards (IFRS’s) in full and that all members of ZICA are obliged to ensure compliance 
with  IFRS.  However,  it  is  unfortunate  that  despite  ZICA  adopting  IFRS,  it  is  not  a  legal 
requirement under the Securities Act, the Insurance Act, the Banking and Financial Services 
Act and also at the Lusaka Stock Exchange.  
Nonetheless,  I  wish  to  state  that  efforts  are  underway  to  make  IFRS  a  mandatory 
requirement  for  financial  institutions.  It  is  important  for  this  provision  to  become  a  legal 
requirement  in  order  to  enhance  the  credibility  of  financial  statements  that  are  being 
produced by institutions governed by the various laws. I wish to state here that as much as it 
is important to follow international standards, these need to be reviewed for their relevance 
and practical application locally. It is also important to look at their relevance to small and 
medium enterprises where compliance may place additional burdens on operations.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  we  discuss  the  harmonization  of  various  laws,  I  would  like  to 
bring  up  the  issue  of  money  laundering.  The  Prohibition  and  Prevention  of  the  Money 
Laundering  Act  (PPMLA),  enacted  in  2001  requires  all  persons,  whether  corporate  or 
unincorporated,  to  comply  with  its  provisions.  Although  the  Act  does  not  impose  specific 
obligations  on  accountants,  they  are  expected  to  comply  with  its  provisions.  It  has  been 
noted from the recent court cases on abuse of office and corruption that professional entities 
such  as  law  and  accounting  firms  have  been  used  as  a  channel  to  launder  some  of  the 
proceeds  of  crime.  As  we  are  all  aware,  one  of  the  duties  of  accountants  is  to  know  the 
sources  and  application  of  the  resources  in  their  organization.  Therefore  I  don’t  think  it  is 
unfair to say that in most organisations, where money is being laundered, an accountant is 
involved.  
As  we  speak,  the  PPMLA  is  being  reviewed,  and  it  is  expected  that  the  amendments  to 
PPMLA as well as the new law for the establishment of the Financial Intelligence Unit will 
impose  some  reporting  requirements  on  accountants.  To  maintain  the  reputation  of  your 
profession,  all  accountants  should  uphold  good  ethical  and  professional  standards  as 
custodians of financial resources. There is also the need to ensure that financial matters are 
prudently  managed  in  organisations  for  we  have  seen  an  increase  in  reported  cases  of 
accountants involved in unlawful practices which does not reflect well on the profession.  
Notwithstanding, allow me to commend ZICA for the hard work leading to the enactment of 
the  Accountants  Act  in  2008.  This  is  a  positive  development  for  the  regulation  of  the 
Accountancy profession in Zambia. I note that the Act prescribes the relevant qualifications 
for accountants and also provides for disciplinary action against accountants found guilty of 
misconduct  and  corrupt  practices.  It  is  my  sincere  hope  that  the  enactment  of  the 
Accountants  Act  will  deter  potential  offenders  and  will  also  ensure  that  accountants  found 
guilty of malpractice receive the appropriate punishment. 
Distinguished Members, I further wish to commend ZICA for the development of the local 
qualification, the ZICA Accountancy program which has been in existence since 2006. This is 
a  positive  achievement  for  ZICA  as  it  provides  affordable  training  to  accountants.  I  am 
encouraged  by  the  statement  in  your  annual  report  that  you  intend  to  make  the  ZICA 
qualification the most preferred in the market. I urge ZICA to ensure this program is relevant 
not only to Zambia but to our neighbouring countries in order to provide an alternative to the 
costlier  international  professional  training  courses.  This  is  a  potential  area  of  foreign 
exchange  earnings  for  this  country.  The  competitive  strength  of  our  country  can  only  be 
proven by our ability to sell in the most demanding of international markets.  
As I conclude, let me challenge ZICA and all its members to assist in promoting efforts to 
improve the financial capability and financial education in Zambia. I particularly would like to 
urge  ZICA  to  partner  with  Non-Governmental  Organisations  as  well  as  the  Ministry  of 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 3
Education  in  promoting  financial  education  in  schools  and  other  institutions  of  learning  in 
rural  areas.  This  sort  of  collaborative  approach  provides  an  excellent  model  for  how 
professionals should put their expertise to good use in local communities across the country.  
At this time when the world economy is at crossroad, I am sure the accountancy profession 
is positioned to take a leadership role in helping to steer our way out of the financial crisis, 
through  high-quality  accounting  and  auditing  standards; 
through  high-quality  ethical 
standards  and  through  an  understanding  and  support  of  the  growth  of  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2010
