Lars Nyberg: Time to change cash to cards? 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor  of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 9th annual 
Nordic Card Markets conference, Stockholm, 20 January 2010.  
 More  often  than  not,  the  Riksbank  is  associated  with  the  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability, which is usually interpreted as attaining a low and stable level of inflation. However, 
we  also  have  another  objective,  namely  promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system. 
What this means in practice is less obvious, but our entire responsibility for financial stability, 
which has undoubtedly been in focus over the last 12 months, in fact rests on this wording in 
the  current  legislation.  This  task  includes  promoting  the  development  of  safe  and  efficient 
payments. This is why we take an interest in cards and cash and it is also why I am here 
today.  
The Riksbank’s responsibility for the payment system also includes having the sole right to 
issue  notes  and  coins.  This  may  seem  self-evident  today,  but  it  has  not  always  been  the 
case.  Up  until  the  early  1900s,  the  private  banks  were  entitled  to  issue  notes  under  the 
supervision  of  the  Riksbank.  The  view  of  what  the  Riksbank  should  do  and  what  private 
market  players  are  expected  to  be  responsible  for  has  thus  developed  over  time.  Up  until 
only  a  few  years  ago,  the  Riksbank  was  also  responsible  for  the  storage  and,  partly,  the 
distribution of notes and coins throughout the country. This phase has now been taken over 
by the banks in line with the model in other countries and the Riksbank is only responsible for 
the wholesale phase.  
Developments in the field of payments can be viewed in a similar way. As long as payments 
are  made  using  notes  and  coins  it  is  the  Riksbank  that  guarantees  the  confidence  of  the 
means of payment. However, as an increasing number of payments are made using cards, 
this role is increasingly becoming the responsibility of the banks and card companies. It is 
against  this  background  that  I  intend  today  to  speak  about  the  Riksbank’s  view  of  the 
development of safe and efficient payments, what we are doing in our area of responsibility 
and what we hope various private players will do.  
The payment behaviour of the Swedes  
Swedes increasingly use cards to make payments. Over the last ten years, the value of the 
card payments made has increased fivefold, while the number of card payments made has 
increased eightfold. For couple of years now, the value of the card payments made has also 
exceeded the value of all cash payments. The value of all card payments is almost twice that 
of all cash withdrawals.  
In  comparison  with  our  Nordic  neighbours,  we  previously  used  cards  to  a  lesser  extent  in 
Sweden. This is no longer the case; cards are now used to more or less the same extent in 
Sweden, Denmark and Finland. In Sweden’s case this means that we have really caught up 
since the beginning of the millennium when we used cards only half as much as these Nordic 
neighbours.1  Cards  are  still  used  to  a  greater  extent  in  Norway  than  in  the  other  Nordic 
countries.  
All-in-all,  this  development  means  that  the  use  of  cards  has  now  reached  such  a  level 
throughout the Nordic region that a serious disruption that affects the entire card system, or 
large parts of the system, would have serious consequences for the ability of people to make 
                                                 
1   Speech by Lars Nyberg (2008): “Paying is expensive – are we using too much cash?”. 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 1
payments. Cash could no longer replace cards if the card systems were to break down. If 
card payments do not work, then the entire payment system will not work satisfactorily either. 
The Riksbank’s responsibility for a safe and efficient payment system therefore means that 
we also have an interest in ensuring that card payments work safely and efficiently.  
To  get  more  up-to-date  information  and  to  learn  more  about  how  the  Swedes  pay,  the 
Riksbank  conducted  a  survey  towards  the  end  of  last  year.  The  aim  of  the  survey  was  to 
determine  how  people  choose  between  different  means  of  payment  and  the  factors  that 
affect  these  choices.  As  similar  surveys  were  conducted  in  2006,  we  also  wanted  to  see 
whether the payment patterns had changed over the three years between the surveys.  
According  to  the  surveys  conducted  in  2006,  approximately  half  of  the  interviewees  used 
cards as the means of payment for at least 80 per cent of all purchases.2 Today, almost two-
thirds of the interviewees use cards as the means of payment for all purchases.  
The great majority of the interviewees in the autumn survey, 95 per cent, had a debit card. A 
much smaller percentage, 40 per cent, had a credit card. Debit cards were used in 96 per 
cent of all card payments. This is an increase since the survey in 2006, when debit cards 
were  used  for  80  per  cent  of  all  card  payments.  Credit  cards  thus  seem  to  have  become 
relatively less important – at least in terms of the number of payments.  
Despite the fact that card payments predominate in terms of both the number and value of 
payments, the Swedish public still prefers cash to cards for purchases of less than SEK 100. 
Our survey shows that as many as 22 per cent choose cash for purchases between SEK 100 
and SEK 500. For amounts under SEK 100, cash is preferred by 63 per cent. There are no 
fully-comparable  figures  from  any  of  the  surveys  carried  out  in  2006,  but  in  2006  the 
“average  consumer”3  did  not  choose  to  pay  by  card  until  the  purchase  sum  exceeded 
SEK 123.4 
So what governs the choice between cash and cards? The most important factor, according 
to our survey, is that the means of payment is perceived as being convenient. Those who 
prefer cash also say that to a certain extent it may be a case of old habits dying hard, or that 
they  happened  to  have  cash  on  them  and  therefore  used  it.  Those  who  prefer  cards  say 
instead  that  one  of  the  reasons  is  that  they  do  not  like  to  walk  around  with  cash.  A 
comparison  of  the  interviewees’  attitudes  to  cash  and  cards  also  reveals  that  cash  is 
perceived as being more secure, while cards are seen as being somewhat less secure.  
There is also a clear generational aspect to the choice of means of payment. The youngest 
age group, those under 25, feel a greater sense of security when using cards than the other 
age groups and are more than willing to use their cards to pay small sums. Those who are 
45 or older pay with cash to a greater extent. The oldest age group, those who are 65 or 
older, prefer to pay with cash, even when they buy something that costs over SEK 500. This 
tendency is the same now as it was in the previous survey.  
What does it cost to pay?  
Should  the  trend  towards  increasing  card  payments  and  decreasing  cash  payments  be 
regarded  as  positive  or  negative?  One  way  of  attempting  to  answer  this  question  is  to 
consider  the  cost  to  society  of  various  payments.  If  the  payment  system  is  to  be  efficient, 
these payments should reasonably cost as little as possible.  
                                                 
2   “Allmänhetens  syn  på  bankerna”  (The  Swedish  public’s  opinion  of  banks),  Temo  survey,  March  2006,  The 
Swedish Bankers’ Association. 
3   The  average  consumer  was  defined  as  a  41-year  old  man  with  upper-secondary  school  education  and  an 
annual income of SEK 350,000–400,000 and who lived in a two-person household. 
4   Synovate Temo, 2006. “Survey of banknotes, coins and use of cash and cards”, December 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2010
A study of data from 2002 conducted by the Riksbank revealed that each cash payment cost 
society an average of SEK 4.6, while each card payment cost SEK 3.0. The costs associated 
with  the  use  of  cash  included  not  only  the  handling  and  transport  costs  of  the  banks  and 
shops but also an estimate of the time consumers spent on fetching and taking care of the 
cash. The variable costs are considerable, that is it costs more to handle a large sum than a 
small sum. Cash has to be counted, transported and stored. This is not the case with cards. 
There  are  major  fixed  costs  in  the  form  of  an  infrastructure  that  includes  terminals  and 
communication lines, but the variable costs are small. It is not more expensive to handle a 
card payment of SEK 50 000 than a payment of SEK 50.  
From this it was possible to calculate that, in 2002, it cost society less when payments were 
made using cash providing that the sum involved was less than approximately SEK 70. For 
sums higher than this it was cheaper to use cards.  
If we now compare this with the choices that the consumers actually made, the conclusion is 
that in 2002 it would have been better from the point of view of the Swedish economy if the 
consumers had made more payments by card and fewer payments in cash. From society’s 
point of view, it was profitable to pay by card when the sums were higher than SEK 70, but, 
as  was  the  investigation  from  2006  made  evident,  the  “average  consumer”  nevertheless 
chose to wait until the sums were higher than SEK 123.  
Eight years have now passed since the study was conducted and it is much more likely that 
the costs of using cash have increased rather than decreased. For example, the costs for 
increasing the security of transportation and ATMs have been substantial. On the other hand, 
available evidence suggests that a card payment costs somewhat less today. One reason for 
this is that the shops’ costs for getting a card payment redeemed seem to have fallen due to 
increased  competition  between  the  card  acquirers.  The  level  at  which  it  becomes  more 
advantageous to the economy to use cards rather than cash has therefore probably fallen 
below SEK 70.  
The survey we conducted last year shows that we use cards to an increasing extent and for 
smaller  and  smaller  payments.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  today’s  “average  consumer”  would 
choose to pay by card for an amount below SEK 123. At the same time, the level at which 
card  payments  become  more  efficient  for  society  has  probably  fallen  below  SEK  70.  But 
which of these figures has fallen furthest? This is something that we do not know. It is thus 
difficult  to  say  whether  consumers  are  still  using  more  cash  than  is  economically  efficient. 
The Riksbank will follow up the previous studies to get a more exact picture of the use of 
cards and cash and of the economic costs of producing the different payments.  
Highlight the charges!  
It would not be so strange if consumers were to choose to make more cash payments than is 
economically efficient. In general, consumers have no idea of how much it costs to produce 
payments.  Our  survey  shows  that  knowledge  concerning  what  the  different  means  of 
payment actually cost is limited. Some 20 per cent of the interviewees were unable to say 
whether it costs them more to use cards or cash. Some 45 per cent of interviewees believe 
that cash is most expensive for the retail sector and the banks.  
We already know that it is difficult to assess the costs of various types of payment.5 They are 
never clearly disclosed. But the costs are there even if they are not apparent. The retail trade 
pays charges to the banks for cash and for card payment services, but does not usually price 
these  services  directly  to  its  own  customers.  The  costs  the  retail  trade  has  to  bear  in 
connection  with  payments  are  instead  transferred  to  the  consumers  by  means  of  general 
                                                 
5   Bergman, M., Guibourg, G., Segendorf, B., (2007), “The Cost of Paying – Private and Social Cost of Cash and 
Card Payments”. Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 212. 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 3
price increases on goods. If the customers were also asked to pay the costs of the payment 
itself  when  they  pay  for  the  goods  they  have  bought,  they  would  probably  choose  to  pay 
more by debit card and less in cash or by credit card.  
Previous  experience  in  both  Sweden  and  Norway  shows  that  the  choice  of  means  of 
payment  is  price-sensitive.  In  Norway,  electronic  payments,  including  card  payments, 
increased very quickly after the banks introduced charges better reflecting the actual cost of 
the various means of payment. Among other charges, there exists in Norway a small charge 
for cash withdrawals from ATMs. In Sweden, we virtually stopped using cheques when the 
banks  began  to  charge  for  them.  These  two  examples  show  that  consumers’  choices 
between the various means of payment change significantly when they become aware of the 
costs.6 
In the autumn survey,  we asked the interviewees how they would react to a charge being 
levied in connection with purchases using cards or cash. Their responses revealed that there 
is certain degree of tolerance for those retailers charging for card payments. A third of the 
interviewees  said  that  they  used  their  cards  despite  a  charge  being  levied.  On  the  other 
hand, there was a lot of opposition to the idea of levying a charge in connection with cash 
purchases  or  cash  withdrawals.  A  majority  of  the  interviewees  said  that  in  this  case  they 
would make more payments by card and reduce the number of cash withdrawals. Common 
to all types of charge is that they arouse strongly negative reactions.  
It  is  not  up  the  Riksbank  to  decide  how  the  retail  trade  or  the  banks  should  distribute  the 
costs  for  different  forms  of  payment.  But  there  are  considerable  gains  to  be  made  from  a 
pricing model that better reflects the underlying costs – both for society and the companies. 
Consumers do not realise that they always pay the costs of their payments. Other countries 
have begun to charge for expensive cards in the retail sector and for the use of cash in the 
form of charges for ATM withdrawals. This has affected payment patterns. The introduction 
of  a  similar  system  in  Sweden  would,  in  all  likelihood,  also  affect  the  choice  of  payments 
made in this country.  
Secure card payments  
However, it is not only the cost that is important for payments, but also security. And this is 
where card payments have a technical disadvantage in relation to cash payments. Security is 
important  to  all  types  of  card  transaction,  not  least  when  private  individuals  use  cards  for 
payments  to  different  types  of  webshop,  which  is  becoming  increasingly  common.  Despite 
the  fact  that  the  card  industry  has developed  new,  secure  ways  of  making  card payments 
over the web, the survey we have conducted shows that the majority of people still reveal 
sensitive card information in connection with purchases. According to the survey, only 18 per 
cent  of  web  purchases  were  made  using  the  safe  solutions  for  card  payments  that  are 
available.  In  as  many  as  71  per  cent  of  the  transactions  over  the  Internet,  the  customers 
revealed their card numbers without using any additional safety measures. This is a major 
source of the card fraud that occurs over the Internet.  
The  Ministry  of  Justice  is  currently  considering  a  new  proposal  on  the  regulation  of 
unauthorised transactions. This aims to clarify how responsibility for a loss should be divided 
between  the  customer  and  the  bank  in  the  event  of  fraud.  New  limits  for  the  customers’ 
deductibles and right to compensation are also proposed. In order to determine how large a 
part of the loss the customer should be responsible for, it will be necessary to assess how 
negligent  the  customer  has  been.  The  customers  must  therefore  be  informed  of  the 
definitions  of  the  different  degrees  of  negligence.  If  the  customers  are  unclear  about  the 
                                                 
6   Speech by Lars Nyberg (2008): “Paying is expensive – are we using too much cash?”.  
4 
 BIS Review 7/2010
rights and obligations they have, this will probably lead to fewer of them wanting to use cards 
in the future.  
The  new  regulation  will  increase  the  cardholders’  responsibility.  The  banks  and  the  card 
industry  can  help  by  intensifying  their  efforts  to  protect  customers  against  unauthorised 
transactions. One element of this may be to accelerate the phase-out of magnetic strips and 
replace them with chips or similar technology. The requirement that all card terminals and 
ATMs  should  use  chips  is  a  good  first  step  as  skimming  and  the  use  of  stolen  cards 
constitute more than half of all the cases of card fraud in Sweden today.7 
It is important that the customers feel that paying with cards that contain chips is simple and 
convenient. A uniform standard for how cards should be placed in card terminals can save 
time  and  reduce  the  risk  of  customers  leaving  cards  behind  after  purchases  have  been 
made. The principle should be the same as for cars: Irrespective of the make of car, we know 
where the accelerator and the brake pedals are placed!  
Better  reporting  of  the  number  of  frauds  and  how  much  they  cost  the  card  industry  would 
also be desirable. It is after all the cardholders that ultimately have to foot the bill and it is 
reasonable to expect that all the relevant information should be available to them. Such an 
approach would also increase the cardholders’ confidence in the cards. In France there is a 
forum  for  representatives  of  the  authorities  and  the  card  industry.  They  work  to  inform 
customers,  shop  owners,  car  issuers  and  other  authorities  about  the  security  levels  in  the 
various  card  systems.  They  also  provide  information  about  the  extent  of  card  fraud  in 
France.8 Wouldn’t it be a good idea to introduce this in Sweden too?  
The Riksbank and cash  
But  what,  as  the  issuer  of  banknotes  and  coins,  is  the  Riksbank  doing  to  improve  the 
efficiency of cash management? Quite a lot has actually happened in recent years.  
The  Riksbank  began  five  years  ago  to  offer  the  commercial  banks  the  opportunity  to 
establish  private  depots  for  receiving  and  distributing  cash.  Behind  this  move  lay  the 
conviction that private participants would be able to handle the distribution of cash from the 
Riksbank to the banks in a more flexible and thus more efficient manner. On the whole, the 
new  organisation  has  functioned  excellently.  It  is,  naturally,  very  important  that  the  depot 
owners really ensure that access is satisfactory for all participants requiring cash and that the 
conditions for access to the depots are applied fairly. The Riksbank regularly evaluates the 
security and efficiency of the new system.  
In the autumn, as a further part of the effort to improve the efficiency of cash management, 
the Riksbank began planning a new cash management facility near Arlanda. When the new 
facility comes into operation in 2013, the present cash management facilities in Mölndal and 
Tumba  will  be  closed  down.  The  new  facility,  which  will  thus  be  the  Riksbank’s  only  cash 
management  facility,  will  be  equipped  with  a  lot  of  modern  technology,  including  a  fully-
automatic warehouse, and will be well adapted to the operations and security requirements 
of the future.  
Like  the  privatisation  of  the  distribution  system,  the  facility  at  Arlanda  is  a  part  of  the 
Riksbank’s efforts to streamline cash handling. The 19 Riksbank offices that conducted these 
operations  10  years  ago  will  have  been  reduced  to  one  by  2013.  In  the  same  period,  the 
number of personnel will have been reduced from around 300 to approximately 10 people.  
                                                 
7   Payment Security Report Sweden 2008, VISA Europe. 
8  
I  am  talking  about  the  Observatory  for  Payment  Card  Security  (Observatoire  de  la  sécurité  des  cartes  de 
paiement) which since 2004 produces an annual report that gives an objective account of the state of the card 
industry in France. 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 5
The  Riksbank  also  recently  evaluated  the  use  of  cash  in  Sweden  and  concluded  that  the 
current Swedish banknote and coin series is becoming outdated. There is a need to further 
develop the security details. It may also be sensible to make the relatively heavy Swedish 
coins lighter.  
Another problem is that the level of coin circulation is low. A few years ago, every Swedish 
household  had  an  average  of  SEK  850  in  coins  stored  in  a  bowl,  jar  or  money  box.  It  is 
hardly likely that this figure is lower today.  
Partly on the basis of this evaluation, the Riksbank has decided that the 50-öre coin is no 
longer needed. It will therefore be withdrawn during the autumn and öre will thereafter only 
exist  as  a  virtual  arithmetical  unit.  I  think  it  feels  rather  strange  to  imagine  this  virtual  öre. 
Some of us may still remember being able to buy a 2-öre or 5-öre toffee at the sweetshop. 
There were also 25-öre comics and the 25-öre coin was very real. But times change. The 
proposal for the new banknote and coin series is that we should introduce a new 200-krona 
banknote  and  reintroduce  the  2-kronor  coin.  Whether  the  20-kronor  banknote  should  be 
retained  or  be  converted  into  a  coin  is  also  a  matter  that  is  being  discussed.  The  final 
decision on the new banknote and coin series has not yet been made.  
New means of payment  
So far, I have mainly spoken about cards and cash. But technology is also developing rapidly 
as regards other means of payment.  
In Stockholm and a number of other Swedish cities, the SMS function of a mobile phone can 
be used, for example, to pay for bus tickets. This is an interesting example of the manner in 
which technology can also create new means of payment. We are, as you know, not alone in 
using mobile payments, these are already available in highly-developed countries like Japan 
and in less-developed countries like Kenya. In Kenya, mobile payments have already taken 
over large parts of the payment market.  
Sweden  is  a  highly-developed  country  with  a  lot  of  expertise  regarding  the  Internet  and 
mobile telephony. We should be able to be at the cutting edge of the development of mobile 
payments. It will be interesting to follow whether Swedish banks, card issuers and telecom 
operators  will  further  develop  this  payment  method,  for  example  by  means  of  real-time 
payments9 initiated from a mobile phone.  
Real-time  payments  are  already  available  in  the  UK.  The  British  company  VocaLink  has 
introduced Faster Payments, a service that processes payments in real time. VocaLink has 
also been commissioned by the Swedish payment system BGC to take over the operation 
and development of its system. As part of this work, BGC and VocaLink have also examined 
the  possibility  of  introducing  Faster  Payments  in  Sweden.  The  banks  are  already  able  to 
make  larger  payments  in  real  time  via  the  Riksbank’s  RIX  system,  which  is  an  RTGS10 
system. In order to enable real-time payments for smaller amounts, discussions are currently 
being  held  between  the  Riksbank  and  BGC  concerning  the  provision  of  special  BGC 
accounts  in  the  RIX  system,  which  can  be  used  even  when  the  system  is  closed.  The 
advantage of this solution is that it would make real-time settlement in central bank money 
possible. This in turn would make it possible for private individuals and companies to make 
payments  to  be  effected  immediately  around  the  clock,  seven  days  a  week,  using  the 
Internet banks and, perhaps within a few years, even their mobile phones.  
Although it is common today to use mobile phones for many other things than just making 
phone  calls,  our  survey  shows  that  private  individuals  in  general  are  not  familiar  with  the 
                                                 
9   A payment effected directly and which can be confirmed for both issuer and recipient, without delay. 
10   Real Time Gross Settlement. 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2010
concept of using their mobile phones to make payments. However, they value convenience 
highly  and  if  a  new  payment  method  emerges  that  is  more  convenient  than  those  that 
already exist it may have a major impact. We only have to look at payments through Internet 
banks, which almost 80 per cent of the interviewees in our survey use today.  
Another  new  development  concerns  the  return  of  the  Cash  Card  following  its  lamentable 
disappearance a few years ago. The new Cash Card has been developed by ICA Banken 
under commission of the Swedish National Debt Office and will primarily be used to make 
those  payments  that  public  authorities  previously  made  in  cash.  There  are,  of  course, 
individuals who lack access to cards and, occasionally, even to bank accounts and who are, 
consequently, entirely dependent upon cash. This new card differs from the previous Cash 
Card in that it cannot be topped up by the holder, only by the issuing party. Otherwise, it can 
be used like a normal debit card and will be equipped with a PIN code. The Migration Board, 
the Swedish Prison and Probation Service and the Social Insurance Office are a few of the 
authorities  expressing  an  interest  in  the  new  card,  although  there  will  certainly  be  other 
users. It will be interesting to follow the development of this new means of payment.  
Summary  
Let me round off.  
• 
We  use  our  cards  more  and  more;  we  use  them  more  often  and  for  smaller  and 
smaller transactions. The importance of cards to the safe and efficient functioning of 
the payment system has increased significantly. As one of the tasks of the Riksbank 
is to promote a safe and efficient payment system, there has been a corresponding 
increase in our interest in card payments.  
It is hardly likely that the costs of using cash have fallen; it is more likely that they 
have increased. On the other hand, most of the indications are that a card payment 
costs somewhat less today. From an economic point of view the use of cards should 
have become increasingly favourable.  
Few  people  know  what  payments  actually  cost.  There  are  increasingly  strong 
reasons  for  the  banks  and  the  retail  sector  to  consider  how  payments  should  be 
priced  for  customers.  Experiences  from  Sweden  and  other  countries  indicate  that 
consumers  are  price-sensitive  when  it  comes  to  the  use  of  means  of  payment. 
Consumers would use less cash if they had to bear a larger portion of cash-handling 
costs.  
The increasing use of cards places increasingly high demands on safety and on the 
reliability  of  the  technical  infrastructure  that  supports  the  cards.  Banknotes  retain 
their  value  as  a  means  of  payment  even  if  the  technical  infrastructure  is  off  line. 
Cards only work when the infrastructure does.  
Private individuals feel a greater sense of security with cash than with cards. If card 
usage is to increase, it must become safer to use cards in shops as well as on the 
Internet.  Clear  information  on  the  frauds  that  are  committed  can  also  serve  to 
reduce uncertainty among consumers.  
Good technical conditions exist for the continued rapid development of both existing 
and new means of payment.  
The Riksbank’s task is to guarantee confidence for cash in society. Confidence in 
the cards must be guaranteed by the banks and the card companies. Consequently, 
increasing responsibility for this rests with the market participants. 
      BIS Review 7/2010 
 7
