Deepak Mohanty: Implementation of monetary policy in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Bankers Club, Bhubaneswar, 15 March 2010. 
 The assistance provided by Shri Bhupal Singh and Shri Binod B. Bhoi is acknowledged. 
I thank the Bankers Club, Bhubaneswar for providing me this opportunity to speak to you this 
evening.  How  does  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  implement  monetary  policy?  This  is  the 
question I would like to address. But before doing that I will briefly touch upon the objectives 
and framework of monetary policy, as they have evolved, to set the context for discussion on 
operational aspects of monetary policy. I will conclude with a discussion on the process of 
monetary policy formulation and communication. 
Objectives and framework 
In India, the objectives of monetary policy evolved as maintaining price stability and ensuring 
adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  With  progressive 
liberalisation and increasing globalisation of the economy, maintaining orderly conditions in 
the  financial  markets  emerged  as  an  additional  policy  objective.  Thus,  monetary  policy  in 
India endeavours to maintain a judicious balance between price stability, economic growth 
and financial stability. 
The  monetary  policy  framework  in  India  from  the  mid-1980s  till  1997–98  can  be 
characterized as a monetary targeting framework on the lines recommended by Chakravarty 
Committee (1985). Because of the reasonable stability of the money demand function, the 
annual growth in broad money (M3) was used as an intermediate target of monetary policy to 
achieve  the  final  objectives.  Monetary  management  involved  working  out  M3  growth 
consistent with projected GDP growth and a tolerable level of inflation. In practice, however, 
the  monetary  targeting  approach  was  used  in  a  flexible  manner  with  “feedback”  from  the 
developments in the real sector. For example, if the real GDP growth was expected to be 
higher, M3 projection was revised upwards. 
In  the  1990s,  the  increasing  market  orientation  of  the  financial  system  and  greater  capital 
inflows imparted instability to the money demand function. Consequently, there was a shift to 
multiple indicators approach in the late 1990s. Under this approach, interest rates or rates of 
return  in  different  markets  along  with  movements  in  currency,  credit,  fiscal  position,  trade, 
capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing and transactions in foreign exchange – 
available  on  a  high  frequency  basis  –  are  juxtaposed  with  output  data  for  drawing  policy 
perspectives. The multiple indicators approach continued to evolve and was augmented by 
forward  looking  indicators  and  a  panel  of  parsimonious  time  series  models.  The  forward 
looking  indicators  are  drawn  from  the  Reserve  Bank’s  industrial  outlook  survey,  capacity 
utilization  survey,  professional  forecasters’  survey  and  inflation  expectations  survey.  The 
assessment from these indicators and models feed into the projection of growth and inflation. 
Thus,  the  current  framework  of  monetary  policy  can  be  termed  as  augmented  multiple 
indicators approach.1 
                                                 
1   Mohanty,  Deepak  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  Framework  in  India:  Experience  with  Multiple-Indicators 
Approach”, Speech delivered at the Conference of the Orissa Economic Association in Baripada, Orissa, on 
February 21, 2010. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 1
Operating procedure 
Operating procedure refer to the day to day management of monetary conditions consistent 
with the overall stance of monetary policy. It is in essence the “nuts and bolts” of monetary 
policy. It involves: first, the choice of the operational target; second, the nature, extent and 
the frequency of different money market operations by the central bank; third, the use and 
width  of  the  corridor  for  very  short-term  market  interest  rates  and;  finally,  the  manner  of 
signalling policy intentions. The choice of the operating target is crucial as this variable is at 
the beginning of the monetary transmission process. The operating target of a central bank 
could be bank reserves, base money or a benchmark interest rate. While actions of a central 
bank could influence all these variables, the final outcome is determined by the response of 
financial  markets  and  institutions  to  the  central  bank  action.  I  will  briefly  survey  the 
international experience before turning to our own experience.  
International experience 
Among the two operating targets ─ bank reserves and interest rates ─ the focus increasingly 
shifted  towards  interest  rates  in  the  early  1990s  reflecting  greater  significance  of  interest 
rates  in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  as  markets  developed  in  a  deregulated 
environment.  Consequently,  the  overnight  rate  emerged  as  the  most  commonly  pursued 
operating target in the conduct of monetary policy. For example, developed countries such 
as the US, the UK, Japan, Canada and Australia focus on the overnight inter-bank rate as 
the key operative target. The European Central Bank (ECB) follows a corridor approach for 
short-term market interest rates with a floor provided by its deposit facility and the ceiling by 
its  marginal  lending  facility.  The  ECB  provides  liquidity  through  its  main  refinancing 
operations to ensure that the demand-supply conditions in the inter-bank market support a 
short-term inter-bank market interest rate consistent with its interest rate target. While many 
emerging market economies (EMEs) target overnight interest rate, there is also a preference 
for an interest rate corridor.  
Literature on the central banks’ own accounts in the industrial countries attribute five main 
reasons for reforms in their operating procedures during the 1980s and the 1990s.2 
– 
First,  monetary  policy  instruments  were  changed  to  adapt  to  the  new  operational 
frameworks of the respective monetary authorities. 
Second, with financial deepening occurring more or less entirely outside the central 
banks’  balance  sheets,  the  share  of  the  financial  system  over  which  monetary 
authorities  had  direct  control  was  reduced,  warranting  indirect,  price-oriented  as 
opposed  to  quantity-oriented  instruments,  ways  to  control  the  non-monetary 
components of liquidity in the financial system. 
Third, in the wake of expansion, diversification and integration of financial markets 
and  the  narrowing  of  differentials  between  rates  of  return  in  different  currencies, 
there was a need for instruments that could impart flexibility to liquidity management 
in terms of timing, magnitude and accuracy. 
Fourth,  the  growing  importance  of  expectations  in  financial  markets  favoured  the 
adoption of instruments that were better suited for signalling the stance of monetary 
policy. 
Fifth,  there  was  a  growing  urge  on  the  part  of  central  banks  to  stimulate  money 
market  activity  and  improve  monetary  policy  transmission  while  emphasising  the 
separation of monetary and government debt management objectives. 
                                                     
2   Mehran  H.,  Laurens,  B.  and  M.  Quintyn  (eds.)  (1996),  Interest  Rate  Liberalization  and  Money  Market 
Development: Selected Country Experiences, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2010
Thus,  during  the  1990s  there  was  continuous  reduction  in  reserve  requirements  with 
increasing emphasis on active liquidity management accompanied by a greater transparency 
in the policy signals relating to desired interest rate levels. Most central banks prefer open 
market  operations  (OMO)  as  a  tool  of  monetary  policy,  which  allow  them  to  adjust  market 
liquidity and influence the term structure of interest rates. 
the 
the  monetary 
institutional  arrangements.  During 
Indian experience 
Consistent  with  the  objectives  and  policy  framework,  the  operating  procedure  of  monetary 
policy in India has also witnessed significant changes. The choice of targets, instruments and 
operating  procedure  was  circumscribed  to  a  large  extent  by  the  nature  of  the  financial 
markets  and 
targeting  period  
(1985–1998), while M3 growth provided the nominal anchor, reserve money was used as the 
operating  target  and  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  was  used  as  the  principal  operating 
instrument.  Besides  CRR,  in  the  pre-reform  period  prior  to  1991,  given  the  command  and 
control  nature  of  the  economy,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  to  resort  to  direct  instruments  like 
interest  rate  regulations  and  selective  credit  control.  These  instruments  were  used 
intermittently to neutralize the expansionary impact of large fiscal deficits which were partly 
monetised.  The  administered  interest  rate  regime  kept  the  yield  rate  of  the  government 
securities  artificially  low.  The  demand  for  them  was  created  through  periodic  hikes  in  the 
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for banks. The task before the Reserve Bank was, therefore, 
to develop the financial markets to prepare the ground for indirect operations. 
The year 1992–93 was a landmark in the sense that the market borrowing programme of the 
government  was  put  through  the  auction  process.  This  was  buttressed  by  a  phased 
deregulation of lending rates in the credit market. The Reserve Bank also brought down the 
SLR to its statutory minimum of 25 per cent by October 1997, while CRR was brought down 
from  15  per  cent  of  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL)  of  banks  to  9.5  per  cent  by 
November 1997. The automatic monetization of deficits was also phased out in April 1997. 
All these developments resulted in a decline in pre-emption of resources from the banking 
system from a peak of 63 per cent in 1992 to 35 per cent by 1997. 
The  Narsimham  Committee  (1998),  however,  noted  that  the  money  market  continued  to 
remain lopsided, thin and volatile and the Reserve Bank also had no effective presence in 
the market. Therefore, it reiterated the need to transform the call money market into a pure 
inter-bank  market  and  recommended  the  Reserve  Bank’s  operations  to  be  market-based. 
Following  these  recommendations,  the  Reserve  Bank  introduced  the  liquidity  adjustment 
facility (LAF) in June 2000 to manage market liquidity on a daily basis and also to transmit 
interest rate signals to the market. Under the LAF, the Reserve Bank’s policy reverse repo 
and repo rates set the corridor for overnight market interest rates. Thus, OMO including LAF 
emerged as the dominant instrument of monetary policy, though CRR continued to be used 
as an additional instrument of policy.  
The call money market was transformed into a pure inter-bank market by August 2005 in a 
phased manner. Concomitantly, to enable a smooth exit of non-banks, new instruments such 
as the collateralized borrowing and lending obligations (CBLO) were introduced in January 
2003. With the introduction of prudential limits on borrowing and lending by banks in the call 
money  market,  the  collateralized  money  market  segments  developed  rapidly.  Maturities  of 
other  money  market  instruments  such  as  commercial  papers  (CPs)  and  certificates  of 
deposit (CD) were gradually shortened to seven days in order to align the maturity structure. 
Managing  large  and  persistent  capital  inflows  in  excess  of  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the 
economy added another dimension to the liquidity management operations during the 2000s. 
Although, initially the liquidity impact of large capital inflows were sterilised through OMOs and 
LAF operations, given the finite stock of government securities in the Reserve Bank’s portfolio 
and the legal restrictions on issuance of its own paper, additional instruments were needed to 
contain  liquidity  of  a  more  enduring  nature.  This  led  to  the  introduction  of  the  market 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 3
stabilisation scheme (MSS) in April 2004. Under this scheme, short-term government securities 
were  issued  but  the  amount  remained  impounded  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet  for 
sterilisation  purposes.  Interestingly,  in  the  face  of  reversal  of  capital  flows  during  the  recent 
crisis, unwinding of such sterilised liquidity under the MSS helped to ease liquidity conditions. 
In response to the measures taken to develop the money market, over the years the turnover 
in  various  market  segments  increased  significantly.  All  these  reforms  have  also  led  to 
improvement in liquidity management operations by the Reserve Bank as evident from the 
stability in call money rates, which also helped improve integration of various money market 
segments and thereby effective transmission of policy signals (Chart 1). The rule-based fiscal 
policy  pursued  under  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act,  by 
easing fiscal dominance, contributed to overall improvement in monetary management. 
Chart 1 
Money Market Integration and Policy Rates 
Notwithstanding  such  improvements  at  the  short-end  of  the  financial  market  spectrum,  the 
transmission  of  the  policy  signals  to  banks’  lending  rates  has  been  rather  slow  given  the 
rigidities  in  the  system,  particularly  the  preference  for  fixed  interest  rate  on  term  deposits. 
Against the backdrop of ample liquidity in the system more recently, as banks have reduced 
their deposit rates, the effective lending rates would have shown further moderation (Chart 2). 
Chart 2 
Transmission of Policy Rate to Lending Rate 
 4 
  BIS Review 43/2010
Policy formulation processes 
The process of monetary policy in India had traditionally been largely internal with only the 
end  product  of  actions  being  made  public.  The  process  has  overtime  become  more 
consultative,  participative  and  articulate  with  external  orientation.  The  internal  work 
processes  have  also  been  re-engineered  to  focus  on  technical  analysis,  coordination, 
horizontal management and more market orientation. The process leading to monetary policy 
actions  entails  a  wide  range  of  inputs  involving  the  internal  staff,  market  participants, 
academics, financial market experts and the Bank’s Board (Chart 3). 
Chart 3 
Processes of Monetary Policy Formulation 
 Several new institutional arrangements and work processes have been put in place to meet 
the needs of policy making in a complex and fast changing economic environment. At the 
apex of the policy process is the Governor, assisted closely by Deputy Governors and guided 
by deliberations of the Board of Directors. A Committee of the Board meets every week to 
review the monetary, economic and financial conditions and renders advice on policy. There 
are several other standing and ad hoc committees or groups which play a critical role with 
regard  to  policy  advice.  An  interdepartmental  Financial  Markets  Committee  focuses  on 
day-to-day  market  operations  and  tactics  while  periodic  monetary  policy  strategy  meetings 
analyse strategies on an ongoing basis. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 5
Information dissemination and policy communication  
It  is  generally  believed  that  greater  information  dissemination  and  policy  communication 
could  lead  to  better  policy  outcome.  It  is,  however,  not  clear  as  to  what  extent  the 
communication  would  result  in  shaping  and  managing  expectations.  For  example,  the  US 
Federal Reserve, since 1994, appears to have been providing forward guidance, while the 
ECB appears to be in the mould of keeping the markets informed rather than guiding it. In 
India, a middle path is followed by sharing of both information and analysis.  
The stance of monetary policy and the rationale are communicated to the public in a variety 
of  ways,  the  Governor’s  most  important  being  the  quarterly  monetary  policy  statements. 
Further, 
in  various  statutory  and  non-statutory 
publications,  speeches  and  press  releases.  Information  on  areas  relating  to  the  economy, 
banking  and  financial  sector  is  released  with  stringent  standards  of  quality  and  timeliness. 
Dissemination of information takes place through several channels (Chart 4). The Reserve 
Bank has also developed a real time database on the Indian economy, which is available to 
the public through its website.  
the  policy  measures  are  analysed 
Information Dissemination and Policy Communication 
Chart 4 
6 
  BIS Review 43/2010
Conclusions 
With  the  changing  framework  of  monetary  policy  in  Indian  from  monetary  targeting  to  an 
augmented  multiple  indictors  approach,  the  operating  targets  and  processes  have  also 
undergone a change. There has been a shift from quantitative intermediate targets to interest 
rates, as the development of financial markets enabled transmission of policy signals through 
the interest rate channel. At the same time, availability of multiple instruments such as CRR, 
OMO  including  LAF  and  MSS  has  provided  necessary  flexibility  to  monetary  operations. 
While monetary policy formulation is a technical process, it has become more consultative 
and  participative  with  the  involvement  of  market  participant,  academics  and  experts.  The 
internal  process  has  also  been  re-engineered  with  more  technical  analysis  and  market 
orientation.  In  order  to  enhance  transparency  in  communication  the  focus  has  been  on 
dissemination  of  information  and  analysis  to  the  public  through  the  Governor’s  monetary 
policy statements and also through regular sharing of policy research and macroeconomic 
and financial information.  
BIS Review 43/2010 
 7
