Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Improving the economic governance and stability 
framework of the Union, in particular in the euro area 
Intervention  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  (ECON)  Committee  Hearing  on 
“Improving the economic governance and stability framework of the Union, in particular in the 
euro area”, Brussels, 15 September 2010. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
I would like to thank you for this opportunity to exchange views on an issue which is both 
topical and highly relevant. It’s topical because in a few weeks the Commission will publish 
its legislative proposals and Mr Van Rompuy will present in one month the report of the Task 
Force  to  the  European  Council.  It’s  highly  relevant  since  the  recent  developments  have 
demonstrated  the  urgent  necessity  of  improving  the  economic  governance  and  stability 
framework of the Union, in particular in the euro area.  
Indeed, to improve the governance and stability framework of the euro area, we need to first 
understand what went wrong with the previous system and the risks that may occur if these 
failures are not remedied. There is now broad agreement on what went wrong. The system 
was not able to impose the discipline which is necessary in a monetary union. In particular, 
the mechanisms designed to promote budgetary discipline did not work as expected. First, 
the decision-making process underlying the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) did not prevent 
excessive deficits from emerging and, when they did, it did not correct them quickly enough. 
Second,  financial  markets  did  not  act  as  deterrent  against  the  accumulation  of  excessive 
deficits, as they did not discriminate between national issuers. As a result, a combination of 
the global financial and economic crisis – the worse since WWII – and the accumulation of 
undue  imbalances  within  the  euro  area,  resulting  from  insufficient  attention  being  paid  to 
relative competitiveness and inappropriate fiscal policies, created a severe debt burden for 
several countries.  
Euro  area  countries cannot  use the  monetary  instrument  to  inflate  away  their  debt,  so  the 
deterioration of public finances has brought to the surface a series of issues which were not 
fully considered at the start of EMU. The first is that countries may have problems servicing 
their  debt.  This  was  not  thought  relevant  because  the  SGP  was  supposed  to  prevent  it 
occurring. The second issue is that financial markets may rapidly change their assessment of 
a country’s solvency, and actually trigger such an event. The fact that money can be gained 
from  the  bankruptcy  of  a  company,  or  even  a  country,  without  ever  investing  in  it,  raises 
issues  related  to  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  which  unfortunately  have  not  been 
tackled – it seems to me – in recent reforms.1 The third problem is that a sovereign default 
can  have  systemic  consequences  in  a  monetary  union  as  a  result  of  the  financial 
interconnections. This explains why the risks affecting a relatively small part of the euro area 
in the course of last spring have had such significant effects on the euro.  
This third dimension is still not fully understood, although it is one of the most important in 
view  of  the  changes  to  be  made  to  the  institutional  structure  of  the  euro  area.  The 
interconnections  created  by  the  single  currency  have  transformed  what  appeared  to  be  a 
relatively limited problem affecting the Greek economy, which represents less than 3% of the 
                                                 
1   L. Bini Smaghi, “Lessons of the crisis: Ethics, Markets, Democracy”, Milan, 13 May 2010 
 
(http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2010/html/sp100513.en.html). 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 1
area GDP, into a systemic issue. This explains why, as markets started to doubt the solvency 
of  Greece,  the  speculative  positions  aimed  at  minimising  losses  or  maximising  the  profits 
associated with such an event also affected the valuation of other sovereign assets and of 
the euro itself. 
Tensions  in  the  euro  area  financial  markets  mounted  significantly  in  early  May,  reaching 
unusually  high  levels  in  some  segments,  higher  even  than  after  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers. Just to quote a few figures, between mid-February, right after the first European 
Council meeting on Greece, and Friday 7 May, the spread between the 10-year Greek and 
German  government  bonds  increased  by  about  650  basis  points.  At  the  same  time,  the 
spreads for the Irish, Portuguese and Spanish government bonds also went up, by around 
150, 230 and 90 basis points, respectively (see chart 1). Similarly, premia on credit default 
swaps (CDSs), a proxy for sovereign risk, also increased substantially. Interestingly, the CDS 
premium  on  German  government  bonds  (i.e.  the  price  to  insure  against  their  default  
–  whatever  that  means!)  increased  to  close  to  60  basis  points  (see  chart  2).  Additional 
evidence regarding government bond dysfunctions is reflected by the daily changes in their 
prices: as shown in chart 3 this measure of uncertainty peaked in May 2010. 
Tensions spilled over into market segments other than government bonds. Not surprisingly, 
the credit risk of the EU banking system mounted to levels higher than those observed after 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  (see  chart  4).  By  the  same  token,  the  probability  of  a 
simultaneous  default  of  two  or  more  large  and  complex  euro  area  banking  groups,  as 
measured by the indicator of systemic risk reported in chart 5, rose sharply on 7 May. 
Money  market volatility also surged (see chart 6): implied volatility on three-month interest 
rate  futures  went  up  in  early  May  for  contracts  expiring  six  months  (second  contract)  and 
12 months (fourth contract) ahead. 
Regarding  the  foreign  exchange  markets,  between  mid-February  and  7  May,  the  euro 
depreciated  by  7%  against  the  dollar,  from  USD  1.36  to  1.27  per  euro.  Shorting  the  euro 
became the proxy speculative position for selling Greek and other “peripheral” debt. In early 
May the net short speculative (non-commercial) position against the euro reached a record 
114,000 contracts, equivalent to about €14 billion (see chart 7). 
The turmoil had an impact on equity markets as well: between mid-February and 7 May, the 
euro area stock market declined by more than 7% (and by 15.5% from April 15 to May 7!). 
Even more worrisome, in May equity indices decreased worldwide (see chart 8). In May and 
June the average pair-wise realised correlation between S&P500 stocks went up more than it 
did  after  the  Lehman  bankruptcy.  Loosely  speaking,  this  indicates  that  concerns  about 
macroeconomic developments had inhibited investors from differentiating between different 
stocks, and panic was mounting (see chart 9). Stock markets also became more volatile, as 
reflected  by  the  increase  in  the  implied  volatility  of  the  EuroStoxx50  and  S&P500  indices, 
albeit at levels lower than those observed towards the end of 2008 (see chart 10). The long-
term implied volatility of the US stock market also surged (see chart 11). 
Finally, indicators of investors’ sentiment, as measured by the difference between equity put 
and call options implied volatilities, went up in May (see charts 12, 13, and 14). 
All in all, on the eve of the first week-end of May the global financial system was on the verge 
of  a  meltdown  similar  to,  if  not  worse  than,  the  one  which  occurred  after  the  failure  of 
Lehman  Brothers.  Markets  would  indeed  have  collapsed  if  the  Heads  of  State  and 
Government  of  the  euro  area  had  not  agreed  –  that  weekend  –  to  establish  a  European 
Financial Stability Fund to support countries in difficulty and if the ECB had not decided to 
intervene directly in some securities markets to restore their proper functioning. That action 
stopped  the  speculative  rout  and  forced  market  participants  that  had  taken  short  positions 
against  the  euro  and  some  sovereign  assets  to  bear  losses.  The  actions  succeeded  in 
preserving the integrity of the euro area. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2010
It would be a mistake to think that the risks which emerged last spring will never occur again. 
Unless the weaknesses that were exposed during the spring are definitely addressed, new 
bouts  of  instability  may  arise.  The  Van  Rompuy  task  force  has  the  mandate  to  produce 
concrete  proposals.  Those  proposals  must  close  all  the  loopholes  in  the  institutional 
construction  of  the  euro,  which  could  leave  it  exposed  to  future  attacks.  This  is  the  real 
challenge we are confronted with. 
Any  change  in  the  institutional  structure  of  the  euro  should  start  by  avoiding  the  same 
simplifying assumptions made in the past. Let me mention three.  
The first is to think that markets are always right and are able to discipline countries and their 
debts. Markets made mistakes in the past in under-pricing risk, they are probably doing so 
again  now  in  over-pricing  it,  and  they  will  also  make  mistakes  in  the  future.  Leaving  to 
markets the task of disciplining budgetary policies and inducing the Member States to take 
corrective actions is an illusion that only economists can have. If we really want to prevent 
and  correct  imbalances,  in  particular  fiscal  imbalances,  we  need  stronger  institutional 
mechanisms,  across  the  euro  area  and  within  countries.  This  means  more  rules  and 
automatic sanctions.  
The second mistake is to think that crises can be prevented altogether. Crises have occurred 
in the past and might occur in the future, also because of contagion. We have to be prepared 
for them and be able to manage them efficiently.  
The third mistake is to think that there are easy, or “orderly” solutions to crises. Crises are 
messy, contagious and have unintended consequences. 
The ECB has developed concrete proposals to address the above issues. They are now well 
known,  so  let  me  be  concise  and  point  to  the  three  main  aspects,  which  relate  to  fiscal 
discipline,  macroeconomic  surveillance  and  crisis  management.  Let  me  start  with  two 
general, but important points. 
The first is that these proposals do not change the fundamental nature of the euro area, in 
particular with respect to the basic allocation of responsibilities in relation to budgetary policy, 
which  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  national  authorities.  There  is  no  need  to  have  a  single 
budgetary policy in the euro area. No need for a so-called transfer union. However, national 
budgetary  policies  have  to  be  conducted  in  a  framework  which  is  consistent  with  a  single 
currency.  We  need  a  leap  forward  in  the  governance  underlying  the  economic  policies 
conducted  in  the  member  states  of  the  euro  area.  We  should  therefore  concentrate  our 
efforts on strengthening discipline first and foremost in euro area countries since they share 
the  common  currency,  making  use  of  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty  –  notably  Article  136  – 
which  has  been  inserted  into  the  Treaty  precisely  because  the  member  countries  of 
monetary union require enhanced economic governance. Whatever is decided for the euro 
area  could  conceivably  also  apply  to  the  rest  of  the  Union,  but  the  discussion  among  all 
27 Member States should not water down what is necessary for the euro area. 
The second point is that the institutional framework can be strengthened within the current 
Treaty, exploiting to the extent possible secondary legislation. There is no need for a Treaty 
change  to  achieve  the  large  part  of  proposals  which  are  required  and  that  we  have  put 
forward.  There  is  also  no  time.  As  I  mentioned  previously,  the  doubts  raised  by  financial 
markets  about  the  ability  of  the  system  to  become  more  resilient  need  to  be  answered 
quickly. If these answers are linked to a long and uncertain ratification process, doubts will 
spread again.  
Let me now turn to the discussions which have taken place so far on the three main building 
blocs of the reform.  
On  the  subject  of  reinforced  fiscal  governance,  a  first  step  forward  was  made  on 
7 September, when the ECOFIN Council endorsed the new framework of the EU Semester 
as  had  been  proposed  by  the  Commission  in  its  Communication  of  12  May.  Better  fiscal 
governance requires changes both at the national and European level. At the national level, 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 3
the  ECB  supports  the  establishment  of  national  fiscal  frameworks  that  set  out  minimum 
requirements for compliance with EU fiscal and statistical rules and that in particular would 
promote  more  independence  in  the  national  fiscal  assessment,  high-quality  standards,  a 
medium-term  orientation  and  an  effective  coverage  of  all  general  government  finances.  At 
the  EU  level,  the  ECB  favours  a  strengthening  of  the  fiscal  framework  around  the  five 
following measures: 
1. 
more streamlined and hence more effective procedures in the assessment of fiscal 
developments;  
reversal of the burden of proof, making it more difficult for the Council to overturn in 
its decisions the assessment of the Commission.  
more independence in the collection, verification and assessment of the fiscal data 
and fiscal analysis at the level of the Commission.  
more emphasis on public debt developments, as the Treaty foresees.  
quasi-automaticity  of  sanctions  in  case  of  breaches  of  the  rules,  including  the 
provision of both so-called procedural and financial sanctions. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The Commission’s Communications of 12 May and 30 June does not go far enough in the 
ECB’s view on two counts: 
1. 
They thus far remain silent on how the independence of the fiscal assessment and 
the  independence  and  quality  assessment  of  the  statistical  data  collection  can  be 
made more effective within the Commission. In particular, we would like to see some 
of the procedures currently in force in DG Competition at the level of the technical 
assessment and the role of the Commissioner in the college also being applied for 
DG ECFIN and its Commissioner. As regards statistics, the new Council Regulation 
of  July  2010  should  be  followed  up  with  deeds;  in  particular  with  more  resources 
devoted to fiscal data and its verification by Eurostat.  
The  Commission  ideas  currently  on  the  table  provide  too  little  in  terms  of 
streamlining the procedures and hence making them more effective. We have seen 
many  times  in  the  past  that  procedures  are  too  lengthy  and  laborious  before 
effective  action  can  be  undertaken  to  incentivise  or  enforce  on  Member  States  a 
correction in their fiscal developments. So far, procedures have been launched only 
on the basis of the notification by the Member States. It could be envisaged to also 
launch them on the basis of an assessment or a forward looking assessment by the 
Commission. Had this been done in the case of Greece, many problems could have 
been avoided or at least reduced. 
2. 
On the second building block – broader macroeconomic surveillance – we see a strong need 
for  making  a  quantum  leap,  given  the  large  spillovers  from  the  macroeconomic  policies  of 
one country on all other participating countries in the single currency area. Accordingly, the 
ECB  proposes  the  creation  of  an  alert  mechanism  based  on  a  clear  and  limited  set  of 
indicators that identifies unsustainable policies at a sufficiently early stage. We would also 
like to see put in place a procedure for the correction of macroeconomic imbalances with a 
preventive  and  a  corrective  arm  which  includes  graduated  enforcement  steps  to  ensure 
compliance, including sanctions. Again, the Commission ideas voiced in its communication of 
30  June  go  in  the  right  direction  but  are  not  yet  ambitious  enough  to  meet  the  long-term 
requirements  of  an  efficiently  functioning  monetary  union.  We  are  awaiting  for  the  new 
proposals in this field and stand ready to contribute actively. 
Let me now spend a few words on the third building block, crisis management. There is a 
theory according to which if you have a good prevention system there will be no crisis. It is a 
theory, indeed. In practice, crises do occur, even though the institutional system underlying 
surveillance  and  prevention  should  be  strengthened  to  avoid  such  crises.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier, it would not only be a mistake but also irresponsible to assume that crises will never 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2010
occur again. This would encourage market participants to speculate on their re-occurrence 
because of a lack of proper management framework. As we have experienced, self-fulfilling 
expectations could by themselves precipitate a crisis. 
The creation of the EFSF ultimately averted the financial collapse in early May. Without such 
a system the euro would be vulnerable to any speculative attack against any of its members, 
be  it  justified  or  not  by  economic  fundamentals.2  The  question  is  how  to  create  a 
management mechanism that avoids crises without creating moral hazard. This is not a new 
issue.  It  has  been  dealt  with  in  the  context  of  the  IMF  and  consists  of  attaching  strong 
conditions, in terms of structural and fiscal policies, to any financial support that is provided 
to a country in difficulty. Financial support is disbursed only according to precise milestones, 
linked to compliance with the conditions contained in the programme. There is no need for 
Europe to reinvent the wheel. We can learn from the experience of the IMF. History shows 
that  countries  are  not  particularly  keen  to  get  financial  support  from  the  IMF,  precisely 
because of its tough conditions. 
The proposals put forward by the ECB go very much in that direction and aim to create a 
framework  that  can  manage  a  crisis  effectively  while  discouraging  speculative  attacks 
against the system. 
The  crisis  management  framework  raises  another  issue,  which  is  more  complex  and 
deserves  some  reflection.  The  issue  is  known  as  “private  sector  involvement”  in  crisis 
resolution. What it means is that public money should not be used to bail out private sector 
organisations  that  have  taken  the  wrong  decisions.  This  would  be  the  case  if  the  money 
provided by the crisis management framework were used to reimburse the private sector for 
its losses, eliminating all the risks it was exposed to.  
This  issue  was  considered  in  the  context  of  the  IMF  reform  after  the  Asian  crisis.  The 
discussion showed that it is very difficult to design a simple mechanism which would make 
restructuring mandatory. The reason is simple. The solvency of a state is a different concept 
from that of a company or a financial institution. It ultimately depends on the economic and 
political sustainability of achieving and sustaining a given level of primary budget surplus to 
stabilise and reduce the debt. If a country commits to a certain recovery programme which 
justifies  the  financial  support  of  the  other  partners,  it  cannot  be  considered  insolvent  and 
unable to reimburse its debts. Why should it in such cases restructure them? On the other 
hand, if debt restructuring is made too easy, or too “orderly” – to use a fashionable term – 
market participants may consider it the easy way out for countries and might be tempted to 
take speculative positions from which they would profit in case of default. In other words, a 
restructuring  mechanism,  if  too  simple,  could  lead  to  moral  hazard.  Furthermore,  the  very 
nature of the markets would mean contagion spreading immediately to the other countries, 
as participants would start guessing which other country might need to undergo restructuring.  
To  sum  up,  using  the  words  of  a  recent  IMF  document,  in  today’s  advanced  economies 
default is UUU, “Unnecessary, Undesirable and Unlikely”.3 It is naïve to think that there is 
such a thing as an orderly debt restructuring mechanism. 
What is the solution then, if we want to avoid moral hazard and unduly bailing out the private 
sector?  The  best  way  to  involve  the  private  sector  is  to  ensure  that  a  country  which 
experiences  financial  difficulties  implements  a  credible  adjustment  programme,  which 
convinces  markets  to  invest  again  in  that  country.  Experience  shows  that  successful 
programmes  –  with  “success”  being  measured  by 
the  policies  which  have  been  
                                                 
2   “An  Economist  Reflects:  A  View  from  2020:  The  Eurozone  Break-up  of  2013”  Morgan  Stanley  Research 
Europe, 30 July 2010. 
3   Cottarelli, Forni, Gottschalk and Mauro, “Default in Today’s Advanced Economies: Unnecessary, Undesirable, 
and Unlikely”, IMF Staff Position Note 10/12, 1 September 2010. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 5
implemented  –  have  ultimately  made  it  possible  to  regain  market  confidence.  It  may  take 
some  time,  and  some  re-profiling  of  official  financial  support,  but  in  the  end  access  to 
markets was regained.  
If some form of rescheduling or re-profiling of the debt over time turns out to be necessary, 
for  the  debt  to  be  sustainable,  this  can  be  achieved  in  an  orderly  way  only  through  an 
agreement between creditors and debtors. Other forms of constrained action, on the creditor 
or  on  the  debtor  side,  are  bound  to  lead  to  litigations  and  produce  disorderly  effects  on 
financial markets. In this respect, the adoption of collective action clauses by the euro area 
member  states  would  make  it  easier  for  creditors  and  debtors  to  agree  on  a  fair  burden-
sharing.  This  was  the  conclusion  of  the  discussions  in  the  context  of  the  IMF  and  can  be 
further explored at European level.  
Another way to prevent market participants from being bailed out is to use the funds made 
available from the official support mechanism to purchase debt on the secondary market, at 
the  prevailing  market  discount,  rather  than  reimbursing  the  maturing  debt  at  the  nominal 
value. In this way holders of debt instruments willing to sell would have to accept the market 
haircut. This possibility is envisaged in the ECB’s proposals. 
To  conclude,  the  European  Union  is  a  community  of  law,  subscribed  to  by  the  Member 
States in which pacta sunt servanda. This refers to all the pacts, starting from fiscal discipline 
in the member states to the commitment of the Member States to pay their debts. In my view, 
we have to be very careful in considering exemptions, such as providing the possibility for 
countries  to  unilaterally  modifying  the  value  of  their  debt  contracts.  The  euro,  and  its 
underlying  institutional construction,  is  about  respect  for  the  law.  If  any  changes  are  to be 
made,  they  should  be  to  strengthen  these  principles  rather  than  to  provide  exemptions  – 
dangerous exemptions which could undermine the stability and cohesion of the whole Union.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2010
 Chart 1: Tensions in euro area 
Selected intra-euro area spreads against Germany (10Y) 
Chart 2: Tensions in euro area 
Selected government credit default swaps (5Y) 
Source: Bloomberg
Source: Bloomberg
  BIS Review 118/2010 
 7
 Chart 3: Dysfunction in the bond markets 
Daily change in bond prices; in percent 
Source: Bloomberg. Note: on 10 May, change in bond prices rose to +35% for Greece and +14% for Portugal.
 Chart 4: Credit risk of EU banking system 
 Source: Bloomberg
8 
 BIS Review 118/2010
