Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Expanding financial services in Sri Lanka 
Address  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
opening of a new branch office in Jaffna by The Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation 
Ltd, Jaffna, 11 February 2010. 
 My dear friends, 
I am delighted to be here in Jaffna today for the opening of a new branch of HSBC, one of 
the market leaders in global banking. The history of the HSBC in Sri Lanka could be traced 
back  to  1884,  when  it  first  commenced  operations  in  Colombo.  Today,  the  largest  foreign 
bank operating in Sri Lanka has moved to Jaffna bringing banking to the doorsteps of people 
in the Northern Province. This is indeed a historic milestone. 
This  development  did  not  happen  by  chance.  It  did  not  take  place  automatically.  With  the 
liberation of our entire nation in May last year, the Government and the Central Bank have 
taken  determined  efforts  to  expand  financial  services,  facilitate  and  stimulate  economic 
activities,  and  develop  infrastructure  in  the  North  and  the  East.  In  fact,  I  have  personally 
participated  at  several  bank  branch  openings  during  the  last  few  months,  and  our  officers 
have  been  following  up  the  progress,  and  these  outcomes  are  a  result  of  such  combined 
efforts. Today, I can proudly say that an ever-growing number of financial institutions operate 
in the North and that these provide diverse financial services, whilst of course we would be 
the first to admit that a lot more needs to be done.  
My  dear  friends,  the  development  and  maintenance  of  essential  public  infrastructure  is  an 
important  ingredient  for  sustained  economic  growth  and  poverty  reduction.  In  particular, 
health, education, electricity, housing and efficient water and sanitation services help lay the 
groundwork  for  a  productive  and  healthy  population,  capable  of  contributing  to  sustained 
economic  growth.  We  all  know  that  as  a  result  of  the  long  and  bloody  conflict,  the 
infrastructure facilities in the North could not be developed as done in the other Provinces. It 
is  due  to  that  fact  that,  with  a  view  to  fast  tracking  the  development  in  the  North,  the 
Government  has  now  launched  a  well-planned,  integrated,  accelerated  development 
program titled “Vadakkin Vasantham.” Under this program, the Government expects to invest 
approximately Rs. 295 billion (US$ 2.7 billion) during the next 3 years, towards rehabilitation 
and development activities. This program is expected to cover the rehabilitation of roads and 
other  transportation  infrastructure,  the  upgrading  of  electricity  for  domestic  housing  and 
industry,  water  supply,  agriculture  and  irrigation  infrastructure  and  the  improvement  of  the 
manufacturing  framework.  The  Government  also  intends  to  implement  a  special  poverty 
reduction program and establish the required social safety net, quickly.  
My dear friends, as we all know, the speedy resettlement of the internally displaced people 
has  also  been  a  top  priority  for  the  Government.  Towards  this  goal,  many  extraordinary 
efforts  have  been  taken.  Out  of  the  over  300,000  internally  displaced  persons  who  were 
rescued  and  had  to  be  temporarily  housed  in  welfare  camps,  over  217,000  or  72%  have 
already  been  resettled.  All  those  from  Vavuniya,  Mannar,  Jaffna,  a  part  of  Mulativu  and 
Killinochchi  have  now  returned  to  their  homes.  The  others  mainly  from  Mulativu  and 
Killinochchi are also to be resettled systematically without  any undue  delay, depending on 
the speed at which the de-mining processes take place. This is an outstanding achievement 
against  all  odds,  and  I  believe  the  successful  resettlement  is  a  tribute  to  the  deep 
commitment  of  the  Government,  the  tremendous  efforts  of  our  public  service  and  the 
dedicated contribution of several international organizations. I am also tempted to mention 
that this surprising outcome may have been a pleasant surprise to many who at certain times 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 1
expressed the belief that the government may not have had the inclination nor the urgency to 
carry out this challenging task so expeditiously.  
My  dear  friends,  the  Central  Bank  has  also  contributed  its  mite  to  these  normalization 
processes. We have, so far, over the past 8 months, granted approvals for the establishment 
of  more  than  90  banking  outlets  in  the  Northern  Province.  We  have  introduced  a  Special 
Loan Scheme, also titled “Vadakkin Vasantham” to boost the livelihood development of the 
people  in  the  North.  Under  this  scheme,  an  initial  sum  of  Rs.  3,000  million  has  been 
appropriated to be disbursed at a concessionary interest rate of 9% per annum to the eligible 
micro,  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises,  through  several  Participating  Financial 
Institutions.  The  repayment  period  could  extend  up  to  5  years  with  a  grace  period  of  6 
months. I am happy to note that over 9,000 loans amounting to Rs. 1.8 billion have already 
been registered with the PFIs and disbursements of over Rs 1 billion has taken place.  
My dear friends, the rich resources of the North, including its forests, agricultural land, wet 
lands, lagoons and bays provide a solid base for many enterprises. Even during the conflict 
period, the Northern Province accounted for 10 percent of the paddy production, 40% of Red 
Onions,  10%  of  Chillies,  14%  of  Green  Gram  and  25%  of  Ground  Nuts.  These  statistics 
indicate  that  there  would  be  many  viable  income  generating  activities  which  could  be 
promoted to upgrade the livelihood of the people, with the assistance of the banking sector. It 
has been estimated that 129,000 fishermen, representing 20 percent of the total number of 
fishermen  in  our  country,  live  in  219  fishing  villages  in  the  Northern  Province.  In  the  year 
2006, the total fish production from the North stood at 25,900 MT, representing 12 percent of 
the country’s total production. These facts also indicate that the income generating activities 
in  the  fisheries  sector  too  could  be  developed  substantially  in  the  coastal  areas  with  the 
provision  of  appropriate  banking  facilities,  particularly  for  multi-day  boats,  fishing  gear  and 
other ancillary needs such as ice plants, and storage facilities. 
Over  the  past  several  years,  the  Central  Bank  has  also  initiated  several  credit  schemes 
applicable  throughout  the  country,  aimed  at  promoting  regional  development  and  poverty 
alleviation. In particular, work has commenced on a new Poverty Alleviation Micro Finance 
Project to cover conflict-affected districts. Approximately 3,000 beneficiary groups with more 
than  12,000  low-income  families  have  already  been  organized  within  the  Jaffna  peninsula 
under this project. We have also fast-tracked the Agro-Livestock Development Loan scheme, 
which is another scheme that could provide increased benefits to this Province. 
My  dear  friends,  during the  several  recent  visits  that  I  made  to  Jaffna,  I  always  made  it  a 
point  to  meet  with  the  Chambers  of  Commerce  officials,  bankers,  Teachers,  students, 
villagers, fishermen and many others. We received many valuable suggestions from them. In 
particular, we received too very useful ideas to open a Central Bank’s Provincial Office and 
to arrange for a Special Northern Regional Development Fund for the Northern Province. I 
am glad to announce today that we will implement both such initiatives in the coming months. 
My  dear  friends,  I  thought  it  may  also  be  appropriate  to  use  this  opportunity  to  make  a 
special appeal to the Sri Lankan Tamil Diaspora, living in all parts of the world. The decades 
long  conflict  which  sapped  our  combined  energies  in  various  ways,  is  finally  behind  us. 
Therefore, it is now time for all of us to get together and rebuild our nation, in particular, the 
areas  that  have  suffered.  We,  on  our  part,  are  keen  to  assist  the  people  of  the  North  to 
resume normal lives as soon as possible. Towards that outcome, we believe the Diaspora 
too could play an active role and become partners in the development process of the North. 
They  can  be  an  important  influence  to  accelerate  investments  to  these  areas  and  thereby 
support  the  expansion  of  industrial  activity  and  tourism.  Needless  to  say  economic 
opportunities in the North are expanding day by day, and I would like to urge overseas Sri 
Lankans  to  take  an  early  look  at  emerging  investment  opportunities  in  these  areas, 
particularly in the fields of IT, education and real estate development where they can surely 
and effectively contribute.  
2 
 BIS Review 16/2010
I would also urge the Chambers of Commerce and Industries, and other similar Associations 
to  consider  establishing  international  institutional  frameworks  and  links,  which  would  pave 
the way for two-way interaction between the overseas Sri Lankan community and our local 
institutions  and  businesses.  Such  relationships  could  then  act  as  focal  points  to  promote 
remittances and investments into the domestic economy, as well.  
My  dear  friends,  today,  we  meet  in  the  midst  of  a  significant  change  in  our  country’s 
economic and political landscape. The end of the decades long conflict has resulted in the 
creation  of  a  significant  positive  impact,  not  just  in  the  Northern  Province,  but  also  in  the 
entire country. To benefit by this positive outlook, it is crucial that we start new businesses 
and  expand  on-going  ventures.  In  this  regard,  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  HSBC,  which 
brands  itself  as  the  “World’s  Local  Bank”,  could  now  offer  both  corporate  and  small 
customers  a  full  range  of  financial  products  and  services.  In  doing  so,  they,  as  well  as  all 
other  banks  who  are  doing  business  in  these  emerging  areas,  will  face  the  challenges  of 
borrowers  not  possessing  long  credit  histories  or  not  possessing  adequate  collateral.  This 
situation will certainly pose challenges, but we would like to urge all bankers that they should 
practice innovative cash flow based lending methods at least for 2 to 3 years, and not to be 
too constrained by security based lending only. I also urge financial institutions to lend the 
money mobilized from the region for the development of this region.  
Finally, let me place on record my appreciation of the presence of the High Commissioner of 
the UK, Dr. Peter Hayes at this opening ceremony. Your support to this effort would certainly 
encourage the business community both here in Jaffna and elsewhere in Sri Lanka, and I 
thank you for your gesture. Let me also congratulate HSBC on this auspicious occasion of 
opening the first foreign bank branch in Jaffna. The HSBC Bank with its global connections 
could  now  facilitate  financial  transactions  in  the  North  with  all  parts  of  the  world,  while 
HSBC’s presence in the Jaffna Peninsula from today onwards, would convey an important 
signal to the world that tangible progress is being made in post conflict Sri Lanka. I wish Mr 
Nick A Nicolaou, his team in Sri Lanka the HSBC and all their customers, especially the ones 
in this area, all success. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 3
Lars E O Svensson: Inflation targeting after the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Prof  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
International  Research  Conference  “Challenges  to  Central  Banking  in  the  Context  of 
Financial Crisis”, Mumbai, 12 February 2010. 
 I thank Charles Bean, Claes Berg, Alan Blinder, Stephen Cecchetti, Chuck Freedman, Charles Goodhart, Lars 
Nyberg, Irma Rosenberg, Hyun Shin, Frank Smets and Staffan Viotti for discussions of these issues. The views 
expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Riksbank’s executive board or of 
the Riksbank’s staff. Hanna Armelius and Hans Dellmo of the Riksbank’s staff contributed to this speech. 
As  the  world  economy  begins  to  recover  from  the  financial  crisis  and  the  resulting  deep 
recession of the global economy, there is a lively debate about what caused the crisis and 
how the risks of future crises can be reduced. Some blame loose monetary policy for laying 
the foundation for the crisis and there is a lively debate about the future of monetary policy 
and its relation to financial stability. Here I will discuss the lessons for inflation targeting after 
the  crisis.  My  view  is  that  the  crisis  was  not  caused  by  monetary  policy  but  mainly  by 
regulatory  and  supervisory  failures  in  combination  with  some  special  circumstances. 
Ultimately,  my  main  conclusion  for  monetary  policy  from  the  crisis  so  far  is  that  flexible 
inflation targeting, applied in the right way and using all the information about financial factors 
that is relevant for the forecast of inflation and resource utilization at any horizon, remains the 
best-practice  monetary  policy  before,  during,  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  But  a  better 
theoretical,  empirical  and  operational  understanding  of  the  role  of  financial  factors  in  the 
transmission  mechanism  is  urgently  required  and  needs  much  work,  work  that  is  already 
underway in academia and in central banks.  
So I will focus on two particular issues: whether monetary policy caused the crisis and what 
the possible lessons for future monetary policy are.1
 Best practice before the crisis: Flexible inflation targeting  
It is probably not a surprise to hear that I consider flexible inflation targeting the best-practice 
monetary  policy.  The  Riksbank  and  all  the  other  inflation-targeting  central  banks  conduct 
flexible  inflation  targeting  rather  than  strict  inflation  targeting.  Flexible  inflation  targeting 
means that monetary policy aims at stabilizing both inflation around the inflation target and 
the real economy, whereas strict inflation targeting aims at stabilizing inflation only, without 
regard to the stability of the real economy, what Mervyn King (1997) has described as being 
an  “inflation  nutter”.  By  stabilizing  the  real  economy  I  mean  stabilizing  resource  utilization 
around a normal level, keeping in mind that monetary policy cannot affect the long-term level 
of resource utilization.2 
Because of the time lags between monetary-policy actions and their effect on inflation and 
the  real  economy,  flexible  inflation  targeting  is  more  effective  if  it  relies  on  forecasts  of 
inflation  and  the  real  economy.  Therefore,  flexible  inflation  targeting  can  be  described  as 
“forecast  targeting”:  the  central  bank  chooses  a  policy-rate  path  so  that  the  forecast  of 
inflation  and  resource  utilization  “looks  good.”  By  a  forecast  that  looks  good  I  mean  a 
forecast  for  inflation  and  resource  utilization  that  effectively  stabilizes  both  inflation  around 
I have previously discussed these issues in Svensson (2009 b). 
                                                 
1  
2   The term “inflation nutter” for a central bank that is only concerned about stabilizing inflation was introduced in 
a  paper  by  Mervyn  King  at  a  conference  in  Gerzensee,  Switzerland,  in  1995  and  later  published  as  King 
(1997). The terms “strict” and “flexible” inflation targeting were to my knowledge first introduced in a paper of 
mine presented at a conference at the Bank of Portugal in 1996, later published as Svensson (1999). 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2010
 the inflation target and resource utilization around a normal level. In the event of conflicting 
objectives,  it  achieves  a  reasonable  compromise  between  the  stability  of  inflation  and  the 
stability of resource utilization. Different central banks express this in slightly different words. 
The Riksbank has often used the term “well-balanced” monetary policy.3
The  forecasts  of  inflation  and  the  real  economy  are  then  conditional on  the  central  bank’s 
view of the transmission mechanism, an estimate of the current state of the economy and a 
forecast  of  important  exogenous  variables.  The  central  bank  uses  all  relevant  information 
that has an impact on the forecast of inflation and the real economy. In this framework, the 
central  bank  takes  financial  conditions  such  as  credit  growth,  asset  prices,  imbalances, 
potential  asset  price  bubbles  and  so  on  into  account  only  to  the  extent  that  they  have  an 
impact on the forecast of inflation and resource utilization. Inflation and resource utilization 
are  target  variables,  that  is,  variables  that  the  central  bank  tries  to  stabilize.  Financial 
conditions  are  not  target  variables.  Instead,  they  are  only  indicators,  as  they  provide 
information to the central bank about the state of the economy, the transmission mechanism 
and exogenous shocks. Financial conditions then affect policy rates only to the extent that 
they have an impact on the forecast of inflation and resource utilization.4
Now, is there any reason to modify this view of monetary policy given the experience of the 
financial crisis so far? Let me approach this question by first asking what the causes of the 
financial  crisis  were,  whether  monetary  policy  contributed  to  the  crisis,  and  whether  a 
different monetary policy was warranted and could have prevented or reduced the size of the 
crisis.  
 The financial crisis was not caused by monetary policy  
Many have claimed that excessively easy monetary policy by the Federal Reserve after 2001 
helped  cause  a  bubble  in  house  prices  in  the  U.S.,  a  bubble  whose  inevitable  bursting 
proved to be a major source of the financial crisis.5
 However, as I see it, the crisis was mainly 
caused  by  factors  that  had  very  little  to  do  with  monetary  policy  and  were  mostly  due  to 
background  macro  conditions,  distorted  incentives  in  financial  markets,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  failures  (also  when  central  banks  have  been  responsible  for  regulation  and 
supervision),  information  problems  and  some  specific  circumstances,  including  the  U.S. 
housing policy to support home ownership for low-income households.6
The macro conditions preceding the crisis included low world real interest rates associated 
with global imbalances, as well as the Great Moderation, with a long period of very stable 
growth and stable low inflation, which led to a systematic underestimation of risk and very 
low  risk  premia  in  financial  markets.  There  were  distorted  incentives  for  commercial  and 
investment  banks  to  increase  leverage  that  were  made  possible  by  lax  regulation  and 
supervision and the lack of an appropriate bank resolution regime. There were also distorted 
                                                  
3   The idea that inflation targeting implies that the inflation forecast can be seen as an intermediate target was 
introduced in King (1994). The term “inflation-forecast targeting” was introduced in Svensson (1997), and the 
term “forecast targeting” in Svensson (2005). See Woodford (2007a, b) for more discussion and analysis of 
forecast targeting. 
4   Several  central  banks  that  do  not  call  themselves  inflation  targeters  effectively  do  conduct  flexible  inflation 
targeting, although they may not be quite as transparent about their inflation target, the role of stability of the 
real economy, etc. 
5   See, for instance, Taylor (2007). 
6   See Bean (2009) for an extensive and excellent discussion of the crisis, including the credit expansion and 
housing  boom,  the  macroeconomic  antecedents,  the  distorted  incentives,  the  information  problems,  the 
amplification  and  propagation  of  the  crisis  into  the  real  economy,  the  policy  responses  and  the  lessons  for 
monetary  policy  and  economics  generally.  The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2009)  provides  a  more 
detailed account of the possible macro- and microeconomic causes of the crisis. 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 5
incentives to exercise less due diligence in loan origination because of securitisation and to 
conduct  regulatory  arbitrage  by  setting  up  off-balance-sheet  entities,  which  for  various 
specific reasons ended up still effectively remaining on the balance sheet. There were also 
distorted incentives for traders and fund managers to take excessive risks because of myopic 
and  asymmetric  remuneration  contracts.  There  were  eventually  enormous  information 
problems in assessing the risks of extremely complex asset-backed securities, and there was 
a huge underestimation of the potential for correlated systemic risks. None of these causes 
had anything to do with monetary policy, except that monetary policy may have contributed 
to the Great Moderation.  
Regarding the role of Federal Reserve monetary policy in the crisis, there are two relevant 
questions. First, was the low interest rate reasonable given the information available at the 
time? Second, could a different monetary policy with higher interest rates have prevented the 
crisis? The first question, whether the low interest rate was reasonable given the available 
information,  is  the  relevant  one  when  evaluating  monetary  policy.  It  is  more  relevant  to 
evaluate policy taking into account the information available ex ante to the policymaker rather 
than information ex post that was unknown to the policymaker at the time (see Svensson, 
2009a, on evaluating monetary policy ex ante and ex post).7
 During the period in question, 
given  the  information  available,  there  was  a  genuine  and  well-motivated  fear  of  the  U.S. 
falling  into  a  Japanese-style  deflationary  liquidity  trap,  and  the  optimal  policy  in  such  a 
situation is a  very  expansionary  monetary  policy.8  It  may  be  that,  in  retrospect,  the  risk  of 
deflation was exaggerated, but there was no way to know this ex ante. Hence, I consider the 
expansionary policy very appropriate. Adding some ex post evaluation, one can note that it 
did not lead ex post to very high inflation or an overheated economy.9  
The second question, whether a different monetary policy could have prevented the crisis, is 
relevant  when  assessing  to  what  extent  monetary  policy  can  be  blamed  for  causing  the 
crisis, notwithstanding if it was reasonable from an ex ante perspective. The credit growth 
and  the  housing  boom  in  the  U.S.  and  elsewhere  were  very  powerful.  Real  interest  rates 
were  low  to  a  large  extent  because  of  global  imbalances,  the  global  saving  glut  and 
investment shortage. I believe that somewhat higher interest rates would have made little or 
no difference. Empirical evidence indicates that only a small portion of house-price increases 
can be attributed to monetary policy.10
 Bernanke (2010) shows that the recent phenomenon 
of a higher share of adjustable-rate mortgages was unlikely to have significantly increased 
the  sensitivity  of  house  prices  to  monetary  policy.  The  availability  of  new,  more  exotic 
mortgage types mattered much more for initial mortgage payments than the level of short-
term interest rates. In my view, interest rates would probably have had to be raised very high 
so as to cause considerable damage to the real economy in order to stop the credit growth 
and housing boom.11
 That could have thrown the U.S. right into Japanese-style deflation and 
eventually a liquidity trap. Certainly, higher interest rates would have had no impact on the 
regulatory  problems,  distorted  incentives  and  information  problems  mentioned  above 
                                                 
7  
I remember this period very vividly, because I was fortunate to have the opportunity to discuss and debate the 
problems of current monetary policy, deflation and liquidity traps in a group of great economists at Princeton 
University that included Ben Bernanke (before he left to be a Governor on the Federal Reserve Board), Alan 
Blinder, Paul Krugman, Chris Sims and Michael Woodford. 
8   See Svensson (2003) for a discussion of policy options before and in a liquidity trap. 
9   Bernanke (2010) shows that Fed policy rates do not seem excessively low given real-time FOMC forecasts. 
10   See Del Negro and Otrok (2007), Jarocinski and Smets (2008), Edge, Kiley, and Laforte (2008), and Iacoviello 
and Neri (2008). 
11   See Nyberg (2010) for similar arguments. 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2010
 (although  they  could  have  ended  the  Great  Moderation  with  a  deep  recession  and 
deflation).12
However,  going  beyond  the  Fed’s  actual  monetary  policy,  perhaps  it  is  possible  that  the 
Fed’s emphasis on its readiness to relax monetary policy aggressively in the wake of a sharp 
fall  in  asset  prices,  as  expressed  by  Greenspan  (2002)  for  example,  may  have  induced 
expectations of a floor under future asset prices and contributed to the asset-price boom, the 
so-called  Greenspan  put  (Miller,  Weller  and  Zhang,  2002).  Arguably,  this  is  more  of  a 
communication issue than one of actual policy, and less emphasis on the readiness to clean 
up after a sharp fall in asset prices might have been a preferable alternative.  
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (2009,  Chapter  3)  has  investigated  the  role  of  monetary 
policy  in  causing  financial  crises.  A  large  number  of  countries  and  financial  crises  were 
included  in  the  sample.  The  conclusion  is  that  “the  stance  of  monetary  policy  has  not 
generally  been  a  good  leading  indicator  of  future  house  price  busts…  There  is  some 
association between loose monetary policy and house price rises in the years leading up to 
the current crisis in some countries, but loose monetary policy was not the main, systematic 
cause of the boom and consequent bust.” Further-more, the overall relationship between the 
stance of monetary policy and house-price appreciation across countries in the years before 
the  current  crisis  is  statistically  insignificant  and  economically  weak,  and  monetary  policy 
differences explain only about 5 percent of the variability in house price appreciation across 
countries.13
 Lessons for flexible inflation targeting  
What conclusions can we draw so far from the financial crisis about the conduct of monetary 
policy  and  any  need  to  modify  the  framework  of  flexible  inflation  targeting?  One  obvious 
conclusion  is  that  price  stability  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability  (Carney  2009, 
White 2006). Good flexible inflation targeting by itself does not achieve financial stability, if 
anyone ever believed that. Specific policies and instruments are needed to ensure financial 
stability.  
Another  conclusion  is  that  interest-rate  policy  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability. 
Other  instruments  like  supervision  and  regulation,  including  appropriate  bank  resolution 
regimes, should be the first choice for financial stability. In many countries, the responsibility 
for these instruments rests on authorities other than the central bank. Generally, to the extent 
financial  instability  depends  on  specific  distortions,  good  regulation  should  aim  to  attack 
these distortions as close to the source as possible. To counter the observed procyclicality of 
existing regulation, macro-prudential regulation that is contingent on the business cycle and 
financial  indicators  may  need  to  be  introduced  to  induce  better  financial  stability.  Possible 
macro-prudential regulation includes variable capital, margin, and equity/loan requirements. 
As  expressed  by  Bean  (2009),  “the  best  approach  is  likely  to  involve  a  portfolio  of 
instruments”.14
More generally, what is the relation between financial stability and monetary policy? Financial 
stability is an important objective of economic policy. A possible definition of financial stability 
is a situation when the financial system can fulfil its main functions (of submitting payments, 
channelling saving into investment and providing risk sharing) without disturbances that have 
                                                  
12   Kohn (2008), after extensive discussion, concludes that there is insufficient evidence that low interest rates 
would have contributed much to the house-price boom and that higher interest rates would have had much 
dampening effect on it. 
13   The relationship for the Euro area countries is less weak, but for reasons explained by Bernanke (2010) it is 
potentially overstated. 
14   Nyberg (2010) provides more discussion of macroprudential regulation and regulation reform. 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 7
intervention 
foreign-exchange 
significant  social  costs.  I  find  it  helpful  to  conceptually  distinguish  financial-stability  policy 
from  monetary  policy.  Different  economic  policies  and  policy  areas,  such  as  fiscal  policy, 
labor  market  policy,  structural  policies  to  improve  competition,  etc.,  can  be  distinguished 
according  to  their  objectives,  the  policy  instruments  that  are  suitable  for  achieving  the 
objectives,  and  the  authority  or  authorities  controlling  the  instruments  and  responsible  for 
achieving  the  objectives.  Monetary  policy  in  the  form  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  has  the 
objective  of  stabilizing  both  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  resource  utilization 
around a normal level. The suitable instruments are under normal circumstances the policy 
rate  and  communication,  including  possibly  a  published  policy-rate  path  and  a  forecast  of 
inflation and the real economy. In times of crisis, as we have seen during the current crisis, 
other  more  unconventional  instruments  can  be  used,  such  as  fixed-rate  lending  at  longer 
maturities,  asset  purchases  and 
to  prevent  currency 
appreciation. The authority responsible for monetary policy is typically the central bank.  
Financial-stability policy has the objective of maintaining or promoting financial stability. The 
available instruments are under normal circumstances supervision, regulation and financial-
stability  reports  with  analyses  and  leading  indicators  that  may  provide  early  warnings  of 
stability  threats.  In  times  of  crisis,  there  are  instruments  such  as  lending  of  last  resort, 
variable-rate  lending  at  longer  maturities,  special  resolution  regimes  for  financial  firms  in 
trouble, government capital injections and so forth. The responsible authority or authorities 
vary across countries. In some countries it is the central bank, in other countries there is a 
separate  financial  supervisory  authority,  sometimes  the  responsibility  is  shared  between 
different  institutions.  In  Sweden,  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  is  responsible  for 
supervision and regulation, the Riksbank is responsible for lending of last resort to solvent 
banks and for promoting a safe and efficient payment system, while the National Debt Office 
is  responsible  for  the  resolution  of  failed  banks.  During  times  of  crisis,  these  authorities 
cooperate closely with the Ministry of Finance.  
My  point  here  is  that  financial-stability  policy  and  monetary  policy  are  quite  different,  with 
different  objectives,  instruments  and  responsible  authorities,  the  latter  with  considerable 
differences across countries. This does not mean that there is no inter-action between them. 
Financial  stability  directly  affects  the  financial  markets,  and  financial  conditions  affect  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Problems  in  financial  markets  may  have  a 
drastic effect on the real economy, as the current financial crisis has shown. Monetary policy 
affects asset prices and balance sheets and can thereby affect financial stability. But the fact 
that  financial-stability  policy  and  monetary  policy  are  conceptually  distinct,  with  distinct 
objectives and distinct suitable instruments, has to be taken into account when considering 
the lessons of the financial crisis for monetary policy. In particular, it makes little sense to 
extend the mandate of monetary policy to include financial stability.15
What are the specific conclusions for flexible inflation targeting? One important lesson from 
the financial crisis is that financial factors may have a very strong and deteriorating effect on 
the transmission mechanism, making standard interest-rate policy much less effective. This 
motivates more research on how to incorporate financial factors into the standard models of 
the  transmission  mechanism  used  by  central  banks.  A  rapidly-increasing  volume  of  such 
research is now being produced by academic and central-bank researchers and presented at 
an increasing number of conferences on financial factors and monetary policy. Important and 
challenging questions include how potential output and neutral real interest rates are affected 
by financial factors and financial distortions (Curdia and Woodford 2009, Walsh 2009), and 
                                                  
15   However, conceptually distinguishing the two policy areas does not rule out that there might be advantages of 
to keeping a large part of the responsibility for financial-stability policy within the central bank, as argued by, 
for instance, Blinder (2010) and Nyberg (2010). 
8 
 BIS Review 16/2010
 what impact financial factors have on the general equilibrium effects of alternative policy-rate 
paths on inflation and resource utilization forecasts.16
Even with much better analytical foundations concerning the role of financial factors in the 
transmission  mechanism,  there  will  of  course,  as  always,  be  considerable  scope  for  the 
application of good judgment in monetary policy.  
Another conclusion, which is not new, is that consideration of the impact of financial factors 
on  the  forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilization  may  require  longer  forecast  horizons. 
Several  inflation-targeting  central  banks  (including  the  Bank  of  England,  Norges  Bank  and 
the  Riksbank)  have  for  other  reasons  already  extended  their  forecast  horizon  from  the 
previously common two years to three years. There is nothing that in principle prevents an 
inflation  targeter  from  considering  forecasts  beyond  a  three-year  horizon,  but  in  practice 
there  is  usually  little  information  about  anything  at  longer  horizons  except  the  tendency  to 
revert to the long-term average.  
What about “leaning against the wind” (as advocated by, for instance, Borio and White, 2003, 
and Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani, 2002), the idea that central banks should raise the 
interest rate more than what appears to be warranted by inflation and resource utilization to 
counter rapid credit growth and rising asset prices? It has sometimes not been quite clear 
whether  advocates  of  leaning  against  the  wind  mean  that  credit  growth  and  asset  prices 
should  be  considered  targets  and  enter  the  explicit  or  implicit  loss  functions  alongside 
inflation and resource utilization, or whether they mean that credit growth and asset prices 
should still be considered just indicators and are emphasized only because credit growth and 
asset  prices  may  have  potential  negative  effects  on  inflation  and  resource  utilization  at  a 
longer horizon. In the latter case, leaning against the wind is a way to improve the stability of 
inflation  and  resource  utilization  in  the  longer  run.  Then  it  is  completely  consistent  with 
flexible inflation targeting.17 
However, in line with the previous discussion, instruments other than interest rates are likely 
to be much more effective in avoiding excessive credit growth and asset-price booms, and 
should thus be used as a first best alternative. Interest rates that are high enough to have a 
noticeable  effect  on  credit  growth  and  asset  prices  may  have  strong  negative  effects  on 
inflation  and  resource  utilization,  and  a  central  bank  will  probably  rarely  have  sufficient 
information  about  the  likely  beneficial  longer-horizon  effects  on  inflation  and  resource 
utilization for the trade-off to be worthwhile and motivated.18
                                                  
16   Walsh (2009) points out that when financial factors cause distortions, these distortions will in general introduce 
corresponding terms in a loss function for monetary policy that is a second-order approximation to household 
welfare.  Curdia  and  Woodford  (2009)  present  a  model  where  the  second-order  welfare  approximation  is  a 
standard quadratic loss function of inflation and the output gap between output and potential output, but where 
potential output is affected by financial factors. Then inflation and the output gap remain the target variables, 
with and without financial factors. The neutral rate in the model, that is, the real rate consistent with output 
equal to potential output, is then also affected by financial factors. 
17   Adrian and Shin (2007, 2009) argue, in a model with a risk-taking channel as in Borio and Zhu (2008), that 
short interest-rate movements may have considerable effects on the leverage of securities broker-dealers in 
the market-based financial sector outside the commercial-banking sector. However, new regulation may affect 
the magnitude of these affects, and the size of the market-based financial sector may end up being smaller 
after the crisis. In Europe, the commercial banks dominate the financial sector. 
18   Kohn (2006, 2008) specifies three conditions that should be fulfilled for central banks to take “extra action” to 
deal  with  a  possible  asset-price  bubble:  “First,  policymakers  must  be  able  to  identify  bubbles  in  a  timely 
fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have a high probability 
that it will help to check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, the expected improvement in future 
economic  performance  that  would  result  from  the  curtailment  of  the  bubble  must  be  sufficiently  great.”  He 
concludes, also in 2008 and after thorough considerations, that those conditions would rarely be met. See also 
Kohn (2009). 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 9
In particular, if there is evidence of rapidly-rising house prices and mortgage loans, and these 
developments are deemed to be unsustainable and a possible bubble, there are much more 
effective  instruments  than  policy  rates.  Restrictions  on  loan-to-value  ratios  and  minimum 
mortgages and requirements of realistic cash-flow calculations for house buyers with realistic 
interest  rates  are  much  more  effective  in  putting  a  break  on  possible  unsustainable 
developments than a rise in the policy rates. In particular, more transparency about future 
policy  rates,  in  the  form  a  policy-rate  path  published  by  the  central  bank,  may  help  in 
providing realistic information about future interest rates.  
Ultimately, my main conclusion from the crisis so far is that flexible inflation targeting, applied 
in the right way and using all the information about financial factors that is relevant for the 
forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilization  at  any  horizon,  remains  the  best-practice 
monetary  policy  before,  during,  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  But  a  better  theoretical, 
empirical  and  operational  understanding  of  the  role  of  financial  factors  in  the  transmission 
mechanism  is  urgently  required  and  needs  much  work,  work  that  is  already  underway  in 
academia and in central banks.  
The outcome might very well be that financial factors are considered to have a larger role in 
affecting  the  transmission  mechanism  and  as  indicators  of  future  inflation  and  resource 
utilization. If so, central banks would end up responding more to financial indicators, in the 
sense of adjusting the policy rate and policy-rate path more to a given change in a financial 
indicator. However, this would not mean that financial factors and indicators have become 
independent targets besides inflation and resource utilization in the explicit or implicit central-
bank  loss  function.  Instead,  it  would  be  a  matter  of  responding  appropriately  to  financial 
indicators in order to achieve the best possible stabilization of inflation around the inflation 
target and resource utilization around a normal level over time.  
References  
Adrian,  Tobias  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2007)  “Liquidity  and  Leverage”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Intermediation,  forthcoming.  Available  as  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff 
Reports 328.  
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2009),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary 
Economics”, in Friedman, Benjamin M., and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary 
Economics, Volume 3a and 3b, forthcoming.  
Bank for International Settlements (2009), 79th Annual Report, www.bis.org.  
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2009),  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great 
Contraction”, Schumpeter Lecture, Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk.  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” speech on January 3, 
2010, www.federal.reserve.  
Blinder, Alan S. (2010), “How Central Should the Central Bank Be?” CEPS Working Paper 
No. 198.  
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” Bank for International Settlements Working 
Paper 268.  
Borio, Claudio and White, William R. (2003), “Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The 
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a 
Changing  Economy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Jackson  Hole  Symposium,  
131–212.  
10 
 BIS Review 16/2010
Carney, Mark (2009), “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic 
Activity”, in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Jackson Hole Symposium.  
Cecchetti, Stephen, Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002), “Asset Prices in a Flexible 
Inflation Targeting Framework”, in Hunter, W., G. Kaufman, and M. Pomerleano, eds., Asset 
Price  Bubbles:  The  Implications  for  Monetary,  Regulatory  and  International  Policies, 
Cambridge, 427–444.  
Curdia,  Vasco,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2009),  “Credit  Frictions  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy”, working paper.  
Del Negro, Marco, and Christopher Otrok (2007), “99 Luftballons: Monetary Policy and the 
House Price Boom across U.S. States”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1962–1985.  
Edge,  Rochelle  M.,  Michael  T.  Kiley,  and  Jean-Philippe  Laforte  (2008),  “The  Sources  of 
Fluctuations  in  Residential  Investment:  A View from a Policy-Oriented  DSGE  Model of the 
U.S.  Economy”,  paper  presented  at  the  2009  American  Economic  Association  annual 
meeting, January 3–5.  
Greenspan,  Alan  (2002)  “Opening  Remarks”,  in  Rethinking  Stabilization  Policy,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 1–10.  
Iacoviello,  Matteo,  and  Stefano  Neri  (2008)  “Housing  Market  Spillovers:  Evidence  from  an 
Estimated DSGE Model”, working paper, Boston College.  
International Monetary Fund (2009), World Economic Outlook, October 2009.  
Jarocinski, Marek, and Frank R. Smets (2008), “House Prices and the Stance of Monetary 
Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 90, 339–365.  
King, Mervyn (1994), “Monetary Policy in the UK”, Fiscal Studies 15(3), 109–128.  
King,  Mervyn,  (1997),  “Changes  in  UK  Monetary  Policy:  Rules  and  Discretion  in Practice”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 81–97.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2006),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices”,  speech  on  March  16,  2006, 
www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices  Revisited”,  speech  on 
November 19, 2008, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2009),  “Policy  Challenges  for  the  Federal  Reserve”,  speech  on 
November 16, 2009, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Miller, Marcus H., Paul A. Weller, and Lei Zhang (2002), “Moral Hazard and the U.S. Stock 
Market: Analysing the Greenspan Put”, Economic Journal. 112, C171–C186.  
Nyberg, Lars (2010), “After the Crisis”, speech on February 5, 2010, www.riksbank.se.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (1997),  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring 
Inflation Targets”, European Economic Review 41, 1111–1146. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999), “Inflation Targeting: Some Extensions”, Scandinavian Journal of 
Economics 101, 337–361.  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003), “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof 
Way and Others”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4), 145–166.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy  with  Judgment:  Forecast  Targeting”, 
International Journal of Central Banking 1(1), 1–54.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2009a),  “Evaluating  Monetary  Policy”,  in  Koenig,  Evan,  and  Robert 
Leeson,  eds.,  From  the  Great  Moderation  to  the  Great  Deviation:  A  Round-Trip  Journey 
Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, forthcoming, www.larseosvensson.net.  
BIS Review 16/2010 
 11
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2009b),  “Flexible  Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the  Financial 
Crisis”, speech on September 21, 2009, www.riksbank.se.  
Taylor, John B. (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy”, in  Housing, Housing Finance, and 
Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 463–476.  
Walsh,  Carl  E.  (2009), “Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic Activity”,  in  Financial 
Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium.  
White,  William  R.  (2006),  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?”,  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  205, 
www.bis.org.  
Woodford,  Michael  (2007a),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007.  
Woodford,  Michael  (2007a),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007.  
Woodford, Michael (2007b), “Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy: Policy Rules 
in Practice”, in Koenig, Evan, and Robert Leeson, eds., From the Great Moderation to the 
Great Deviation: A Round-Trip Journey Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, forthcoming.  
Daniel K Tarullo: Equipping financial regulators with the tools necessary 
to monitor systemic risk 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance, 
Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate,  Washington  DC, 
12 February 2010. 
 Chairman Bayh, Ranking Member Corker, and other members of the Committee, thank you 
for inviting me to testify today. I also want to thank all of you for taking the time to explore a 
subject that is easily overlooked in the public debate around financial reform, but that will be 
central to ensuring a more stable financial system in the future.  
The recent financial crisis revealed important gaps in data collection and systematic analysis 
of institutions and markets. Remedies to fill those gaps are critical for monitoring systemic 
risk and for enhanced supervision of systemically important financial institutions, which are in 
turn necessary to decrease the chances of such a serious crisis occurring in the future. The 
Federal Reserve believes that the goals of agency action and legislative change should be 
(1) to ensure that supervisory agencies have access to high-quality and timely data that are 
organized  and  standardized  so  as  to  enhance  their  regulatory  missions,  and  (2)  to  make 
such data available in appropriately usable form to other government agencies and private 
analysts  so  that  they  can  conduct  their  own  analyses  and  raise  their  own  concerns  about 
financial trends and developments.  
In my testimony this morning I will first review the data collection and analysis activities of the 
Federal  Reserve  that  are  relevant  to  systemic  risk  monitoring  and  explain  why  we  believe 
additional data should be collected by regulatory authorities with responsibility for financial 
stability. Next I will set forth some principles that we believe should guide efforts to achieve 
the two goals I have just noted. Finally, I will describe current impediments to these goals 
and suggest some factors for the Congress to consider as it evaluates potential legislation to 
improve the monitoring and containment of systemic risk.  
12 
 BIS Review 16/2010
The Federal Reserve and macro-prudential supervision 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  considerable  experience  in  data  collection  and  reporting  in 
connection  with  its  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  monetary  policy 
deliberations, and lender-of-last-resort responsibilities. The Federal Reserve has made large 
investments in quantitative and qualitative analysis of the U.S. economy, financial markets, 
and  financial  institutions.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  has  recently  initiated  some  new  data 
collection and analytical efforts as it has responded to the crisis and in anticipation of new 
financial and economic developments.  
For supervision of the largest institutions, new quantitative efforts have been started to better 
measure  counterparty  credit  risk  and  interconnectedness,  market  risk  sensitivities,  and 
funding and liquidity. The focus of these efforts is not only on risks to individual firms, but 
also  on  concentrations  of  risk  that  may  arise  through  common  exposures  or  sensitivity  to 
common shocks. For example, additional loan-level data on bank exposures to syndicated 
corporate  loans  are  now  being  collected  in  a  systematic  manner  that  will  allow  for  more 
timely  and  consistent  measurement  of  individual  bank  and  systemic  exposures  to  these 
sectors.  In  addition,  detailed  data  obtained  from  firms’  risk-management  systems  allow 
supervisors to examine concentration risk and interconnectedness. Specifically, supervisors 
are  aggregating,  where  possible,  the  banks’  largest  exposures  to  other  banks,  nonbank 
financial  institutions,  and  corporate  borrowers,  which  could  be  used  to  reveal  large 
exposures  to  individual  borrowers  that  the  banks  have  in  common  or  to  assess  the  credit 
impact of a failure of a large bank on other large banks. Additional time and experience with 
these  data  will  allow  us  to  assess  the  approach’s  ability  to  signal  adverse  events,  and 
together  they  will  be  a  critical  input  to  designing  a  more  robust  and  consistent  reporting 
system.  
Furthermore, we are collecting data on banks’ trading and securitization risk exposures as 
part of an ongoing, internationally coordinated effort to improve regulatory capital standards 
in  these  areas.  Moreover,  analysis  of  liquidity  risk  now  incorporates  more  explicitly  the 
possibility of marketwide shocks to liquidity. This effort also is an example of the importance 
of context and the need to understand the firms’ internal risk models and risk-management 
systems in designing data collection requirements. Data that only capture a set of positions 
would not be sufficient since positions would not incorporate behavioral assumptions about 
firms, based on information about firms’ business models and practices.  
The Federal Reserve’s responsibilities for monetary policy are also relevant for systemic risk 
monitoring.  Systemic  risk  involves  the  potential  for  financial  crises  to  result  in  substantial 
adverse  effects  on  economic  activity.  As  the  nation’s  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve 
assesses  and  forecasts  the  U.S.  and  global  economies  using  a  wide  variety  of  data  and 
analytical  tools,  some  based  on  specific  sectors  and  others  on  large-scale  models.  In  the 
wake of the crisis, research has been expanded to better understand the channels from the 
financial sector to the real economy. For example, building on lessons from the recent crisis, 
the Federal Reserve added questions to the Survey of Professional Forecasters to elicit from 
private-sector  forecasters  their  subjective  probabilities  of  forecasts  of  key  macroeconomic 
variables,  which  provides  to  us,  and  to  the  public,  better  assessments  of  the  likelihood  of 
severe macroeconomic outcomes.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  made  substantial  investments  in  data  and  analytical  staff  for 
financial  market  monitoring.  Each  day,  the  Trading  Desk  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York analyzes and internally distributes reports on market developments, focusing on 
those  markets  where  prices  and  volumes  are  changing  rapidly,  where  news  or  policy  is 
having a major effect, or where there are special policy concerns. Those analyses begin with 
quantitative data, supplemented with information obtained through conversations with market 
participants and reviews of other analyses available in the market. Over the past few years, 
the Desk has worked closely with our research staff in developing new quantitative tools and 
new data sources.  
BIS Review 16/2010 
 13
trade  data 
from  over-the-counter  derivatives 
This  ongoing  monitoring  requires  continual  evaluation  of  new  data  sources  and  analytical 
tools to develop new data as new markets and practices develop. For example, information 
on market volumes and prices can be collected from new trading platforms and brokers, data 
on  instruments  such  as  credit  default  swaps,  or  CDS,  are  provided  by  vendors  or  market 
participants, and fresh insights are gained from new methods of extracting information from 
options data. In some cases, publication of data by the private sector may be mandated by 
legislation  (such  as,  potentially, 
trade 
repositories);  in  other  cases,  the  Federal  Reserve  or  other  government  agencies  or 
regulators require or encourage the gathering and publication of data.  
Our experiences with supervision, monetary policy, and financial market monitoring suggest 
that  market  data  gathering  and  market  oversight  responsibilities  must  continuously  inform 
one another. In addition, efforts to identify stresses in the system are not a matter of running 
a  single  model  or  focusing  on  a  single  risk.  Rather,  it  is  the  assembly  of  many  types  of 
analysis in a systematic fashion. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) for 
large financial institutions – popularly known as the “stress test” when it was conducted early 
last year – illustrates the importance of combining analysis by credit experts, forecasts and 
scenario design by macroeconomists, and hands-on judgments by supervisors in assessing 
the financial condition and potential vulnerabilities of large financial institutions.  
While  considerable  steps  have  been  made  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal 
Reserve  intends  to  do  a  good  deal  more.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  will  continue  to 
strengthen  and  expand  its  supervisory  capabilities  with  a  macro-prudential  approach  by 
drawing on its considerable data reporting, gathering, and analytical capabilities across many 
disciplines. In the areas in which we are collecting data through the supervisory process on 
measures  of  interlinkages  and  common  exposures  among  the  largest  financial  firms  we 
supervise, we are developing new analytical tools that may lead us to change our information 
requests from supervised firms. The Federal Reserve is exploring how to develop analytically 
sophisticated  measures  of  leverage  and  better  measures  of  maturity  transformation  from 
information that we can collect from the supervised firms in the supervisory process and from 
other available data and analysis. We envision developing a robust set of key indicators of 
emerging  risk  concentrations  and  market  stresses  that  would  both  supplement  existing 
supervisory  techniques  and  assist  in  the  early  identification  of  early  trends  that  may  have 
systemic significance and bear further inquiry. This kind of approach will require data that are 
produced  more  frequently  than  the  often  quarterly  data  gathered  in  regulatory  reports, 
although not necessarily real-time or intraday, and reported soon after the fact, without the 
current,  often  long,  reporting  lags.  These  efforts  will  need  to  actively  seek  international 
cooperation as financial firms increasingly operate globally.  
The potential benefits of additional data 
Improved  data  are  essential  for  monitoring  systemic  risk  and  for  implementing  a  macro-
prudential  approach  to  supervision.  The  financial  crisis  highlighted  the  existence  of 
interlinkages  across  financial  institutions  and  between  financial  institutions  and  markets. 
Credit  risks  were  amplified  by  leverage  and  the  high  degree  of  maturity  transformation, 
especially  outside  of  traditional  commercial  banking  institutions.  Moreover,  supervision 
traditionally has tended to focus on the validity of regulated firms’ private risk-management 
systems, which did not easily allow comparisons and aggregation across firms.  
One key feature of the recent crisis was the heavy reliance on short-term sources of funds to 
purchase long-term assets, which led to a poor match between the maturity structure of the 
firms’  assets  and  liabilities.  Such  maturity  transformation  is  inherently  fragile  and  leaves 
institutions  and  entire  markets  susceptible  to  runs.  Indeed,  a  regulatory,  supervisory,  and 
insurance  framework  was  created  during  the  Great  Depression  to  counter  this  problem  at 
depository 
in  recent  years  a  significant  amount  of  maturity 
transformation took place outside the traditional banking system – in the so-called shadow 
institutions.  However, 
14 
 BIS Review 16/2010
banking system – through the use of commercial paper, repurchase agreements, and other 
instruments. Our ability to monitor the size and extent of maturity transformation has been 
hampered by the lack of high-quality and consistent data on these activities. Better data on 
the sources and uses of maturity transformation outside of supervised banking organizations 
would greatly aid macro-prudential supervision and systemic risk regulation.  
Another feature of the recent crisis was the extensive use of leverage, often in conjunction 
with  maturity  transformation.  The  consequences  of  this  combination  were  dramatic.  When 
doubts arose about the quality of the assets on shadow banking system balance sheets, a 
classic  adverse  feedback  loop  ensued  in  which  lenders  were  increasingly  unwilling  to  roll 
over  the  short-term  debt  that  was  used  as  funding.  Liquidity-constrained  institutions  were 
forced  to  sell  assets  at  increasingly  distressed  prices,  which  accelerated  margin  calls  for 
leveraged actors and amplified mark-to-market losses for all holders of the assets, including 
regulated  firms.  Here,  too,  government  regulators  and  supervisors  had  insufficient  data  to 
determine the degree and location of leverage in the financial system.  
More generally, the crisis revealed that regulators, supervisors, and market participants could 
not fully measure the extent to which financial institutions and markets were linked. A critical 
lesson  from  this  crisis  is  that  supervisors  and  investors  need  to  be  able  to  more  quickly 
evaluate the potential effects, for example, of the possible failure of a specific institution on 
other large firms through counterparty credit channels; financial markets; payment, clearing, 
and settlement arrangements; and reliance on common sources of short-term funding.  
A better system of data collection and aggregation would have manifold benefits, particularly 
if  the  data  are  shared  appropriately  among  financial  regulators  and  with  a  systemic  risk 
council if one is created. It would enable regulators and a council to assess and compare 
risks  across  firms,  markets,  and  products.  It  would  improve  risk  management  by  firms 
themselves by requiring standardized and efficient collection of relevant financial information. 
It also would enhance the ability of the government to wind down systemically important firms 
in  a  prompt  and  orderly  fashion  by  providing  policymakers  a  clearer  view  of  the  potential 
impacts of different resolution options on the broader financial system.  
Additional  benefits  would  result  from  making  data  public  to  the  degree  consistent  with 
protecting firm-specific proprietary and supervisory information. Investors and analysts would 
have  a  more  complete  picture  of  individual  firms’  strengths  and  vulnerabilities,  thereby 
contributing  to  better  market  discipline.  Other  government  agencies,  academics,  and 
additional interested parties would be able to conduct their own analyses of financial system 
developments and identify possible emerging stresses and risks in financial markets.  
One  area  in  which  better  information  is  particularly  important  is  the  web  of  connections 
among  financial  institutions  though  channels  such  as  interbank  lending,  securities  lending, 
repurchase  agreements,  and  derivatives  contracts.  Regulators  also  need  more  and  better 
data on the links among institutions through third-party sponsors, liquidity providers, credit-
support providers, and market makers. Knowledge of such network linkages is a necessary 
first  step  to  improve  analysis  of  how  shocks  to  institutions  and  markets  can  propagate 
through the financial system.  
Principles for developing a system of effective data and analytical tools 
Moving from the recognition of the need for more data to an efficient data system is not an 
easy  task.  Data  collection  entails  costs  in  collection,  organization,  and  utilization  for 
government agencies, reporting market participants, and other interested parties. Tradeoffs 
may  need  to  be  faced  where,  for  example,  a  particular  type  of  information  would  be  very 
costly to collect and would have only limited benefits. The Internet and other applications of 
information  technologies  have  made  us  all  too  aware  of  the  potential  for  information 
overload, a circumstance in which relevant information is theoretically available, but the time 
and expense of retrieving it or transforming it into a usable form make it unhelpful in practical 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 15
terms. Collection of more data just for its own sake also can raise systemic costs associated 
with moral hazard if investors view data collection from certain firms, products, and markets 
as  suggesting  implicit  support.  It  is  thus  particularly  worth  emphasizing  the  importance  of 
having data available readily and in a form that is appropriate for the uses to which it will be 
put. With these considerations in mind, we have derived a number of guiding principles for a 
system  of  new  data  and  analytical  tools  for  effectively  supervising  large  institutions  and 
monitoring systemic risk.  
First, the priorities for new data efforts should be determined by the nature of regulatory and 
supervisory  missions.  In  particular,  the  data  need  to  be  sufficiently  timely  and  to  cover  a 
sufficient  range  of  financial  institutions,  markets,  instruments,  and  transactions  to  support 
effective  systemic  risk  monitoring  and  macro-prudential  supervision,  as  well  as  traditional 
safety-and-soundness  regulation.  The  events  of  the  past  few  years  have  painfully 
demonstrated that regulators, financial institutions, and investors lacked ready access to data 
that  would  have  allowed  them  to  fully  assess  the  value  of  complex  securities,  understand 
counterparty risks, or identify concentrations of exposures.  
The data needed for systemic risk monitoring and supervision are not necessarily “real-time” 
market  data  –  information  about  trades  and  transactions  that  can  be  reported  at  high 
frequency  when  the  events  occur  –  but  certainly  data  would  need  to  be  “timely”.  What  is 
considered to be “timely” will depend on its purpose, and decisions about how timely the data 
should be should not ignore the costs of collecting and making the data usable. For many 
supervisory needs, real-time data would be impractical to collect and analyze in a meaningful 
way and unnecessary. For example, while supervisors may indeed need to be able to quickly 
value  the  balance  sheets  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  very  frequent 
updates  as  transactions  occur  and  market  prices  change  could  lead  to  more  volatility  in 
values than fundamental conditions would indicate and would be extraordinarily expensive to 
provide and maintain. Certainly, real-time data could be needed for regulators responsible for 
monitoring  market  functioning,  and  daily  data  would  be  helpful  to  measure  end-of-day 
payment settlements and risk positions among the largest firms. But for supervising market 
participants,  real-time  market  data  could  require  enormous  investments  by  regulators, 
institutions,  and  investors  in  order  to  be  usable  while  yielding  little  net  benefit.  As 
policymakers consider redesign of a system of data collection, the goal should be data that 
are timely and best suited to the mission at hand.  
A second principle is that data collection be user-driven. That is, data on particular markets 
and institutions should be collected whenever possible by the regulators who ultimately are 
responsible  for  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  institutions  or  for  the  functioning  of  those 
markets.  Regulators  with  supervisory  responsibilities  for  particular  financial  firms  and 
markets are more likely to understand the relevance of particular forms of standardized data 
for risk management and supervisory oversight. For example, supervisors regularly evaluate 
the ability of individual firms’ own risk measures, such as internal ratings for loans, and of 
liquidity  and  counterparty  credit  risks,  to  signal  potential  problems.  As  a  result,  these 
supervisors have the expertise needed to develop new reporting requirements that would be 
standardized across firms and could be aggregated.  
Third, greater standardization of data than exists today is required. Standardized reporting to 
regulators  in  a  way  that  allows  aggregation  for  effective  monitoring  and  analysis  is 
imperative. In addition, the data collection effort itself should encourage the use of common 
reporting systems across institutions, markets, and investors, which would generally enhance 
efficiency and transparency. Even seemingly simple changes, such as requiring the use of a 
standardized unique identifier for institutions (or instruments), would make surveillance and 
reporting substantially more efficient.  
Fourth,  the  data  collected  and  the  associated  reporting  standards  and  protocols  should 
enable  better  risk  management  by  the  institutions  themselves  and  foster  greater  market 
discipline  by  investors.  Currently,  because  the  underlying  data  in  firms’  risk-management 
16 
 BIS Review 16/2010
systems are incomplete or are maintained in nonstandardized proprietary formats, compiling 
industry-wide data on counterparty credit risk or common exposures is a challenge for both 
firms and supervisors. Further, institutions and investors cannot easily construct fairly basic 
measures  of  common  risks  across  firms  because  they  may  not  disclose  sufficient 
information. In some cases, such as disclosure of characteristics of underlying mortgages in 
a securitized pool, more complete and interoperable data collection systems could enhance 
market  discipline  by  allowing  investors  to  better  assess  the  risks  of  the  securities  without 
compromising proprietary information of the lending institution.  
Fifth, data collection must be nimble, flexible, and statistically coherent. With the rapid pace 
of financial innovation, a risky new asset class can grow from a minor issue to a significant 
threat  faster  than  government  agencies  have  traditionally  been  able  to  revise  reporting 
requirements. For example, collateralized debt obligations based on asset-backed securities 
grew  from  a  specialized  niche  product  to  the  largest  source  of  funding  for  asset-backed 
securities  in  just  a  few  years.  Regulators,  then,  should  have  the  authority  to  collect 
information  promptly  when  needed,  even  when  such  collections  would  require  responses 
from  a  broad  range  of  institutions  or  markets,  some  of  which  may  not  be  regulated  or 
supervised.  In  addition,  processes  for  information  collection  must  meet  high  standards  for 
reliability, coherence, and representativeness.  
Sixth,  data  collection  and  aggregation  by  regulatory  agencies  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
process for making the data available to as great a degree as possible to fellow regulators, 
other  government  entities,  and  the  public.  There  will,  of  course,  be  a  need  to  protect 
proprietary  and  supervisory  information,  particularly  where  specific  firm-based  data  are  at 
issue. But the presumption should be in favor of making information widely available.  
Finally,  any  data  collection  and  analysis  effort  must  be  attentive  to  its  international 
dimensions  and  must  seek  appropriate  participation  from  regulators  in  other  nations, 
especially  those  with  major  financial  centers.  Financial  activities  and  risk  exposures  are 
increasingly  globalized.  A  system  without  a  common  detailed  taxonomy  for  securities  and 
counterparties  and  comparable  requirements  for  reporting  across  countries  would  make 
assembling a meaningful picture of the exposures of global institutions very difficult. Efforts to 
improve  data  collection  are  already  under  way  in  the  European  Union,  by  the  Bank  of 
England  and  the  Financial  Services  Authority,  and  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  has 
expressed support for developing a unified international system of taxonomy and reporting. 
The Financial Stability Board, at the request of the G-20, is initiating an international effort to 
develop  a  common  reporting  template  and  a  process  to  share  information  on  common 
exposures and linkages between systemically important global financial institutions.  
Barriers to effective data collection for analysis 
Legislation  will  be  needed  to  improve  the  ability  of  regulatory  agencies  to  collect  the 
necessary  data  to  support  effective  supervision  and  systemic  risk  monitoring.  Restrictions 
designed  to  balance  the  costs  and  benefits  of  data  collection  and  analysis  have  not  kept 
pace with rapid changes in the financial system. The financial system is likely to continue to 
change rapidly, and both regulators and market participants need the capacity to keep pace.  
Regulators  have  been  hampered  by  a  lack  of  authority  to  collect  and  analyze  information 
from unregulated entities. But the recent financial crisis illustrated that substantial risks from 
leverage  and  maturity  transformation  were  outside  of  regulated  financial  firms.  In  addition, 
much  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  collection  of  data  is  based  on  voluntary  participation.  For 
example,  survey  data  on  lending  terms  and  standards  at  commercial  banks,  lending  by 
finance companies, and transactions in the commercial paper market rely on the cooperation 
of  the  surveyed  entities.  Moreover,  as  we  have  suggested,  the  data  collection  authority  of 
financial regulators over the firms they supervise should be expanded to encompass macro-
prudential considerations. The ability of regulators to collect information should similarly be 
expanded  to  include  the  ability  to  gather  market  data  necessary  for  monitoring  systemic 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 17
risks. Doing so would better enable regulators to monitor and assess potential systemic risks 
arising  directly  from  the  firms  or  markets  under  their  supervision  or  from  the  interaction  of 
these firms or markets with other components of the financial system.  
The  Paperwork  Reduction  Act  also  can  at  times  impede  timely  and  robust  data  collection. 
The  act  generally  requires  that  public  notice  be  provided,  and  approval  of  the  Office  of 
Management and Budget (OMB) be obtained, before any information requirement is applied 
to  more  than  nine  entities.  Over  the  years,  the  act’s  requirement  for  OMB  approval  for 
information  collection  activity  involving  more  than  nine  entities  has  discouraged  agencies 
from undertaking many initiatives and can delay the collection of important information in a 
financial crisis. For example, even a series of informal meetings with more than nine entities 
designed  to  learn  about  emerging  developments  in  markets  may  be  subject  to  the 
requirements  of  the  act.  While  the  principle  of  minimizing  the  burdens  imposed  on  private 
parties  is  an  important  one,  the  Congress  should  consider  amending  the  act  to  allow  the 
financial supervisory agencies to obtain the data necessary for financial stability in a timely 
manner when needed. One proposed action would be to increase the number of entities from 
which  information  can  be  collected  without  triggering  the  act;  another  would  be  to  permit 
special  data  requests  of  the  systemically  important  institutions  could  be  conducted  more 
quickly and flexibly.  
The global nature of capital markets seriously limits the extent to which one country acting 
alone  can  organize  information  on  financial  markets.  Many  large  institutions  have  foreign 
subsidiaries that take financial positions in coordination with the parent. Accordingly, strong 
cooperative  arrangements  among  domestic  and  foreign  authorities,  supported  by  an 
appropriate  statutory  framework,  are  needed  to  enable  appropriate  sharing  of  information 
among relevant authorities. Strong cooperation will not be a panacea, however, as legal and 
other restrictions on data sharing differ from one jurisdiction to the next, and it is unlikely that 
all  such  restrictions  can  be  overcome.  But  cooperation  and  legislation  to  facilitate  sharing 
with foreign authorities appears to be the best available strategy.  
Significant practical barriers also exist that can, at times, limit the quality of data collection 
and analysis available to support effective supervision and regulation, which include barriers 
to  sharing  data  that  arise  from  policies  designed  to  protect  privacy.  For  example,  some 
private-sector databases and bank’s loan books include firms’ tax identification (ID) numbers 
as  identifiers.  Mapping  those  ID  numbers  into  various  characteristics,  such  as  broad 
geographic location or taxable income measures, can be important for effective analysis and 
can be done in a way that does not threaten privacy. However, as a practical matter, a firm 
may have multiple ID numbers or they may have changed, but the Internal Revenue Service 
usually cannot share the information needed to validate a match between the firm and the ID 
number,  even  under  arrangements  designed  to  protect  the  confidentiality  of  the  taxpayer 
information obtained.  
In addition, a significant amount of financial information is collected by private-sector vendors 
seeking to profit from the sale of data. These vendors have invested in expertise and in the 
quality of data in order to meet the needs of their customers, and the Federal Reserve is a 
purchaser  of  some  of  these  data.  However,  vendors  often  place  strong  limitations  on  the 
sharing of such data with anyone, including among federal agencies, and on the manner in 
which such data may be used. They also create systems with private identifiers for securities 
and firms or proprietary formats that do not make it easy to link with other systems. Surely it 
is important that voluntary contributors of data be able to protect their interests, and that the 
investments  and  intellectual  property  of  firms  be  protected.  But  the  net  effect  has  been  a 
noncompatible web of data that is much less useful, and much more expensive, to both the 
private and the public sector, than it might otherwise be.  
Protecting privacy and private-sector property rights clearly are important policy objectives; 
they  are  important  considerations  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  current  data  collection  and 
safeguarding.  Protecting  the  economy  from  systemic  risk  and  promoting  the  safety  and 
18 
 BIS Review 16/2010
soundness  of  financial  institutions  also  are  important  public  objectives.  The  key  issue  is 
whether  the  current  set  of  rules  appropriately  balances  these  interests.  In  light  of  the 
importance  of  the  various  interests  involved,  the  Congress  should  consider  initiating  a 
process  through  which  the  parties  of  interest  may  exchange  views  and  develop  potential 
policy options for the Congress’s consideration.  
Organization structure for data collection and developing analytical tools 
In  addition  to  balancing  the  costs  and  benefits  of  enhanced  data  and  analytical  tools,  the 
Congress  must  determine  the  appropriate  organizational  form  for  data  collection  and 
development  of  analytical  tools.  Budget  costs,  production  efficiencies,  and  the  costs  of 
separating data collection and analysis from decision-making are important considerations. 
Any  proposed  form  of  organization  should  facilitate  effective  data  sharing.  It  also  should 
increase  the  availability  of  data,  including  aggregated  supervisory  data  as  appropriate,  to 
market  participants  and  experts  so  that  they  can  serve  the  useful  role  of  providing 
independent perspectives on risks in the financial system.  
The current arrangement, in which different agencies collect and analyze data, cooperating 
in  cases  where  a  consensus  exists  among  them,  can  certainly  be  improved.  The  most 
desirable  feature  of  collection  and  analysis  under  the  existing  setup  is  that  it  satisfies  the 
principle  that  data  collection  and  analysis  should  serve  the  end  users,  the  regulatory 
agencies.  Each  of  the  existing  agencies  collects  some  data  from  entities  it  regulates  or 
supervises, using its expertise to decide what to collect under its existing authorities and how 
to analyze it. Moreover, the agencies seek to achieve cost efficiencies and to reduce burdens 
on the private sector by cooperating in some data collection. An example is the Consolidated 
Reports of Condition and Income, or Call Reports, collected by the bank regulatory agencies 
from both national and state-chartered commercial banks. The content of the reporting forms 
is  coordinated  by  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council,  which  includes 
representatives of both state and federal bank regulatory agencies.  
A standalone independent data collection and analysis agency might be more nimble than 
the current setup because it would not have to reach consensus with other agencies. It might 
also  have  the  advantage  of  fostering  an  overall  assessment  of  financial  data  needs  for  all 
governmental purposes.  
However,  there  would  also  be  some  substantial  disadvantages  to  running  comprehensive 
financial data collection through a separate independent agency established for this purpose. 
A new agency would entail additional budget costs because the agency would likely need to 
replicate many of the activities of the regulatory agencies in order to determine what data are 
needed. More importantly, because it would not be involved directly in supervision or market 
monitoring,  such  an  agency  would  be  hampered  in  its  ability  to  understand  the  types  of 
information  needed  to  effectively  monitor  systemic  risks  and  conduct  macro-prudential 
supervision. Data collection and analysis are not done in a vacuum; an agency’s duties will 
inevitably reflect the priorities, experience, and interests of the collecting entity. Even regular 
arms-length  consultations  among  agencies  might  not  be  effective,  because  detailed 
appreciation of the regulatory context within which financial activities that generate data and 
risks  is  needed.  The  separation  of  data  collection  and  regulation  could  also  dilute 
accountability if supervisors did not have authority to shape the form and scope of reporting 
requirements by regulated entities in accordance with supervisory needs.  
An alternative organizational approach would be available if the Congress creates a council 
of financial regulators to monitor systemic risks and help coordinate responses to emerging 
threats, such as that contemplated in a number of legislative proposals. Under this approach, 
the supervisory and regulatory agencies would maintain most data collection and analysis, 
with  some  enhanced  authority  along  the  lines  I  have  suggested.  Coordination  would  be 
committed to the council, which could also have authority to establish information collection 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 19
requirements beyond those conducted by its member agencies when necessary to monitor 
systemic risk.  
This  approach  might  achieve  the  benefits  of  the  current  arrangement  and  the  proposed 
independent agency, while avoiding their drawbacks. The council would be directed to seek 
to  resolve  conflicts  among  the  agencies  in  a  way  that  would  preserve  nimbleness,  and  it 
could recommend that an agency develop new types of data, but it would leave the details of 
data  collection  and  analysis  to  the  agencies  that  are  closest  to  the  relevant  firms  and 
markets. And while this council of financial supervisors could act independently if needed to 
collect information necessary to monitor the potential buildup of systemic risk, it would benefit 
directly  from  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  financial  supervisors  and  regulators 
represented on the council. The council could also have access to the data collected by all its 
agencies  and,  depending  on  the  staffing  decisions,  could  either  coordinate  or  conduct 
systemic risk analyses.  
Conclusion 
Let me close by thanking you once again for your attention to the important topic of ensuring 
the availability of the information necessary to monitor emergent systemic risks and establish 
effective macro-prudential supervisory oversight. As you know, these tasks will not be easy. 
However,  without  a  well-designed  infrastructure  of  useful  and  timely  data  and  improved 
analytical tools – which would be expected to continue to evolve over time – these tasks will 
only  be  more  difficult.  We  look  forward  to  continued  discussion  of  these  issues  and  to  a 
development of a shared agenda for improving our information sources. I would be happy to 
answer any questions you might have. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
20 
 BIS Review 16/2010
