Sada Reddy: Grow your company, grow the economy – have you 
considered the capital markets 
Opening address by Mr Sada Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the Capital 
Markets & Listing Seminar, Suva, 18 August 2010. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. I thank you all for accepting the RBF’s invitation to 
today’s seminar on the topic “Grow your company, grow the economy: have you considered 
the capital markets.”  
Just  a  little  over  12  months  ago,  on  August  19,  2009,  the  administration  of  the  Capital 
Markets  Development  Authority  (CMDA)  was  transferred  to  the  Reserve  Bank  under  the 
Capital Markets Decree 2009. I am pleased to say that the work on developing the capital 
markets has continued and in many respects strengthened by the change that has occurred. 
The capital markets unit has successfully integrated into the Reserve Bank family and has 
added a different dimension and skills-set to the Bank. I am happy to say that we can expect 
some major activities and events for the capital markets in the future. 
In  March  this  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  established  the  first  Capital  Markets  Development 
Taskforce.  The  members  are  Daryl  Tarte,  Bob  Niranjan,  Norman  Wilson,  Pradeep  Patel, 
Lisa Apted  and  myself  as  Chair.  This  Taskforce  is  a  “think  tank”  for  the  capital  markets 
development work of the Reserve Bank.  
Let me now turn to today’s event. 
The  development  of  the  secondary  trading  and  the  stock  exchange  is  a  key  factor  to 
developing the capital markets in Fiji.  
One  of  the core  functions  of  a  stock  exchange  is  to  connect  entities  with  surplus  funds  to 
others  who  require  capital.  An  exchange  also  facilitates  the  entire  continuous  trading  and 
wealth  creation  process;  thus  stimulating  economic  growth  and  development.  The  stock 
market fulfils a number of vital functions. These include:  
1.  
2.  
3.  
Price discovery through the generation of transparent prices  
Facilitate efficient allocation of resources  
Promote  sound  risk  management  and  corporate  governance  structures  within 
publicly listed organisations.  
Consequently,  a  well  functioning  capital  markets  requires  the  support  of  strong  institutions 
backed  by  a  well  developed  legal,  accounting,  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  and  a 
supportive private sector.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the SPSE has been challenged and continues to be challenged with 
many issues, some of which are:  
1.  
A number of investors in the share market are large institutional investors who buy 
and hold, instead of making market with their stocks;  
Our mums-and-dads investors, who are generally risk averse, have not embraced 
the stock market as a wealth creation opportunity, unlike in many countries where 
this section of the population is very actively participating in the stock market;  
An under developed brokerage community; and 
A business community apprehensive of listing for various reasons.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
BIS Review 108/2010 
 1
What can be done to mitigate these challenges?  
It  is  important  that  the business  enablers  (such  as  the  Reserve  Bank,  Commercial  Banks, 
FTIB, FIRCA and other regulatory agencies) and the private sector players like yourselves, 
view  the  capital  markets,  and  by  extension  the  SPSE,  as  a  mechanism  for  business  and 
economic development in Fiji.  
The Reserve Bank will do whatever it can to ensure the development of the capital market 
and  will  play  a  pivotal  role  in  public  education  and  investor  awareness  programs  to  foster 
confidence in the markets. We will also spearhead initiatives, whether with Government or 
other  agencies,  which  seek  to  develop  the  market  and  raise  these  issues  at  the 
political/ministerial level so that these reach successful conclusions. Here, I wish to mention 
that  following  Cabinet  approval,  reviews  are  currently  underway  to  amend  the  Capital 
Markets and Unit Trusts legislation. 
Government has offered a reduced corporate tax of 20% to companies who list on the SPSE 
which would not only facilitate economic development but improve the governance structures 
of  companies.  So  why  haven’t  more  companies  grasped  this  opportunity  to  grow  their 
businesses? I hope we can discuss some of these issues today. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, today we have present in this room, investment advisers, brokers, 
lawyers and accountants, and also FIRCA, who can assist you and answer your questions in 
relation  to  the  capital  markets  and  the  stock  exchange.  We  have  purposely  also  included 
presentations from people and companies who have successfully utilised the capital markets 
to take their companies to the next level so that you all have the opportunity to hear it from 
the “horse’s mouth”. 
I urge you to use this opportunity to get the information you need and make contact with our 
licensed intermediaries.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you very much for your time and attention and I wish you a 
good evening. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2010
