Njuguna Ndung’u: Corporate social responsibility in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, on the occasion 
of  the  launch  of  Equity  Group/Master  Card  Foundation  Scholarship,  Nairobi,  8  February 
2010. 
 The Rt. Hon. Raila Odinga, Prime Minister of the Republic of Kenya; 
Hon. Prof. Sam Ongeri, Minister for Education; 
Mr. Peter Munga, Chairman of Equity Bank; 
Dr. James Mwangi, Chief Executive Officer, Equity Bank; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
1. 
I  am  honoured  to  join  you  this  morning  on  this  important  occasion.  Let  me  at  the 
outset  acknowledge  the  presence  of  the  Right  Honourable  Prime  Minister  and  the 
Honourable Minister of Education. Your presence here is testimony to the emphasis that the 
Government of Kenya places on education. 
2. 
Allow  me  also  to  salute  the  Equity  Group  Foundation  and  the  Master  Card 
Foundation on the launch of scholarships for top primary school performers. This is a worthy 
extension of the corporate social responsibility activities of Equity and Master Card. I urge 
other entities to take up similar initiatives. 
3. 
Developing  the  requisite  human  capital  base  is  the  cornerstone  for  Vision  2030. 
Endogenous growth models emphasize the role of human capital. Inadequate human capital 
will choke growth and condemn the country to a low equilibrium trap. 
4. 
The  focus  of  this  Foundation  on  high  performing  students  from  vulnerable 
backgrounds  who  may  easily  drop  out  of  the  education  system  should  serve  as  the  best 
signalling mechanism for hard work and excellence. 
5. 
I  look  forward  to  the  success  of  this  Foundation  and  the  rolling  out  of  similar 
schemes by the corporate sector. I am sure that these scholarships will nurture Kenya’s next 
generation of transformational leaders. 
6. 
this distinguished gathering. 
Honourable Minister, You have the floor. 
It is now my pleasant duty to invite the Honourable Minister for Education to address 
Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Expanding financial services in Sri Lanka 
Address  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
Opening  of  a  New  Branch  Office  in  Jaffna  by  The  Hongkong  &  Shanghai  Banking 
Corporation Ltd, Jaffna, 11 February 2010. 
 My dear friends, 
I am delighted to be here in Jaffna today for the opening of a new branch of HSBC, one of 
the market leaders in global banking. The history of the HSBC in Sri Lanka could be traced 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 1
back  to  1884,  when  it  first  commenced  operations  in  Colombo.  Today,  the  largest  foreign 
bank operating in Sri Lanka has moved to Jaffna bringing banking to the doorsteps of people 
in the Northern Province. This is indeed a historic milestone. 
This  development  did  not  happen  by  chance.  It  did  not  take  place  automatically.  With  the 
liberation of our entire nation in May last year, the Government and the Central Bank have 
taken  determined  efforts  to  expand  financial  services,  facilitate  and  stimulate  economic 
activities,  and  develop  infrastructure  in  the  North  and  the  East.  In  fact,  I  have  personally 
participated  at  several  bank  branch  openings  during  the  last  few  months,  and  our  officers 
have  been  following  up  the  progress,  and  these  outcomes  are  a  result  of  such  combined 
efforts. Today, I can proudly say that an ever-growing number of financial institutions operate 
in the North and that these provide diverse financial services, whilst of course we would be 
the first to admit that a lot more needs to be done.  
My  dear  friends,  the  development  and  maintenance  of  essential  public  infrastructure  is  an 
important  ingredient  for  sustained  economic  growth  and  poverty  reduction.  In  particular, 
health, education, electricity, housing and efficient water and sanitation services help lay the 
groundwork  for  a  productive  and  healthy  population,  capable  of  contributing  to  sustained 
economic  growth.  We  all  know  that  as  a  result  of  the  long  and  bloody  conflict,  the 
infrastructure facilities in the North could not be developed as done in the other Provinces. It 
is  due  to  that  fact  that,  with  a  view  to  fast  tracking  the  development  in  the  North,  the 
Government  has  now  launched  a  well-planned,  integrated,  accelerated  development 
program titled “Vadakkin Vasantham.” Under this program, the Government expects to invest 
approximately Rs. 295 billion (US$ 2.7 billion) during the next 3 years, towards rehabilitation 
and development activities. This program is expected to cover the rehabilitation of roads and 
other  transportation  infrastructure,  the  upgrading  of  electricity  for  domestic  housing  and 
industry,  water  supply,  agriculture  and  irrigation  infrastructure  and  the  improvement  of  the 
manufacturing  framework.  The  Government  also  intends  to  implement  a  special  poverty 
reduction program and establish the required social safety net, quickly.  
My dear friends, as we all know, the speedy resettlement of the internally displaced people 
has  also  been  a  top  priority  for  the  Government.  Towards  this  goal,  many  extraordinary 
efforts  have  been  taken.  Out  of  the  over  300,000  internally  displaced  persons  who  were 
rescued  and  had  to  be  temporarily  housed  in  welfare  camps,  over  217,000  or  72%  have 
already  been  resettled.  All  those  from  Vavuniya,  Mannar,  Jaffna,  a  part  of  Mulativu  and 
Killinochchi  have  now  returned  to  their  homes.  The  others  mainly  from  Mulativu  and 
Killinochchi are also to be resettled systematically without  any undue  delay, depending on 
the speed at which the de-mining processes take place. This is an outstanding achievement 
against  all  odds,  and  I  believe  the  successful  resettlement  is  a  tribute  to  the  deep 
commitment  of  the  Government,  the  tremendous  efforts  of  our  public  service  and  the 
dedicated contribution of several international organizations. I am also tempted to mention 
that this surprising outcome may have been a pleasant surprise to many who at certain times 
expressed the belief that the government may not have had the inclination nor the urgency to 
carry out this challenging task so expeditiously.  
My  dear  friends,  the  Central  Bank  has  also  contributed  its  mite  to  these  normalization 
processes. We have, so far, over the past 8 months, granted approvals for the establishment 
of  more  than  90  banking  outlets  in  the  Northern  Province.  We  have  introduced  a  Special 
Loan Scheme, also titled “Vadakkin Vasantham” to boost the livelihood development of the 
people  in  the  North.  Under  this  scheme,  an  initial  sum  of  Rs.  3,000  million  has  been 
appropriated to be disbursed at a concessionary interest rate of 9% per annum to the eligible 
micro,  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises,  through  several  Participating  Financial 
Institutions.  The  repayment  period  could  extend  up  to  5  years  with  a  grace  period  of  6 
months. I am happy to note that over 9,000 loans amounting to Rs. 1.8 billion have already 
been registered with the PFIs and disbursements of over Rs 1 billion has taken place.  
2 
 BIS Review 16/2010
My dear friends, the rich resources of the North, including its forests, agricultural land, wet 
lands, lagoons and bays provide a solid base for many enterprises. Even during the conflict 
period, the Northern Province accounted for 10 percent of the paddy production, 40% of Red 
Onions,  10%  of  Chillies,  14%  of  Green  Gram  and  25%  of  Ground  Nuts.  These  statistics 
indicate  that  there  would  be  many  viable  income  generating  activities  which  could  be 
promoted to upgrade the livelihood of the people, with the assistance of the banking sector. It 
has been estimated that 129,000 fishermen, representing 20 percent of the total number of 
fishermen  in  our  country,  live  in  219  fishing  villages  in  the  Northern  Province.  In  the  year 
2006, the total fish production from the North stood at 25,900 MT, representing 12 percent of 
the country’s total production. These facts also indicate that the income generating activities 
in  the  fisheries  sector  too  could  be  developed  substantially  in  the  coastal  areas  with  the 
provision  of  appropriate  banking  facilities,  particularly  for  multi-day  boats,  fishing  gear  and 
other ancillary needs such as ice plants, and storage facilities. 
Over  the  past  several  years,  the  Central  Bank  has  also  initiated  several  credit  schemes 
applicable  throughout  the  country,  aimed  at  promoting  regional  development  and  poverty 
alleviation. In particular, work has commenced on a new Poverty Alleviation Micro Finance 
Project to cover conflict-affected districts. Approximately 3,000 beneficiary groups with more 
than  12,000  low-income  families  have  already  been  organized  within  the  Jaffna  peninsula 
under this project. We have also fast-tracked the Agro-Livestock Development Loan scheme, 
which is another scheme that could provide increased benefits to this Province. 
My  dear  friends,  during the  several  recent  visits  that  I  made  to  Jaffna,  I  always  made  it  a 
point  to  meet  with  the  Chambers  of  Commerce  officials,  bankers,  Teachers,  students, 
villagers, fishermen and many others. We received many valuable suggestions from them. In 
particular, we received too very useful ideas to open a Central Bank’s Provincial Office and 
to arrange for a Special Northern Regional Development Fund for the Northern Province. I 
am glad to announce today that we will implement both such initiatives in the coming months. 
My  dear  friends,  I  thought  it  may  also  be  appropriate  to  use  this  opportunity  to  make  a 
special appeal to the Sri Lankan Tamil Diaspora, living in all parts of the world. The decades 
long  conflict  which  sapped  our  combined  energies  in  various  ways,  is  finally  behind  us. 
Therefore, it is now time for all of us to get together and rebuild our nation, in particular, the 
areas  that  have  suffered.  We,  on  our  part,  are  keen  to  assist  the  people  of  the  North  to 
resume normal lives as soon as possible. Towards that outcome, we believe the Diaspora 
too could play an active role and become partners in the development process of the North. 
They  can  be  an  important  influence  to  accelerate  investments  to  these  areas  and  thereby 
support  the  expansion  of  industrial  activity  and  tourism.  Needless  to  say  economic 
opportunities in the North are expanding day by day, and I would like to urge overseas Sri 
Lankans  to  take  an  early  look  at  emerging  investment  opportunities  in  these  areas, 
particularly in the fields of IT, education and real estate development where they can surely 
and effectively contribute.  
I would also urge the Chambers of Commerce and Industries, and other similar Associations 
to  consider  establishing  international  institutional  frameworks  and  links,  which  would  pave 
the way for two-way interaction between the overseas Sri Lankan community and our local 
institutions  and  businesses.  Such  relationships  could  then  act  as  focal  points  to  promote 
remittances and investments into the domestic economy, as well.  
My  dear  friends,  today,  we  meet  in  the  midst  of  a  significant  change  in  our  country’s 
economic and political landscape. The end of the decades long conflict has resulted in the 
creation  of  a  significant  positive  impact,  not  just  in  the  Northern  Province,  but  also  in  the 
entire country. To benefit by this positive outlook, it is crucial that we start new businesses 
and  expand  on-going  ventures.  In  this  regard,  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  HSBC,  which 
brands  itself  as  the  “World’s  Local  Bank”,  could  now  offer  both  corporate  and  small 
customers  a  full  range  of  financial  products  and  services.  In  doing  so,  they,  as  well  as  all 
other  banks  who  are  doing  business  in  these  emerging  areas,  will  face  the  challenges  of 
BIS Review 16/2010 
 3
borrowers  not  possessing  long  credit  histories  or  not  possessing  adequate  collateral.  This 
situation will certainly pose challenges, but we would like to urge all bankers that they should 
practice innovative cash flow based lending methods at least for 2 to 3 years, and not to be 
too constrained by security based lending only. I also urge financial institutions to lend the 
money mobilized from the region for the development of this region.  
Finally, let me place on record my appreciation of the presence of the High Commissioner of 
the UK, Dr. Peter Hayes at this opening ceremony. Your support to this effort would certainly 
encourage the business community both here in Jaffna and elsewhere in Sri Lanka, and I 
thank you for your gesture. Let me also congratulate HSBC on this auspicious occasion of 
opening the first foreign bank branch in Jaffna. The HSBC Bank with its global connections 
could  now  facilitate  financial  transactions  in  the  North  with  all  parts  of  the  world,  while 
HSBC’s presence in the Jaffna Peninsula from today onwards, would convey an important 
signal to the world that tangible progress is being made in post conflict Sri Lanka. I wish Mr 
Nick A Nicolaou, his team in Sri Lanka the HSBC and all their customers, especially the ones 
in this area, all success. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2010
