Thomas M Hoenig: Leverage – the double-edged sword 
Written  statement  by  Mr  Thomas  M  Hoenig,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, before the House Financial Services Oversight and 
Investigations Subcommittee, United States House of Representatives, Kansas City, 6 May 
2010. 
 Introduction 
Chairman Moore, ranking member  Biggert, and members of the committee. Thank you for 
the opportunity to testify at this timely hearing. 
The  financial  panic  of  2008  created  the  worst  recession  since  the  1930s,  sending 
unemployment  soaring  to  10  percent  and  dramatically  changing  the  landscape  of  our 
financial  system.  While  many  factors  were  responsible  for  creating  this  crisis,  there  is  no 
doubt that excessive debt and leverage was a major contributor. 
Leverage, the ability to use debt to build assets as a multiple of a firm’s capital base, is a 
double-edged  sword.  Credit  is  obviously  essential  to  an  economy’s  growth  and  prosperity. 
But when a tower of debt is built on a foundation of weak capital, the inevitable outcome is a 
collapse and loss of national wealth. 
Following this most recent crisis, lawmakers and regulators are examining the issues of debt, 
leverage and financial strength. We are at a crossroads. The country must again review and 
define  an  acceptable  leverage  profile  for  our  economy  and  specifically  for  financial 
institutions. Defining leverage standards too tightly inhibits growth. Defining them too loosely 
invites excess risk and crisis. 
My views on this topic are based on 36 years of broad experience in the Federal Reserve. As 
head of bank supervision for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in the 1980s, I saw 
the  damage  caused  nationally  and  locally  by  excessive  leverage  and  bank  failures  –  both 
small and large. As President of our Bank over the past 18 years, I’ve witnessed the anguish 
of individuals and businesses as they struggled to manage the downside effects of too much 
leverage.  
Trends 
Over the past two decades there has been a systematic increase in debt and leverage within 
the United States, involving all major sectors of the economy. The charts I have included with 
my  statement  show  asset-capital  and  debt-income  ratios  increasing  annually  across  all 
sectors, rising to levels well above long-run trend lines. In hindsight most agree this build up 
was excessive and the markets and the regulators should have seen the crisis coming. But 
they didn’t. 
There  are  three  components  that  we  must  look  at  in  judging  the  safety  of  any  level  of 
leverage: the quality of assets, the quality of capital and the amount of capital. While asset 
quality  is  important,  it  is  the  quality  and  amount  of  capital  that  gets  a  company  through 
unexpected  asset  problems  encountered  during  the  course  of  business.  For  that  reason,  I 
will focus my attention here on the quality and amount of capital. 
Stockholder  tangible  common  equity  is  the  strongest  form  of  capital.  It  is  immediately 
available to meet creditor obligations and absorb losses. Fundamentally, this is what defines 
a meaningful measure of leverage. Other measures of capital include different hybrid debt 
instruments or intangibles that attempt to account for potential value and future earnings. For 
example, goodwill is an intangible that is not immediately available and evaporates quickly 
when  a  firm  encounters  asset  problems.  Trust  preferred  stock  is  a  hybrid-debt  instrument 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 1
that carries cash flow demands over the life of the instrument. Thus, I measure leverage as a 
firm’s total tangible assets measured against tangible common equity. 
The  leverage  at  banking  organizations  has  been  rising  steadily  since  the  mid-1990s.  The 
increase,  however,  is  not  immediately  obvious  because  of  the  different  ways  capital  and 
leverage  can  be  measured  (Chart  1).  For  example,  in  2007  just  before  the  crisis  began, 
leverage for all banking organizations based on total equity capital, which includes common 
equity, perpetual preferred stock, and goodwill and other intangible assets, was the same as 
it was in 1993, $13 of assets for each dollar of capital. 
The  story  is  quite  different  when  you  focus  on  tangible  common  equity  by  excluding 
perpetual preferred stock and goodwill and other intangible assets. Tangible total assets rose 
from  16  times  tangible common  equity  in  1993  to  a  multiple  of  25 in  2007.  The  increased 
reliance on lower quality capital in recent years is clearly seen by the large gap among the 
various  leverage  measures  in  recent  years  as  compared  to  the  early  1990s  when  all  the 
measures were about the same. 
Moreover, a closer examination of the distribution of leverage across firms of different sizes 
shows that almost all of the increase in leverage is due to the largest banking organizations 
(Chart 2). For the 10 largest banking companies, leverage based on tangible common equity 
almost  doubled  from  18  in  1993  to  34  in  2007,  and  this  doesn’t  include  their  off-balance 
sheet  activities.  For  the  rest  of  the  industry,  leverage  rose  from  14  to  just  17  (Chart  3).  I 
would also note that for broker-dealers, which are an increasingly important source of credit 
through the shadow banking system, financial leverage rose from 13 in 1992 to 47 in 2007 
(Chart 4). 
As a result, with twice as much leverage as all other banking organizations, the 10 largest 
had  much  riskier  balance  sheets  at  the  start  of  the  crisis.  The  much  higher  leverage  and 
greater  risk  exposure  of  the  10  largest  firms  clearly  indicates  that  they  had  a  significant 
funding  cost  advantage  over  all  other  organizations,  and  their  creditors  believed  they  had 
less exposure to losses. 
This  increase  in  financial  sector  leverage  fueled  a  significant  growth  of  debt  in  the  non 
financial sector of the economy and, as it turned out, led to a general excess of credit growth 
over  the  past  10  years  (Chart  5).  Bank  lending  rose  from  39  percent  of  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) in 2004 to 47 percent by the end of 2007, and that figure excludes the rapid 
growth  in  credit  from  the  shadow  banking  sector  and  the  GSEs,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie 
Mac. While bank loans relative to GDP have declined since 2008, it remains well above the 
long-term trend. 
The increase in leverage and debt was most prominent in the consumer sector. Consumer 
debt as a percent of personal income generally has been rising since the 1950s (Chart 6). 
However, it began a rapid acceleration in 2000, rising from 76 percent to 110 percent by the 
end of 2007. Non financial business borrowing relative to nominal GDP also has followed an 
upward trend since the 1950s (Chart 7). During this most recent expansion, it has increased 
from 77 percent in 2004 to 89 percent at the end of 2007. 
Finally,  and  no  less  importantly,  the  federal  government  deficit  is  at  record  levels  and  the 
current trend is unsustainable (Chart 8). The increase over the past two years is due partly to 
the  automatic  stabilizers  that  come  in  to  use  during  a  recession  and  to  additional  fiscal 
actions taken to restart the economy. These temporary actions will add to an already heavy 
burden of various programs that have sharpened the upward trend with no obvious end in 
sight. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2010
Effects 
Given  the  levels  of  leverage  in  the  economy,  no  one  should  have  been  surprised  at  the 
collapse triggered by the housing bubble bursting in 2006 and the rise in subprime mortgage 
defaults in 2007. 
When housing prices fell, many discovered that they had taken on more financial risk than 
they  previously  assumed  and  more  than  their  capital  levels  could  support.  The  institutions 
with the highest leverage suffered the most, and, as it turned out, these were some of the 
largest institutions in the world. Financial panic quickly followed. 
What started as a Wall Street panic soon created regional distress and finally Main Street 
suffering. And just like the largest institutions, the regional and community banks that were 
most  leveraged,  were  most  likely  to  fail.  The  wave  of  losses,  consumer  foreclosures  and 
business failures infected every element of the economy. 
The deleveraging process commenced as highly-leveraged financial institutions, working with 
highly-leveraged consumers and business, had insufficient capital to withstand the financial 
blows.  Increasing  numbers  of  homeowners  were  unable  to  keep  up  with  their  mortgage 
payments, leading to higher defaults. Mortgage defaults, in turn, sharply lowered the values 
of  mortgage  securities  held  by  financial  institutions.  These  losses  led  banks  to  attempt  to 
reduce  their  leverage,  which  required  rebuilding  tangible  capital  and  reducing  total  assets  
–  thus  reducing  loans.  This  placed  downward  pressure  on  asset  values,  losses  worsened 
and  the  vicious  cycle  of  deleveraging  worsened.  Homes  and  businesses  were  lost  to 
foreclosure and liquidation, while unemployment climbed. 
The large increases in leverage over the past decade have wrecked havoc on our economy 
and  are  responsible  for  the  sluggishness  of  our  recovery.  Strong  economic  growth  simply 
cannot occur if consumers and businesses must focus on rebuilding balance sheets instead 
of on increasing spending, production and hiring of new workers. 
Once  again  we  have  learned  that  the  double  edged  sword  of  leverage  is  a  pro-cyclical 
weapon. 
Constraining leverage 
Today,  the  largest  financial  firms  are  showing  a  solid  recovery.  Regional  and  community 
banks continue to show stress but problems may have peaked as they have worked to re-
establish  stable  capital  and  leverage  levels.  The  market  appears  to  be  correcting  and 
leverage based on high quality capital is returning to more historic norms. In time credit will 
once again expand and the economy will improve. But it won’t be quick or easy. Therefore, 
we must now turn to actions that will prevent the impulses of consumers, businesses, and 
financial institutions from assuming ever more leverage as the expansion becomes a boom. 
If  we  take  action  now,  then  when  the  next  economic  correction  occurs  there  will  be  less 
devastation  to  our  economy.  If  we  don’t  change  policy  now,  then  this  crisis  will  be 
remembered only in text books and leverage will rise again and lead to another crisis. 
I  strongly  support  establishing  hard  leverage  rules  that  are  simple,  understandable  and 
enforceable and that apply equally to all banks and bank holding companies that operate in 
the United States. As we saw in the years leading up to the current crisis, leverage tends to 
rise  during  economic  expansions  as  investors  and  lenders  forget  their  past  mistakes  and 
believe  that  prosperity  will  continue  with  no  end  in  sight.  Straightforward  leverage  and 
underwriting  rules  are  not  procyclical,  so  that  as  the  economy  expands  and  heats  up, 
bankers must match increases in assets with increases in capital, which constrains reckless 
growth. Thus, such rules would serve to limit growth beyond a prudent level by creating a 
counter-cyclical force that moderates booms and provides a cushion to bank losses when the 
next recession occurs. 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 3
For an example of the power of a hard leverage rule, consider the impact on assets and/or 
equity of restricting bank holding companies to holding no more than $15 of tangible assets 
for every $1 of tangible equity capital (Chart 9).As I noted, at the end of 2007, the 10 largest 
bank holding companies held $34 of tangible assets for every $1 of tangible equity capital. If 
the  maximum  leverage  ratio  was  15:1,  these  companies  would  have  had  to  reduce  their 
assets  by  $4.9  trillion  (56  percent),  increase  their  tangible  common  equity  by  $326  billion 
(125 percent), or some combination of the two. 
Simple rules also provide examiners with the tools they need to prevent leverage from rising 
and underwriting standards from declining. Without hard rules on leverage ratios and lending 
standards,  bank  examiners  were  disadvantaged  in  taking  actions  on  rising  leverage  and 
declining  loan-to-value  ratios  because  bankers  could  correctly  claim  they  were  following 
supervisory guidance on capital levels, and their loan problems were very low, while profits 
were strong. 
Finally, the rise in leverage in the last cycle was facilitated by the complexity of international 
risk-based-capital  requirements.  In  particular,  the  Basel  I  risk-based  capital  standards  in 
place  leading  up  to  the  crisis  provided  very  crude  measures  of  asset  riskiness,  which 
increasingly underestimated risk as asset markets deteriorated. Banks also could arbitrage 
capital  standards  and  raise  their  risk-based  capital  ratios  by  shifting  assets  to  favorably 
treated off-balance sheet vehicles or exchanging assets such as prime mortgages for “lower 
risk”  subprime  mortgage-backed  securities.  The  Basel  II  risk-based  standards,  which  we 
were  starting  to  phase  in,  would  have  enabled  an  even  greater  amount  of  leveraging  to 
occur.  These  standards,  which  allow  banks  to  use  model-based  risk  estimates  for  many 
types  of  assets,  actually  suggested  banks  were  holding  too  much  capital  in  the  months 
leading up to the crisis. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2010
 5
BIS Review 64/2010 
  6 
 BIS Review 64/2010
 7
BIS Review 64/2010 
  8 
 BIS Review 64/2010
 9
BIS Review 64/2010 
  10 
 BIS Review 64/2010
 11
BIS Review 64/2010 
  12 
 BIS Review 64/2010
 13
BIS Review 64/2010 
 