Ewart S Williams: Launch of managed funds study 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Securities and Exchange Commission breakfast, Port-of-Spain, 25 March 2010. 
 Let me first of all thank the Securities and Exchange Commission for the invitation to make a 
few opening remarks at this breakfast meeting to launch this most timely study. As noted, 
since  the  start  of  trade  and  financial  liberalization  in  the  1990s,  the  financial  landscape  of 
Trinidad and Tobago has undergone quite rapid growth and development both in terms of the 
structure  of  financial  institutions  as  well  as  the  array  of  instruments  and  services  they 
provide. 
While the commercial banks have remained the dominant sub-sector in terms of its share in 
total financial assets, we have witnessed relatively strong growth in non-banking institutions 
such  as  pension  funds;  insurance  companies;  collective  investment  schemes  including 
mutual funds; and asset management business. 
To  a  large  extent,  this  rapid  growth  has  been  facilitated  by  the  significant  increase  in 
personal incomes and the search for higher returns and portfolio diversification by investors. 
While  a  significant  degree  of  effort  has  been  expended  on  developing  information  and 
reporting regimes for the banking sector, the information base for other critical segments 
of the financial system has lagged somewhat (behind that of the banking system).  
In  an  effort  to  fill  this  gap  and  to  provide  a  greater  array  of  information  for  investors  and 
decision  makers,  the  SEC,  in  collaboration  with  the  Central  Bank,  sponsored  a  baseline 
study in 2005 to gauge and assess the structure and performance of collective investment 
schemes. 
This study which was subsequently published in August 2007, noted the rapid rate of growth 
of the collective investments scheme industry, with funds under management in the mutual 
fund  sector  increasing  almost  fivefold  in  the  period  2000–2005.  It  also  pointed  to  the  high 
concentration of funds under management; fragmentation in the supervision and regulation 
of the industry and the need for a comprehensive regulatory framework for the sector. 
It  is  now  five  years  since  the  baseline  study  on  collective  investment  schemes  was 
undertaken and, in the meantime, the global financial landscape has undergone significant 
transformation  following  the  global  financial  crisis.  Here  at  home,  the  banking  system  has 
shown  remarked  resilience,  the  stock  market  performance  has  remained  anemic,  while 
mutual funds have continued to be attractive investment vehicles. 
The  regulatory  environment  has  also  been  undergoing  major  reform  with  the  upgrading  of 
legislation for various segments of the financial services industry. A new Financial Institutions 
Bill was passed in December 2008 and new legislation covering the insurance industry, the 
credit union sector and the securities industry are well underway.  
If there is one issue that the recent global financial crisis has driven home is the need for a 
better understanding of the products in our financial system, the levels of risk that are 
being assumed by various financial institutions, the investments strategies that are being 
adopted and the quality of information disclosure being provided to investors and the public 
at large.  
Today’s launch is aimed at understanding the size, range, investment practices and impact 
of the managed funds industry in Trinidad and Tobago. Unlike, the previous baseline study 
which concentrated exclusively on collective investment schemes, this study is aimed at a 
wider  array  of  collective  investment  institutions  including  mutual  funds,  trustee  divisions  of 
subsidiaries of financial institutions and long-term contractual institutions such as insurance 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 1
companies, pension funds and the NIB, which are also active participants in the securities 
markets. Its prime objectives are to: 
• 
Develop  a  comprehensive  profile  of  the  managed  funds  industry  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago with respect to size, structure and institutional composition. 
Examine  and  evaluate  the  asset  management  practices  and  the  framework  within 
which fund managers make investment decisions. 
Gauge  the  impact  of  the  managed  funds  industry  on  the  size,  growth  and 
development of the securities market. 
Evaluate the effect of the regulatory framework and investment rules on the pattern 
of deployment of managed funds, on the efficiency of investment and on investment 
performance. 
Assess,  from  the  point  of  view  of  market  actors,  the  overall  prospects  for  greater 
integration of the domestic and regional securities markets. 
    From the perspective of the Central Bank, this study provides us with a unique opportunity to 
gain a better understanding of the nexus between saving and capital market investment as 
well as the linkage between capital market development and economic growth. In the final 
analysis, it will go a long way in: 
• 
• 
providing potential investors with a greater understanding of capital markets; 
helping  decision-makers  better  define  priorities  for  the  further  development  of  the 
market; and 
allowing  regulators  to  gain  a  better  insight  on  how  the  regulatory  framework  and 
investment rules affect the efficient deployment of investment and overall investment 
performance.  
 The Bank lends it full support to this current initiative of the SEC and encourages all market 
participants to participate as effectively as possible to ensure the success of this study. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2010
