Nils Bernstein: The Danish krone during the crisis 
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Copenhagen 
Business School, Copenhagen, 22 March 2010. 
 It is now my turn to discuss how Denmark – as a non-euro area EU, ERM II member state – 
has navigated through the financial crisis. The really interesting question is, perhaps, what 
difference it would have made, if we had been part of the euro area. That is difficult to say, as 
other  things  might  not  have  been  equal.  For  example:  who  knows  whether  Denmark’s 
economic  policy  would  have  been  the  same,  if  we  had  not  been  governed  by  the 
fixed-exchange-rate policy? (Chart 1) 
Since the euro was rejected in a referendum in 2000, it has been a widespread view, that 
Danish membership of the euro area is first and foremost a political question. Combined with 
the  other  three  opt-outs,  the  issue  is  whether  Denmark  wants  to  participate  fully  in  the 
important political decisions on the future of Europe. 
From a purely economic point of view, Danish participation in the euro can be expected to 
lead to slightly lower interest rates, a small increase in foreign trade and lower transaction 
costs.  In  normal,  calm  periods,  interest  rates  will  only  be  marginally  lower  than  under  the 
current fixed-exchange rate regime. 
Over a longer horizon, adopting the euro will have a certain positive overall effect on growth 
in Denmark. But it is difficult to quantify this effect, which is hardly likely to be felt in the short 
term. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  rough  estimate  is  that,  in  the  long  term,  euro  area  membership 
would permanently boost GDP by between 0.5 and 1 per cent.  
Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999,  Denmark  has  performed  well  outside  the  euro 
area.  This  is  due  to  our  long-standing  stability-oriented  economic  policy  with  a  focus  on 
medium-term objectives and structural reforms, not least in the labour market. It is important 
that  Denmark  continues  along  this path  –  even  if  we  eventually  join  the  euro.  The  current 
economic policy discussion should be viewed in that context.  
All  along,  we  have  been  aware  that  the  advantages  of  euro  area  membership  would  be 
accentuated in periods of financial turmoil. The lessons from the financial crisis have more 
than confirmed this. 
The world before Lehman fell 
The seeds of the financial crisis were sown already in July 2007, when the rating agencies 
decided  to  downgrade  bonds  issued  to  finance  sub-prime  mortgages.  This  increased 
uncertainty  in  the  markets.  The  effect  soon  spread  to  more  creditworthy  securities.  In  the 
money  markets,  the  uncertainty  was  reflected  in  a  widening  spread  between  collateralised 
and  uncollateralised  money-market  loans.  The  confidence  crisis  developed  in  stages  over 
the latter part of 2007 and up to September 2008. 
In  August  2008,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  with  a  government  guarantee  and  the  Danish 
Contingency  Association  acquired  Roskilde  Bank  on  the  brink  of  collapse.  This  was  an 
important medium-sized bank, with a significant funding in foreign currencies. This should be 
seen  in  the  light  of  a  Danish  banking  sector  with  a  total  deposit  deficit  of  600  billion  kr. 
Danmarks Nationalbank’s primary reason for stepping in was to avoid a systemic crisis. In 
that situation we couldn’t accept doubts that loans to Danish banks would be honoured. 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 1
Capital outflows from smaller areas 
The financial crisis intensified from mid-September 2008 after the collapse of Lehman Bros. 
Risky  assets  such  as  shares  and  credit  bonds  plummeted.  The  heightened  uncertainty 
prompted  investors  to  seek  safe  havens.  This  led  to  portfolios  shifts  towards  more  secure 
assets. There was a worldwide trend for foreign exchange to flow out of small capital areas 
and  into  larger  ones.  In  other  cases,  portfolios  were  actually  closed  by  investors  who  had 
bought assets, financed by short-term loans in foreign currency – such as dollars – that were 
subject  to  regular  renewal.  Investors  who  were  unable  to  obtain  renewed  funding  in  early 
October  2008,  when  the  international  loan  markets1  froze,  were  compelled  to  sell  assets 
immediately, regardless of the price. The interest-rate increases by Danmarks Nationalbank, 
– which I will return to – did not have any impact on investors, who were forced to sell out, 
when the global loan markets contracted. 
Liquidity constraints – the need for euro and dollars 
Initially  the  money-market  turmoil  was  strongest  in  the  dollar  market,  and  many  financial 
institutions outside the USA experienced a shortage of dollar funding. As the crisis escalated, 
the euro market was eventually also affected.  
In the spring of 2008, the ECB established a swap line with the Fed, with a view of lending 
dollars  to  euro  area  banks.  The  majority  of  the  Danish  banks  did  not  have  access  to  this 
facility. 
Many financial institutions in Europe already depended on short-term funding in both dollars 
and euro. As a result, most of them were on the same side of the order flow. Moreover, the 
usual dollar funding channels dried up, to a certain extent because the suppliers themselves 
had  an  increasing  need  for  dollars,  which  in  itself  was  partially  due  to  mounting  concerns 
about counterparty risk. This put pressure on both the demand and supply sides of the dollar 
market. 
Impact on the Danish krone 
The dysfunctional markets for, primarily, euro and dollars had a considerable impact on the 
market  for  Danish  kroner.  Danish  banks  needed  access  to  funding  in  euro  and  dollars;  a 
need that was to some extent satisfied by issuing CP and trading in the FX swap market. In 
principle, the use of FX swaps has no impact on the exchange rate of the krone. But as the 
crisis evolved, funding and hedging in the FX swap market became expensive, and the spot 
markets became a more attractive source of foreign exchange. As a result, the krone came 
under pressure. 
Developments in the euro area were particularly significant for the krone. In late September 
and  early  October  2008,  extensive  demand  for  euro  liquidity  meant  that  the  average 
allotment  rate,  in  the  ECB’s  weekly  main  refinancing  operations,  exceeded  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s lending rate. In other words, the interest-rate spread turned negative. Usually 
the spread is positive to compensate for the exchange-rate risk. In early October, just before 
the  ECB  began  to  offer  unlimited  liquidity  at  a  fixed  rate  of  interest  (the  lending  rate),  the 
ECB’s  average  allotment  rate  was  observed  to  be  a  full  39  basis  points  higher  than 
Danmarks Nationalbank’s lending rate. As a result, the krone came under pressure. 
                                                 
1  The interbank market for uncollateralised lending, the CP market, and the FX swap market. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2010
Speculation against the krone 
At  the  peak  of  the  crisis,  many  market  rumours  were  circulating,  claiming  that  Danmarks 
Nationalbank was in difficulties. A large foreign bank wrote that Danmarks Nationalbank no 
longer  had  any  reserves  for  intervention  and  that  the  exchange  rate  was  approaching  its 
limit, i.e. a deviation of 2.25 per cent from the central rate. If that situation does occur, the 
ECB has an obligation to intervene in support of the krone. So far this has never happened. 
The ERM II agreement includes a provision on unlimited intervention credit between the ECB 
and the participating central banks, including Danmarks Nationalbank. Such credit must be 
repaid within three months.  
There  was  extensive  market  focus  on  the  size  of  our  foreign-exchange  reserve.  More 
specifically, a limit of DKK 100 billion was mentioned for Danmarks Nationalbank to be able 
to defend the krone.  
The  currency  positions  of  the  Danish  banks  in  the  market  were,  on  the  whole,  not 
unfavourable to the krone (Chart 2). The banks reduced their market positions, to more or 
less  neutral  levels,  but  never  held  long  currency  positions,  when  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
made intervention purchases to support the krone. This reflected some degree of confidence 
on the part of the Danish banks, that Danmarks Nationalbank would be able to observe the 
unofficial de facto band. 
There was anecdotal “evidence” that certain foreign investors were speculating against the 
krone (Chart 3). The first speculation rumours concerned options, with a strike price outside 
the  implicit  narrow  band  around  the  central  rate.  For  example,  a  large  hedge  fund  was 
reputed  to  have  bought  options  against  the  krone  weakening.  The  size  of  the  financial 
backing  behind  this  speculation  is,  however,  uncertain.  “Out-of-the-money”  options  involve 
little  cost,  but  hedging  by  sellers  of  such  options  may  have  led  to  considerable  sales  of 
kroner. 
Generally speaking, international speculators had a certain interest in testing the strength of 
the  support  for  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy.  This  caused  further  uncertainty  about  the 
krone. 
Intervention 
The  spring  of  2008  saw  gradual  weakening  of  the  krone,  and  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
Danmarks responded by intervening – to a limited extent (Chart 4). As late as in July 2008, 
we mirrored the ECB when it raised its key interest rates. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  took  the  usual  course  of  action  when  the  krone  came  under 
pressure. First, we sell foreign exchange for kroner. If this has not had the desired effect after 
some time, we raise interest rates. 
To  counter  the  tensions  in  the  dollar  market,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  intervened  in  the 
FX swap market on 18 September, i.e. before the crisis really erupted. Dollars were offered 
against  kroner  for  a  total  of  DKK  3  billion  with  a  maturity  of  7  days.  Likewise,  in  early 
October, Danmarks Nationalbank intervened in the euro market, offering euro for a total of 
DKK  17  billion  with  maturities  of  7  days  and  1  month.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  had  not 
previously intervened in the FX swap market in recent times.  
The intervention in the FX swap market turned out to have only a temporary impact on the 
market. The Danish market for euro and dollar liquidity is considerable, and intervention via 
the  FX  swap  market  also  entails  drawing  substantial  amounts  on  the  foreign-exchange 
reserve.  
Pressure on the krone prompted Danmarks Nationalbank to intervene heavily directly in the 
foreign-exchange market in late September and the first weeks of October. Intervention sales 
of foreign exchange totalled DKK 1 billion in September and reached a monthly all-time high 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 3
of  DKK  64  billion  in  October.  There  were  considerable  day-to-day  fluctuations.  On  some 
days,  intervention  purchases  approached  DKK  15  billion.  Intervention  by  Danmarks 
Nationalbank was concentrated in the periods around 7 and 24 October, when we raised our 
interest rates. We could literally see our reserves pouring out of our coffers. I felt like driving 
a car without brakes.  
to 
the  krone 
led  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
Monetary-policy interest rates 
Sustained  strong  pressure  on 
increase 
monetary-policy interest rates on several occasions in October (Chart 5). On 7 October, the 
lending rate was raised by 0.4 percentage point. The following day, the ECB reduced its key 
interest rate by 0.5 percentage point, thereby widening the interest-rate spread once more. It 
was very unpleasant to have to raise interest rates and accept a widening spread at a time 
when other central banks were lowering theirs to support the financial sector. The only way 
to interpret this was that something must be rotten in the state of Denmark! But we had no 
other choice. 
These  interest-rate  increases  had  no  short-term  impact  on  the  krone.  In  the  hours 
immediately  after  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  announcements,  the  krone  weakened  further 
and intervention sales of foreign exchange were necessary. The interest-rate instrument did 
not have the desired effect. Few domestic counterparties bought kroner in response to the 
interest-rate increases.  
On 15 October, the ECB introduced full allotment in its weekly main refinancing operations, 
and the pressure on the krone eased temporarily. Euro area banks were now able to obtain 
sufficient liquidity from the ECB, which was reflected in market spreads to the euro area. 
On  24  October,  further  capital  outflows  –  driven  by  foreign  investors  –  led  Danmarks 
Nationalbank to raise interest rates further. Subsequently, the spread to the euro area was 
1.75  percentage  points,  which  was  enough  to  make  domestic  insurance  and  pension 
companies in particular turn towards the Danish kroner once again. 
Issuance of CP 
The  substantial  intervention  sales  in  October  drained  the  foreign-exchange  reserve.  In 
previous  crises,  it  had  been  possible  immediately  to  increase  the  reserves  by  issuing 
short-term CP loans and later replacing these by longer-term loans if necessary. Experience 
from the autumn of 2008 showed that we, on the behalf of the government, could not issue 
sufficient  CP  at  the  peak  of  the  crisis.  Furthermore,  it  took  quite  a  while  before  the 
government was able to raise longer-term foreign loans at an acceptable price. We did not 
want  to  borrow  at  a  rate  that  signalled  an  urgent  need  for  foreign  exchange.  The  crisis 
confirmed the old saying that money is hardest to come by when you need it the most. By 
15 October, the foreign-exchange reserve had been reduced to DKK 104 billion, the lowest 
level  in  ten  years  (Chart  6).  How  long  would  it  take  before  the  situation  would  begin  to 
improve?  
After  14  October,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  was  finally  able  to  issue  CP  on  behalf  of  the 
Danish government (Chart 7). This continued on an almost daily basis throughout the rest of 
2008. 
Other initiatives 
We  managed  to  keep  our  head  above  water,  but  this  was  not  solely  due  to  our  own 
intervention and interest-rate increases. A number of other factors played an important role. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2010
The  shortage  of  euro  and  dollar  liquidity,  combined  with  dysfunctional  financial  markets  
– notably the frozen interbank market – led the ECB and the Fed to establish swap lines with 
other central banks, including Danmarks Nationalbank. Via these swap lines, national central 
banks were able to offer euro and dollar liquidity to domestic banks.  
Danmarks Nationalbank established a swap line with the Fed on 24 September 2008. The 
need for this facility was highlighted by the fact that volumes offered in our dollar auctions 
were drawn upon in full. The swap line with the Fed – totalling USD 15 billion – was fully 
exercised after three auctions. 
On 27 October 2008, Danmarks Nationalbank and the ECB established an equivalent swap 
line for 12 billion euro. Although this limit was not reached, the security of Danish banks in 
relation to euro funding was undoubtedly boosted. The swap facility has been very helpful in 
addressing the banks’ liquidity needs. 
It  should  be  emphasised  that  this  facility  did  not  affect  the  foreign-exchange  reserve  or 
support  the  krone  directly.  It  supported  the  krone  indirectly  by  calming  the  market  for  FX 
swaps; and the ECB’s backing sent a strong positive signal to the market. 
Issuance  of  30-year  government  bonds  was  another  key  factor.  There  was  extensive 
demand in the Danish market for domestic bonds with longer maturities – particularly on the 
part  of  pension  funds,  which  needed  to  hedge  their  long-term  commitments.  In  November 
and December 2008, the Danish government took the extraordinary step of issuing 30-year 
bonds.  As  a  result,  Danish  pension  funds  restructured  their  portfolios  from  foreign  to 
domestic securities. This supported the krone. 
Last – but not least – it was equally important that the government, at short notice in early 
October 2008, decided to issue a guarantee for all deposits with and loans to Danish banks. 
It  is  impossible  to  say  exactly  what  the  impact  of  this  measure,  known  as  Bank  Rescue 
Package I, was. Non-residents withdrew krone deposits totalling DKK 70 billion from Danish 
banks in October 2008. 
This  package  contributed  strongly  to  keeping  capital  outflows  during  the  crisis  at  a 
manageable  level.  Timing  and  determination  were  essential  elements  in  terms  of  ensuring 
confidence in Danish banks. 
As  I  see  it,  the  Danish  banks  would  have  been  far  worse  off  without  this  guarantee,  and 
Danmarks Nationalbank’s ability to keep the krone stable might have been called into doubt. 
But  while  the  government  provided  bank  guarantees  totalling  around  2.5  times  Denmark’s 
GDP, the potential claims on the foreign-exchange reserve increased. If a bank failed, the 
guarantee might be called in at short notice. If loans had been raised abroad, this would have 
affected the foreign exchange reserve. Therefore, the need to increase the reserve was even 
more important. 
The  turning  point  in  the  krone  crisis  came  in  late  October,  when  stabilisation  of  the  krone 
market  enabled  us  to  buy  back  foreign  exchange.  Large  scale  buy-backs  took  place  from 
4 November 2008. 
Partial  normalisation  of  the  situation  made  it  possible  for  us  to  follow  suit  when  the  ECB 
lowered its interest rates by 0.5 per cent on 6 November. In December, the monetary-policy 
spread gradually narrowed by a total of 0.75 percentage point. 
Conclusion 
(Chart 8) During 2009, Danmarks Nationalbank gradually reduced interest rates so that the 
spread to the euro area narrowed again. Today, the monetary- policy spread is only 5 basis 
points.  But  the  actual  money-market  spread  is  around  50  basis  points,  mainly  due  to  the 
substantial amount of excess liquidity in the Euro area. 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 5
Over the last year, Danmarks Nationalbank has built up the foreign exchange reserve to a 
much higher level than it used to be. It now exceeds DKK 400 billion. The dollar swap line 
with the Federal Reserve has expired.  
So,  in  many  ways  the  situation  has  normalised.  But  we  have  learnt  what  it  means  to  be 
outside  the  euro  area  when  you  are  a  small  economy  with  a  fixed-exchange-rate  regime. 
This should give food for thought.  
We made it through. I will not ponder upon – at least not openly – what could have happened 
if speculation against the krone hadn’t subsided. We are still in a fixed exchange rate regime. 
As  recent  developments  have  shown,  euro  membership  is  not  –  and  should  not  –  be  a 
guarantee  for  easy  access  to  foreign  borrowing.  That  depends  on  one’s  ability  to  keep  its 
own house in order. There is no substitute for sound economic policy inside or outside the 
euro. 
But when you are a small open economy and a storm of this magnitude sweeps through the 
markets – you would rather not have your own currency to worry about. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
Chart 1 
 6 
  BIS Review 35/2010
Chart 2 
Chart 3 
BIS Review 35/2010 
   7
Chart 4 
Chart 5 
  8 
 BIS Review 35/2010
Chart 6 
Chart 7 
BIS Review 35/2010 
   9
Chart 8 
 10 
 BIS Review 35/2010
