Karolina Ekholm: Dealing with cross-border banking without rolling back 
financial integration 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Bank of 
Greece, Athens, 11 June 2010. 
 It is an honour for me to have been invited here to the Bank of Greece. Little did I know when 
I originally planned this visit that Greece would be the country on everyone’s lips by the time I 
got  here,  given  that  it  is  now  at  the  centre  of  a  fiscal  crisis  in  the  European  Union. 
Considering  that  Sweden  is  one  of the  European  countries  that  has  previously  carried  out 
fiscal consolidation of the same order of magnitude as Greece is planning for the next few 
years, I might have chosen to talk about fiscal consolidation today. But it appears that there 
is  no  lack  of  good  advice  from  the  outside  world  on  this  topic.  I  will  therefore  talk  instead 
about another issue that the financial crisis has revealed to be of some urgency – how to 
deal with problems arising from cross-border banking. 
The global financial crisis and the bailout and failure of several cross-border institutions have 
raised  serious  concerns  regarding  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  such  institutions  and 
crisis  management  regarding  institutions  in  distress.  Possible  policy  responses  to  the 
problems arising from cross-border banking include various ways of limiting banks’ abilities to 
expand abroad. However, such responses would also reduce the potentially positive effects 
arising from financial integration. The question is then how we can maintain the benefits of 
financial integration at the same time as we avoid ending up in another crisis such as this 
one.  
It  is  especially  important  to  answer  this  question  in  our  respective  countries,  that  is,  in 
Sweden as well as in Greece. Both you and I represent countries with domestic banks that 
are  heavily  engaged  in  cross-border  banking  activities.  In  Sweden,  the  domestic  banks 
conduct  roughly  half  of  their  lending  in  international  markets,  mainly  in  the  other  Nordic 
countries and in Germany. However, over the last five years we have also seen three of our 
largest banks (SEB, Swedbank and Nordea) capturing substantial market shares in the Baltic 
States. In some of these countries the Swedish banks account for up to 80 per cent of the 
domestic  banking  system.1  Greek  banks  are  also  extensively  involved  in  cross-border 
banking. National Bank of Greece, for instance, operates subsidiaries in over 20 countries in 
South-eastern Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean.2 
I will devote most of this speech to a discussion about the main implications and challenges 
arising  from  this  new  banking  structure.  Before  turning  to  that,  however,  I  will  say  a  few 
words about how cross-border banking has developed and describe briefly why we may have 
seen such a rapid globalisation of the banking sector to begin with. Then I will focus on the 
need to enhance cross-border cooperation between national authorities. In my view this is 
the only reasonable way of dealing with cross-border problems without rolling back financial 
integration.  
Recent development of cross-border banking 
The  structure  of  the  financial  services  industry  has  gone  through  major  changes  over  the 
past  decades.  Until  some  twenty  years  ago,  banks  were  essentially  national  entities  with 
                                                 
1  
In terms of lending the Swedish banks’ market shares account for 80 per cent in Estonia, 53 per cent in Latvia 
and 60 per cent in Lithuania. 
2   National Bank of Greece, Annual Report 2009. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 15
the  Netherlands.3 
most  of  their  activities  limited  to  their  home  market.  Of  course,  many  banks  conducted 
international  operations  even  earlier  than  this,  but  those  operations  primarily  focused  on 
wholesale markets and large corporate clients. Smaller companies and consumers have in 
principle  been  obliged  to  use  the  services  offered  by  domestic  banks.  Today,  banks  run 
businesses  across  the  globe.  And  through  the  existence  of  foreign-based  branches  and 
subsidiaries consumers can choose to buy services from banks that are headquartered in a 
completely different part of the world. 
The trend towards more cross-border banking is widespread, but much of the development is 
driven  by  large  financial  institutions  in  a  few  countries,  notably  the  US,  the  UK,  France, 
Germany,  Japan  and 
It  has  become  an  especially  widespread 
phenomenon  in  Europe.  In  the  EU27,  foreign  affiliates’  local  claims  in  local  currency  as  a 
share  of  total  banking  assets  increased  from  on  average  9.8  per  cent  during  the  period 
2001–2003  to  16.9  per  cent  at  the  end  of  2009.  The  corresponding  increase  for  other 
advanced economies4 was from 4.1 per cent to 5.9 per cent.5 In 2009, European banks had 
more  than  60  per  cent  of  their  total  banking  assets  abroad,  compared  to  approximately 
30 per cent for North American banks and 25 per cent for Asian banks. 
While a large part of the European banks’ international operations take place outside Europe, 
there  is  a  strong  regional  component  to  cross-border  banking.6  There  is  a  clear  tendency 
towards  regional  clusters  in  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisition  activities  in  Europe  –  in 
particular there seem to be such clusters in the Benelux region, the Nordic-Baltic region and 
in Southern, Central and Eastern Europe.7 That geography matters for cross-border banking 
is  shown  by  simple  regression  analysis  relating  the  local  claims  of  one  country’s  banks  in 
another country to the size of the home and host economies and the geographical distance 
between them. Using information on cross-border activities within the EU in 2009 from the 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  shows  that,  on  average,  a  10  per  cent  greater 
geographical distance between the home and host countries is associated with 14 per cent 
lower  consolidated  local  claims,  controlling  for  the  GDP  of  the  countries  involved.8  The 
further  countries  are  located  from  one  another,  the  less  likely  it  is  that  their  banks  will  be 
active in one another’s markets.  
Many  of  the  banks  operating  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  originate  in  Western  Europe. 
Right after the fall of the Soviet Union and the opening up of strictly regulated markets, the 
presence of foreign banks from Western Europe exploded. Today, many of the countries in 
the  region  report  foreign  ownership  in  excess  of  80  per  cent  of  total  banking  assets.  Also 
here we see a strong geographical component. A large share of the foreign banking assets in 
                                                 
3   By the end of 2009 these countries accounted for nearly half of the global banking system measured in terms 
of gross global cross-border banking assets. 
4   Other advanced economies include the US, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Switzerland.  
5   See Table 1 in Barba Navaretti et al. 2010. 
6  
Inside the euro zone, cross-border loans have more than doubled from € 152 billion in 1999 to € 361 billion in 
2006,  while  cross-border  deposits  have  increased  from  €  221  billion  to  €  316  billion,  respectively 
(see Heuchemer, Kleimeier and Sander (2008)). 
7   The regional dimension of cross border banking activities was also emphasised in a speech given by José 
Manuel González-Páramo (24 February 2006). 
8   The  estimated  simple  gravity  equation  is  lncij=4+0.9lnGDPi+0.8GDPj-1.4lndistij,  where  lncij  is  the  log  of 
consolidated claims of country i’s banks in country j, lnGDPi and lnGDPj are the logs of GDP in countries i and 
j, respectively, and lndistij is the log of the greater circle distance between the capital cities of country i and j. 
All estimated coefficients are statistically significant at the 1 per cent level. The country sample includes all EU 
countries for which data on foreign claims by nationality of reporting banks, immediate borrower basis, at the 
end of September 2009, is available from the Bank for International Settlements. Data on GDP in 2009 have 
been collected from the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook Database, April 2010. Data 
on greater circle distance have been collected from www.distancefromto.net. 
16 
 BIS Review 82/2010
Bulgaria and Romania belongs to Greek banks, a large share of the foreign banking assets 
in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia belongs to Austrian banks, a large share of the 
foreign banking assets in Poland belongs to German banks, and a large share of the foreign 
banking assets in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania belongs to Swedish banks.9 
One reason why cross-border banking is especially widespread in Europe is the efforts that 
have  been  made  to  achieve  the  long-term  goal  of  creating  a  single  market  for  financial 
services. In the early 1990s, a number of legislative reforms aiming to liberalise the financial 
sector were introduced. Perhaps the most important part of this deregulation process was the 
Second Banking Directive, which became effective in 1993 and which introduced the single 
banking license, enabling European banks to operate in any EU member state without the 
need for local authorisation. In fact one of the first European institutions that benefited from 
this  regulation  was  the  Nordic  financial  institution  Nordea,  which  was  established  through 
cross-border mergers in 1997. Today, Nordea has substantial activities in four of the Nordic 
countries, and also constitutes a significant part of the financial system in all these countries. 
Measured  in  terms  of  lending,  Nordea  constitutes  the  largest  bank  in  Finland,  the  second 
largest in Denmark, the third largest in Norway and the fourth largest bank in Sweden. 
The  transformation  of  the  banking  sector  towards  a  more  globalised  one  has  become 
apparent in the current financial crisis. We have experienced several severe financial crises 
also before cross-border banking became a notable feature of the financial sector, including 
the  Swedish  banking  crisis  in  the early  1990s.  But  this  time  around  dealing  with  the  crisis 
became  even  more  challenging  because  of  the  banks’  presence  in  several  jurisdictions, 
creating a need for cooperation between several national authorities. 
Why do banks become multinational? 
How can we explain the increase in cross-border banking, in particular in retail banking? The 
deregulation  of  previously  strictly-regulated  markets  made  crossborder  banking  possible.10 
But why do banks want to do business in a country where they are not completely familiar 
with the laws, local customs or business practices and where they typically would have to 
compete  with  well-established  local  banks?  A  bank  that  decides  to  enter  a  foreign  market 
must believe that it can offer something new or better than what is already being provided by 
local banks.11 
The driving forces behind the geographical expansion of banks are likely to be in many ways 
similar to those of other types of business. A bank with a better business model or stronger 
brand name than the local banks can gain market shares if it gets access to customers, and 
in retail banking local presence is often necessary. In this sense, the reasons behind banks’ 
decisions to expand their business to foreign markets are not much different from those of 
goods-producing  firms  that  establish  foreign  subsidiaries  in  order  to  gain  better  access  to 
their foreign customers.12 This type of driving force may have been particularly relevant for 
                                                 
9   Based on data on foreign claims by nationality of reporting banks, immediate borrower basis, at the end of 
September 2009 from the Bank for International Settlements. 
10   Before the single market was introduced, European banks wanting to establish themselves in another member 
country had to obtain authorization from the supervisory body of each host country. 
11   In the literature on determinants of foreign direct investment it has been emphasized  that an  investing firm 
needs to have some advantage over a potential local investor in order to overcome the disadvantage of doing 
business in a foreign environment (see e.g. Dunning 1977). 
12   The standard theory of so-called horizontal foreign direct investment is based on the idea that firms selling in 
foreign markets face a trade-off between the benefits of concentrating production in one place (because of 
economies  of  scale)  and  the  benefits  of  avoiding  costs  associated  with  exporting  the  good  (see  e.g. 
Horstmann and Markusen, 1992, Markusen and Venables, 1998, 2000; for an overview of this literature, see 
Barba Navaretti and Venables, 2004, Chapter 3). 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 17
the  expansion  of  Western  European  banks  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  during  their 
transition to market economies. Western European banks had expertise and know-how that 
local banks lacked, and by establishing themselves in Central and Eastern Europe – in many 
cases through the acquisition of local banks – they were able to quickly gain market shares. 
Another motive, perhaps more specific to the wholesale operations of banks is to follow the 
cross-border  expansion  of  clients,  sometimes  referred  to  as  “the  defensive  expansion 
approach”.13 The rationale for this would be to preserve existing banking relationships in the 
home country. Indeed, many of the European banks entering the US initially did so to provide 
services  for  their  home-country  clients  that  were  starting  US  operations.  Recent  bank 
surveys  also  show  that  following  clients  abroad  is  still  an  important  element  in  banks’ 
internationalization strategies.14 
Another issue is what determines the location choice of a bank that has decided to expand 
abroad. From what has already been said it is quite clear that we see a similar pattern as in 
all international transactions – geography matters. Presumably this is mainly due to the fact 
that  geographical  proximity  is  related  to  familiarity  with  language  and  customs,  which  puts 
foreign bank at less of a disadvantage vis-à-vis local banks. But it could also be due to the 
higher costs associated with operating activities that are located very far apart.15 
One  might  expect,  however,  that  recent  advances  in  communication  and  information 
technology  would  change  the  premises  for  cross-border  banking.  New  technology  allows 
banks to provide financial services over the Internet and would therefore seem to reduce the 
advantages  of  local  presence,  at  least  for  certain  services.  Take  for  instance  the  online 
savings accounts by which banks can attract retail deposits from foreign markets without any 
physical presence at all. At the same time, improvements in communication technology may 
lower the costs of operating activities located far apart and therefore reduce the advantages 
of  geographical  proximity  between  headquarters  and  the  foreign  branches  or  subsidiaries. 
Whether this is likely to lead to more or less local presence by foreign banks is difficult to 
say, but it clearly is a factor that contributes to making banking more globalised. 
Consequences of cross-border banking 
The increased globalisation of banking has brought both benefits and costs to the economy. 
For  a  long  time,  the  benefits  have  appeared  to  outweigh  the  costs,  but  the  recent  global 
financial  crisis  has  put  this  issue  in  a  new  light.  I  will  talk  about  the  economic  costs  of  
cross-border banking shortly. But let me first say something about its benefits. 
A general problem with the banking sector is that it is highly concentrated, which makes it 
especially  prone  to  anti-competitive  behaviour.  An  interesting  question  in  itself  is  why  the 
banking  sector  is  so  concentrated.  One  reason  is  surely  that  it  is  heavily  regulated. 
Regulations create entry and exit barriers. From my viewpoint, however, it also seems as if 
the mechanisms of banking crises are such that you end up with an even more concentrated 
banking sector after a crisis than before. When some banks run into difficulties, a common 
solution is to let them be acquired by a more healthy-looking competitor. In Sweden, we went 
from seven large banks to only four as a consequence of the acquisitions that occurred in 
connection with the banking crisis in the early 1990s. Four banks now hold around 80 per 
cent of the total market. That is a highly concentrated market!  
                                                 
13   Williams (2002). 
14   See e.g. “Mapping of large European groups with a significant cross-border banking activity for the year 2008” 
prepared by the Banking Supervision Committee (restricted edition). 
15   Geographical distance and the presence of a common language have been shown to impact on international 
investment decisions of banks (see e.g. Buch (2000) and Brevoort and Wolken (2008)). 
18 
 BIS Review 82/2010
One  of  the  few  things  that  can  potentially  mitigate  anti-competitive  behaviour  in  a 
concentrated industry is outside competition, or even the threat of outside competition. The 
entry  of  new  players  into  local  markets  may  lead  to  a  more  competitive  environment, 
generating efficiency gains that can be passed on to consumers. In banking these efficiency 
gains probably take the form of a greater variety of financial services and lower prices. 
Other potential benefits of cross-border banking that deserve to be mentioned are transfers 
and  spillovers  of  knowledge  and  know-how.  In  particular,  host  countries  with  weak  local 
banks and a lack of experience with bank supervision might benefit from the transmission of 
knowledge from foreign banks and supervisory authorities to local counterparts. 
Moreover,  cross-border  banking  has  the  potential  to  improve  financial  stability.  In  light  of 
recent  experience,  I  realise  that  such  a  claim  is  controversial.  However,  the  empirical 
evidence on this issue is that cross-border banking on balance seems to improve rather than 
weaken financial stability.16 First, unlike domestic financial institutions – particularly those in 
which  the  government  is  involved  –  foreign  banks  are  typically  less  open  to  government 
pressure to lend to “preferred borrowers”. Consequently, foreign banks may contribute to an 
improvement  in  the  overall  quality  of  the  loan  portfolios.  Second,  since  foreign  banks  are 
active  in  more  than  one  market  they  usually  hold  a  more  geographically  diversified  credit 
portfolio. Therefore they are less likely to be affected by stress in the local market. Third, as 
affiliates of foreign-owned banks generally have better access to international funding they 
contribute  to  less  volatile  lending  over  the  local  business  cycle.  For  this  reason  they  can 
serve as a countervailing force to the local business cycle. Finally, as I have already touched 
upon, foreign bank entry can have a positive impact on the host country authorities, which in 
turn may induce stricter regulation and improved financial supervision. 
For all these reasons foreign banks have the potential to contribute to the overall soundness 
of local banking systems. 
Having  said  this,  I  am  of  course  aware  that  there  are  also  problems  associated  with  
cross-border  banking.  First  of  all,  as  has  become  evident  during  this  crisis,  the  increasing 
globalisation  of  financial  markets  can  create  strong  contagion  effects  across  markets. 
Problems in one country tend to spill over to other countries very fast, generating a snowball 
effect where problems grow along with the costs of handling them. 
Furthermore,  it  has  become  clear  that  it  can  be  extremely  difficult  and  costly  to  deal  with 
distressed  banks  in  a  cross-border  setting.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  there  are  many 
stakeholders  involved  and  that  the  resolution  of  failing  institutions  is  even  more  poorly 
defined at the international level than at the national level. As governments are responsible 
to their respective parliaments, and ultimately to the voters, there is also a strong tendency to 
favour  national  solutions.  Because  of  this  we  have  seen  a  number  of  uncoordinated  crisis 
resolutions  resulting  in  exceptional  levels  of  public  financial  support  to  the  banking  sector. 
The  handling  of  the  failures  of  Fortis  and  the  three  Icelandic  banks  are  perhaps  the  most 
obvious  cases.  In  the  case  of  Fortis,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  authorities  from  the 
Benelux countries initially reached an agreement to save the group as a whole. However, as 
liquidity  pressures  continued  and  the  burden-sharing  agreement  proved  politically  unviable 
the  agreement  eventually  fell  apart.  In  the  end,  the  authorities  had  no  other  choice  but  to 
divide the bank along national borders – an outcome which most likely became more costly 
than a joint solution for the group as a whole. 
An important factor affecting the authorities’ abilities to deal with cross-border banks is how 
banks choose to organise themselves. The most common way of accessing markets outside 
the home country is to either establish a foreign based branch or a subsidiary and to offer 
                                                 
16   See  e.g.  Navaretti  G.,  Calzolari  G.,  Pozzolo  A.  and  Levi  M.  (2009),  Agénor  (2001),  Goldberg  (2002,  2004, 
2008). 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 19
services through this legal entity. At present these two forms of foreign operations end up 
being dealt with within different regulatory frameworks. While subsidiaries are independent 
companies, supervised by domestic authorities, branches follow the single banking licence 
schemes  and  are  therefore  governed  by  the  regulation  and  supervision  that  apply  in  their 
home country. This means that when a branch experiences financial difficulties, authorities in 
the host country have to rely on actions taken by authorities in the home country. However, 
the home country may not always be willing or able to support the parent bank (and indirectly 
the branch) – especially not in a case where the bank has the larger part of its activities in 
other countries. After all, such intervention would have to be paid for by the home country’s 
taxpayers.  Problems  arising  from  the  need  to  rely  on  home  country  regulation  and 
supervision have become evident in the aftermath of the melt-down of the Icelandic banks 
and the subsequent disagreement between Icelandic, British and Dutch authorities regarding 
compensation of the customers of Icesave, which was operated as a branch.17 
Moreover, the incentives for monitoring banks with foreign branches may differ between the 
home and host countries’ authorities. Consider for instance the case where a bank which is 
relatively small in the home country runs a foreign branch which is systemically important in 
the  host  country.  The  home  supervisors,  who  are  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  the 
foreign branch, may not think that the bank merits very careful supervision. At the same time 
the  supervisors  in  the  host  country,  who  are  responsible  for  financial  stability  in  the  host 
country, have strong incentives to monitor the bank closely. 
A third major issue connected to the increasingly integrated banking sector is the concern 
that  some  institutions  have  become  “too  big  to  fail”  or  “too  complex  to  fail”.  In  principle, 
however, this concern is not related to whether banks are involved in cross-border activities 
or  not.  In  practice,  banks  considered  “too  big  to  fail”  tend  to  be  banks  with  cross-border 
operation  simply  because  multinational  banks  tend  to  be  big.18  As  we  know,  the  implicit 
government guarantee of the survival of banks that are “too big to fail” has raised serious 
concerns about the moral hazard built into the system. Banks that expect to be bailed out if 
things go badly are likely to be willing to engage in excessive risk-taking in order to maximise 
their profits. 
Policy responses and the importance of effective cooperation  
Dealing with these difficulties is a top priority among policy-makers world-wide. A number of 
proposals  on  how  to  deal  with  large  cross-border  banks  have  recently  been  put  forward. 
Some of them include limiting the size of banking institutions that are considered too big to 
fail  and  restricting  the  scope  of  their  operations.  Some  suggest  that  we  should  consider 
preventing the banks from operating abroad through branches. 
There is no perfect solution. The moral hazard problems generated by banks being “too big 
to  fail”  are  of  course  very  important  and  we  need  to  find  ways  to  deal  with  them.  But  the 
nature of these problems is different from the one created by banks’ cross-border operations. 
Just because the biggest banks conduct foreign operations, it is not necessarily the foreign 
                                                 
17   The disagreement between Iceland, on the one hand, and the UK and the Netherlands, on the other, began in 
October 2008 when Landsbanki failed and was placed into receivership by the Icelandic Financial Supervisory 
Authority and the Icelandic government made clear that it would not compensate depositors in the UK and the 
Netherlands with Icesave accounts. The British and Dutch governments unilaterally decided to refund savers 
in  their  respective  countries.  Thereafter  they  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  Icelandic  government 
demanding repayment of the refunds corresponding to the EU guarantee. Still today no agreement has been 
reached. 
18   It is a general phenomenon that firms with foreign operations tend to be relatively big and this phenomenon 
can be explained as the outcome of a selection process where only the most productive firms find it profitable 
to pay the sunk fixed costs associated with entering new markets through foreign affiliates (see e.g. Helpman, 
Melitz and Yeaple, (2004)). 
20 
 BIS Review 82/2010
operations  that  are  the  problem.  Therefore,  I  will  not  discuss  the  problems  arising  from 
institutions being “too big to fail” but instead focus on how we can best deal with problems 
arising from cross-border banking activities. 
From a policy perspective, the key problem with cross-border banking is that the regulatory 
framework for ensuring financial stability has not been adapted to market developments as 
quickly  and  as  thoroughly  as  needed.  While  financial  markets  have  developed  beyond 
national  borders,  the  current  legal  and  institutional  frameworks  –  including  regulation, 
supervision, deposit insurance and crisis resolution – remain national.  
The  complexity  of  this  problem  has  aptly  been  described  as  the  European  Financial 
Trilemma, meaning that the three objectives of global financial stability, financial integration 
and  national  financial  independence  cannot  be  achieved  at  the  same  time.19  So  far,  EU 
member  states  have  chosen  to  prioritise  financial  integration  and  to  safeguard  national 
powers. Until the financial crisis, this combination seemed to work well, but only because the 
financial  safety  nets  were  not  really  put  to  the  test.  In  connection  with  the  financial  crisis, 
however,  policy  makers  have  been  forced  to  realise  that  financial  stability  and  financial 
integration  cannot  be  achieved  in  combination  with  strictly  national  policies.  And  since  the 
costs of financial instability have proved to be too high to be acceptable, a choice between 
the latter two has to be made. 
In this context continuing to safeguard national independence would imply closing borders to 
foreign  financial  institutions.  Such  an  option  would  not  only  be  extremely  costly,  but  also 
strike  a  serious  blow  at  the  very  heart  of  European  integration  –  the  single  market. 
Restrictions  on  operating  abroad  through  branches  has  been  proposed  as  a  possible  way 
forward, since this would then make all foreign bank affiliates subject to local supervision.20 It 
should be noted however that the distinction between branches and subsidiaries is becoming 
increasingly blurred. To be as efficient as possible, banks often organize themselves along 
business  lines  rather  than  along  legal  and  national  lines.  As  a  result,  foreign  subsidiaries 
have become less self-contained. This means that we can no longer take for granted that a 
subsidiary will be able to continue its business much longer than a branch, if the parent bank 
defaults. Therefore, even if all foreign affiliates were operated as subsidiaries, the national 
authorities of the home and host countries would still have to be prepared to deal with a crisis 
in a cross-border setting. 
Consequently, finding ways to deal with banking regulation and supervision at the EU level is 
the  only  sensible  long-term  solution.  However  it  is  not  a  simple  task.  It  would  involve  a 
supervisory regime that can coordinate national supervision, cross-border crisis management 
and  resolution  arrangements  that  address  any  conflicts  of  interest.  This  will  require 
governments to give up some of their sovereignty – and that is a painful process. Moreover, 
as the use of public funds can never be completely ruled out, governments will have to agree 
on how to share any such potential burdens. This may require a set of binding burdensharing 
agreements or at least some principles that can be used in case of interventions using public 
funds.  While  I  think  this  is  doable,  I  do  not  think  it  is  realistic  to  expect  that  the  political 
commitment required to create such arrangements will arise anytime soon. 
Does this mean then that we are stuck with the trilemma? Not necessarily. One possible way 
forward in the short to medium run is to improve the current frameworks so that they better 
                                                 
19   Schoenmaker (2010). 
20   A number of non-EU countries with a bank sector that has a high level of foreign ownership, including New 
Zeeland and Canada, have chosen such an approach. In New Zealand, branches are in principle prohibited. 
Every systemically important bank has to be registered as a New Zealand company. Canada used to have a 
similar ban on branches. In 1999, however, the law was amended to admit foreign bank branches, albeit with 
substantial restrictions. For instance, branches of foreign banks are not allowed to accept deposits of less than 
$150 000. The purpose of this restriction is to discourage retail banking operations. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 21
match the international landscape of financial markets. This can be achieved by the further 
harmonisation  of  national  procedures  for  supervision  and  crisis  management,  and  by 
preparing  for  joint  actions  in  one  way  or  another.  This  of course  requires  better  and  more 
extensive cooperation across national borders. Because cross-border banking has a strong 
geographical component, enhancing cooperation on a regional basis can be an effective way 
of proceeding. 
We  have  in  fact  already  taken  some  steps  in  this  direction.  Regarding  supervision,  EU 
leaders  have  been  able  to  agree  on  an  extensive  set  of  reforms  that  will  enhance 
coordination across member states, including the creation of European supervisory agencies 
and of a European Systemic Risk Board. In parallel, the EU has set up a number of colleges 
of  supervisors  for  large  cross-border  banks,  which  will  ensure  that  relevant  national  bank 
supervisors  meet  regularly,  share  information  and  expose  or  deal  with  any  cross-border 
problems. 
In the field of crisis management, the attempts to enhance cooperation within the EU can be 
summarised in a set of non-legally binding Memoranda of Understanding (MoU). The latest 
MoU, which was signed in 2008, aims at improving cross-border cooperation between all the 
27 EU Member States. Obviously, signing a non-legally binding document is not a solution to 
the  complex  trilemma  discussed  here.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  that  representatives  from 
supervisory  authorities,  central  banks  and  finance  ministries  across  the  entire  EU  have 
agreed on a common set of principles for crisis management and resolution is an important 
starting point for more intense cooperation. 
But obviously more has to be done. In my view the actions taken by us in the Nordic-Baltic 
countries can constitute a promising way forward. We have decided to increase coordination 
by creating a permanent structure for regional cooperation. This structure takes the form of a 
so-called cross-border stability group. To the best of my knowledge, it is the first of its kind. 
The  Nordic  cross-border  resolution  stability  group  includes  22  stakeholders  from  eight 
countries that will meet on a regular basis to share information and discuss financial sector 
developments. To facilitate coordination we have also agreed on a number of specific and 
detailed  crisis  management  procedures  and  prepared  for  a  clear  division  of  roles  and 
responsibilities  between  the  authorities  and  ministries.  Ultimately,  this  should  enhance  our 
preparedness for managing a crisis in any of our common international banking groups. 
At the EU level, the member states have recently agreed that countries with common cross-
border banking groups shall establish such stability groups in one way or another. As these 
arrangements  will  call  for  extensive  information-sharing  and  more  cooperation  across 
jurisdictions they will impose strong demands on the different national authorities involved. 
But most importantly, they will make it easier to solve cross-border problems within the EU. 
As Greek banks are heavily engaged in cross-border banking operations, it may be in the 
Greek authorities’ interest to consider setting up such a group. 
It is important to emphasise that the establishment of a well-functioning cooperation structure 
is  not  something  that  is  done  overnight.  On  the  contrary,  the  establishment  of  the  Nordic-
Baltic Cross-Border Stability Group has been an ongoing process for quite some time now. It 
started already in 2007 when we carried out a Nordic-Baltic crisis management exercise. By 
trying  to  manage  an  imaginary  crisis  using  actual  banks  and  applying  the  institutional  and 
regulatory structures of the different countries, we learnt from one another and realised the 
importance of working together. 
Cooperation  does  not  come  by  itself.  It  requires  initiatives  and  continuous  backing.  And  it 
takes time. Still, as far as I can see it is currently the only viable way forward in trying to deal 
with problems arising from cross-border banking in a way that does not lead to a backlash in 
European financial integration.  
What I have said today is fairly uncontroversial both in terms of the analysis of the challenges 
arising  from  cross-border  banking  and  the  need  for  joint  action.  However,  despite  the  fact 
22 
 BIS Review 82/2010
that  opting  for  national  solutions  has  proved  to  be  a  costly  strategy  in  this  crisis,  some 
countries still seem to prefer going along this path. I think that is a mistake. I think that at the 
end of that path awaits financial disintegration with strongly negative consequences for future 
growth prospects.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me briefly summarize my main points. The structure of the financial services industry has 
gone  through  major  changes  over  the  past  decades.  When  the  financial  crisis  hit, 
governments  had  to  deal  with  a  novel  feature  in  their  crisis  management  –  cross-border 
banks.  
Cross-border banking brings potentially many benefits, such as a more competitive banking 
industry  and  the  transfer  of  know-how.  However,  because  the  EU’s  long-term  objective  of 
creating a single financial market – including an integrated banking system – has never been 
matched with a single legal and prudential framework, cross-border banks also pose severe 
problems for the regulatory and supervisory community. 
In my view, it would be misguided to conclude from the problems that we have seen during 
the financial crisis that cross-border banking should be prevented or limited. However, at the 
same time I do not believe it is very realistic to expect the creation of a single regulatory and 
supervisory authority at the EU level in the near future. Instead, I think we need to find new 
forms for cross-border cooperation between national authorities. As it may take some time to 
achieve effective cooperation at the EU level, I want to strike a blow for cooperation at the 
regional level. After all, cross-border banking is to a large extent taking place in a regional 
context.  This  may  not  completely  prevent  problems  related  to  crossborder  banking  from 
arising,  but  I  think  it  is  the  only  reasonable  middle  way  between  maintaining  financial 
integration and avoiding the unduly high costs associated with managing cross-border banks 
in a crisis. 
References 
Agénor  P.  2001),”Benefits  and  Costs  of  International  Financial  Integration:  Theory  and 
Facts”, World Economy, Vol. 26, pp. 1089–1118.  
Barba  Navaretti  G.  and  Venables  A.  (2004),  Multinational  Firms  in  the  World  Economy 
Chapter 3, Princeton University Press. 
Bank for International Settlements, Consolidated banking statistics, End September 2009. 
Banking  Supervision  Committee  at  the  European  Central  Bank  (2010),  “Mapping  of  large 
European banking groups with a significant cross-border banking activity for the year 2008”, 
Restricted edition. 
Buch,  C.  (2000),  “Information  or  Regulation:  What  is  Driving  the  International  Activities  of 
Commercial Banks?” Kiel Working Paper No. 1011. 
Brevoort  P.  and  Wolken  J.  (2008),  “Does  distance  matter  in  banking?”,  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2008–34, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Dunning J. H. (1977), “Trade, location of economic activity and the multinational enterprise: a 
search for an eclectic approach”, in B. Ohlin, P. O. Hesselborn and P. M. Wijkman (eds.), 
The Allocation of Economic Activity, London: Macmillan.  
Distance Between Cities Places On Map, provided by Google, http://www.distancefromto.net. 
Goldberg,  L.  (2002),  “When  is  Foreign  Bank  Lending  to  Emerging  Markets  Volatile?”  in 
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, ed. by S. Edwards and J. Frankel, National 
Bureau of Economic Research and University of Chicago Press, pp. 171–96.  
BIS Review 82/2010 
 23
Goldberg  L.  (2004),  “Financial  Sector  FDI  and  Host  Countries:  New  and  Old  Lessons”, 
Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, pp. 1–17.  
Goldberg  L.  (2008),  Understanding  Banking  Sector  Globalisation,  IMF  Staff  Papers,  2009, 
vol. 56, issue 1, pp. 171–197.  
González-Páramo  J.M.  (Member  of  the  executive  board  at  the  ECB)  “Globalisation, 
international  financial  integration  and  the  financial  crisis:  The  future  of  European  and 
international financial market regulation and supervision”, speech held on 19 February 2010, 
www.ecb.org. 
González-Páramo J.M. (Member of the executive board at the ECB) “Cross-border banking 
in  the  EU:  developments  and  emerging  policy  issues”,  speech  held  on  24  February  2006, 
www.ecb.org. 
Helpman E., Melitz M.J. and Yeaple S.R. (2004), “Export vs. FDI with heterogeneous firms”, 
American Economic Review, vol. 94, pp. 300–316.  
Heuchemer  S.  Kleimeier  S.  and  Sander  H.  (2008),  “The  Geography  of  European  Cross-
Border  Banking:  The  Impact  of  Cultural  and  Political  Factors”,  Maastricht  University 
METEOR Research Memorandum No. RM/08/008. 
Horstmann I. and Markusen J. (1992), “Endogenous market structures in international trade 
(natura facit saltum)”, Journal of International Economics vol. 32, pp 109–129.  
Markusen  J.R.  and  Venables  A.J.  (1998),  “Multinational  firms  and  the  new  trade  theory”, 
Journal of International Economics, vol 46, pp. 183–203.  
Markusen  J.R.  and  Venables  A.J.  (2000),  “The  theory  of  endowment,  intra-industry  and 
multinational trade”, Journal of International Economics, vol. 52, pp. 209–234.  
National Bank of Greece, Annual Report 2009, www.nbg.gr. 
Navaretti G., Calzolari G., Pozzolo A. and Levi M. (2009) “Multinational Banking in Europe: 
Financial Stability and Regulatory – Implications Lessons from the Financial Crisis”, Centro 
Studi Luca D’Agliano Development Studies, Working Paper, No. 292. 
Schoenmaker,  D.  (2010),  “The  Financial  Trilemma  at  Work  in  Europe”,  Working  Paper, 
SSRN1340395. 
The International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Database, April 2010.  
The  Turner  Review  (March  2009)  “A  regulatory  response  to  the  global  banking  crisis”, 
www.fsa.gov. 
Williams B. (2002), “The Defensive Expansion Approach to Multinational: Evidence to date”, 
Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments, Vol. 11, pp. 127–203. 
24 
 BIS Review 82/2010
