Ardian Fullani: Recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Joint Press Conference 
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission, the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of 
Albania, Tirana, 9 March 2010. 
 Honourable Mr. Minister of Finance, 
Honourable Mr. Bell, 
Honourable participants, 
During the last two weeks we have had an intensive dialogue with the IMF Mission, which 
visited  Tirana  in  the  framework  of  periodic  consultations  in  terms  of  the  observance  of 
Article IV. During these discussions there is appraised the good performance of the Albanian 
economy during the past year and there is also emphasized the need for pursuing prudent 
economic  policies,  designed  and  implemented  in  the  context  of  strengthening  the 
macroeconomic and financial stability. Also, special attention has been paid to the need for 
ongoing structural reform that will support our long-term economic growth. 
The Albanian economy has recorded a positive economic growth during the past year and 
has  successfully  tackled  the  direct  and  indirect  shudders  of  the  global  economic  crisis. 
Moreover, the Albanian economy has passed the test, by maintaining the domestic economic 
and financial balances, which serve as a prerequisite for a sustainable and long-term growth. 
Thus,  inflation  rate  fluctuated  around  2  to  3  percent  during  2009;  the  country’s  external 
balances  have  shown  correction  signs,  while  the  Albanian  banking  system  remains  robust 
and well-capitalized. 
However,  the  economic  growth  rate  slowed  down  significantly  during  2009.  The  global 
economic  crisis,  which  deeply  affected  all  countries  of  the  region,  was  accompanied  by 
slowed  exports,  reduced  remittances  and  other  foreign  currency  inflows,  increased 
uncertainty  and  slowed  credit  growth.  Although  2010  is  expected  to  be  accompanied  by  a 
gradual improvement in the world economic environment, many of the factors that negatively 
affected the Albanian economy will continue to be present even during this year. 
The  stimulating  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  helped  supporting  the  economic  activity  during 
2009.  However,  fiscal  trajectories  and  the  need  for  long-term  stability  suggest  that  the 
Albanian economy can not rely for a long time on fiscal stimulus. Against this background, in 
2010 a more conservative fiscal policy is necessary and is welcomed by the Bank of Albania. 
In a medium- and long-term horizon, we are of the opinion that fiscal sustainability should be 
ensured through a clear and prudent fiscal rule. 
Under  new  circumstances,  the  economic  growth  should  be  based  more  on  boosting  the 
private  sector  of  the  economy  and  bank  credit  plays  a  key  role  in  this  regard.  The  good 
financial  health  of  our  banking  system  and  the  progressive  improvement  of  liquidity 
conditions  and  risk  premiums  in  domestic  and  foreign  financial  markets  are  encouraging 
developments. The easing of monetary conditions and the liquidity injections by the Bank of 
Albania  have  supported  and  will  further  support  this  process.  However,  the  reactivation  of 
credit  activity  remains  a  challenging  goal,  which  would  require  encouragement  of  the  final 
demand  and  generation  of  business  plans  valid  for  bank  financing,  reduction  of  real  and 
perceived  risk  in  the  economy,  review  of  development  strategies  and  commercial  banks’ 
lending  policies,  as  well  as  reduction  of  cost  and  non-cost  elements  in  lending.  All  these 
factors are envisaged to gradually improve throughout the year; however, they will remain far 
from the pre-crisis levels. 
Bank  of  Albania’s  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  prudent,  chiefly  oriented  towards 
achievement of inflation target. The recent upward inflation trend might have been motivated 
by temporary-action and limited-intensity supply factors. The Bank of Albania has envisaged 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 1
that the exceeding of 4 percent inflation rate will be for a short period of time and will not be 
followed by steady inflationary pressures. Our projections show that consumer price inflation 
will  fall  gradually  towards  the  3  percent  targeted  rate  during  2010.  However,  we  remain 
committed  to  taking  all  appropriate  steps  to  ensure  this  performance  and  meet  our  legal 
mandate for price stability in the economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2010
