Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Launch of the Strengthening Program for Rural 
Banks (SPRB) 
Keynote message by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
(the central bank of the Philippines), to the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC), 
Makati City, 8 August 2010. 
 PDIC  President  Jose  Nograles,  Members  of  the  PDIC  Board,  Ms.  Cora  Miller  and  other 
officers  of  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines  (RBAP),  fellow  workers  in 
government, distinguished guests, friends from media, ladies and gentlemen, good morning 
to all of you.  
First,  let  me  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  a  message  in  this  milestone  event  –  the 
launching of the Strengthening Program for Rural Banks (SPRB). It is indeed a pleasure for 
me to affirm today the BSP’s commitment, support and partnership with the PDIC and the 
rural banking industry in this important undertaking.  
Rural banks are, what I often refer to as, the “natural frontliners” in our national program to 
broaden and deepen the reach of responsible… and empowering… financial services to local 
communities. It is therefore incumbent upon the regulators to ensure that the strength and 
viability of this critical segment of our banking system is sustained, particularly during these 
challenging times that we face.  
The SPRB is specifically expected to achieve this goal of creating a stronger rural banking 
system  as  it  promotes  mergers  and  consolidations  between  or  among  rural  banks  and 
eligible strategic third party investors (STPIs) under a specific set of guidelines.  
There are two prongs to the SPRB – one, the capital augmentation component, and two, the 
regulatory relief package.  
The  capital  augmentation  and  direct  loan  component  is  to  be  made  available  through 
financial assistance from the PDIC. 
To flesh out the regulatory relief package, the Monetary Board approved a set of incentives 
that include the conversion and opening/relocation of head offices, branches and extension 
offices,  the  waiver  of  penalties  and  other  incentives  pertaining  to  rediscounting  and 
emergency loans. In addition to the financial strengthening of the resulting entities, the grant 
of these incentives is expected to allow such entities to achieve economies of scale, attract 
more skills, and better manage their liabilities.  
Furthermore,  through  mergers  and  consolidations,  the  resulting  banks  will  achieve  higher 
capitalization, which would then enable them to diversify their portfolios to reduce risk, fund 
growth and innovation and expand their presence and their reach throughout the country. As 
you can tell, this is consistent with our objective of strengthening the rural banking system so 
it can more effectively serve the countryside and better contribute in promoting balanced and 
sustainable  growth  for  our  nation.  In  this  regard,  the  RBAP  plays  an  important  role  in 
ensuring the success of this program, jointly with the PDIC and the BSP. 
Beyond  the  SPRB,  however,  the  BSP  shall  continue  to  ensure  that  a  sound  regulatory 
framework is in place that would enable Philippine banks, including RBs, to cope with both 
domestic  and  global  challenges.  The  BSP  will  also  continue  to  pursue  reforms  to  further 
strengthen  the  capitalization  of  banks  and  improve  the  supervisory  oversight  of  risk 
management  of  banks.  In  addition,  we  will  also  continue  to  implement  reforms  geared 
towards improving the corporate governance structures of banks, including RBs.  
Sustaining and ensuring the strength of the rural banking sector is not, however, just the role 
of the regulators. It is a partnership with the regulated. As in the past, we therefore look to 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
the solid support of the rural banks, through the RBAP, in effecting important reforms and 
initiatives that would improve the resilience of our banks, including the RBs, and our financial 
system as a whole so they will continue to withstand the impact of domestic and global crises 
and remain important channels for investment, credit and overall economic development. 
On this note, I wish to congratulate all those who have been instrumental in putting together 
this program. The BSP looks forward to the success of this program in close partnership with 
PDIC and RBAP. 
Thank you and good day! 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
