Umayya Toukan: The international monetary system – too big to fail 
Speech by Mr Umayya Toukan, Governor of the Central Bank of Jordan, at the 34th Jackson 
Hole  Economic  Symposium  on  “Macroeconomic  policy:  post-crisis”,  Session  6,  Jackson 
Hole, Wyoming, 28 August 2010. 
 The international monetary system: too big to fail 
I am extremely honored to be asked to speak on such an important topic and before such a 
distinguished audience and I wish to thank Tom Hoenig for giving me this opportunity. I am 
also very proud to be on this panel. Some years back, and throughout my dissertation work 
which was under the able guidance of Frederic Mishkin, Maurice Obstfeld went beyond the 
call  of  duty  to  respond  to  my  many  inquiries.  I  wish,  once  again,  to  express  to  Professor 
Obstfeld  my  feelings  of  gratitude.  John  Lipsky  has  been  giving  me  valuable  advice  on 
matters of monetary policy and bank supervision in my country and I wish to thank him and 
his team at the International Monetary Fund. 
There is no shortage of justifications to the call for the reform of the International Monetary 
System  (IMS).  The  justifications  referred  to  can  be  sorted  out  under  two  categories:  the 
macro  policies  of  member  countries  and  the  imperfections  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system. 
Macro  policies  of  member  countries  include  such  policies  as  running  massive  deficits  or 
intervening in foreign exchange markets. On the other hand, commentators agree that the 
Bretton Woods system did not function as originally planned. After 1973, the IMS seem to 
have  reverted  to  a  more  market  oriented,  hybrid  and  voluntary  system  as  opposed  to  a 
system  characterized  by  IMF  surveillance  and  supported  by  IMF  facilities.  In  my  remarks 
today, I will attempt to relate the above mentioned issues to three sets of interrelated but at 
times  conflicting  considerations:  (i)  national  vs.  international  considerations  (ii)  political  vs. 
economic considerations. (iii) Public policy vs. market considerations. 
Given that seven countries are currently dollarized or have currency boards using the dollar, 
and 89 countries have pegged exchange rates using the dollar as an anchor1, it is clear that 
the macro policies of the main reserve currency country have a huge impact not only on the 
countries just mentioned but also on the rest of the developed world. It is equally important to 
appreciate the perception of vulnerability by the countries whose currencies are pegged to a 
major reserve currency and the consequent need to accumulate reserves as self insurance2. 
The global current account imbalances and the resulting volatility of capital inflows did have 
several serious consequences, some of which, were blamed for the recent global economic 
and  financial  crisis3.  Considerable  volatility  in  capital  flows,  and  the  associated  “liquidity 
shocks” can create strong need to accumulate reserves. Commentators generally agree that, 
in the case of oil exporters and China, reserves holdings exceed conceivable precautionary 
needs, and reflect more the state of the still developing financial markets in those countries 
as well as the desire to boost policy credibility4. 
The move to a flexible exchange rate regime by advanced economies was expected to help 
clear global imbalances. That expectation has not been fully met for several reasons. First, 
public policy choices for some countries continue to put off important structural adjustments. 
                                                 
1  Reinhart and Rogoff 2004. 
2  Aizenman and Sun 2009. 
3  Kohn, 2010. 
4  Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor, 2009. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 1
Furthermore, a number of emerging economies did not allow their currencies to float freely, 
and  continued  to  defend  their  peg  at  an  undervalued  exchange  rate.  Those  modes  of 
behavior beg in the issue of how to deal with protectionist sentiments. 
We have a light hearted question in our region which asks: why did God choose to send the 
prophets of all three religions to the Middle East? And the answer is: it was impossible to get 
them a Schengen visa. 
Divine wisdom aside, protectionism, in its broadest sense, continues to be a major challenge 
to global coordination. Anecdotal evidence suggests that, last year alone, 450 “low intensity” 
protectionist measures were taken by the G20 members5. With fiscal consolidation in many 
countries  and  an  almost  jobless  growth,  countries  may  continue  to  resort  to  increasing 
exports  to  create  jobs.  Consequently,  the  risk  of  competitive  devaluations,  through 
intervention or otherwise, may be growing. The plausible assumption for the persistence of 
protectionist  sentiments  is  that  countries  who  take  protectionist  measures  do  so  to  protect 
their “national interest ”. Similarly, one may also assume that the competitive devaluations of 
the  1930s  were  intended  to  protect  the  national  interests  of  the  countries  concerned.  The 
outcome  of  the  events  of  the  1930s  and  their  aftermath  clearly  do  not  support  the  fine 
objective of this line of reasoning neither do the present imbalances and the present market 
volatility.  And  it  is  not  only  public  policy  that  tends  to  overvalue  national  interest  and 
undervalue international interests but also the market mechanism seems to produce a similar 
outcome. An interesting argument in support of this view was presented in the Per Jacobson 
lecture  last  June  in  Basle6  and  I  quote  “...there  is  a  nationalist  bias  in  the  pro-market 
revolution...”  unquote.  Given  the  dominance  of  globalization  and  the  interdependence  of 
financial markets, it may seem paradoxical that there is still that much difficulty in reconciling 
national and international interests. 
To sum up on this point: I think the Bretton Woods institutions and indeed the United Nations 
system were designed to reconcile national interest with global interests and to ensure the 
mutual  consistency  of  national  policies7.  The  fixed  but  adjustable  peg  and  later  on  the 
floating or managed exchange rates regime were supposed to take care of imbalances in the 
current account. The prevailing hybrid system of exchange rates could not clear the current 
account and imbalances continue to persist. The good news is that IMF surveillance proved 
to be invaluable in the case of deficit developing countries. Since the late 1980s, we have 
introduced  several  key  structural  reforms  in  Jordan  based  on  IMF  surveillance  and  IMF 
consultations. More recently, the FSAP reviews helped us introduce several key reforms in 
the financial sector. Other developing countries may have gone through the same exercise. 
In  this  regard,  the  IMF  can  play  an  important  role  in  the  ongoing  regulatory  and  financial 
reform  efforts  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Furthermore,  the  call  for  more  legitimacy  in 
representation or quotas may enhance the multilateral role of the IMF and meet the concerns 
regarding  IMF  governance.  More  importantly,  I  suggest  that  enabling  the  IMF  to  provide 
international  liquidity  when  needed  with  schemes  that  establish  a  “Global  Financial  Safety 
Net”  and  expanding  its  mandate  in  the  light  of  the  recent  global  crisis  to  include 
macrofinancial surveillance and spillover analysis should be seriously considered. In general, 
I would suggest that strengthening the IMF with some enforcement mechanism, such as 
Keynes original idea of a global clearing bank, would restore to the international monetary 
system  some  needed  ownership  and  credibility.  I  believe  it  was  the  late  Charles 
Kindleberger8 who said that the international financial system will not work unless somebody 
should  take  responsibility  for  it.  Finally  on  this  point,  it  is  also  essential  for  the  IMF  to 
                                                 
5  Saccomanni, 2010. 
6  Tommaso, 2010. 
7  Carney, 2009. 
8  Landau, 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2010
enhance  its  collaboration  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  as  well  as  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS). 
A  major  criticism  against  the  Bretton  Woods  agreement  of  1944  is  that  it  separated 
economics  and  politics  in  “water  tight  ”  compartments  according  to  Richard  Gardner  in  his 
very interesting book “Sterling Dollar Diplomacy9”. In this regard, political policy choices can 
continue to put off adjustment in surplus countries. How any reformed international monetary 
system  can  bring  about  the  needed  consistency  between  economic  and  political 
considerations will be a major challenge for the global community in the coming years. 
The global crisis and the fact that it started in the US may have led some to believe that the 
current  IMS  model  of  using  the  dollar  as  the  global  key  currency  has  been  undermined. 
Moreover,  recent  sovereign  debt  problems  in  Europe  raised  doubts  about  the  Euro  and 
whether  a  single  currency,  with  limited  political  integration,  and  little  fiscal  coordination 
among  member  countries,  could  be  sustainable.  In  this  regard,  I  suggest  that  most  of  the 
concerns  are  not  totally  justified.  The  dollar  is  backed  by  trust  in  the  US  political  and 
economic  system,  the  liquidity  and  depth  of  the  US  financial  markets  and  the  outstanding 
infrastructure for payments’ settlement. Moreover, and although the Euro has been around 
for only ten years, it is today associated with price stability. In this regard, I think major credit 
should  go  to  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  to  President  Trichet  also  for  his 
consistent stand on the independence and integrity of the ECB. By definition, only currencies 
that can be freely convertible for trade or investment purposes have the potential to achieve 
the status of an international currency. Furthermore, the international use of currencies is a 
market-driven process which is determined by independent decisions of private agents and 
public  policy.  The  criteria  for  Central  Banks’  decisions  on  their  foreign  currency  portfolios 
often  differs  from  the  considerations  of  private  savings  which  may  be  more  related  to 
standard portfolio choice criteria. 
When  the  present  international  monetary  system  in  its  original  form  was  agreed  upon  in 
1944, it was expected that the dollar would be the main reserve currency. Over sixty years 
on, the dollar is still the main reserve currency. Any shift by central banks from holding dollar 
reserve assets risks large accounting loses. Structural reforms, in particular, in the area of 
medical care and entitlements as well as addressing what is often described as a savings 
glut  or  investment  drought,  are  essential  to  restore  balance  to  the  global  economy.  Major 
reserve currency governments are responding to the calls for fiscal balance, higher savings, 
and more balanced investment spending at home. Other countries could also introduce more 
flexibility to the exchange rate of their currencies and allow relative prices to change. Fiscal 
policy  in  some  emerging  markets  can  also  stimulate  domestic  demand  away  from  exports 
and toward more consumption at home. This is all well known but I think it bears repetition. 
Before I conclude, I would like to present a quotation from a book about the history of the 
Bank for International Settlements in Basle10, when during one cold snowy December night in 
North Carolina, the author woke up on a power failure which, in his words, took him back to 
the 19th century and he realized that we take for granted so many things in life and I quote: 
“…the payments system is yet another example of a highly complex network technology. We 
take it for granted that our checks clear, ATMs instantly provide cash anywhere in the world, 
imports are paid for in the required currency, and the desired amount of liquidity is available 
to us any time at the lowest cost. In fact, we should marvel at the ordinarily smooth working 
of the international payments system rather than be surprised at its occasional malfunction...” 
unquote. 
                                                 
9  Gardner, 1980. 
10  Toniolo, 2005. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 3
Clearly, the global crisis of the past two years is hardly an occasional malfunction. However, I 
would like to suggest that the Bretton Woods agreement and subsequent reforms did serve 
the global economy well since World War II. Furthermore, markets do work and even when 
they  become  dysfunctional,  as  we  saw  during  the  past  18  months  or  so,  markets  were 
sending a clear message for corrective action. Of course the coordinated non-conventional 
measures  taken  by  major  central  banks,  in  particular  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of 
England and the ECB, as well as action taken by governments, did save the global economy 
from  a  meltdown.  The  managing  director  of  the  IMF  suggested  last  spring  that  1/3  of  the 
effectiveness of stimulus measures was due to global coordination. Those same measures 
taken individually may not have produced the same result. A quick review of all statements 
by ministers at the IMF meetings last spring would reveal that the terms “multilateralism”, 
“coordination”  and  “surveillance”  were  the  most  frequently  used  terms.  At  least  one 
minister  called  for  “compulsory  multilateral  coordinated  surveillance”.  The  Ministers’ 
remarks  were  reflected  in  the  “G-20  Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and  Balanced 
Growth” which emphasized the mutual assessment of members’ monetary, exchange rate, 
fiscal  and  financial  policies  with  the  assistance  of  the  IMF  and  other  international  financial 
institutions. 
I started my remarks by referring to several inconsistencies which need to be reconciled by 
the global community and I would like to end my remarks by going back to basics. Central 
banks  should  continue  to  adhere  to  their  medium  term  objective  of  price  stability  and 
governments  should  adhere  to  fiscal  consolidation  or  the  unwinding  of  fiscal  deficits. 
Furthermore, an international agreement on a framework for financial sector reform should 
be arrived at. Maintaining central bank credibility as well as fiscal and regulatory credibility 
are essential to restore confidence to the IMS. However, it is still not clear how any reform 
mechanism can impose adjustment on surplus countries. Furthermore, it is not clear either, 
under  any  reformed  system,  how  an  international  body  can  impose  fiscal  discipline  on 
member  countries.  I  would  therefore  fully  subscribe  to  the  view  that  “achieving  a  better 
balance will require lasting shifts in spending, production, saving and borrowing around the 
world11”. It would be ideal if the political-economic mix in public policy, especially in major 
economies, would be consistent in allowing the market to produce those shifts and for the 
countries  concerned  to conceive  those  shifts  as  being  in  their  national  interest.  After  all,  if 
anything is too big to fail, it should be the International Monetary System. I thank you for your 
attention. 
References 
Aizenman, J., and Y., Sun, 2009. “The Financial Crisis and Sizable International Reserves 
Depletion: From Fear of Floating to Fear of Losing International Reserves”. NBER Working 
Paper 15308, October 2009. 
Bergsten, F., 2009. “The Long-Term International Economic Position of the United States”. 
Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C., May 2009. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2007).  “Global  Imbalances:  Recent  developments  and  Prospects”. 
Bundesbank lecture, Berlin, September 2007. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2009).  “Asia  and  the  Global  Financial  Crisis”.  Speech  At  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Conference on Asia and the Global Financial Crisis, Santa 
Barbara, California October 2009. 
                                                 
11  Kohn, 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2010
Internationalization  of  Currencies:  A  Central  Banking 
Bini  Smaghi,  L.,  2008.  “The 
Perspective”.  in  J.  Pisani-Ferry  and  A.  S.  Posen,  eds.,  the  Euro  at  Ten:  The  Next  Global 
Currency? Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
Blanchard, O., F., Giavazzi and F. Sa (2005). “The U.S. Current Account and the Dollar”. MIT 
Department of Economics Working Paper, No 05–02 and NBER Working Paper No 11137, 
February 2005. 
Carney, M., 2009. “The Evolution of the International Monetary System”. Remarks, Foreign 
Policy Association, New York, November 2009. 
Caruana, J. 2010 BIS Annual General Meeting. Basel June 2010. 
Duttagupta,  R.  Mateos,  Lago,  I.,  &  Goyal,  R.  (2009).  “The  debate  on  the  International 
Monetary System”. IMF Staff Position Note, SNP/09/26, November 2009. 
Eichengreen,  B.,  2009.  “Out  of  the  Box  Thoughts  about  the  International  Financial 
Architecture”. IMF Working Paper WP/09/116. 
Gardner,  R.,  1980.  “Sterling-Dollar  Diplomacy  in  Current  Perspective:  The  Origins  and  the 
Prospects of Our International Economic Order”. 
Goldberg, L. S., 2010. “Is the International Role of the Dollar Changing? Current Issues in 
Economics and Finance”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Vol. 16 (1). 
Kohn, L. 2010. “High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System”. Sponsored 
by the Swiss National Bank and the International Monetary Fund, Zurich, Switzerland, May, 
2010. 
Landau,  J.,  2010.  “An  International  Financial  Architecture  for  the  21st  Century:  Some 
Thoughts”. 17th Central Banking Seminar of the Bank of Korea; Seoul, June 2010. 
Mishkin,  F.,  (2008).  “Housing  and  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism”.  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Obstfeld, M., and K., Rogoff (2009). “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Products of 
Common  Causes”.  Paper  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Asia 
Economic Policy Conference, October 2009. 
Obstfeld,  M.,  J.  Shambaugh,  and  A.  Taylor,  2009.  “Financial  Stability,  the  Trilemma,  and 
International Reserves”. American Economic Journal, 99(2), pp. 480–86. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2004). “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A 
Reinterpretation”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1–48. 
Saccomanni,  F.,  2010.  “The  Global  Crisis  and  the  Future  of  the  International  Monetary 
System”. Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, April 2010. 
Strauss-Kahn,  D.,  2010.  “High-Level  Conference  on  the  International  Monetary  System”. 
Zurich, May 2010. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 2010. “Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy”. 
W.W.Norton & Company, Inc., 2010. 
Toniolo,  G.,  2005.  “Central  Bank  Cooperation  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements, 
1930–1973”. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
Tommaso  P.,  2010.  “Markets  and  Government  before,  during  and  after  the  Crisis”.  Per 
Jacobsson Lecture, Basel, June 2010. 
Zhou, X. 2009. Statement on Reforming the International Monetary System. Central Bank of 
China, Beijing March 2009. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 5
