 Mervyn King: Address by Mervyn King to Trades Union Congress 
Address by  Mr  Mervyn  King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the 2010 Trades Union 
Congress, Manchester, 15 September 2010. 
 President and Congress  
I  want  first  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  address  Congress.  Members  of  your  General 
Council have made a huge contribution to the Bank of England by serving on our board – the 
Bank’s Court. Carrying on that tradition today is Brendan Barber. By bringing a distinct and 
important  perspective  to  our  discussions,  Brendan  has  helped  us  through  some  extremely 
turbulent times. I am grateful to him.  
Recent times have indeed been turbulent. After a decade and a half of stability, with rising 
employment  and  living  standards,  came  the  crisis  and  recession  –  the  biggest  economic 
upheaval since the Great Depression. Before the crisis, steady growth with low inflation and 
high employment was in our grasp. We let it slip – we, that is, in the financial sector and as 
policy-makers – not your members nor the many businesses and organisations around the 
country which employ them. And although the causes of the crisis may have been rooted in 
the financial sector, the consequences are affecting everyone, and will continue to do so for 
years to come.  
Thankfully, the costs of the crisis have been smaller than those of the Great Depression. But 
only because we learnt from that experience. An unprecedented degree of policy stimulus, 
here and abroad, prevented another world slump. Even so, around a million more people in 
Britain are out of work than before the crisis. Many, especially the young unemployed, have 
had  their  futures  blighted.  So  we  cannot  just  carry  on  as  we  are.  Unless  we  reform  our 
economy  –  rebalance  demand,  restructure  banking,  and  restore  the  sustainability  of  our 
public finances – we shall not only jeopardise recovery, but also fail the next generation.  
To  my  mind,  a  market  economy  and  its  disciplines  offer  the  best  way  of  raising  living 
standards.  But  a  market  economy  cannot  survive  on  incentives  alone.  It  must  align  those 
incentives to the common good. It must command support among the vast majority who do 
not receive the large rewards that accrue to the successful and the lucky. And it must show a 
sense of fairness if its efficiency is to yield fruit.  
There was nothing fair about the financial crisis. It was caused not by problems in the real 
economy; it came out of the financial sector. But it was the real economy that suffered and 
the  banks  that  were  bailed  out.  Your  members,  and  indeed  the  businesses  which  employ 
them, are entitled to be angry. But however legitimate, anger will not produce change unless 
its energy is harnessed to a cool analysis of what happened and why. So I want to discuss 
the fundamental causes of the crisis before turning to current policy.  
The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 changed both politics and economics. Within a few years, 
the former Soviet empire, China and other Asian economies, with their combined workforce 
of over a billion people, entered the world trading system as market economies. Their focus 
on export-led growth allowed consumers in the West to enjoy rising living standards as the 
prices of traded goods fell. But the trade surpluses in emerging economies implied an outflow 
of capital. Relatively poor countries were lending money to richer western ones – the reverse 
of  the  traditional  model of  development.  In  the process,  countries  like China  built up  huge 
holdings of foreign assets – running into trillions of dollars – matched by equally huge debts 
in the deficit countries. Such massive imbalances were never likely to be sustainable, and so 
it proved.  
If the first fundamental cause of the crisis was the scale of imbalances in the world economy, 
the second was the inability of our banking system to absorb such large inflows of capital 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 1
 without taking excessive risk. In the five years leading up to the crisis, the balance sheets of 
the West’s largest banks doubled – mainly because banks lent more to other firms within the 
financial  sector  than  to  the  wider  economy.  And  the  proportion  of  capital  held  by  banks 
shrank  so  that  their  leverage  –  the  ratio  of  total  liabilities  to  equity  capital  –  rose  to 
unprecedented levels. Immediately prior to the crisis, the leverage ratios of some UK banks 
approached 50. To say that was risky is an understatement: at such levels, a 2% fall in the 
value of a bank’s assets is sufficient to wipe out its capital and render it insolvent.  
Remuneration,  especially  the  structure  of  financial  sector  bonuses,  encouraged  excessive 
risk-taking,  and  distorted  the  aspirations  and  career  choices  of  too  many  talented  young 
people.  Investors,  banks  and  regulators  had  been  swept  up  by  the  apparent  success  of 
modern finance. When investors realised that many of the assets that banks held on their 
balance sheets were opaque and hard to value, there was immediate and justifiable concern 
about the solvency of many of those banks.  
At the end of 2008, these two fundamental factors culminated in the worst financial crisis in 
history. In the six months after Lehman Brothers collapsed world trade fell by nearly 20% – a 
faster decline than in the Great Depression. Around the world, the same telling phrase was 
repeated: economic activity was “falling off a cliff”. In its statement to the London G20 summit 
in April 2009, the international trade union movement argued that “The first priority for G20 
leaders must be to restore confidence by halting the freefall in world growth”. That has been 
achieved. World output grew by 4% over the past year. And in the United Kingdom, growth 
has  been  somewhat  faster  than  anticipated  a  year  ago.  Nevertheless,  total  UK  output 
remains around 10% below where it would have been had the crisis not occurred.  
So how do we prevent this happening again? If we are to prevent another crisis, action is 
required on both of the fundamental causes. First, we need to resolve the problems caused 
by massive capital flows from poor to rich countries. Yet the imbalances are growing again. 
This problem can be tackled only by international cooperation – most obviously through the 
G20 – and I hope that the trade union movement will continue to engage with that process.  
Second, our financial system needs radical reform. Slowly but surely, we must move towards 
a banking system that does not put both the economy and your members’ livelihoods at risk. 
In  the  long  run,  banks  will  have  to  hold  much  more  capital  and  be  much  less  highly 
leveraged. Part of the answer is improving the way we regulate banks, and devising policy 
tools to control the risks taken by the financial system as a whole. The aim should not be to 
prevent all bank failures. Just as with every other company in the economy, banks that get it 
wrong  must  be  allowed  to  fail,  without  risk  to  ordinary  depositors  or  taxpayers.  In  2008, 
banks were bailed out not to protect them but to protect the rest of the economy from the 
banks. That may not seem fair – and it isn’t – when other companies, such as Jaguar, had to 
stand on their own feet or go to the wall. So banks too must face market discipline.  
But  we  need  to  do  more  than  reform  our  banking  system.  If  the  world  economy  needs 
rebalancing, so does our own. The substantial trade deficit over a number of years means 
that national spending exceeded production. We need a higher national saving rate, a shift in 
spending and production away from consumption and towards exports. And a key part of that 
is a reduction in our budget deficit. 
There  is  a  perfectly  reasonable  debate  about  the  precise  speed  at  which  to  reduce  the 
deficit.  Indeed,  I  supported  the  extra  fiscal  stimulus  to  the  economy  provided  in  the 
immediate wake of the crisis. And there is a further question about how the deficit should be 
reduced – the balance between raising taxes and cutting spending. That is not for me to say; 
that is for you and the politicians to debate. But it is indisputable that, because of the crisis, 
national income is 10% lower than was expected with a damaging impact on tax revenues. 
As a result, this country has the largest peacetime budget deficit in its history – over 11% of 
GDP in the fiscal year to 2010. Although a large budget deficit is inevitable for a period after 
a crisis, it is also clearly unsustainable – our national debt, even relative to GDP, is rising 
sharply and will continue to do so for several years. It is vital for any government to set out 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 and  commit  to  a  clear  and  credible  plan  for  reducing  the  deficit.  I  would  be  shirking  my 
responsibilities if I did not explain to you the risks of failing to do so.  
Vague promises would not have been enough. Market reaction to rising sovereign debt can 
turn  quickly  from  benign  to  malign,  as  we  saw  in  the  euro  area  earlier  this  year.  It  is  not 
sensible to risk a damaging rise in long-term interest rates that would make investment and 
the cost of mortgages more expensive. The current plan is to reduce the deficit steadily over 
five years – a more gradual fiscal tightening than in some other countries. As a result of a 
failure to put such a plan in place sooner, some euro-area countries have found – to their 
cost – a much more rapid adjustment being forced upon them.  
Of course, no one can forecast the gusts – or indeed storms – the economy may face looking 
ahead. But if the recovery is slower than expected then the automatic fiscal stabilisers – the 
lower tax receipts and higher spending that result from weaker growth – will act to stimulate 
demand.  And  monetary  policy  can  react  too,  especially  when  there  is  a  credible  plan  to 
reduce the deficit.  
In the wake of the worst financial crisis ever, the amount of money in our economy – broad 
money  –  is  now  barely  growing  at  all.  It  was  the  failure  in  the  1930s  to  halt  a  marked 
contraction in the money supply that led to the Great Depression. So the Bank of England 
has taken extraordinary measures – described as “quantitative easing” – to boost the supply 
of money in order to support a recovery in the economy and keep inflation on track to meet 
our  target.  And  because  monetary  policy  is  a  flexible  instrument  that  can  be  changed  in 
either direction each month, it is the best tool for managing the economy in the short run.  
Nevertheless,  the  road  ahead  is  unlikely  to  be  straight.  There  is  considerable  uncertainty 
about the prospects for both the United States and the euro area – our most important export 
markets. Business and consumer confidence at home has weakened recently, and it will be 
some time before our banking sector is able to finance a recovery on the usual terms. The 
transition  to  a  better  balanced  economy  will  be  difficult.  But  we  are  already  seeing 
encouraging signs of expansion in manufacturing and UK exports.  
This morning’s figures show a small rise in the claimant count and a small fall in the Labour 
Force Survey measures of unemployment. But the big picture is that unemployment is higher 
than  before  the  crisis  but  lower  than  many  had  feared  a  year  ago.  In  July,  on  one  of  my 
regular visits to different parts of the country, I met with the Scottish TUC in Glasgow to learn 
more about the labour market there. Our contacts with experienced union officials in touch 
with a range of companies and sectors are the best source of intelligence on labour markets. 
With  your  help,  we  are  determined  to  understand  what  is  happening  in  every  region  and 
country of our economy so that we can set the right monetary policy. I want to assure you 
that the Bank of England is there to serve the whole economy, right across the length and 
breadth of this country. 
The costs of this crisis will be with us for a generation. And we owe it to the next generation 
to seize this opportunity to put in place the reforms that will make another crisis much less 
likely  and  much  less  damaging.  We  at  the  Bank  of  England  and  you  in  the  trade  union 
movement should work together. That is why I am pleased to be with you today. It will require 
patience  and  determination  on  all  our  parts,  including  your  members.  But  the  prize  of 
restoring and maintaining economic stability – and a return to sustained rises in employment 
and living standards – will be worth the effort. 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 3
