Tim Lane: Risks to Canada’s financial stability in an uncertain world 
Remarks by Mr Tim Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Winnipeg CFA 
Society, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 22 June 2010. 
 Good afternoon. It’s a pleasure to be here. 
The recent past has underscored the fact that, in finance and the economy, most things are 
interconnected  on  a  global  scale.  Throughout  its  history,  Canada  has  been  powerfully 
affected by events elsewhere. Manitobans in particular are well aware of this reality. Waves 
of immigration, rapid changes in commodity prices, the Great Depression, two World Wars, 
and  technological  advances  –  all  have  had  an  enormous  impact  here.  More  recently,  the 
global financial crisis has been a stark reminder that everyone – even citizens in countries 
with sound “fundamentals” – is affected by major shocks, regardless of where those shocks 
originate. 
Global realities and their impact on the domestic financial system inform much of the Bank of 
Canada’s  most  recent  issue  of  its  Financial  System  Review  (FSR),  which  was  published 
yesterday.  In  the  FSR,  the  Bank  identifies  and  evaluates  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the 
financial  system.  Our  goal  in  doing  this  is  to  contribute  to  the  long-term  resiliency  of  the 
Canadian financial system by promoting informed discussion of various relevant issues and 
developments.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I’d  like  to  discuss  two  issues  that  are  discussed  in  the  FSR,  which, 
directly  or  indirectly,  pose  risks  to  financial  stability.  These  issues  are  sovereign  debt  and 
global  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Both  are  “global”  issues,  but  they  will  have  to  be 
managed at the national, as well as the international, level. As such, they are at the core of 
ongoing G20 discussions, including those taking place this week in Toronto.  
I’ll start by taking a very brief look at the Canadian economy – where we are now, and where 
we appear to be headed. Then, I’ll elaborate on the two issues I’ve identified. I’ll welcome 
comments and questions at the end. 
The Canadian economy 
The global economic recovery is under way, but it is an uneven one. In the emerging-market 
economies, growth has been vigorous – indeed it has been stronger than we expected a few 
months  ago.  At  the  same  time,  in  most  advanced  economies,  the  recovery  has  been 
subdued and heavily dependent on the exceptional stimulus provided by monetary and fiscal 
policies.  In  recent  months,  concerns  over  European  sovereign  debt  have  dampened 
prospects  for  the  recovery  in  Europe.  So  far,  these  concerns  have  had  limited  effects  on 
Canada  –  mainly,  a  modest  fall  in  commodity  prices  and  some  tightening  of  financial 
conditions – but they are an important risk to the recovery.  
In  Canada,  the  economic  recovery  is  proceeding  somewhat  more  rapidly  than  expected. 
Growth has been very strong in the past two quarters, although we expect it to moderate, 
starting this quarter. Several factors have been supporting the recovery: fiscal and monetary 
stimulus,  improved  financial  conditions,  the  rebound  in  global  economic  growth,  more 
favourable terms of trade, and increased business and household confidence. At the same 
time,  the  persistent  strength  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  our  poor  relative  productivity 
performance, and the low absolute level of demand in the United States are acting as a drag 
on  the  recovery.  The  Bank  projects  GDP  growth  of  3.7  per  cent  in  2010,  with  a  gradual 
slowing to 3.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per cent in 2012. Inflation is expected to remain close 
to our 2 percent target through this period.  
BIS Review 88/2010 
 1
In  view  of  this  outlook,  the  Bank  of  Canada  indicated  in  late  April  that  the  need  for 
extraordinary monetary policy stimulus – which we had been providing since the beginning of 
the financial crisis and through the recession – was passing. On 1 June, we increased our 
policy interest rate from ¼ of a per cent to ½ of a per cent. Of course, that still leaves interest 
rates  at  a  very  stimulative  level.  But  because  of  the  uncertainties  –  particularly  those 
emanating from Europe – we’ve been careful to emphasize that the extent and timing of any 
additional withdrawal of monetary stimulus would depend on how the outlook for economic 
activity  and  inflation  evolves.  In  making  those  decisions,  we  will  always  stay  focused  on 
achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. 
In our monetary policy decisions, we are mindful of the risks to the economic outlook, both on 
the upside and the downside. In assessing financial stability, the downside risks are our main 
focus. So let me turn now to a discussion of two areas of risk that may bear on the health 
and  stability  of  the  financial  system,  both  here  and  abroad.  First,  I’ll  look  at  the  issue  of 
sovereign debt. 
Sovereign debt 
Sovereign  debt  –  and  unsustainable  fiscal  deficits  –  have  been  front  and  centre  in  recent 
global economic events. Concerns about sovereign debt have flared up in recent months in a 
number of European countries. But in the coming years, many advanced countries will face 
major  challenges  in  achieving  and  maintaining  sustainable  fiscal  positions.  In  Canada,  we 
are fortunate that this task will be more manageable than elsewhere, and continued resolve 
is required. 
The current sovereign debt problems were exacerbated and brought to a head by the global 
financial crisis and recession. Of course, a number of countries entered the crisis with weak 
fiscal positions, but their situations have deteriorated substantially. In part, this reflects the 
direct  support  many  governments  provided  to  keep  troubled  financial  institutions  afloat. 
Although  the  final  bill  for  this  support  is  not  yet  known,  it  could  be  very  large.  Another 
important  element  is  the  massive  fiscal  stimulus  that  governments  in  all  major  countries 
delivered to mitigate the recession. And, of course, reduced tax revenues, associated with 
the recession, have added substantially to the problem. 
Both financial system support and fiscal stimulus were necessary, since the alternative would 
have been much worse. When private sector spending was no longer sufficient to support 
growth, governments had to step in to fill the gap. But the result was a shifting of the debt 
build-up from the private sector to the public sector.  
Growing sovereign debt is a source of risk for two main reasons. First, high levels of public 
debt  tend  to  constrain  economic  growth.1  Second,  when  concerns  about  sovereign  debt 
become acute – even if they are limited to a few countries – they can have pervasive effects 
on the financial system. These effects stem from the fundamental importance of government 
liabilities  in  the  financial  system.  Government  debt  instruments  are  typically  viewed  as 
risk-free  and  highly  liquid  assets  that  are  held  by  financial  institutions  and  individual 
investors,  and  are  used  as  a  benchmark  for  pricing  other  financial  assets.  What  happens, 
then, when these assets are perceived as risky – and when they become increasingly illiquid 
(as we saw in early May, when European sovereign debt markets seized up)?  
                                                 
1   See  Carmen  M.  Rienhart  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff,  “Growth 
in  a  Time  of  Debt,”  available  at 
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/rogoff/files/Growth_in_Time_Debt.pdf: “...whereas the link between 
growth and debt seems relatively weak at ‘normal’ debt levels, median growth rates for countries with public 
debt over 90 percent of GDP are roughly one percent lower than otherwise; average (mean) growth rates are 
several  percent  lower.  Surprisingly,  the  relationship  between  public  debt  and  growth  is  remarkably  similar 
across emerging markets and advanced economies” (page 2). 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2010
First,  consider  the  chain  of  exposures  to  the  credit  risk  –  from  the  holders  of  those 
government securities, to their creditors, and their creditors’ creditors, and so on. And since 
many of these exposures are uncharted, the uncertainty about where the exposures lie may 
cause  a  spike  in  perceived  counterparty  risk,  and  thereby  affect  short-term  financing 
decisions. As a result, funding markets become increasingly illiquid, with widening spreads 
and diminishing access to financing.  
Finally, there is a general retrenchment in risk-taking, which results in a decline in the prices 
of  risky  assets  –  including  currencies  and  commodities.  We  saw  all  of  these  transmission 
channels  in  Europe  in  early  May.  If  the  situation  had  deteriorated  further,  the  impact  on 
Canada’s financial conditions, and on financial conditions more generally, could have been 
substantial. 
The market turmoil in Europe was met by a forceful policy response. In the affected countries 
– as happens with most sovereign debt crises – there are two dimensions to the problem: the 
short-term  challenge  of  rolling  over  debt,  and  the  medium-term  challenge  of  attaining  a 
sustainable  fiscal  position.  Of  course,  these  two  challenges  are  mutually  reinforcing:  the 
markets’ skepticism about the medium-term fiscal position makes it more difficult to roll over 
debt,  while  the  higher  debt-refinancing  costs  make  it  more  difficult  to  balance  the  budget. 
Thus,  both  problems  have  to  be  addressed  in  a  credible  manner.  The  funding  problem  is 
currently  being  addressed  with  the  massive  financing  packages  being  provided  by  the 
European  governments  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  The  medium-term  fiscal 
challenge will require hard decisions, painful adjustment, and perseverance. 
The  fiscal  austerity  that  is  required  in  such  a  situation  involves  a  painful  dilemma.  Such 
adjustment  can  impede  the  economic  recovery.  On  the  other  hand,  as  I’ve  stressed,  in 
countries where sovereign debt concerns have become paramount, failing to adjust will have 
adverse financial effects – which will also harm the recovery. In theory, this dilemma could be 
sidestepped by committing to undertake serious adjustment only later, when the economy is 
stronger; but promises of future action are rarely enough to convince markets. The solution 
typically  involves  taking  the  bull  by  the  horns:  making  a  bold  start  with  serious  structural 
measures that will have a lasting effect on the fiscal position. The pension reforms that have 
been undertaken in some European countries are a good example.  
But there is a problem here for the global economy. For the past several months, there has 
been concern about the risks associated with the “hand-off” from public demand to private 
demand. The concern is that if fiscal stimulus runs out before the private sector has gathered 
sufficient momentum, the global economic recovery could falter. This points to the need for 
the pace of fiscal austerity to be consistent with continued recovery.  
So far, I have been focusing on two channels through which excessive sovereign debt at the 
global level can create risk for the financial system here in Canada – more difficult liquidity 
and  funding  conditions,  and  a  weaker  global  economic  outlook.  These  are  two  of  the  five 
areas of risk examined in the current FSR. I would now like to focus on a third, and related, 
area of risk: global macroeconomic imbalances.  
Global imbalances 
An  important  backdrop  to  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  ensuing  recession  was  the 
configuration  of  large  current  account  imbalances  in  major  economies.  These  global 
imbalances  were  evident  in  the  high  levels  of  savings,  and  the  persistent  current  account 
surpluses  in  China  and  many  Asian  countries,  counterbalanced  by  the  credit-fuelled 
spending  by  households  and  governments,  and  the  large  and  persistent  current  account 
deficits in the United States and some other Western economies.  
These imbalances were not the proximate cause of the crisis, but they contributed to its scope 
and  intensity.  In  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  high  savings  rates  in  surplus  countries, 
together with inflexible exchange rates, helped to keep global interest rates low, encouraging 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 3
consumers and governments in some advanced economies to take on more debt than was 
wise.  The  low  interest  rates  also  led  to  a  “search  for  yield”,  meaning  that  investors  and 
financial institutions acquired riskier assets. At the same time, debt was being repackaged in 
various  ways  –  sometimes  into  hard-to-understand,  and  often  illiquid,  products  –  and 
distributed  throughout  the  financial  system.  Many  of  these  products  then  unravelled  –  with 
devastating  consequences  –  during  the  crisis.  Global  imbalances  engendered  financial 
fragility  because  there  were  also  underlying  weaknesses  in  the  financial  systems  of  many 
countries  –  including  deficiencies  in  supervision  and  regulation  and  inadequate  risk 
management within financial institutions. Addressing these underlying weaknesses is one of 
the principal objectives of the G20 agenda. 
Global imbalances have narrowed significantly during the past couple of years. However, this 
was largely the temporary effect of the recession and the policies adopted to counter it. In the 
United States in particular, savings rates have increased as households have been trying to 
recuperate  from  the  loss  of  housing  and  equity  wealth.  In  China,  substantial  stimulus 
measures  have  boosted  domestic  demand  – 
including  consumer  spending  and 
infrastructure.  And  the  sizable  drop  in  commodity  prices  from  their  2008  peak  contributed 
importantly to the narrowing of global imbalances.  
What is worrying, however, is that global imbalances appear to be growing once again as the 
recovery  advances,  and  their  nature  is  changing.  Whereas  before  the  crisis,  these 
imbalances  primarily  corresponded  to  unsustainable  household  spending  in  the  United 
States,  they  now  increasingly  reflect  unsustainable  government  deficits  in  a  number  of 
countries. 
It is clear that what is needed is a “rotation of demand”: surplus countries need to increase 
their domestic spending, while deficit countries need to decrease theirs. Together with those 
adjustments  in  spending,  exchange  rates  need  to  adjust  –  with  a  depreciation  of  the 
U.S. dollar against Asian currencies – to support the corresponding adjustment of external 
current  accounts.  In  this  regard,  China’s  recent  decision  to  enhance  the  flexibility  of  its 
exchange rate is an important step forward; its full implementation will contribute to strong, 
sustainable, and balanced global economic growth. 
In the absence of these necessary policy changes, there are three main risks to the global 
financial system and to the global economy. One is that the status quo becomes increasingly 
untenable. If the surplus countries do not increase their domestic demand, the United States 
and other deficit countries will have trouble weaning their economies off fiscal stimulus. The 
result could be a buildup of public debt relative to the size of these economies, which could 
not continue indefinitely. These higher debt levels would tend to drive up long-term interest 
rates, by both increasing demand for available funds and by feeding concerns about how the 
ever-increasing debt burden would be resolved. Recently, the Bank of Canada looked at the 
implications of this status quo scenario for global economic growth. Following a short-term 
boost, global economic growth would fall steadily from the 4 per cent average of 2002–07 to 
below 3 per cent by 2013. In addition, macroeconomic imbalances would continue to grow, 
possibly setting the stage for another crisis.  
A  second  risk  is  that  adjustment  may  be  lopsided.  Even  if  the  surplus  countries  do  not 
expand their demand, the deficit countries may be forced by markets to reduce their fiscal 
deficits. In that case, there would be a deficiency of demand worldwide. With monetary policy 
constrained by the zero lower bound, deflation could emerge. As a result, real interest rates 
would increase, fiscal consolidation would be more difficult, and growth would stall.  
A third risk is that exchange rates may adjust, but in a disorderly way. If increasing concerns 
about  the  U.S.  current  account  triggered  a  portfolio  shift  away  from  the  U.S.  dollar,  the 
resulting  exchange  rate  adjustment  could  overshoot  the  level  required  to  bring  current 
accounts to sustainable levels. If that occurred, it would likely send shock waves throughout 
the global financial system, adversely affecting the world economy. Such an adjustment did 
not happen during the recent financial crisis; on the contrary, the retrenchment of risk-taking 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2010
that occurred led to a shift into U.S.-dollar-denominated assets, resulting in an appreciation 
of that currency. But disorderly exchange rate adjustment remains one of the important risks 
associated with global imbalances.  
It is because of these risks that the G20 is placing so much emphasis on policies to achieve 
strong, sustainable, and balanced growth, in tandem with measures to build a more robust 
global  financial  system.  The  rotation  of  demand  required  to  achieve  such  balanced  global 
growth  will  require  policy  changes  in  both  deficit  and  surplus  countries.  It  will  also  involve 
adopting  greater  flexibility  in  exchange  rates,  which  would  facilitate  adjustment  to  both 
current imbalances and future economic shocks.  
How  can  this  adjustment  come  about?  An  important  step  is  the  G20  Mutual  Assessment 
Process,  now  under  way,  through  which  G20  members  strive  to  ensure  that  the  “policies 
pursued  by  individual  G20  countries  are  collectively  consistent  with  more  sustainable  and 
balanced trajectories for the global economy.”2 Each member country will submit its policies 
to the G20 for assessment by other members, with a view to promoting coherence among 
macroeconomic  policies.  Details  of  this  process  are  now  being  worked  out,  but  the  most 
important thing is that the required policy changes be implemented, and in a timely manner. 
Failing that, we leave ourselves on the same unsustainable, and risky, path.  
Allow me to conclude. 
Conclusion 
The financial system makes a vital contribution to our welfare. A sound financial system, one 
that is stable, efficient, and resilient to shocks, is crucial to a well-functioning economy.  
While  the  world’s  financial  system  is  stronger  than  it  was  during  the  crisis,  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  remain.  The  G20  agenda  for  financial  and  macroeconomic  reform  is  sound 
and  far-reaching.  It  provides  a  blueprint  for  building  a  sound  foundation.  But  the  time  for 
action has arrived.  
We cannot afford to be complacent. Although Canada fared relatively well in the crisis, we 
are not immune to risk. We must continue to make our own financial system more resilient. 
Together  with  its  partners,  the  Bank  of  Canada  works  to  do  just  that.  The  Bank  will  also 
continue  its  work  in  international  forums  to  reduce  systemic  risk  in  the  global  financial 
system. The issues I discussed – sovereign debt and global imbalances – are important, and 
they must be resolved effectively, and in a timely fashion. Our future well-being is at stake. 
                                                 
2   See “Leaders’ Statement: The Pittsburgh Summit,” available at:  
http://www.pittsburghsummit.gov/mediacenter/129639.htm. 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 5
