Bandid Nijathaworn: Regional financial supervision – challenges and the 
way forward for Asia 
Remarks  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  a 
conference on “Macroeconomic and financial stability in Asian emerging markets”, organised 
by the Central Bank of Malaysia and the Asian Development Bank Institute, Kuala Lumpur, 
4 August 2010. 
 First, let me thank Bank Negara Malaysia and the Asian Development Bank Institute for the 
invitation. It is a pleasure to be here. Since the first session this morning, we have covered 
many important issues facing Asian Emerging Markets, and I can not agree more that they 
are  the  important  policy  issues  for  Asia  in  the  period  ahead.  In  this  concluding  panel  on 
coordination  of  regulatory  practices,  I  want  to  make  a  few  observations  on  the  challenges 
and the way forward for Asia, focusing on cross-border financial regulation and supervision.  
A good way to begin is to note that the global financial crisis not only offers important lessons 
for monetary policy and financial regulation, it also points to the need to further strengthen 
policy coordination on cross-border financial supervision and resolution amongst regulators 
in the region, as well as between home and host regulators, in order for us to be able to react 
better to the risk and the global-wide impact of a systemic financial distress. This issue, as 
we  know,  is  a  complex  one,  and  implementing  the  new  reform  or  the  new  standards 
proposed, whether for crisis prevention or crisis resolution, will pose an important challenge 
for the region.  
Turning  specifically  to  the  issue  of  cross-border  supervision,  I  think  it  is  clear  from  the 
experience  of  the  current  crisis  that  a  number  of  observations  were  important.  First, 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs),  which  include  internationally  active 
banks,  do  have  significant  implications  for  global  financial  stability,  not  least  for  the  Asia-
Pacific region. When in distress, their operations and the uncertainties that they propagate 
can significantly impact confidence, market liquidity, and the real economy through a credit 
crunch and the drying up of international trade financing as we have seen, while prolonged 
market anxiety about how the problem is going to be resolved can heighten volatility in global 
financial markets.  
Second,  over  such  period,  as  was  seen  in  the  current  crisis,  host  regulators  in  emerging 
markets  in  Asia  had  limited  room  and  information  to  respond  to  the  SIFI’s  distress.  The 
dominant role in managing the crisis was played by the home regulators. What followed was 
a lack of balance in addressing relationship and responsibility of home and host supervisors, 
particularly in information sharing. As a result, host regulator’s response became less timely 
and was bilateral in nature, limited largely to a mixture of ring fencing and coordinated moves 
that raised the potential for negative externality. This included measures to ensure adequate 
levels of capital and liquidity for the distressed foreign entities operating in their jurisdictions, 
or to ensure an orderly unwinding of their local operations in some cases, while maintaining 
confidence in the overall financial system.  
And  third,  while  there  were  significant  benefits  associated  with  a  closer  exchange  of 
information  and  policy  discussion  between  regulators  at  the  international  level  and  the 
regional level, the conduct of policy actions that followed was more on a bilateral basis. A 
case  in  point  was  the  US  dollar  swap  lines  which  were  available  selectively.  So,  while 
financial systems in Asia were able to successfully weather the impact of the global crisis, 
recent experience points to an important gap in the coordination of supervisory policies and 
crisis resolution, both at the international and the regional levels.  
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
Currently, as we know, efforts to strengthen financial regulation and supervision are being 
undertaken at all levels. The most important and also the most widely known is the BCBS’s 
reform,  which  aims  to  increase  the  quality,  quantity  and  international  consistency  and 
transparency of bank capital, to strengthen liquidity standards, to discourage excessive risk 
taking, and to improve the overall risk coverage framework. The proposed new international 
standards, while important, are complex and will pose a critical adoption and implementation 
challenge.  
Another  important  point  at  issue  is  the  proper  treatment  of  macroprudential  policies  in  the 
context of financial regulation and supervision. The focus on a macro-perspective of systemic 
risk  is  definitely  important  and  the  use  of  macroprudential  measures  is  not  new  in  Asia, 
especially  in  the  context  of  limiting credit  and  asset  price  excesses  that  can  have broader 
financial  stability  implications.  Recently,  however,  macroprudential  measures  have  been 
used, in combination with monetary policy, to manage the macro-implications of large capital 
inflows.  To  this  end,  while  the  short-term  benefits  of  macroprudential  policies  for  financial 
stability purposes are clear, they are no substitute for a proper alignment of macroeconomic 
policy. The challenge, therefore, is how to appropriately utilise macroprudential policies in the 
context of managing both economic and financial stability.  
Going forward, therefore, emerging markets Asia will have to address these important policy 
challenges, and the way they go about meeting the challenge will have important implications 
not  only  for  Asia’s  own  growth  and  stability,  but  also  for  the  continued  resilience  of  Asian 
financial systems, as well as the future of international banking.  
Against  this  background,  I  want  to  leave  you  with  a  few  thoughts  on  the  way  forward.  My 
overriding  message  is  simple:  given  the  complexity  of  the  proposed  reforms,  the  recent 
experience  of  implementation  and  coordination  gaps,  and  the  implications  that  the  new 
global  standards  can  have  for  Asia’s  growth  prospects  and  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system, it is important that Asia plays a stronger role in shaping global policies. This is to 
ensure that the adopted international standards are consistent with Asia’s long-term interest 
in  sustaining  economic  growth  and  stability,  while  helping  to  promote  higher  standards  for 
banking supervision and regulation globally. To this end, I think emerging markets Asia, as a 
group, must aim for a coordinated response on at least three fronts.  
First,  is  the  coordinated  approach  with  respect  to  implementing  the  new  global  regulatory 
standards. This means emerging market Asia needs to aim for a degree of flexibility whereby 
national  or  regional  variation  or  discretion  is  warranted  in  pursuing  the  shared  global 
standards.  The  aim  of  flexibility  is  to  adapt  the  new  standards  for  local  settings,  taking 
account  of  the  vast  diversity  that  exists  in  levels  of  development  and  structures  of  the 
region’s financial systems. The dimensions which such adaptive flexibility may apply include 
timing of implementation, as well as technical calibration of policy measures.  
Second, to ensure an effective adoption of the global standards, Asia needs to establish a 
regional approach or standards on the key regulatory and supervisory issues. For example, 
on  the  issue  of  cross-border  supervision,  we  need  more  effective  home-host  relationships 
with more authority for host supervisors with regard to information sharing especially during a 
crisis,  and  national  discretion  on  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  of  local  operations  of 
SIFIs. Also, we should strengthen regional coordination on crisis management, for example, 
in  dealing  with  home  regulator  on  the  resolution  of  SIFIs,  supplemented  by  a  process  of 
supervisory  surveillance  of  SIFIs’  operating 
to  highly 
interconnected markets such as OTC derivatives and interbank transactions.  
Third,  is  the  need  to  strengthen  the  regional  financial  system  through  greater  regional 
financial integration and development of a robust region-wide financial infrastructure. At this 
time,  efforts  to  strengthen  financial  systems  through  reform  and  institutional  building  are 
being carried out visibly at the national level. In Thailand, the Bank of Thailand has embarked 
on  its  second  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  aimed  at  promoting  greater  efficiency  through 
competition,  expanding  access  to  financial  services,  and  strengthening  local  financial 
that  extends 
the  region 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
infrastructure. But at the regional level, large benefits to the region’s longer-term growth and 
welfare  can  be  gained  by  promoting  closer  integration  of  financial  systems  in  the  region 
through  the  development  of  the  region’s  asset  market,  the  banking  sector,  financial 
technology and financial infrastructure. All this will help ensure a continued translation into 
productive  investment  of  the  region’s  high  savings,  intermediated  by  Asia’s  own  financial 
system.  This  is  a  feature  that,  in  my  view,  is  most  critical  for  achieving  and  ensuring 
sustained economic growth and prosperity in Asia.  
I hope this brief remark is useful. Again, I would like to thank Bank Negara Malaysia and the 
ADBI for the invitation.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 3
