Shyamala Gopinath: Securitisation markets in India – a post-crisis 
perspective 
Inaugural address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Bank of India, at the 
India Securitisation Summit 2010 hosted by the National Institute of Securities Markets (NISM), 
Mumbai, 10 August 2010. 
 1.  
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  delivering  the  inaugural  address  at  this  Securitisation 
Summit. I am thankful to the NSIM, particularly Mr. Sethu whose persistent efforts brought 
me  here  today.  The  development  of  a  robust  securitisation  market  in  India,  along  with  a 
broader corporate bond market, though universally acknowledged as a desired objective is 
proving a challenge in reality. In my address today I wish to touch upon some of the issues 
engaging the policy deliberations, particularly in the post-crisis context.  
2.  
It has become customary these days for any speech on financial sector to start from 
the  vantage  point  of  the  crisis  –  it  is  such  an  inflexion  point.  Howsoever  hard  one  tries,  it 
becomes well nigh impossible to disassociate from the immediacy of the crisis, particularly 
when talking about a market so intricately linked to the crisis – securitisation.  
3.  
Securitisation  generically  refers  to  the  pooling  of  cash-flow-producing  assets 
(e.g., mortgages, loans, bonds) and subsequent issuance of securities in the capital markets 
backed  by  these  collateral  pools.  This  broad  definition  encompasses  simple  non-tranched 
structures, including covered bonds and pass through structures as well as tranched water-
fall structures. The latter is a recent phenomenon and it is this version which accentuated the 
crisis.  
Structural  benefits  from  securitization  arise  from  the  flexibility  they  provide  in 
4.  
transforming cash flows and risks of the collateral pool into those of the securities issued on 
the  pool.  The  traditional  vanilla  securitisation  models  have  played  an  important  role  in 
strengthening  the  lending  culture  by  providing  the  lenders  with  an  avenue  to  free  up  the 
balance  sheets  in  a  cost-effective  manner.  Securitization  can  also  improve  balance  sheet 
liquidity  by  converting  long-term  and  illiquid  receivables  into  funds  that  can  be  used  for 
additional value-generating investments. Furthermore, securitisation enables end investors to 
obtain a more efficient market portfolio and thereby diversify their idiosyncratic risks.  
However, the growing complexity over the years dissociated securitisation from its 
5.  
key  positive  attributes.  The  role 
in  securitisation,  particularly 
securitisations  of  US  subprime  mortgages,  played  in  precipitating  the  financial  crisis  has 
been widely acknowledged. The analysis has thrown up various factors but the fundamental 
problem with the way securitisation markets developed in recent years was the inadequate 
understanding and pricing of risks inherent in the process of transformation of risks – credit 
risk transformation, liquidity transformation and maturity transformation. It was expected that 
the process of securitisation was undertaking a socially value-enhancing inter-temporal and 
inter-participant  risk  transfers  through  the  capital  markets.  However,  there  were  serious 
deficiencies in this process, as became evident during the crisis, the most glaring of which 
were that (i) task of risk management got disowned and (ii) risks ultimately remained on the 
bank balance sheets.  
 
The  “originate  and  distribute”  approach  implied  a  clear  incentive  against  prudent 
credit  appraisal  standards  as  the  traditional  risk  management  of  the  loan  portfolio 
through  sound  monitoring  and  analysis  was  found  to  entail  significant,  avoidable 
costs. The focus shifted decisively from “managing the risks” to “disowning the risks” 
as soon as possible.  
that  market 
failures 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
   the  chain 
lengthening  of 
involving  multiple 
The  growing  complexity  and 
intermediaries resulted in increased distance from the originator. The longer chain 
gave rise to several principal/agent problems.  
The maturity transformations, effected through the SIV model, placed predominant 
reliance  on  indirect  bank  support  to  short  term  collateralised  markets  for  funding 
long term exposures. This militated against the very concept of de-risking the bank 
balance sheets.  
There were fundamental modelling issues which resulted in incorrect estimation of 
riskiness and default correlations of the underlying assets. The problem of adverse 
incentives  induced  by  incorrect  modelling  issues  was  further  exacerbated  by  the 
legitimacy accorded to the same by rating agencies and the regulatory framework.  
6.  
The repair work is underway and the efforts are directed at designing a framework 
for  “sustainable  securitisation”.  These  include  BCBS  measures  adopted  in  July  2009  to 
strengthen  the  capital  treatment  of  securitisation  and  establish  clear  rules  for  banks’ 
management  and  Pillar  3  disclosure.  These  actions  address  the  regulatory  arbitrage 
incentives that led to distortions in the market, and at the same time  will drive changes in 
transaction  structures  and  incentives  going  forward.  Accounting  standards  are  being 
strengthened  to  ensure  disclosure  of  off  balance  sheet  entities  and  tighten  derecognition 
requirements.  
7.  
Other  proposals  being  considered  internationally  include  a  requirements  for  the 
originators  to  retain  a  portion  of  each  securitization  originated  and  a  minimum  period  of 
retention of loans prior to securitization to give comfort to ensure adequate due diligence by 
the originator.  
Indian securitisation market  
8.  
The  growth  in  the  Indian  securitisation  market  has  been  largely  fuelled  by  the 
repackaging of retail assets and residential mortgages and more recently by single loan sell-
off of corporate loans of banks and other financial entities. This market which has been in 
existence  since  the  early  1990s,  has  matured  only  post-2000  with  an  established  narrow 
band  of  investor  community  and  regular  issuers.  Asset  backed  securitisation  (ABS)  is  the 
largest  securitisation  class  driven  by  the  growing  retail  loan  portfolio  of  banks,  investors’ 
familiarity with the underlying assets and the short maturity of these loans.  
9.  
Though  securitisation  of  auto  loans  remained  the  mainstay  throughout  the  1990s, 
over  time,  the  market  has  spread  into  several  asset  classes  –  housing  loans,  corporate 
loans,  commercial  mortgage  receivables,  project  receivables,  toll  revenues,  and  more 
recently, even microfinance loans have been securitised. Within the auto loan segment, the 
car  loan  segment  has  been  more  successful  than  the  commercial  vehicle  loan  segment, 
mainly  because  of  factors  such  as perceived  credit  risk,  higher  volumes  and  homogenous 
nature of receivables. Other types of receivables for which securitisation has been attempted 
in the past include property rental receivables, power receivables, telecom receivables, lease 
receivables and medical equipment loan receivables.  
10.  
The mortgage backed securities (MBS) market has been relatively slow in taking off 
despite a growing housing finance market due to the long maturity periods, lack of secondary 
market liquidity and the risk arising from prepayment/re-pricing of the underlying loan. Unlike 
many international jurisdictions, though, MBS in India has not depended on direct or indirect 
government support/guarantee.  
11.  
In the recent times, direct assignment of single loan or retail loan pools (as against 
securitisation involving a special purpose vehicle, or SPV) has been gaining importance in 
India.  The  broad  structure  of  such  transactions  is  similar  to  that  of  regular  ABS  or  RMBS 
transactions, except for the absence of the issuance of any instruments like PTCs. The pool 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
receivables in such cases are assigned directly to the “assignee” or “purchaser”. Such deals 
typically involve a bank or a mutual fund acquiring the portfolio from other banks or NBFCs.  
12.  
The choice of the route, “direct assignment” or “securitisation” depends largely on 
investor  preference  and  such  deals  are  customised  to  meet  the  requirements  of  investing 
entities.  For  instance,  while  MFs  can  invest  only  in  “instruments”,  banks  often  prefer  to 
acquire loan portfolios outright, as PTCs—by virtue of being investments— would need to be 
marked to market, and loans and advances do not have such requirement. Further, for the 
purchasing  banks,  the  attraction  is  that  many  of  such  loans  qualify  for  the  Priority  Sector 
Lending (PSL) requirements.  
13.  
From a regulatory perspective, the real issue is that of regulatory arbitrage. While 
there  is  nothing  wrong  in  direct  sale  of  loans,  banks  should  appreciate  that  if  these 
transactions  are  being  done  to  avoid  restrictions  on  profit  booking  and  higher  capital 
requirements  for  credit  enhancements,  RBI  would  have  concerns.  As  a  prudent  practice, 
banks should apply regulatory instructions according to the substance of transaction rather 
than form.  
Recent trends  
14.  
Though the securitisation market in India is marked by relatively simple structures 
and  stable  ratings,  concerns  over  asset  quality  have  affected  investor  appetite  for 
securitisation in the post-crisis scenario. Much of the securitisation activity is driven on the 
supply side by growth of retail loan portfolio in banks and NBFCs and the prevalent liquidity 
conditions.  On  the  demand  side,  the  key  factors  have  been  the  requirements  of  mutual 
funds, particularly at the short end, ,insurance companies and r banks to meet priority sector 
lending targets. Most of the securities are acquired with the intention to hold to maturity.  
15.  
As per the data compiled by major rating agencies, the year 2009–10 has witnessed 
an overall moderation in the volumes in securitisation market. Total issuance volume saw a 
decline  of  22%  in  2009–10  over  the  previous  fiscal.  The  dip  in  the  overall  securitisation 
volumes  owed  mainly  to  the  60%  reduction  in  loan  sell-off  (LSO)  issuances,  which  were 
mostly short-term in nature. In the case of retail loan-backed transactions, with the overall 
growth  in  retail  loan  portfolios  being  subdued  and  the  liquidity  position  of  most  financiers 
being comfortable, the need to securitise – as a funding source – was limited. Nevertheless, 
securitisation of retail loans, both ABS and RMBS reported a 61 per cent increase in volume 
in 2009–10.  
16.  
While  the  securitisation  market  has  remained  concentrated  with  a  handful  of 
originators  and  limited  investors,  the  asset  classes  have  continued  to  diversify,  the  latest 
additions being gold loans, microfinance loan receivables and loan against property.  
Trends in structured finance volumes (Rs. billion)  
Type  
2001–02 2002–03 2003–04 2004–05 2005–06 2006–07 2007–08 2008–09 2009–10
ABS  
MBS  
CDO/LSO 
/SLSD  
OTHERS  
TOTAL  
12.9  
0.8  
19.1  
4  
36.8  
36.4  
14.8  
24.3  
2.3  
77.8  
80.9  
29.6  
28.3  
222.9  
33.4  
25.8  
178.5  
50.1  
21.0  
234.2  
16.1  
119.0  
313.2  
5.9  
318.2  
135.8  
32.9  
364.4  
209.7  
62.5  
145.8  
0.5  
139.3  
26  
308.1  
–  
249.6  
–  
369.3  
13  
650.3  
11.6  
544.7  
7.9  
425.9  
(CDO: Corporate Debt Obligations, LSO: Loan Sell off, SLSO: Single Loan Sell-down)  
Source: Various Rating agencies like ICRA, CRISIL etc. 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 3
After  market  showed  some  maturity,  the  capital  adequacy  treatment  was  aligned 
RBI guidelines 
17.  
RBI had issued comprehensive guidelines on securitization in February 2006 based 
on  international  best  practices.  The  main  focus  of  the  guidelines  was  to  encourage 
securitization in manner that ensures true sale-real risk transfer and banks do not retain risks 
in the transferred assets beyond a point. To this end, limit was placed on banks’ exposure to 
PTCs  and  concentration  of  entire  credit  enhancement  in  the  originating  bank  was 
discouraged by making second loss facilities more costly through higher capital adequacy. 
Banks are however permitted to invest outside the prescribed limit for non-listed investments 
in ABS and MBS which are rated at or above the minimum investment grade.  
18.  
Another  feature  of  the  2006  guidelines  was  the  requirement  that  the  gain  on 
securitization of assets should not be recognized upfront and should be amortised over the 
life of the securities issued. This requirement was put as a conservative measure to avoid 
securitisation being used to inflate profits even while banks exposures in various capacities 
to the SPV remain.  
19.  
with that under Basel II in April 2007.  
20.  
The recent draft guidelines issued in April 2010 stipulate a minimum holding period 
(MHP)  and  a  minimum  retention  requirement  (MRR)  by  the  originators.  The  guidelines 
envisage MHP of 9 months and 12 months respectively for loans with maturity of less than 
24 months and more than 24 months. Similarly, the MRR for loans with maturity of less than 
24  months  and  more  than  24  months  has  been  proposed  as  5%  and  10%  respectively. 
Banks  will  not  be  permitted  to  hedge  the  credit  risk  in  the  retained  exposures  counting 
towards the minimum retention requirements.  
21.  
The guidelines further stipulate that the total exposure of banks to the SPV and/or 
securitised  assets  in  the  form  of  investments  in  equity/subordinate/senior  tranches  of 
securities 
through  underwriting  commitments;  Credit 
enhancements  including  cash  and other  forms  of  collaterals  including over-collateralisation 
and liquidity support should not exceed 20 percent. Complex securitisation structures viz. re-
securitisation,  synthetic  securitisations  and  securitisation  with  revolving  structures  are 
specifically prohibited.  
22.  
undertaken by NBFCs.  
23.  
a. 
The feedback received mainly briefly relates to the following:  
Level playing field between banks and NBFCs as regards MRR and MHP – On the 
one  hand,  there  is  a  view  that  given  the  intrinsic  nature  of  loans  given  by  the 
NBFCs, particularly in the microfinance sector, stringent requirements may hamper 
lending in these critical areas. On the other, there is the regulatory arbitrage issue 
which  necessitates  ensuring  that  the  incentive  structures  do  not  again  result  in  a 
shadow banking system.  
Applicability of the guidelines to direct assignment transactions.  
Category-specific relaxations for MHP  
Relaxation of MRR requirement for retail loans  
Treatment of “time-tranched” issuances as against “credit tranched” issuances  
Relaxation in respect of the “total exposure” norm  
RBI is examining the responses and the final guidelines for banks as well as NBFCs 
b.  
c.  
d.  
e.  
f.  
24.  
will be issued after taking into account the feedback.  
Similar  guidelines  have  also  been  issued  in  respect  of  securitisation  transactions 
issued  by 
the  SPV 
including 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2010
Conclusion  
25.  
Globally,  over  the  past  two  decades,  banks  have  lost  their  traditional  role  as  the 
dominant  suppliers  of  credit  in  some  countries,  and  securitisation  has  become  a  core 
component of the market-based supply of credit. While corporate bonds served as the main 
dis-intermediated  financing  tool  for  non-financial  corporations,  securitisation  acted  as  the 
main  capital  market  instrument  for  household  finance,  and to  a  lesser degree  SMEs.  Post 
crisis,  however,  many  of  the  pitfalls  of  the  securitisation  market  have  come  to  the  fore. 
Securitisation per se has not been discredited totally though the new normal for securitisation 
markets is expected to be lower than its pre-crisis peak.  
26.  
Covered bonds are considered an important part of this new normal particularly in 
Europe  where  it  is  permitted  subject  to  safeguards.  In  this  case  the  bonds  are  issued 
secured by high quality assets and both the liability and the assets remain on the balance 
sheet of the bank. The concentration of risks in the banking system remains which puts great 
strain  on  the  health  of  the  bank  balance  sheets.  More  importantly,  it  raises  issues  for  the 
resolution regime given that the backing for depositors gets constrained.  
27.  
The  downside  of  securitisation  that  has  come  to  the  fore  is  the  absence  of 
alternative  solutions  available  to  borrowers  to  restructure  their  loans  when  there  is  a 
downturn  with  the  originator  since  the  banker–customer  relationship  is  snapped  when  the 
loans are securitised. Any restructuring requires consent of the final investors and in the long 
chain of intermediaries it becomes difficult to restructure debt.  
28.  
One of the reasons for the complexities of structures is that other derivatives such 
as  currency  and  interest  rate  swaps  are  also  embedded  in  some  structures.  This  can  be 
dealt with if these transactions are undertaken by the SPV and not embedded in the original 
structure.  
29.  
In the Indian context, “sustainable securitisation” can indeed play a positive role in 
financial  intermediation  provided  there  is  genuine  transfer  of  risk  away  from  the  banking 
system. The existing and proposed guidelines are in line with international practices and may 
appear stringent but in the long term, it is imperative that securitisation market develops for 
the right reasons. It is also necessary to promote standardisation to facilitate risk assessment 
and valuation and eventually enable the trading of these securities on the exchanges. There 
are a few challenges which need to be addressed.  
 
Bilateral  assignments  of  a  single  loan  or  a  portfolio  that  are  in  substance 
securitisation should be subject to the guidelines on securitisation.  
Though  securitised  paper  issued  by  securitisation  SPVs  has  been  recognised  as 
“security”  under  SCRA,  there  are  still  some  tax  issues  relating  to  recognition  of 
pass-through structure of the SPV.  
Substitution of long term funding by banks by other market intermediaries through 
securitisation,  particularly  mortgage  related  securitisation,  may  require  active 
participation by real money investors such as long term institutional investors such 
as insurance companies and pension/provident funds and the investment guidelines 
for these entities need to accommodate this aspect.  
However  it  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  such  investors  have  better  access  to 
essential  information  and  less  reliance  on  rating  agencies.  This  will  require 
dissemination of loan pool composition and ongoing performance detail.  
The reliance on rating agencies may be the default option, in the absence of a viable 
alternative.  Some  of  the  methodological  issues,  though,  need  to  be  addressed  by 
the regulators.  
    BIS Review 105/2010 
 5
 There  are  serious  data  issues  and  as  regulators  of  banks  and  NBFCs,  it  may 
become  imperative  for  the  RBI  and  the  SEBI  to  put  in  place  a  robust  reporting 
mechanism for primary issuances as well as secondary market data.  
I am sure the deliberations today will cover some of these issues and come up with 
30.  
viable suggestions. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2010
