Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The restructuring of the financial system 
Opening speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
XVII Meeting on the Financial Sector/Deloitte-ABC, Madrid, 13 April 2010. 
 Good morning. 
Let me first thank ABC and Deloitte for the opportunity to address such a select audience as 
that gathered here today. 
I have tried to explain from the outset of the crisis that, although it may have compounded 
the  main  problems  besetting  our  economy,  these  are  specifically  Spanish  problems. 
Accordingly,  their  solution  unavoidably  involves  adopting  domestic  measures  without 
counting on an improvement in the external environment to resolve them for us. 
Among these problems is the necessary restructuring of the Spanish banking system. This 
sector,  which  grew  in  parallel  with  the  extraordinary  real  estate  expansion  of  the  past 
15 years,  now  shows  overcapacity  and  insufficient  capitalisation  in  the  case  of  certain 
institutions,  meaning  re-sizing  and  appropriate  restructuring  are  needed.  Last  year,  in  this 
same forum, I referred to the need for banks to be aware of the situation facing them and to 
set  about  the  task  at  hand.  Today,  with  few  exceptions,  I  believe  they  are  doing  their 
homework. 
Regarding the restructuring of the financial system, the government and Parliament too have 
done  what  they  had  to,  and  correctly  so  in  my  view.  On  one  hand,  formulas  such  as 
nationalisations, “bad banks” and capital injections without requiring that capacity be reduced 
have been rejected. Such formulas were probably unavoidable in countries that have seen 
the  bulk  of  their  banking  systems  collapse,  but  are  absolutely  inappropriate  for  Spain’s 
circumstances, where most of the sector is essentially healthy. On the other, the capacity of 
the  Banco  de  España  has  been  reinforced  to  act  effectively  when  it  is  necessary  to  take 
control of banks and, in turn, an appropriate framework has been set in place so that those 
banks  that  so  require  may  access  the  funds  needed  to  restructure.  Even  if  still  currently 
viable, they are encouraged in this way to go ahead with restructuring, which allows them to 
be  prepared  to  lend  without  problems  once  the  recovery  arrives  and  the  current  declining 
pattern of the demand for credit turns around. 
These measures – implemented in the Royal Decree Law creating the FROB (Fund for the 
Orderly Restructuring of Banks) – have been adopted with a broad Parliamentary consensus, 
enjoying the support of the two main parties, in a similar fashion to the consensus behind the 
swift  response  of  our  authorities  to  the  closure  of  the  wholesale  markets.  The  latter  event 
saw the approval of Royal Decree Laws for the fund for the acquisition of financial assets 
and for State backing of bond issues by credit institutions, both of which initiatives smoothed 
the way for the wholesale funding of much of the Spanish banking system at a most delicate 
juncture  in  the  crisis.  All  these  measures  for  the  support  and  restructuring  of  the  financial 
system have proven technically correct, they are well adjusted to Spain’s situation, and they 
were rapidly designed and approved with broad consensus. Certainly, such characteristics 
should  be  applied  to  other  areas  so  needy  of  reform,  such  as  the  rebalancing  of  public 
finances and certain labour market institutions. 
The need for restructuring has been understood by most of the banks that required this to 
ensure  their  viability  and  soundness  in  the  future,  and  they  have  reacted  by  working  on 
various integration processes. In previous talks I explained the criteria used by the legislator 
for  these  processes,  and  which  are  those  that  should  prevail:  the  sufficient  reduction  of 
capacity, the soundness of the resulting banks and the minimal use of public funds. These 
should be the goals both of banks themselves and of all the public authorities intervening in 
the process. 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 1
Along  with  restructuring,  my  recent  speeches  on  the  financial  system  have  focused  on  a 
matter  I  consider,  unquestionably,  to  be  the  biggest  risk  hanging  over  Spanish  credit 
institutions, especially the least diversified ones: mass unemployment. Unless a reform of our 
labour institutions that tackles this most serious and most Spanish problem with resolve is 
approved promptly and  with the widest possible consensus, many of our credit institutions 
will  suffer  the  consequences:  more  bad  debts,  less  business,  higher  public  indebtedness 
and,  consequently,  dearer  wholesale  funding,  etc.  If  these  millions  of  workers  remain 
unemployed in Spain for any lengthy period the banking system, having served to underpin 
the economy during the crisis, might turn into an obstacle to achieving economic recovery. 
These  are  the  issues  I  believe  we  should  pay  greatest  attention  to  at  present.  But  I  shall 
focus  today  on  the  changes  taking  place  in  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial 
system globally. While not so immediate, these changes will ultimately exert effects on the 
Spanish banking system and we should all prepare for this new regulatory setting. 
 Nobody with responsibilities for the financial system will be able to forget 14 November 2008. 
It was on that day, on a European initiative, that the Washington summit was held. This date 
will go down in history as the start of a sea change in the style and substance of financial 
regulation.  In  terms  of  style,  because  the  summit  marked  the  beginning  of  a  radical 
turnaround in the governance of the global financial system with the creation of the enlarged 
G20  –  to  which  Spain  was  invited  –  that  would  culminate  in  the  transformation  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  into  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  a  “club”  of  which  Spain 
became a fully fledged member for the first time. I shall not elaborate here on this change in 
style, but let me stress its historical nature, since it entailed the recognition of a far different 
world from that when the Bretton Woods institutions were designed at the end of the Second 
World War. 
But  the  change  in  substance  has  not  been  any  less.  The  philosophy  behind  international 
regulation until then had been based on the idea that private financial institutions knew better 
than  anybody  what  they  had  to  do,  and  we  could  therefore  count  on  self-regulation. 
Meantime, in many countries, hands-off supervision was the prevailing philosophy: the less 
the public sector laid its hands on financial activity, the better. The crisis and the initiative of 
the G20 leaders have called this philosophy into question. 
An  example  of  this  is  the  radical  change  in  direction  of  the  work  of  the  Basel  Committee. 
Although the so-called Basel II reform had some very positive aspects, such as the greater 
sensitivity to risk of regulatory requirements and the consequent stimulus for banks to set in 
place better risk management systems, the Committee’s work was naturally infused by the 
self-regulation approach then prevailing. However, since late 2008, financial regulation has 
taken a radically different road. We need only review the documents published by the Basel 
Committee last December, at the request of the G20 and the FSB, to realise how sharp the 
change  in  direction  has  been,  to  the  extent,  indeed,  that  some  have  called  this  new 
regulation “Basel III”: more capital of higher quality, more stringent requirements on trading 
activity, an obsession with avoiding procyclicality, etc. And the same can be said of the work 
of  the  various  agencies  and  institutions  (IMF,  EU,  IOSCO,  etc.)  that  are  contributing  to 
shaping the new regulation of financial systems. The objective is clear: this can not happen 
again. 
Taking  advantage  of  the  eminent  audience  here  today,  I  shall  mention  some  of  the 
developments  I  consider  most  important,  since this  international  regulatory  earthquake  will 
entail a substantial change in how financial system players from all countries can act. And 
although the effects will not be felt immediately, our banks should take them very much into 
account so that they may adapt in an orderly fashion to the new setting. 
Among the vast number of issues under discussion today in various international fora, I am 
only going to mention those I consider to be of most importance to Spanish banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2010
One of the guiding principles of the reform of the financial system promoted by the G20 is the 
reinforcement of the prudential regulation of capital and liquidity. To this end, the Basel 
Committee  has  tabled  an  important  set  of  measures  aimed  at  increasing  the  financial 
system’s resilience in the medium and long term. These include most notably: 
– 
Firstly, the proposal to increase the amount and quality of capital required of banks 
in  order  to  enhance  their  loss-absorption  capacity.  The  definition  of  capital  will, 
moreover, be more transparent and internationally comparable. 
Secondly,  consideration  is  being  given  to  introducing  minimum  global  liquidity 
standards  and  establishing  common  criteria  to  help  supervisors  identify  and 
evaluate liquidity risk. 
Thirdly, work is under way to define various measures to mitigate the procyclicality 
of the financial system, which was not taken sufficiently into account in the pre-crisis 
period.  Along  these  lines,  the  creation  of  countercyclical  capital  buffers  has  been 
proposed so as to contribute to reducing and not amplifying credit cycles. The aim 
pursued would be for banks to reinforce their capital during upturns and to be able to 
use it subsequently in periods of stress. 
  In  other  areas,  measures  have  been  proposed  to  lessen  the  tendency  of  financial  market 
participants to accentuate business cycles by their behaviour. Specifically, a series of criteria 
have been set for bankers’ pay in order to lessen their incentives to adopt risky, short-termist 
strategies. These have already been applied in the main developed economies. 
In  the  field  of  accounting  regulations,  too,  significant  efforts  are  being  made  to  strengthen 
standards.  Here  work  is  being  done  to  achieve  convergence  –  hitherto  non-existent  – 
between the accounting standards of the main economic areas. Also of great interest is the 
analysis of proposals for the proper valuation and classification of financial instruments, and 
for the development of a countercyclical provisioning system, similar to that in place in Spain. 
There is universal agreement that these improvements in regulation can hardly be successful 
unless they are implemented in a widespread and consistent manner. 
Hence  the  FSB  is  acting  on  several  fronts  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  international 
standards,  demanding  greater  commitment  (and  transparency)  of  the  main  economies  in 
terms of compliance. In this respect, peer review exercises have begun and a major effort is 
being made to identify those areas in which the regulatory framework does not sufficiently 
recognise risks, placing particular emphasis on those institutions, instruments and markets 
which are not currently regulated or supervised. 
In addition to all these efforts in the field of regulation, work is ongoing to set in place more 
effective and uniform microprudential supervision of financial institutions. 
The financial crisis has revealed major supervisory failings in certain jurisdictions. In these 
cases  supervision  did  not  adapt  sufficiently  to  the  increasingly  global  nature  of  financial 
activities  and  it  was  not  as  intensive  as  would  have  been  necessary.  As  a  result,  certain 
banks ultimately built up excessive risks, prompting public interventions with a high cost for 
taxpayers.  This  was  due  in  part  to  excessively  lax  supervisory  standards,  which  led  to 
insufficient  monitoring  of  institutions  under  inspection  and  to  the  underutilisation  of  the 
information available to supervisors, and which allowed the excessive growth of the “shadow 
banking system”. 
Work  is  now  in  progress  to  define  and  standardise  ways  in  which  material  information  on 
transnational institutions can be exchanged through so-called colleges of supervisors, which 
group  together  the  supervisors  of  the  countries  where  these  institutions  have  a  significant 
volume  of  activity.  Substantial  headway  has  been  made  in  a  short  time  and  improved 
supervisory cooperation at international level and at European level (with the creation of new 
European supervisory authorities) will unquestionably enable more effective action. 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 3
I  would  like  to  emphasise  here  another  dimension  which  the  Banco  de  España  considers 
crucial, namely the improvement of national supervision. The first step in achieving effective 
international  supervision  is  to  ensure  high  quality  national  supervision,  not  only  of  large 
institutions,  but  of  the  whole  system,  since  systemic  risk  may  flare  up  due  to  a  mere 
contagion  effect.  The  second  step  is  to  foster  the  convergence  of  a  majority  of  countries 
towards  uniform  and  higher-quality  supervisory  standards.  In  this  respect,  work  is 
commencing  on  a  review  of  the  various  national  supervisory  models  with  a  view  to 
developing principles based on sound supervisory practices. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  a  key  issue  in  discussions  on  changes  in 
regulation  and  supervision  is  the  search  for  ways  to  mitigate  the  problem  of  moral 
hazard associated with so-called systemic institutions.  
Some of the more perverse consequences of the crisis have manifested themselves in these 
institutions, i.e. those which, owing to their size, their inter-connectedness or the difficulty of 
replacement of their business areas, are too “big” to allow them to fail. The governments of 
most developed economies have had to intervene to avoid the consequences of their failure 
for the system as a whole, at a considerable cost to the public coffers of these countries. 
The treatment of these systemic institutions is a cornerstone of the reforms proposed by the 
G20.  The  wide  variety  of  work  under  way  includes  most  notably  improving  countries’ 
restructuring and resolution capabilities, i.e. the ability to disaggregate the balance sheet of 
these  institutions,  and  reducing  the  likelihood  and  systemic  impact  of  their  possible 
bankruptcy or severe financial stress. 
In this respect, the members of the FSB undertook to ensure that cross-border institutions 
have a restructuring plan whereby these can obtain emergency liquidity and deleverage their 
financial position to improve solvency, and that they have a detailed resolution plan if they 
are unable to continue operating. 
That  said,  the  solution  to  the  problem  of  systemic  institutions  must  be  a  global  one  and 
encompass many other measures. Key among these are improved national and international 
supervision,  higher  capital  requirements  depending  on  the  particular  features  of  each 
institution,  improved  prudential  and  accounting  regulation,  and  the  establishment  of  an 
incentives system to persuade institutions to adopt structures which are more solid and less 
exposed to the risks inherent in organic business expansion. 
 Many  of  the  proposals  described  here  are  still  under  discussion  or  at  the  public 
review/comment  stage  and  are  thus  subject  to  change.  Furthermore,  there  is  general 
agreement on allowing a reasonable lapse of time before they come into force. Nevertheless, 
I believe that the direction of change is now sufficiently clear, and Spanish institutions should 
hasten  to  digest  it  so  they  have  time  to  plan  how  they  will  adapt  to  the  new  regulatory 
environment in the least traumatic way. 
To  this  end,  institutions  must  not  only  prepare  themselves  to  comply  with  higher  capital 
requirements, but must also become familiar with many other significant changes, such as, 
for example, the applicable rates of deduction (minority interests, investments in financial and 
non-financial firms, tax assets, etc) and the required liquidity ratios, which are new to Spain, 
where regulation had previously focused only on the attendant qualitative aspects. 
Spanish deposit institutions have in fact begun to increase their levels of capital, particularly 
higher-quality  capital.  In  doing  so,  they  are  acting  in  anticipation  of  future  regulatory 
requirements  and,  moreover,  strengthening  their  solvency  at  a  time  of  heightened 
uncertainty.  This  improvement  evidences  their willingness and  ability  to  respond  to  market 
demands and to future regulatory requirements, although additional adaptive efforts to raise 
higher-quality capital may be required of some banks. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2010
With regard to liquidity, Spanish banks have always been attentive to this risk, as evidenced 
by their bond issues and long-term securitisations, despite the fact that the cost of short-term 
funding was more attractive. This conservative funding term structure on the liabilities side is 
one of the factors explaining the strength of Spanish banks during the crisis. However, the 
financial  markets  are  still  far  from  being  back  to  normal,  so  it  is  essential  that  institutions 
continue paying particular attention to liquidity and funding. In the medium term, and despite 
that strong starting point, the new regulations will require additional efforts, particularly with 
respect to the short-term liquidity buffers which banks must have in place. 
Hence,  in  addition  to  the  uncertainty  resulting  from  the  depth  and  duration  of  the  financial 
crisis, banks have to deal with the additional pressure put on them by the new regulations, 
still  to  be  defined  in  many  cases.  Banks  have  to  make  a  special  effort  to  explain  to  the 
market how they will meet the challenges posed by the crisis and to convey their plans for 
successfully  coping  with  the  regulatory  changes.  This  transparency  drive  will  have  to  be 
stepped  up  in  the  immediate  future.  Specifically,  in  situations  of  high  uncertainty  like  the 
present, the lack of information on asset quality and loss provisioning may lead investors to 
believe  that  the  situation  is  much  worse  than  it  actually  is.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  deposit 
institutions to inform the market of how their business is being affected by the crisis and of 
their  short-  and  medium-term  strategy  for  dealing  with  the  situation,  stating  explicitly  their 
level of risk by business segment and the provisions set aside for that risk. 
But  it  is  not  only  private  institutions  which  have  to  do  their  homework;  regulators  and 
legislators have an obligation to amend national law so as to allow or help private institutions 
to adapt to the new international regulatory environment. 
An  example  of  this  in  the  case  of  Spain  is  the  need  to  change  our  legislation  on  the  own 
funds of savings banks so that these singular institutions can comply with the exacting capital 
quality requirements which will be imposed by the new global regulation. Welcome news in 
this respect is the Government’s announcement that it will soon propose new legislation to 
address this problem, the resolution of which is crucial for a significant part of our financial 
system. 
 Let me finish with a medium-term consideration of particular concern to me, which is only on 
the margins of the agenda for global regulatory change. I refer to the availability of financing 
for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  in  the  new  banking  universe  which  will 
emerge following all these regulatory changes. 
I am not thinking of the credit problems of SMEs in the short term due to higher risk aversion 
or  to  their  weakness  during  the  crisis.  These  problems  have  been  covered  extensively  in 
previous addresses and the measures being taken to alleviate them include exceptional and, 
naturally, temporary programmes such as those of the Official Credit Institute. 
Here I am not referring to the short term. My concern is that, although it is positive that all the 
regulatory changes under way seek to ensure that banks will never again cause the serious 
problems which arose in many countries and ultimately spread to all of them, it should also 
be realised that those new post-crisis banks will, by definition, be less willing to lend money 
for business projects with a certain level of risk. Clearly, you can’t remove the punchbowl and 
expect the party to swing. 
The purpose of the calibration exercises undertaken is to avoid excessive requirements that 
stifle  the  economy.  But  nothing  will  prevent  the  post-crisis  banks  arising  from  the  new 
regulatory regime from being much more prudent and focused on traditional intermediation 
than  in  the  recent  past.  It  will  be  possible  to  temper  those  requirements  involving  an 
excessive cost/benefit burden, but it is doubtful that a change enjoying such wide support will 
be stopped. The fact is that public opinion in the major countries wants the new international 
regulatory  environment  to  oblige  financial  institutions  to  behave  as  conservatively  as 
necessary to avoid a repeat of the current crisis.  
BIS Review 51/2010 
 5
If  we  take  this  new  scenario  as  given,  we  then  have  to  look  at  how,  under  those  new 
conditions,  entrepreneurs  can  get  sufficient  financing  to  see  their  projects  through.  This 
challenge is even more crucial in countries like Spain, where bank financing has much more 
weight than the alternative sources provided by the stock market, today only accessible to a 
small number of large companies. 
Our  efforts  are  now  concentrated  on  how  to  exit  the  crisis  and  on  avoiding  a  repeat 
experience, but we should also be thinking of how to stimulate economic growth under the 
new  regulatory  framework.  The  global  agenda  of  structural  reform  should  include  this 
challenge of how to encourage high-risk business financing by banks which will inevitably be 
much  more  risk-averse  than  in  the  past  and  will  find  it  difficult  to  hold  large  sums  of  risky 
investments on their balance sheets. Hence the new financial system which emerges from 
the crisis should also offer alternative non-bank financing to new entrepreneurs and medium-
sized firms. Such alternatives sources of financing scarcely exist today, so all of us (credit 
institutions,  governments,  regulators  and  non-financial  corporations)  will  have  to  contribute 
our intellectual and other efforts to address a problem which is not significant today but will 
undoubtedly be so in the future. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2010
