Karolina Ekholm: The role of forecasts in monetary policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Karolina  Ekholm,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  held  at 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 11 May 2010. 
 The theme I have chosen for today’s speech is the role of forecasts in the monetary policy 
decision-making  process.  Given  the  events  in  recent  days,  I  realise  that  many  people  are 
probably more curious about how we at the Riksbank view the problems with public finances 
in southern Europe than about our methods for making and using forecasts. So I shall begin 
with a few words about this.  
The EU countries have now decided to implement several measures aimed at preventing the 
public finance problems in Greece from creating new problems in the financial markets and 
possibly leading to a new economic downturn. The Riksbank considers it a very positive sign 
that  a  large  rescue  package  with  measures  has  now  been  presented  to  promote  financial 
stability in Europe. We all gain from safeguarding stability. However, it is still too early to say 
exactly what effects the new package will have.  
Here in Sweden the financial markets are functioning, but this does not rule out the possibility 
that they will suffer contagion effects from the international financial markets. Swedish banks 
have  only  small  direct  exposures  towards  the  so-called  PIIGS  countries  (Portugal,  Italy, 
Ireland, Greece and Spain) and are well-capitalised in an international comparison. However, 
the Riksbank follows developments closely and has regular contacts with Swedish banks and 
with  other  central  banks.  We  are  as  always  prepared  to  take  whatever  measures  are 
necessary to safeguard financial stability. If we need to take action we will, as usual, make it 
clear what we intend to do, how we will do it and when we will do it.  
The recent developments illustrate something that has direct relevance to the theme of my 
speech  today  –  namely  the  difficulty  in  capturing  all  of  the  relevant  factors  when  making 
forecasts. Sweden has little trade with Greece and our banks have little exposure towards 
the country. Nevertheless, Greece’s problems are important factors when we try to predict 
future developments in the Swedish economy. And this leads me back to what I had actually 
intended to talk about today – the role of forecasts in monetary policy.  
Probably  like  many  other  economists  outside  the  bank  world,  I  was  very  sceptical  of 
forecasts when I came to the Riksbank last year. To me, making forecasts appeared to be an 
activity that required very elaborate machinery, with complicated models and vast amounts of 
data,  the  results of  which  were  nevertheless  usually  incorrect.  Since  then  I  have gained  a 
new  perspective,  both  with  regard  to  the  process  of  making  forecasts  and  their  role  in 
monetary policy decision-making. Today I intend to share with you some of my new insights 
into this field.  
One  thing  that  I  of  course  knew  from  the  beginning  is  that  forecasts  –  regardless  of  the 
uncertainty  of  their  accuracy  –  must  be  made  when  one  is  making  a  decision  and  future 
developments  affect  which  decision  alternative  appears  most  appropriate.  This  applies  in 
particular  to  monetary  policy  decisions.  As  monetary  policy  affects  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation  with  some  time  lag,  we  need  to  gain  an  idea  of  how  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation will look in the future to be able to decide on what is the most appropriate repo rate 
now.  But  unlike  when  deciding  on,  for  instance,  investment  in  a  particular  share,  it  is  not 
possible to disregard the fact that the interest rate decision itself affects future developments. 
We  therefore  also  make  a  forecast  of  our  own  future  decisions,  which  is  affected  by  the 
current decision. This makes particular demands of our forecasting.  
One  question  that  one  can  pose  is  to  what  extent  the  Executive  Board  is  involved  in  the 
forecasts of future repo rate decisions. This is a forecast of what stance we, this group of six 
individuals, will take at future monetary policy meetings. Today I shall therefore describe the 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 1
process leading up to the repo rate path, that is, the Riksbank’s forecast of the future repo 
rate.  
Forecasts  are  of  course  always  uncertain  to  a  greater  or  lesser  degree.  The  most  recent 
financial crisis is a very good example of this. Few forecasters predicted the developments in 
the world economy that have affected the Swedish economy over the last year or so. In this 
speech  I  shall  begin  by  explaining  why  the  Riksbank  makes  forecasts  and  then  go  on  to 
describe the forecasting process and how it is connected to the monetary policy decisions. 
One  important  question  in  this  context  is  what  stance  decision-makers  should  take  with 
regard  to  risks  that  are  not  captured  by  quantified  forecasts.  The  best  thing  is  to  try  to 
develop  tools  that  can  quantify  the  probability  of  a  particular  scenario,  and  to  improve  the 
analysis  of  what  impact  this  scenario  would  have  on  the  economy.  But  this  is  not  always 
possible and I shall discuss my views on this problem.  
Forecasts are a central part of inflation-targeting monetary policy  
The primary argument for a central bank to make forecasts is that monetary policy has an 
impact  with  a  time  lag.  The  Riksbank  conducts  a  policy  of  flexible  inflation  targeting.  This 
means that, in addition to stabilising inflation around the target of 2 per cent, the Riksbank 
also  aims  to  stabilise  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level.  The  Riksbank  varies  its 
steering  interest  rate,  the  repo  rate,  to  attain  the  inflation  target.  However,  the  effects  of 
monetary policy on the economy come with a fairly long time lag. This means that prior to 
each monetary policy decision it is necessary to analyse how different repo rate decisions 
can be expected to affect inflation and resource utilisation over the coming years. Choosing 
the alternative connected to the forecast that provides the best target fulfilment is sometimes 
called forecast targeting.1  
A  further  argument  for  making  forecasts  is  that  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  can  be 
improved  through  transparency  and  credibility.  By  publishing  our  forecasts  and  explaining 
how our monetary policy decisions relate to them we make it easier for the outside world to 
have correct expectations of how the Riksbank will react to new information. It is important 
that  we  are  clear  about  how  the  Riksbank  views  developments  and  what  effects  the 
monetary policy decisions are expected to have.  
Forecasts and uncertainty  
As I said, forecasts are always uncertain. Neither the Riksbank nor other forecasters have 
access  to  all  of  the  information  that  has  significance  for  the  development  of  the  economy 
during  the  forecast  period.  Shocks  to  the  economy  can  occur  suddenly  and  surprise  the 
forecasters. It is thus impossible to avoid forecasting errors.  
One example of a time of great uncertainty over future economic developments is the recent 
financial crisis. One indicator of this uncertainty is reflected in the broad spread between the 
different analysts’ forecasts. According to the compilation of around 30 different forecasters’ 
assessments in “Consensus Forecasts” (CF), which has, for instance, compiled forecasts for 
GDP growth each month since 1989, the uncertainty over developments in the US economy 
was the largest it has been in at least 20 years.2 It was on the whole greater than during the 
recessions at the beginning of the 1990s and 2000s and, above all, it lasted longer this time. 
Statistics regarding this are only available from 1995 for Sweden, but they nevertheless show 
                                                 
1  See the article “Policy expectations and policy evaluations: the role of transparency and communication” by 
Lars E.O. Svensson in Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review no.1 2010 (p. 62). 
2  This  applies  regardless  of  whether  one  calculates  the  uncertainty  in  terms  of  standard  deviations  in  the 
forecasts, or the difference between the highest and lowest assessment. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2010
that  the  uncertainty  rose  rapidly  and  was  high  in  Sweden  during  the  most  recent  financial 
crisis.  In  recent  months  the  uncertainty  that  can  be  measured  in  the  CF  has  declined 
somewhat with regard to the United States and even more with regard to Sweden, where it 
has returned to the historical average level.  
If one does not have anything else to go on, a forecast can be based on what is known as an 
autoregressive  model.  What  this  means  is  a  model  where  the  forecasts  for  a  variable  are 
solely dependent on its earlier outcomes and a random error term and where one assumes 
that the variable tends to return to a normal level according to historical patterns. However, 
forecast  evaluations  carried  out  by  the  Riksbank  show  that  on  average  there  is  an  added 
value  in  making  active  and  more  sophisticated  forecasts  for  at  least  up  to  1–1  ½  years 
ahead. The accuracy of the forecasts depends on what variable one looks at, but for inflation, 
for instance, the more sophisticated forecasts show a better forecasting performance up to 
two years ahead.  
The Riksbank makes forecasts for GDP, inflation and the repo rate among other things, but 
sometimes there are also other aspects that need to be weighed into the balance in one way 
or another when monetary policy decisions are made. A current example is developments in 
the Swedish housing market, which have been discussed in connection with monetary policy 
recently. House prices have continued to rise during the economic downturn and growth in 
household credits has remained at a high level. Some say that this creates risks for the real 
economy  further  ahead,  with  households  burdened  by  high  interest  costs  and  possible 
downward adjustments in house prices when mortgage rates return to more normal levels. 
Should  the  risk  of  such  a  development  further  ahead  affect  the  monetary  policy  decision 
made now? If so, how and to what extent? It is important to try to quantify those risks – both 
upside  and  downside  risks  –  in  one  way  or  another,  and  as  far  as  possible,  that  are 
considered important with regard to future developments.3 It will then be easier during the 
actual decision to take a systematic stance to the uncertainty that always prevails regarding 
future  developments.  I  shall  return  later  to  how  this  uncertainty  can  be  dealt  with  in  the 
forecasting and decision-making processes.  
How are forecasts made at the Riksbank?  
Models and assessments complement one another  
Let me briefly describe the forecasting process at the Riksbank.4 The Riksbank uses both 
models  and  expert  assessments  in  its  forecasting  work.  The  picture  of  the  forecasting 
process that I had before I came to the Riksbank was one where data are fed into complex 
models which then spit out forecasts. This is of course incorrect. The Riksbank works hard to 
spread the impressions we gain at the many international meetings we regularly attend. We 
also carry out our own company interviews to try to capture development tendencies before 
they become visible in the statistics. Models are necessary to put together the whole picture 
of the analysis and are often used to simulate what various risk scenarios might entail for 
inflation and monetary policy. But they do have their limitations and the analysis must also 
take into account information beyond what the models can handle.  
One  model  that  is  known  outside  of  the  Riksbank  is  Ramses,  which  is  a  variant  of  the 
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models that have become popular in the central bank 
world.5  Ramses  is  an  internally  consistent  model  of  how  the  economy  as  a  whole  fits 
                                                 
3  By risk I mean here the weighing together of the probability that something will occur and the consequences of 
its occurrence. 
4  For  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  forecasting  process,  see  the  speech  entitled  “The  monetary  policy 
decision-making process” by Irma Rosenberg, June 2008. 
5  RAMSES stands for the Riksbank’s Aggregated Macro model for Studies of the Economy in Sweden. 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 3
together.  It  is  a  very  useful  tool  in  analysing  different  scenarios  and  different  action 
alternatives, and it thus functions as a basis for the discussions on which monetary policy 
would be best.  
But the results from model estimates in Ramses and other models are always complemented 
with,  for  instance,  assessments  by  sector  experts.  In  the  shortest  possible  perspective  
– particularly the current quarter, but also to some extent the following quarter – the sector 
expert  often  has  an  information  advantage  compared  with  the  information  contained  in 
Ramses  and  other  models.  The  sector  expert  may  also  have  information  on  different 
economic policy measures, in addition to monetary policy measures, which could affect the 
economy  throughout  the  forecast  period.  One  example  could  be  different  types  of  fiscal 
policy measures that are decided on. It may be difficult to directly include the effects of such 
measures in the models, due to insufficient resources. The forecasting work at the Riksbank 
can therefore be described as an interplay between model use and assessments, where the 
latter can be fairly important, particularly in extreme conditions such as during the financial 
crisis.  
A topical example of how the published forecast can differ from the results in Ramses is the 
GDP forecast for Sweden in the most recent Monetary Policy Update. The published forecast 
for the coming years is a much higher GDP growth than the Ramses results would indicate. 
The final assessment in the Update was that the labour market would develop more strongly 
than  was  predicted  in  Ramses.  The  most  recent  labour  market  indicators  pointed  in  this 
direction.  Moreover,  the  assessment  was  that  the  krona  would  be  weaker  than  in  the 
Ramses forecast, which contributes to higher export growth.  
The forecasting process  
The forecasting work begins in the Monetary Policy Department, normally around six weeks 
prior to the monetary policy meeting. At least this is the case when a Monetary Policy Report 
is going to be published, otherwise the process is slightly shorter.6 The process begins with 
the  forecasting  work  on  international  developments.  A  preliminary  draft  for  this  forecast  is 
presented  at  a  meeting  to  which  we  members  of  the  Executive  Board  are  invited. 
Assessments  and  analyses  of  developments  in  the  Swedish  and  international  financial 
markets  are  often  presented  at  this  meeting,  too.  This  information  is  used  in  the  work  on 
making  forecasts  for  the  real  economy  in  Sweden.  First  an  assessment  is  made  of  the 
current  situation,  then  there  is  a  review  of  the  results  of  the  forecasting  models.  After  this 
there are new meetings, at which draft forecasts and analyses of the labour market, wages, 
inflation and public finances are discussed. These meetings aim to bring together different 
views  and  to  reach  a  joint  picture  of  developments  and  of  the  conditions  for  the  Swedish 
economy, including the labour market and inflation.  
Using these analyses as a base, a forecast for the Swedish and international economies is 
made.  Moreover,  proposals  are  presented  both  for  the  repo  rate  decision  at  the  next 
monetary  policy  meeting  and  for  the  forecasted  repo  rate  path.  These  proposals  normally 
reflect  the  stance  the  Executive  Board  usually  takes  with  regard  to  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation.  They  are  thus  based  on  historical  relationships  between  the  Executive  Board’s 
decisions and the development of the economy.7 
                                                 
6  However, one should bear in mind that forecasting work is actually a continuous process. Even between the 
forecasting rounds, we often analyse the international economy and the Swedish economy for reasons other 
than to make forecasts. For instance, background reports are written prior to Executive Board members taking 
part in international meetings, in which both economic activity and economic policy are discussed. 
7  The  reason  for  the  proposal  being  based  on  the  Executive  Board’s  historical  behaviour  rather  than  on  the 
staff’s perception of what constitutes a well-balanced monetary policy is discussed by Hallsten and Tägtström 
in the article “The decision-making process – how the Executive Board of the Riksbank decides on the repo 
rate” in Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review no. 1 2009 (p. 78). 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2010
If we members of the Executive Board consider that there are any special risks that should 
be  examined,  then  simulations  and  sensitivity  calculations  are  made  for  alternative 
scenarios.  Simulations  are  also  regularly  made  with  regard  to  illustrating  the  effects  of 
conducting an alternative monetary policy. This part of the monetary policy decision-making 
process is important, as it provides a base for the Executive Board to be able to choose the 
decision alternative that appears to provide the best target fulfilment.  
The staff’s proposal for monetary policy is the most important base for the discussion at a 
longer  meeting  that  includes  a  large  number  of  analysts  from  the  Monetary  Policy 
Department and the Executive Board, and which is normally held around two weeks prior to 
the monetary policy meeting. The Financial Stability Department of the Riksbank also plays 
an important role in the analysis work and therefore takes part in this meeting. The Riksbank 
has always considered it important to monitor developments in the financial markets and in 
the Swedish banks, and this has been particularly important in the forecasting work during 
the financial crisis. The Executive Board members’ input is important at this meeting and may 
in  particular  affect  the  forecast  for  the  repo  rate.  However,  this  has  repercussions  for  the 
forecasting work as a whole, as the future repo rate affects most of the other variables in the 
forecasts. The Executive Board may also have views on other parts of the forecasts than the 
repo  rate  path,  but  the  discussion  usually  mainly  centres  on  what  is  a  well-balanced 
monetary policy.  
At a shorter meeting that usually takes place the day after the large meeting, the members of 
the Executive Board have the opportunity to discuss the main scenario and give their views 
on it in a more limited circle. The Executive Board’s perceptions regarding the economy and 
thus  monetary  policy  are  then  woven  in  with  the  other  information  in  the  Monetary  Policy 
Reports, including alternative scenarios and updates that provide background material for the 
monetary policy meetings.  
The forecasts and the monetary policy decisions  
The Executive Board’s priorities and perceptions  
The  members  of  the  Executive  Board  may  have  different  perceptions  regarding  many 
different factors, which affect the monetary policy they consider to be the most well-balanced. 
We  can  have  different  opinions  regarding  the  economic  situation,  about  the  impact  of  our 
interest rate policy on the economy, and about how much importance should be attached to 
stabilising the real economy if this involves a greater deviation from the inflation target. We 
may also have differing opinions on how risks not directly captured in the forecasts should be 
included in our deliberations.  
However, there is no scope for presenting six different repo rate decisions and six different 
repo rate paths which exactly represent the six Executive Board members’ opinions. In this 
case the decision-making situation would be very difficult. It would probably also entail the 
chairman’s repo rate path most often being the one voted through. The chairman decides on 
how  the  different  proposals  should  be  set  against  one  another  in  turn  and  thus  has  the 
opportunity to eliminate the alternatives in an order that increases the likelihood of his own 
repo rate path being in the final battle. Moreover, he has the casting vote. This means that 
the different opinions must instead be brought together into a compromise as far as this is 
possible.  
The  Monetary  Policy  Reports  and  Updates  that  we  publish  can  thus  be  said  to  reflect  the 
average stance of the members of the Executive Board. If one or more of us considers that 
the opinions expressed in the Report or Update differ too much from our own opinion to be 
able  to  express  support  from  them,  we  must  enter  a  reservation  at  the  monetary  policy 
meeting. We have, of course, also had the opportunity to put forward any dissenting opinions 
during  a  number  of  earlier  meetings.  When  a  member  of  the  Executive  Board  enters  a 
reservation  at  a  meeting,  it  therefore  rarely  comes  as  a  surprise  to  those  initiated  in  the 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 5
forecasting  process  or  to  the  rest  of  the  Executive  Board.  Most  of  the  Executive  Board 
members believe that they know roughly how their colleagues on the Executive Board will 
vote at the actual meeting. This is usually true, according to the conclusions of a study made 
by the Monetary Policy Department, and which is based on a questionnaire sent to all current 
and  previous  members  of  the  Executive  Board.8  The  reservation  and  motivation  are 
published after the monetary policy meeting, in the press release and in the minutes of the 
meeting.  
Important to quantify the risks  
Normally, all risks that may have significance for the monetary policy decisions have been 
gone through by the Monetary Policy Department or the Financial Stability Department. But 
events may of course occur that are impossible to predict, or risks may arise at a later stage 
in the process that are very difficult to evaluate, such as the effects of the Lehman Brothers 
bankruptcy  in  autumn  2008.  One  central  issue  with  regard  to  how  the  monetary  policy 
decision-making process is set up is what stance the decision-makers, that is, the Executive 
Board, should take with regard to risks that for various reasons are not directly incorporated 
in the forecasts. If individual Executive Board members consider that there are observable 
risks and suspect that these may have significant consequences, the Riksbank will of course 
try to analyse these in depth. But it is not always easy to quantify such risks, and thus it may 
be difficult to include them in the actual forecast. The question then is how these risks should 
be taken into account in the monetary policy decisions.  
I consider it important to try to quantify as far as possible the risks deemed relevant to the 
monetary  policy  decisions.  This  is  particularly  so  when  it  comes  to  risks  with  a  low 
probability,  but  which  would  have  substantial  consequences  for  the  way  the  economy 
develops, such as a burst housing bubble, so it is important to try to quantify how the risks 
are  affected  by  the  various  alternative  actions.  There  have  recently  been  a  number  of 
discussions regarding whether the low policy rate we have had since last summer increases 
the risk of a Swedish housing market crash further ahead. My personal assessment is that 
extremely  low  interest  rates  lead  to  some  increase  in  the  risk  that  housing  prices  will  be 
pushed up to unsustainable levels. But this increased risk must be weighed against the risk 
of higher interest rates hampering the recovery in the economy.  
However, without properly quantifying these risks the decision-makers have to rely on their 
gut  feeling  in  their  deliberations.  There  are  many  reasons  why  gut  feeling  may  be  a  poor 
guide  with  regard  to  making  this  type  of  decision.  In  the  field  of  cognitive  research,  for 
instance,  one  speaks  of  the  neglect  of  probability  bias,  that  is,  a  tendency  to  entirely 
disregard the probability of various scenarios actually occurring when people make decisions 
under conditions of uncertainty. It is common to entirely disregard the fact that the scenario 
may  never  occur  or  that  one  is  completely  over-estimating  the  probability  of  the  scenario. 
This is far from the only cognitive bias that decision-makers might be affected by. But it is 
one  that  can  be  reduced  by  systematically  trying  to  evaluate  the  probability  of  various 
scenarios occurring. It is also important to try to illustrate how the decision that is to be taken 
will increase or decrease the probability of these scenarios.  
There is thus a need for decision-makers to put their uncertainty in a concrete form and the 
uncertainty should decline if the risks are identifiable and quantified. It is really only possible 
to quantify them with the aid of models. A decline in demand on the housing market and a fall 
in  housing  prices  could  –  through  negative  effects  on  household  wealth  –  have  clearly 
negative effects on consumption. This subdues growth and employment and pushes down 
inflation. If one believes that the risk of such a scenario is affected by the level of the repo 
                                                 
8  See  “Picking  the  Brains  of  MPC  Members”,  Mikael  Apel,  Carl  Andreas  Claussen  and  Petra  Lennartsdotter, 
Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 237, January 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2010
rate, one must take this into account in the monetary policy decision. But the risk of a low 
repo  rate  increasing  the  probability  of  such  a  scenario  must  thus  be  weighed  against  the 
positive effects on employment it will lead to during the forecast period. The clearer we can 
be about how we assess these different risks – and take them into account in a systematic 
manner – the easier it will be for those outside the Riksbank to understand how the repo rate 
decision is affected by various factors.  
I cannot say exactly how probable it is that house prices will fall in Sweden. The only thing I 
can say today is that the rapid increase in lending to households creates certain risks. This 
can  lead  to  some  households  borrowing  so  much  that  they  will  experience  difficulty  in 
meeting interest and amortisation payments in the future. To avoid this, which would make it 
more difficult to attain price stability and stable resource utilisation, the interest rate needs to 
be raised relatively soon.  
Conclusions  
Forecasts are always uncertain and both the Riksbank and other analysts make forecasting 
errors.  However,  forecasts  are  a  necessary  part  of  the  monetary  policy  conducted  in 
Sweden. This is because monetary policy’s effects on the economy come with a time lag and 
it is therefore necessary to look ahead to attain the inflation target. Moreover, the forecasts 
show how the Executive Board was thinking when the monetary policy decision was made, 
which is an important part of our communication with the general public. One can also note 
that the forecast evaluations show that thorough forecasts are better than just assuming that 
developments follow the indications given by an auto-regressive model.  
The Riksbank uses both models and expert assessments in its forecasting work. The models 
are necessary if one wants to analyse the effects of different policy alternatives. They also 
help us to quantify different types of risk scenario. It is sometimes very difficult to formulate a 
risk scenario so that it can be fed into a model. An example of this is the risk of a financial 
crisis. Nevertheless, we should have the ambition to quantify the risks that are considered 
relevant to our monetary policy decisions. The more information we receive on the effects 
that  different  risk  scenarios  have  on  the  economy,  the  clearer  the  base  for  the  monetary 
policy  decisions  will  be.  Then  it  is  necessary  for  decision-makers  to  realise  that  it  is  not 
always possible to explicitly include all possible scenarios in the forecast. Sometimes this is 
impossible due to lack of resources.  
In  principle,  we  Executive  Board  members  have  insight  and  the  possibility  to  discuss  the 
forecasts with the Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Department throughout the whole 
of  the  forecasting  process.  We  can  then  question  the  assessments  made.  The  Board 
members’ assessments of which risks are most relevant for the decision naturally also affect 
which  analyses  are  made  by  the  Monetary  Policy  Department.  The  analyses  published  in 
Monetary  Policy  Reports  and  Updates  are  normally  just  one  part  of  those  made  during  a 
forecasting  round.  Of  course,  the  entire  Executive  Board  does  not  always  agree  with  the 
analyses presented as these are the results of a compromise where the different opinions 
are weighed together. But in this case it is clear, either from the Board member’s contribution 
to the debate as published in the minutes, or in the form of a reservation entered. In this way 
the general public has very good insight into how we Executive Board members have though 
when making our decision. 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 7
