Zhou Xiaochuan: China’s Growth Enterprise Market 
Address by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the ceremony 
marking  the  first  listing  on  the  Growth  Enterprise  Market  (GEM),  Shenzhen,  30  October 
2009. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Dear friends, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
It is a great pleasure to attend this gathering at the invitation of Shenzhen Stock Exchange 
and the 28 companies. Today, the Growth Enterprise Market will see the listing of the first 
28 companies, which is an event long awaited by the financial community, the scientific and 
technological  circle  and  entrepreneurs.  On  this  occasion,  I  would  like  to  extend  sincere 
congratulations to the successful launch of the GEM in my own name and on behalf of the 
People’s Bank of China.  
In  the  1970’s,  the  Growth  Enterprise  Market  was  designed  to  accommodate  vigorous 
scientific  and  technological  innovation  and  the  boom  of  start-ups  around  the  world.  After 
three  decades  of  development  and  especially  after  the  test  of  this  international  financial 
crisis, the GEM is again, showing great vitality. 
The GEM in China does not come easy. Years of comparison and analysis of international 
experiences,  policy  and  system  and  repeated  feasibility  studies  have  finally  led  to  the 
successful listing of the first 28 companies on the GEM. Therefore, my thanks go to everyone 
who contributed to this long process. 
The  PBC  and  the  financial  community  have  been  watching  and  actively  supporting  the 
development of the capital market and the launch of GEM. Direct financing should accelerate 
its  pace  of  development  to  account  for  a  larger  share  in  financing.  We  advocate  healthy 
development of the market and have been supportive of reforming the issuance and pricing 
mechanism on the capital market. The whole financial community attaches great importance 
to the role of capital market in financing by SMEs and innovative enterprises, especially hi-
tech  enterprises  and  growth  enterprises.  The  development  of  GEM  is  consistent  with  the 
scientific  outlook  of  development.  The  PBC  and  the  financial  community  will  continue  to 
support the advancement of the GEM in the future.  
At  present,  China’s  economy  is  at  the  key  juncture  of  stabilization  and  recovery.  In 
accordance  with  the  overall  arrangements  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee  and  the  State 
Council,  we  will  try  to  strike  a  balance  between  maintaining  stable  and  relatively  rapid 
development of the economy, economic restructuring and managing inflationary expectation. 
In order to keep the consistency and stability of macroeconomic policies, we will continue to 
implement the relatively loose monetary policy. The intensity and pace of the monetary policy 
conduct will be carefully handled to enhance the flexibility and sustainability of the monetary 
policy.  
After the hard work in spring, we have welcomed a harvest – the long awaited launch of the 
GEM – in the golden autumn. We sincerely hope that the newly-launched GEM will grow in 
an orderly and healthy manner! 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
