Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: SEPA for cards – more than a symbol of 
SEPA’s success 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank  (ECB),  at  the  Monnet  Symposium  organised  by  the  Monnet  Project,  Madrid, 
5 May 2010. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
5 May is a historic date for European integration. 61 years ago today, the Treaty of London 
on  the  establishment  of  the  Council  of  Europe  was  signed.  The  Council  of  Europe  in 
Strasbourg is one of the oldest international organisations dedicated to facilitating European 
integration, with the focus on democracy and the rule of law. The Council of Europe created 
two symbols which were adopted by the European Economic Community in 1985 and are 
today used by the European Union: the flag of Europe and the European anthem. 
The flag of Europe has become the principal symbol of the European Union. The circle and 
the  number  twelve  –  which  is  the  number  of  stars  positioned  in  a  circle  on  the  flag  –  has 
numerous  associations  with  unity,  such  as  the  12  hours  on  a  clock,  12  months  in  a  year, 
12 signs of the zodiac and 12 semitones in an octave. Unity is also a  crucial factor in the 
success  of  one  of  the  biggest  economic  projects  the  European  Union  has  ever  seen:  the 
establishment  of  one  single  euro  payments  area  –  SEPA.  With  the  united  efforts  of  the 
European  banking  community,  the  legislators  and  the  central  banking  community,  SEPA 
made a successful start with the introduction of the SEPA credit transfer more than two years 
ago  and  the  SEPA  direct  debit  last  year.  Of  course,  SEPA  is  far  from  complete.  The 
migration  to  SEPA  credit  transfers  and  SEPA  direct  debits  will  take  some  time.  I  am 
confident, however, that with the setting of a realistic but ambitious end date, the pace of the 
migration will increase considerably. 
For this reason, I have no concerns regarding the success of a SEPA for credit transfers or 
direct debits. However, SEPA is built on a third column too: SEPA for cards. Cards are the 
most commonly used payment instrument in the European Union, accounting for almost four 
out of ten transactions in 2008. Without the success of SEPA for cards, the project will not be 
complete. Very often SEPA for cards is associated with the establishment of an additional 
European  card  scheme.  But  SEPA  for  cards  is  about  much  more  than  that:  it  is  about 
business rules and technical standards too. 
SEPA for cards – business rules 
The  business  rules  are  set  out  in  the  SEPA  Cards  Framework  (SCF)  by  the  European 
Payments Council (EPC), as well as the ECB’s “SEPA for Cards” report of November 2006. 
Of course, every agreement is to some extent a compromise which tries to accommodate as 
many views as possible. That is not to say that there is anything wrong with a compromise 
per  se.  Without  the  ability  to  reach  compromises  we  would,  for  example  never  have  been 
able to agree on the design of the euro banknotes since, of course, every country believed its 
legacy  banknotes  to  be  the  most  beautiful.  However,  a  compromise  should  not  be  too 
general leaving too much room for interpretation. I have already said on several occasions 
before that for me the SCF document is perhaps too general. I think the SCF requires further 
development, increased clarity and more detailed rules. Let me also recall that in the sixth 
SEPA  progress  report  we  proposed  the  creation  of  a  card  transaction  processing 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 1
framework.1  This  would  set  out  the  business  rules  for  card  schemes  and  processors  with 
regard to the processing of SEPA card transactions. 
But  European  projects  and  initiatives  do  not  relieve  individual  stakeholders  of  the 
responsibility to contribute to European integration. 
Major efforts by individual card scheme providers are needed too. Although work has already 
started in some areas, it is far from finished. A number of tasks that I have highlighted on 
other occasions before are still outstanding: 
 
the effective separation of scheme management from processing entities in order to 
overcome  barriers  to  entry  and  to  contribute  to  fairer  and  greater  competition 
between card schemes, as well as between processors;  
the charges or reporting requirements that some schemes impose on issuers and 
acquirers for transactions carried out with cards bearing their brand, even if it was 
not used in the transactions;  
the  setting  of  the  brand  that  will  be  used  at  terminals,  without  giving  the  retailer 
and/or cardholder any choice; and  
the  rule  that  in  cross-border  transactions,  it  is  always  the  interchange  fee  of  the 
country of the merchant that applies. 
   Europe  is  not  the  only  region  to  recognise  the  importance  of  clear  business  rules  for  the 
proper  functioning  of  the  cards  market.  Less  than  a  month  ago  the  Canadian  government 
released a code of conduct for the credit and debit card industry in Canada, which promotes 
fair business practices and ensures that merchants and consumers understand the costs and 
benefits  associated  with  credit  and  debit  cards.  This  follows  similar  regulatory  initiatives  in 
the United States and significant efforts made in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In 
Europe, strong public intervention is not envisaged for the time being. It is up to the EPC and 
individual  card  schemes  to  create  the  business  rules  which  are  needed  for  a  smooth 
functioning of SEPA for cards. 
SEPA for cards – technical standards 
Business  rules  are  only  half  the  battle  for  a  SEPA  for  cards,  as  technical  standards  are 
needed  too.  Last  December  the  EPC  published  an  updated  version  of  the  SEPA  Cards 
Standardisation  Volume.  This  “Book  of  Requirements”,  as  it  is  now  called,  builds  on  the 
SEPA  Cards  Framework.  The  objective  of  the  document  is  to  lay  the  foundations  for  the 
harmonisation of standards in SEPA. It provides the basis for the SEPA standards that are 
needed so that “any SEPA card could technically work at any SEPA terminal”. 
The  ECB  welcomes  the  EPC’s  commitment  to  ensure  that  the  Book  of  Requirements 
continues to develop in close dialogue with stakeholders in the SEPA cards market, who are 
represented in the EPC Cards Stakeholders Group established last year. 
The evolution of the Book of Requirements will also facilitate and guide the market adoption 
of the detailed standards that various market initiatives have developed or are developing. 
This  is  an  important  step  towards  interoperability,  security  and  market  access.  Without  it, 
there is a risk that technical fragmentation would remain or even be reintroduced in Europe – 
something that none of us wants. 
Another  prerequisite  for  SEPA  for  cards  is  a  certification  framework  that  inspires  trust, 
ensures an appropriate and equivalent level of security for cards and terminals, and provides 
                                                 
1   Processing  relates  to  the  authorisation  of  card  transactions,  as  well  as  their  subsequent  clearing  and 
settlement. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2010
“one-stop shopping” for manufacturers of cards and terminals. Card scheme providers have 
made significant progress over the past year, and are cooperating in the Common Approval 
Scheme (CAS) initiative, and I am looking forward to seeing a clear EPC position, especially 
on governance aspects, in this field. 
Governance  is  in  fact  one  of  the  key  components  in  the  SEPA  for  cards  project:  setting 
requirements and promoting standards is important, without a doubt. But, from a European 
perspective,  it  is  strategically  necessary  for  Europe  to  take  a  more  coordinated  approach 
towards global standard-setting bodies, such as ISO or EMVCo, and  that Europe starts to 
speak with one voice. Giving the EPC, acting on behalf of the European payments industry, a 
say in these bodies would be a very good way to achieve this aim. 
European card scheme  
Since 2006 the Eurosystem has had a great deal to say on the subject of the governance of 
card  payments  in  Europe.  In  our  sixth  SEPA  progress  report  we  clearly  stated  that  the 
“Eurosystem expects at least one additional European card scheme to emerge that meets 
the  requirements  of  cardholders,  banks,  merchants,  competition  authorities  and  the 
Eurosystem”. Of course, there are Visa and MasterCard, and I would like to emphasise how 
essential  they  are  to  Europe,  since  they  are  currently  the  only  schemes  that  offer  a  pan-
European card payment solution. But we also need a sufficient degree of competition. The 
reasons for this call for an additional European scheme are well known and are economically 
well-founded.  The  main  economic  rationale  is  the  possible  lack  of  competition  should 
national card schemes be wound up in the years to come. Some small national schemes, 
such as the Dutch and the Finnish schemes, are being replaced by international ones and 
they  are  unlikely  to  be  the  last.  Moreover,  card  payments  are  increasingly  substituting  for 
cash payments in the day-to-day lives of a growing number of European citizens. With this 
increasing importance, any mispricing of card payment services would have a major impact 
on  each  and  every  European  and  on  the  European  economy  as  a  whole.  Therefore, 
sufficient competition for such an important means of payment is absolutely crucial. 
Sometimes  it  is  worth  looking  beyond  the  borders  and  seeing  how  other  regions  have 
addressed challenges like those we currently face in Europe. China, for example, launched 
an  independent  bankcard  brand  and  established  an  international  payment  brand:  China 
UnionPay (CUP). CUP is today accepted in 29 countries and regions in Europe, as well as 
approximately 60 countries in America, Africa, Oceania and Asia. Two of the world’s largest 
economies  are  expected  to  follow  with  the  creation  of  an  additional  card  scheme:  namely 
Russia and India. 
So why not follow these examples and establish an additional card scheme? Let me reiterate 
the  importance  of  the  international  schemes  currently  present  in  Europe.  Even  with  the 
establishment  of  an  additional  European  card  scheme  they  are  likely  to  play  an  important 
role: for example, in co-branding to promote the global acceptance of an additional European 
card scheme. 
Currently there are three additional card scheme initiatives, one of which is Monnet. Each of 
these  initiatives  has  its  own  strengths  and  weaknesses.  Of  course,  there  are  still  many 
issues to be resolved – finding a proper financing model being probably the most important 
one  from  the  point  of  view  of  banks.  We  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  competition 
authorities have already provided some guidance in this context, although I am aware that it 
does  not  satisfy  many  banks.  Nevertheless,  the  agreement  between  Visa  Europe  and  the 
European Commission, which was announced last week, has brought some further clarity to 
the area of card payments.2 Naturally, the most obvious component of a financing model are 
                                                 
2   Visa  Europe  has  proposed  to  reduce  to  0.20%  the  maximum  weighted  average  MIF  for  all  cross-border 
transactions and for national transactions in a number of Member States using debit cards. It also proposes to 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 3
revenues. However, a financing model is not necessarily restricted to the costs and revenues 
linked  to  card  payments.  It  may  be  worth  analysing  possible  effects  on  other  areas  of 
business too. The reduction in cash handling costs could, for example, form an integral part 
of  the  business  case  when  banks  evaluate  their  involvement  in  one  of  the  initiatives  for  a 
European card scheme. I admit that this is far from being an easy task, however, no one ever 
said that it would be easy to achieve a goal as challenging as the creation of an additional 
European card scheme. Now all parties involved in the various initiatives need to prove their 
commitment  and  determination.  Therefore,  I  appreciate  the  fact  that  Monnet  seems  to  be 
making great strides and I am looking forward to learning about the next concrete steps and 
milestones of the project. 
Conclusion 
I started with the Council of Europe and its important contribution to the European identity 
with  the  flag  of  Europe  and  the  European  anthem.  As  you  know,  the  anthem  is  based  on 
Ludwig van Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” from his Symphony No 9. This is the final symphony 
that  he  completed  and  it  is  generally  considered  to  be  his  masterpiece.  When  it  was  first 
performed  on  7  May  1824  in  Vienna  it  received  five  standing  ovations.  Even  though  the 
completion  of  SEPA  is  extremely  unlikely  to  receive  such  enthusiastic  applause  from  the 
European public, it would be a great achievement with real benefits. But without an additional 
European card scheme, SEPA will remain an unfinished symphony. 
                                                                                                                                                      
maintain  and  further  develop  measures  which  will  increase  transparency  and  competition  in  the  payment 
cards  market.  This  was  welcomed  by  European  Competition  Commissioner  Joaquín  Almunia  (see: 
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/10/462). 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2010
