Lucas Papademos: Assessment of identified risks to the euro area 
financial system and the capacity to absorb disturbances 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at 
the press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the June 2010 ECB Financial Stability 
Review, Frankfurt am Main, 31 May 2010. 
 Introduction 
I.  
My colleagues and I would like to welcome you to today’s press briefing on the occasion of 
the publication of the June 2010 edition of the ECB Financial Stability Review.1 The primary 
objective of the Review is to identify the main sources of risk to the stability of the euro area 
financial  system  and  provide  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  capacity  of  the  financial 
system to absorb adverse disturbances. The Review integrates the interdepartmental work of 
the  ECB  with  that  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  (BSC)  of  the  ESCB.  It  contains 
16 boxes and five special feature articles that address topical financial stability issues in a 
more focused and analytical manner. As in the past, we have prepared a summary note that 
contains some key messages of our analysis and assessment.  
In  my  presentation,  I  will  highlight  the  seven  main  risks  and  vulnerabilities  identified  and 
assessed in the FSR (slide 3) and the associated financial stability challenges. Four of these 
risks stem from outside the euro area financial system, while the other three originate from 
within the financial sector.  
Main risks identified outside the euro area financial system 
II.  
A  main  risk  to  the  euro  area  financial  stability  is  the  possibility  that  concerns  about  the 
sustainability of the public finances persist, or even increase, with an associated crowding 
out of private investment (slide 5). The progressive intensification of market concerns about 
sovereign credit risks among industrialised economies in the early months of 2010 opened 
up  a  number  of  hazardous  contagion  channels  and  adverse  feedback  loops  between 
financial systems and public finances, in particular in the euro area.  
The  main  reason  for  the  severe  deterioration  of  public  finances  was  the  activation  of 
automatic  stabilisers  as  a  result  of  the  marked  contraction  of  economic  activity  which 
followed  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  At  the  same  time,  because  the  structural  fiscal 
deficits of a number of euro area countries were sizeable before the financial crisis erupted, 
fiscal deficits in those countries rose to very high levels. Added to this were the discretionary 
fiscal measures taken by many countries to stimulate their economies, following the adoption 
in December 2008 of the European Economic Recovery Plan.  
By early May this year, adverse market dynamics had taken hold across a range of asset 
markets in an environment of diminishing market liquidity. Ultimately, the functioning of some 
markets,  such  as  the  government  bond  markets  in  countries  with  a  very  negative  fiscal 
outlook, became impaired, thereby triggering a significant widening of government bond yield 
spreads in these countries, as shown on Chart 1 on slide 5. This hampered the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism  and  the  effective  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  At  the  same 
time, fears about the implications of growing fiscal imbalances in some euro area countries 
and  the  potentially  adverse  impact  on  banks’  exposures  to  higher  sovereign  credit  risk  
–  including  their  funding  costs  and  portfolio  exposures  –  led  to  an  increase  in  perceived 
                                                 
1   The cut-off date for data included in the June 2010 FSR was 19 May 2010. 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 1
systemic risk for large banking groups in the euro area to the highest levels seen since the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers.  
To  help  improve  the  market  functioning  and  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  the 
Governing  Council  decided  on  9  May  2010  on  several  remedial  actions.  In  parallel,  at  an 
extraordinary  meeting  on  9/10  May,  the  Ecofin  Council  agreed  to  establish  a  European 
Financial Stabilisation Mechanism. This back-stop financing arrangement will be subject to 
strong conditionality. The mechanism will have up to €500 billion of funds to be provided by 
euro  area  Member  States  at  its  disposal.  The  IMF  will  participate  in  the  financing 
arrangements and is expected to provide at least half as much as the euro area countries’ 
contributions.  Following  the  implementation  of  these  measures,  market  volatility  was 
significantly contained. 
A second main risk is the possibility of adverse feedback between the financial sector and 
public  finances  continuing.  The  review  summarises  various  contagion  channels  through 
which persistently large fiscal imbalances could pose risks to financial stability. If government 
indebtedness  reaches  a  sufficiently  high  level  that  it  triggers  a  loss  of  confidence  in  fiscal 
sustainability, investors will require additional risk premia to compensate for having to bear 
greater  sovereign  credit  risk.  The  resulting  rise  in  sovereign  risk  premia  can  be  passed 
through  to  private  sector  funding  costs,  especially  if  there  is  doubt  about  the  ability  of  the 
public  sector  to  counter  adverse  disturbances  to  non-financial  and  financial  sectors. 
Chart 2 on  slide  6  shows  how  CDS  spreads  for  large  banks  have  become  increasingly 
correlated  over  the  past  seven  and  half  months  with  the  sovereign  CDS  spreads  of  the 
countries  where  these  banks  have  their  headquarters.  Two  snap-shots  are  shown  in  the 
chart: one for 26 November 2009 and the other for 19 May 2010. As can be seen from the 
chart,  between  these  two  dates,  as  sovereign  CDS  spreads  have  risen,  so  have  bank 
CDS spreads. It is furthermore interesting to note that, in the cases where concerns about 
fiscal imbalances have been greater, the co-movement has been substantial.  
The third risk we have identified outside the euro area financial system is the possibility of 
vulnerabilities being revealed in non-financial corporations’ balance sheets, because of high 
leverage, low profitability and tight financing conditions. The balance sheet conditions for the 
euro  area  non-financial  corporate  sector  have  slightly  improved  since  the  last  issue  of  the 
FSR, which has translated into a moderate lowering of the expected write-downs facing euro 
area  banks on  their  corporate  loan portfolios  by  end–2010. Against  the background  of  the 
gradual economic recovery, financial market participants have also become more optimistic 
concerning  corporate  earnings  prospects.  That  said,  the  high  leverage  of  euro  area  
non-financial corporations, coupled with low profitability in 2008 and 2009, has translated into 
high default rates for non-financial firms. Chart 3 on slide 7 shows patterns of default rates 
for  euro  area  firms  of  all  size  categories,  indicating  that,  in  2009,  bankruptcies  reached 
historically high levels. There is a large degree of cross-country heterogeneity within the euro 
area  with  some  countries  having  endured  annual  increases  in  bankruptcies  of  more  than 
70% in 2009.  
When considering the outlook, it is instructive to examine past correlation patterns between 
bankruptcies  and  real  GDP  growth.  As  Chart  3  shows,  insolvencies  in  the  euro  area 
remained  at  very  high  levels  after  the  last  downturn  (2002–03),  even  after  GDP  already 
picked up. Hence, notwithstanding a recovery in economic activity, it might still take some 
time before a normalisation of bankruptcies would be observed.  
The fourth risk identified outside the euro area financial system is the possibility of greater-
than-expected household sector credit losses if unemployment rises by more than expected. 
Over the past six months, the condition of euro area household sector balance sheets has 
changed little with only a slight increase in new ECB estimates for write-downs on residential 
mortgages  and  consumer  loans  up  to  end–2010.  That  said,  considerable  increases  in  the 
rate of unemployment in most countries are expected between the fourth quarter of 2009 and 
the fourth quarter of 2010. This means that downside risks for household income and debt-
2 
 BIS Review 75/2010
servicing  capacity  are  likely  to  persist  and  that  banks  could  face  losses  for  some  time, 
although there are important differences across countries. However, on a more positive note, 
there are signs that the past sharp falls in house prices, together with low interest rates, have 
improved housing affordability. This appears to explain, at least in part, the recent turnaround 
in the extension of new loans to households for house purchases, shown in the Chart 4 on 
slide 8, although substantial differences in these patterns remain across Member States.  
Main risks identified within the euro area financial system  
III.  
Let me now turn to the three main risks that we have identified within the euro area financial 
system.  The  first  is  the  possibility  of  a  setback  to  the  recent  recovery  of  bank  profitability. 
After the sizeable net losses, which were endured by around half of the euro area large and 
complex banking groups (LCBGs) in late 2008, many of them returned to modest profitability 
during  2009.  Moreover,  as  shown  in  the  left-side  of  Chart  5  on  slide  10,  banks’  financial 
performances  strengthened  further  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010  and  all  LCBGs  which  have 
reported financial results so far have shown a positive return on equity. The same pattern 
can be seen as regards the return on assets.  
The leverage ratios of LCBGs have remained broadly constant after a sharp decline in the 
first quarter of 2009. These relatively stable ratios, however, conceal some differences in the 
ways individual institutions have lowered their leverage ratios. Most of them have increased 
their Tier 1 capital, while many have also reduced their assets. Overall, the shock-absorbing 
capacities of euro area LCBGs improved substantially during 2009 and in the first quarter of 
2010. Even those institutions with the lowest capital ratios managed to enhance their buffers 
to levels well in excess of minimum regulatory requirements. At the same time, the capital 
buffers in some segments of the euro area banking sector may not have improved as quickly 
as  has  been  the  case  for  the  LCBGs  and  will  require  further  strengthening.  Conditions  in 
euro  area  LCBG  funding  markets  have  also  tended  to  improve  for  much  of  the  past 
six months, although the recent rise in sovereign credit risks has led to a setback for longer-
term debt financing costs. 
As  shown  in  the  right-side  of  Chart  5,  the  most  important  driver  of  euro  area  LCBGs’  net 
income throughout 2009 and in the first quarter of 2010 continued to be net interest income. 
By the first quarter of this year, around two-thirds of the total net income of the LCBGs was 
generated from this source, while, before the crisis, around half of the total came from net 
interest income. The turnaround of the profitability of the LCBGs in 2009 is also attributable 
to a remarkable recovery of net trading revenue in the second quarter of 2009, which was 
more or less sustained throughout the year and in early 2010, despite a progressive lowering 
of market volatility, a tightening of bid-ask spreads and a stalling of the recovery in financial 
markets.  Finally,  income  from  fees  and  commissions  has  continued  to  produce  a  stable 
revenue flow for euro area LCBGs, and even increasing somewhat in the late 2009 and early 
2010,  boosted  in  particular  by  revenues  from  underwriting  government  and  non-financial 
corporate sector debt securities issuances.  
Looking  ahead,  although  their  financial  performance  has  much  improved,  the  challenges 
facing  euro  area  LCBGs  remain  considerable.  The  central  scenario  is  one  of  subdued 
banking  sector  profitability  in  the  short  to  medium  term  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  First,  the 
recovery  in  the  financial  markets  that  has  taken  place  in  late  2009  has  lowered  the 
ECB estimates  of  banks’  cumulative  mark-to-market  losses  on  holdings  of  securities 
throughout the entire period of the financial turmoil. However, the new estimate in the current 
FSR indicates that the potential cumulative write-downs on securities and loans for the euro 
area banking sector for the period 2007 to 2010 is EUR 515 billion, which is lower than the 
estimate  published  in  the  December  2009  FSR.  Given  the  sizeable  decline  in  projected 
losses  on  securities,  and  the  large  provisions  that  had  already  been  made  against  loan 
losses by the end of 2009, the potential total future write-downs on securities and loans has 
fallen quite substantially.  
BIS Review 75/2010 
 3
Chart  6  on  slide  11  shows  the  profile  of  write-downs  on  securities  and  loans  over  time, 
applying the same methodology as in previous assessments published in the FSR. This time 
the horizon of the estimates for future losses has been lengthened to 2011 and sizeable loan 
losses  are  still  expected  next  year.  The  expected  write-downs  on  loans  will  constitute  a 
significant  and  lasting  drag  on  banking  sector  profitability  and  will  raise  the  risk  that  the 
recent recovery of profits does not prove durable. At the same time, the pressure on banks to 
keep leverage under tight control, the disengagement from public support of banks’ balance 
sheets  and  the  vulnerability  of  net  interest  margins  of  some  banks  to  the  prospect  of  a 
flattening of the yield curve are likely to contribute to keeping profitability moderate.  
Regarding  the  year-by-year  distribution  of  losses  by  type  of  exposure,  write-downs  on 
securities  exposures  were  the  main  contributor  to  the  substantial  losses  for,  and  capital 
drains on, euro area banks in 2008. Going forward, while the recovery in securities prices 
makes valuation write-backs on securities holdings more likely in 2010, write-downs on loans 
are expected to remain relatively high. However, in contrast to the uncertainties created by 
securities valuations in 2008 and 2009, banks should largely be in good positions to forecast 
the loan losses facing them, using their internal models, and they should thus be in a better 
position to manage the potential future write-downs without unexpected capital shortages.  
The  second  risk  that  we  have  identified  within  the  euro  area  financial  system  relates  to 
vulnerabilities of financial institutions associated with concentrations of lending exposures to 
commercial property and to Central and Eastern European (CEE) countries. You may recall 
that,  in  the  December  issue  of  the  FSR,  we  drew  your  attention  to  these  two  types  of 
exposures. Since then, in the commercial real estate sector, prices and rents have continued 
to  fall  in  most  euro  area  countries,  although  at  a  moderating  pace.  Reflecting  this 
deterioration, estimates of losses facing banks on their commercial property loan portfolios 
had been revised upwards by almost 50% over the past six months, as shown in Chart 7 on 
slide 12, and concerns remain about concentrations of such exposures among some euro 
area banks. This increase in estimated losses on commercial property loans is expected to 
more  than  offset  the  recovery  in  the  valuations  of  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities 
held by banks in the euro area.  
As regards banks’ exposures to the CEE region, since December, the economic outlook in 
the  region  has  improved.  However,  new  vulnerabilities  have  emerged,  especially  a  broad-
based  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  positions  in  a  number  of  non-euro  area  EU  countries,  a 
number  of  which  are  currently  under  excessive  deficit  procedures.  As  Chart  8  on  slide 
13 illustrates, it needs to be kept in mind that the stock of outstanding foreign currency loans 
in these countries, while no longer increasing, remains sizeable, which makes the quality of 
exposed banks’ assets vulnerable to exchange rate risks. Given that the exposures to the 
CEE region are rather concentrated among some euro area countries’ banking sectors, the 
risks remain material in these cases.  
The  third  risk  that  has  been  identified  within  the  euro  area  financial  system  is  that  of 
heightened  financial  market  volatility  if  macroeconomic  outcomes  fail  to  live  up  to 
expectations. Until the increase in volatility experienced this month, the stock markets in the 
euro area had broadly stabilised after a strong recovery in 2009, which mainly reflected the 
impact  of  improving  macroeconomic  news  and  better  corporate  earnings  prospects.  Chart 
9 on  slide  14  shows  that  most  conventional  valuation  measures,  such  as  the  long-term  
price-earnings  ratio  do  not  suggest  that  valuations  are  particularly  high  by  historical 
standards.  But  there  is  a  risk  of  heightened  financial  market  volatility,  if  expectations  of 
macroeconomic outcomes are disappointed.  
I  would  also  like  to  briefly  comment  on  the  current  state  of  the  euro  area  securitisation 
markets. The securitisation markets were rendered dysfunctional by the financial crisis for a 
variety of micro and macroeconomic reasons. Efforts are being made both by the financial 
industry  and  the  policy-making  community  to  address  the  most  important  micro  issues, 
including  the  lack  of  transparency,  product  complexity  and  inappropriate  incentives  in  the 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2010
originate-to-distribute  model.  However,  in  recent  months  there  have  been  some,  albeit 
nascent, signs of improvement in securitisation activity, in part supported by a narrowing of 
spreads on securitised products (i.e. yield on securitised products over Libor). The narrowing 
spreads, which reflects the compensation investors are demanding for holding these assets, 
could bring prices closer to levels where issuance of ABS securities makes economic sense. 
This has been indicated in the responses to ECB bank lending surveys and in lower retention 
rates  by  banks  for  newly-issued  ABS.  While  it  is  difficult  to  disentangle  the  relative 
contribution of micro and macro factors to the improvement, it seems clear that the improved 
economic outlook has played an important role.  
Overall assessment 
IV.  
Let me now conclude with the overall assessment of the identified risks to euro area financial 
system stability (slide 15). Although the main risks to euro area financial stability essentially 
remain the same as those to which attention was drawn in the last issue of the FSR, their 
relative  importance  has  changed  significantly  over  the  past  six  months.  Ultimately,  the 
significance of risks for financial system stability must be judged by the probability of their 
materialisation in combination with their likely impact, both on the financial system and on the 
broader  economy,  in  the  event  that  they  do  materialise.  By  this  criterion  the  two  most 
important risks for euro area financial stability at the current juncture are, first, the possibility 
of concerns about the sustainability of public finances persisting or even increasing with an 
associated  crowding-out  of  private  investment  and,  second,  the  possibility  that  adverse 
feedback between the financial sector and public finances continues. 
Considering other risks, albeit less material, identified outside the euro area financial system 
include the possibility of vulnerabilities being revealed in non-financial corporations’ balance 
sheets – because of high leverage, low profitability and tight financing conditions – and the 
possibility of greater-than-expected household sector credit losses, if unemployment rises by 
more than currently expected.  
Within the financial system, the central scenario is for modest banking sector profitability in 
the short to medium term, given the prospect of continued loan losses, lasting pressure on 
the  sector  to  reduce  leverage  and  market  expectations  of  higher  funding  costs  (slide  16). 
Given this outlook, an important risk is the possibility of a set-back to the recent recovery of 
bank  profitability  and  of  adverse  feedback  with  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  economy. 
Moreover, in view of the considerable near-term funding needs of euro area governments, a 
particular concern is the risk of bank bond issuance being crowded out, making it challenging 
to  roll-over  a  sizeable  amount  of  maturing  bonds  by  the  end  of  2012.  In  addition,  the 
vulnerabilities of financial institutions associated with concentrations of lending exposures to 
commercial property markets and to Central and Eastern European countries remain. There 
are also risks of heightened financial market volatility, if macroeconomic outcomes fail to live 
up  to  expectations.  A  key  concern  is  that  many  of  the  vulnerabilities  highlighted  in  my 
presentation today could be unearthed by a scenario involving weaker-than-expected growth.  
I will now conclude with five policy messages stressed in the Review (slide 17).  
First, the measures taken by the ECB to stabilise markets and restore their functioning, as 
well as the establishment of the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism, have lowered 
tail and contagion risks.  
Second,  sizeable  fiscal  imbalances  remain  and  the  responsibility  rests  on  governments  to 
frontload  and  accelerate  fiscal  consolidation,  so  as  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances, not least to avoid the risk of a crowding out of private investment, while establishing 
conditions conducive to durable economic growth.  
Third,  with  pressure  on  governments  to  consolidate  their  balance  sheets,  disengagement 
from financial sector intervention means that banks will need to be especially mindful of the 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 5
risks  that  lie  ahead.  In  particular,  they  should  ensure  that  they  have  adequate  capital  and 
liquidity buffers in place to cushion the risks, should they materialise.  
Fourth,  and  against  this  background,  the  problems  of  those  financial  institutions  that 
remained overly-reliant on enhanced credit and government support will have to be tackled 
decisively. At the same time, fundamental restructuring will be needed when the long-term 
viability  of  banks  is  likely  to  be  threatened  by  the  taking  away  of  state  support.  This  may 
involve the shrinking of balance sheets through the shedding of unviable businesses, with a 
view to enhancing profit-generating capacities.  
Fifth, for the longer-term, a key objective of the agenda for regulatory reform is to strengthen 
capital and liquidity buffers so as to ensure a safer financial system that is more robust to 
adverse disturbances. Swift completion of the process of calibration and implementation of 
these  necessary  reforms  should  remove  related  uncertainties  and  allow  banks  to  optimise 
their capital planning and, where necessary, adjust their business models.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.  
6 
 BIS Review 75/2010
 BIS Review 75/2010 
   7
 8 
   BIS Review 75/2010
 BIS Review 75/2010 
   9
 10 
   BIS Review 75/2010
 BIS Review 75/2010 
   11
 12 
   BIS Review 75/2010
 13
BIS Review 75/2010 
 