Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet 
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, London, 16 June 2010. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
May I join the Lord Mayor in welcoming you, Chancellor, to your first Mansion House Dinner? 
You have set a rapid pace in your first month in office, not least in your announcements this 
evening. 
In  previous  years  I  have  sometimes  set  this  gathering  a  quiz  question.  Tonight  I  want  to 
reverse the process by providing the answer and asking you for the question. The answer is 
23, and later I shall ask you – to what question is 23 the answer? 
Over  the  past  year,  there  has  been  no  slackening  in  the  pace  of  economic  and  political 
upheaval. The financial crisis that began in 2007 is not yet over. Much of the recent market 
volatility  reflects  concerns  about  the  ability  of  governments  to  service  their  own  debt  and 
provide  assistance  where  necessary  to  weakened  banking systems,  especially  in  the  euro 
area. Such risks have the potential to derail recovery and we cannot ignore them. 
At  home  we  face  the  challenge  of  ensuring  recovery  while  rebalancing  the  economy, 
reducing the fiscal deficit, and reshaping the structure and regulation of our banking system. 
In  playing  its  part  to  meet  this  challenge,  the  Bank  of  England  has  two  priorities.  Our  first 
priority must be to maintain low and stable inflation. Of late there have been those who doubt 
our ability or willingness to meet the inflation target. In May, CPI inflation was 3.4%, and for 
much  of  the  past  three  years  has  been  above  the  2%  target.  Over  that  period  the  rise  in 
prices in excess of that implied by the target was around 3%. That can be accounted for by 
the direct impact on the price level of the fall in sterling’s effective exchange rate, of about 
25%, which is supporting the rebalancing of the UK economy. 
Inflation has not only been higher than in the previous decade; it has also been more volatile. 
Our ability to keep measured inflation close to the target has been hindered by movements in 
world  oil  and  commodity  prices,  as  well  as  the  temporary  reduction  in  VAT.  Oil  prices,  for 
example, have gyrated between $40 and $150 a barrel. 
Although  such  price  changes  clearly  lead  to  higher  or  lower  CPI  inflation  for  a  period,  by 
themselves  they  do  not  generate  the  continuous  rise  in  prices  to  which  monetary  policy 
should respond. A continuous rise in prices would ordinarily be associated with strong money 
growth, wage inflation, rapid increases in money spending and an excess of demand over 
the supply capacity of the economy. The UK economy exhibits none of these traits – annual 
broad money growth is around 1%, growth in regular pay is close to 2% and money spending 
growth  is  around  3%;  all  of  which  are  significantly  lower  than  the  average  growth  rates 
recorded before the crisis. And a range of indicators point to spare capacity in the economy 
rather  than  excess  demand.  Perhaps  most  obviously,  unemployment  is  around  8%,  three 
percentage points above the average levels before the crisis – a million fewer people in work. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  judges  that  it  is  likely,  though  not  certain,  that  this  spare 
capacity will press down on inflation. That seems to be happening in both the United States 
and the euro area where underlying inflation is falling. 
No  one  should  take  this  as  a  sign  of  complacency.  The  MPC  is  conscious  that  there  are 
always  risks  to  the  upside,  and  the  apparent  rise  in  inflation  expectations  is  one  that 
concerns  us.  We  have  always  explicitly  recognised  that  there  is  a  significant  chance  that 
inflation  may  turn  out  to  be  above  target.  A  forecast  is  not  a  single  number;  it  is  an 
assessment  of  risks.  In  our  May  forecast,  the  MPC  judged  that,  under  prevailing  market 
interest rates, the odds were in favour of inflation remaining above target over the next year, 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 1
whereas, looking two to three years ahead, the odds were on inflation being below the target. 
There are always risks to the outlook – on both sides – and to ignore them in either direction 
would be foolish. What the MPC must do is continually update its assessment of those risks, 
and set policy in order that, on balance, inflation remains on track to meet the target in the 
medium term. 
No one should doubt our determination to meet the target. The inflation target introduced in 
1992,  and  the  new  regime  for  monetary  policy  decision-making  introduced  in  1997,  have 
shown beyond doubt that monetary policy in the United Kingdom is dedicated to maintaining 
low and stable inflation. Indeed, for ten years, I was, to my frustration, regularly described as 
a hawk. But I am neither hawk nor dove. Everyone on the Committee votes according to his 
or her judgement of the outlook for the economy. I have not changed. The Committee has 
not changed. Circumstances have changed. When confidence, output and trade around the 
world collapsed in the autumn of 2008, the balance of threats to the inflation outlook shifted 
rapidly  to  the  downside.  So  the  Bank  of  England  and  central  banks  in  other  industrialised 
countries  responded  by  reducing  official  interest  rates  nearly  to  zero  and  injecting  money 
directly into the economy. 
There  will  come  a  time  when  our  task  will  be  to  manage  the  exit  from  such  an  abnormal 
degree  of  monetary  stimulus.  The  MPC  will  not  hesitate  to  begin  to  withdraw  the  current 
degree of stimulus when we judge that is necessary. When it comes, that is most likely to be 
through a rise in Bank Rate with asset sales being conducted later in an orderly programme 
over a period of time, leaving Bank Rate as the active instrument. 
But monetary policy must be set in the light of the fiscal tightening over the coming years, the 
continuing fragility in financial markets and the state of the banking system. I know there are 
those who worry that too rapid a fiscal consolidation will endanger recovery. But the steady 
reduction in the very large structural deficit over a period of a parliament cannot credibly be 
postponed indefinitely. If prospects for growth were to weaken, the outlook for inflation would 
probably  be  lower  and  monetary  policy  could  then  respond.  I  do,  therefore,  Chancellor 
welcome your commitment to put the UK’s public finances on a sound footing. It is important 
that, in the medium term, national debt as a proportion of GDP returns to a declining path. 
At the same time, it is important, however, that we work with our partners overseas to reduce 
the global imbalances and promote an adequate level of world growth. Countries with large 
current account and budget deficits will need to pursue both fiscal consolidation and policies 
to  improve  their  competitiveness.  And  countries  with  current  account  surpluses,  while 
understandably wanting to avoid unsustainable fiscal paths of their own, have a responsibility 
to expand domestic demand so that the imbalances can be reduced. Only if the two sets of 
policies work in tandem will growth prove sustainable. 
Our second priority is to accept the challenge of the new responsibilities that you, Chancellor, 
have  asked  the  Bank  to  take  on  in  respect  of  micro  prudential  regulation  and  macro 
prudential control of the balance sheets of the financial system as a whole. I welcome those 
new responsibilities. Monetary stability and financial stability are two sides of the same coin. 
During the crisis the former was threatened by the failure to secure the latter. 
The  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  taught  us  two  important  lessons.  The  first  is  that, 
whatever  its  theoretical  attractions  –  and  there  certainly  are  some  –  putting  prudential 
regulation  into  the  same  organisation  as  the  oversight  of  consumer  protection  and  market 
conduct  didn’t  work  in  practice.  The  two  types  of  regulation  require  different  skills  and  a 
different  approach.  Separating  them  –  the  so-called  “twin  peaks”  model  of  financial  
regulation – is the right direction of reform. That conclusion is not a reflection on the people 
who  work  at  FSA.  They  are  an  able  group  and  have  worked  hard  to  improve  prudential 
regulation over the past three years. I look forward to working with them in the future. Nor 
does  it  follow  from  this  first  lesson  that  prudential  regulation  should  necessarily  go  to  the 
central bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2010
But a second lesson is that when banks hit trouble the central bank needs to be fully involved 
in  resolving  those  problems.  The  Bank  of  England  cannot  effectively  perform  its  role  as 
lender of last resort without first-hand knowledge of the health of the banks to which it might 
provide support. In peacetime, regulation can be conducted outside the central bank. But in a 
crisis,  decisions  must  be  made  quickly  and  decisively  and  the  central  bank,  working  with 
government which is always responsible for any use of public money, needs to be in charge. 
That was one of our painful lessons. 
In approaching our new responsibilities we shall build on the real improvements to its regime 
of prudential regulation made over the past three years by FSA. But the Bank will bring its 
own central banking culture. The focus of regulation needs to be on maintaining stability of 
the banking system as a whole. We shall be looking not just at those aspects of a bank that 
make it look unsafe in comparison with other institutions, but even more so at whether there 
are common features that threaten the stability of the system, such as the dangerously high 
leverage prior to 2007. 
We shall aim to avoid an overly legalistic culture with its associated compliance-driven style 
of  regulation.  That  is  an  important  reason  for  the  separation  of  consumer  protection  and 
market conduct from prudential regulation. We will need to exercise discretion when setting 
capital and liquidity ratios for individual banks. And to do that properly will require changes to 
the  current  legislation  and  rule  book.  We  must  reverse  the  seemingly  inexorable  trend 
towards more regulation and more regulators. That did not work in the past and is not the 
right response now. 
I am absolutely delighted that Hector Sants has agreed to remain at FSA and then move to 
the  Bank  to  become  the  first  chief  executive  of  the  new  prudential  regulator.  In  difficult 
circumstances, Hector has engineered major improvements to FSA’s prudential regulation. 
Andrew Bailey will head the Bank’s transition team and will be the first deputy chief executive 
of  the  prudential  authority.  Together,  Hector  and  Andrew  form  the  perfect  partnership  to 
make the transition work and create the new organisation. 
In the new regime, regulation will reflect two different, though complementary, perspectives. 
The first, as now, is a  bottom-up perspective, focused on setting institution-specific capital 
requirements. Those would be fixed requirements that banks could not breach. The second 
is an overall perspective with a set of system-wide capital requirements that vary over the 
economic cycle. Judgements on the level of these capital buffers will be part of the remit of 
the  new  Financial  Policy  Committee.  The  prudential  regulator,  with  its  micro  prudential 
responsibilities,  and 
its  macro  prudential 
responsibilities, will need to work closely together, and that is one reason why it is sensible 
that they are both in the central bank. 
It is not difficult to see what role such a macro prudential regime might have played in the 
run-up to the crisis. A progressive tightening of capital standards, for example, would have 
helped  rein  in  the  near-tripling  of  UK  bank  balance  sheets  between  2002  and  2007.  The 
Bank’s sermons on the storms ahead would have had more influence if at the same time a 
collection plate was passed round the congregation so that money was available in the event 
that the church roof had to be replaced. 
But a  macro prudential regime also has a key role to play in the downswing phase of the 
cycle. Since 2008, credit conditions have tightened, jeopardising the recovery and, in turn, 
threatening renewed losses for banks. By allowing banks to draw on their macro prudential 
capital  buffers,  while  credit  conditions  remain  tight,  the  system  is  counter-cyclical. In  other 
words,  a  credible  macro  prudential  regime  could  help  forestall  both  excessive  exuberance 
and  unnecessary  caution.  By  altering  the  pressure  on  the  financial  brakes  according  to 
circumstances, regulation, far from being an inflexible foe, would become a flexible friend. 
This type of regulatory regime, and its objectives and tools, are largely untried and untested. 
But that is not a reason for not trying and not testing. The Financial Policy Committee will be 
a  first.  Over  the  next  few  years  we  will  put  in  place  a  framework  for  financial  stability  to 
the  Financial  Policy  Committee,  with 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 3
parallel that for monetary stability. We need both. As we have seen, one without the other is 
not enough. Just as the role of a central bank in monetary policy is to take the punch bowl 
away  just  as  the  party  gets  going,  its  role  in  financial  stability  should  be  to  turn  down  the 
music when the dancing gets a little too wild. 
Still,  we  should  not  put  all  our  faith  in  regulation.  It  has  limits.  If  the  structure  of  banking 
creates incentives to take excessive risk then regulators will be overwhelmed by the avarice 
so vividly captured by Michael Lewis in his book The Big Short. Incentives must be right. One 
misalignment of incentives today is the implicit guarantee to banks that are “too important to 
fail”,  so  that  creditors  have  little incentive  to  monitor  the  behaviour  of banks  because  they 
believe  they  will  be  bailed  out.  This  problem  is  too  important  to  ignore.  There  is  no  one 
simple  solution.  But  we  should  not  shy  away  from  radical  reform  just  because  of  the 
opposition of vested interests. So I welcome the setting up of the Banking Commission, with 
its talented commissioners and a wise and forensic chairman in Sir John Vickers. 
Let me now return to the quiz question I posed earlier – to what question is 23 the answer? 
Several  plausible  answers  come  to  mind.  First,  23  is  the  number  of  players  in  England’s 
World Cup squad in South Africa. Second, it is of course 23 years since England last won the 
Ashes “down under”. But neither of these are the right answer which is that 23 years is the 
age difference between the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Governor of the Bank of 
England.  In  case  there  is  any  doubt,  George  is  the  younger.  This  age  difference  is  highly 
desirable because the appropriate incentives are to allocate the responsibility of determining 
monetary policy to the older generation, which has a real interest in preserving the value of 
money, and the responsibility for fiscal policy to the younger generation, on whom falls the 
burden  of  excessive  debt.  If  we  are  tempted  to  leave  a  large  burden  of  debt  for  the  next 
generation  to  pay  back,  what  better  incentive  mechanism  than  to  have  as  Chancellor 
someone who has a longer life expectancy than any previous Chancellor on record? Given 
those incentives, Chancellor, I look forward to a harmonious coordination of monetary and 
fiscal policy. 
Lord Mayor, as we prepare to toast the Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, all of 
us  here  tonight  would  like  to  pay  tribute  to  your  charitable  work  since  you  became  Lord 
Mayor.  This  year  the  Lord  Mayor’s  charity  “Pitch  Perfect”  is  focussed  on  two  educational 
charities in which  I  have  a  special personal  interest  –  the educational work  of  the  London 
Symphony  Orchestra  and  Chance  to  shine,  the  campaign  to  regenerate  cricket  in  state 
schools which, in five years, has already brought the opportunity to play competitive matches 
to more than one million children, over 40% of whom are girls. Your personal commitment 
Nick to support these causes in times of great financial difficulty is a tribute to you and also to 
the charitable instincts of the City of London. We thank you for that work, and I am sure that 
everyone here tonight thanks both you and the Lady Mayoress for the splendid hospitality 
which you have extended to us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to 
“The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress”, Nick and Claire Anstee. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2010
