Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Launch of the Albay Mayon Credit Surety Fund 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the launch of the Albay Mayon Credit Surety Fund (CSF), 
Legaspi City, Albay, 12 August 2010. 
 Governor Joey Salceda, distinguished leaders of the various sectors in Albay, members of 
cooperatives in Albay, fellow workers in government, special guests, marhay na aga sa indo 
gabos! Good morning. 
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board and my colleagues at the Bangko Sentral 
ng Pilipinas, we welcome Albay province under the leadership of Governor Salceda to the 
Credit Surety Fund movement or what we call CSF. 
With  today’s  launch,  the  Albay  Mayon  Credit  Surety  Fund  becomes  the  12th  CSF  to  be 
created since 2008. 
With  CSF,  entrepreneurs  gain  access  to  bank  loans  even  without  collaterals.  Before  CSF, 
financially-challenged entrepreneurs source funds from informal lenders at very high interest 
rates.  
CSF is also a positive for banks. Even without collaterals, bank loans made under CSF are 
effectively  insured  against  default by  the  surety  fund  set  up  jointly  by  the  LGUs  and  other 
partner organizations.  
You may ask, does it really work? Well, based on our experience from the first 11 CSFs it 
works!  
I will share some CSF updates with you: 
 
As of 31 July 2010, the eleven (11) CSFs set up ahead of Albay are in the Provinces 
of  Aurora,  Bohol,  Cavite,  Compostela  Valley,  Davao  del  Norte,  Davao  Oriental, 
Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental and North Cotabato as well as in the Cities of 
Cebu and Iloilo.  
The combined assets of the cooperatives and NGOs who are members of the first 
eleven  (11)  CSFs  is  valued  at  P8  billion,  about  P2.6  billion  of  which  represents 
equity.  
These eleven CSFs are made up of one hundred seventy-three (173) cooperatives 
and three (3) NGOs with total membership of close to 200,000. The sheer financial 
muscle and reach of the CSFs speak of the tremendous potential of the Program.  
The  total  trust  fund  of  the  eleven  (11)  CSFs  have  reached  P98  million,  including 
P51 million  contributed  by  the  cooperatives  and  NGOs.  This  translates  to  a  total 
potential loan of P511 million at any one time.  
Total loans booked under the program reached P53 million. These loans not only 
helped end-user borrowers finance the needs of their businesses but helped their 
immediate communities as well. Loan applications amounting to P156 million are in 
various stages of processing and approval.  
    Given these numbers, it is safe to say that CSFs have gained traction. For this, we thank our 
LGU  partners,  as  well  as  our  institutional  partners  that  includes  the  Land  Bank  of  the 
Philippines, the Development Bank of the Philippines and the Industrial Guarantee and Loan 
Fund. We also acknowledge IGLF’s support for the training of contributing cooperatives on 
credit  appraisal  and  monitoring,  basic  accounting,  marketing,  and  credit  risk  management. 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 1
The University of the Philippines’ Institute of Small Scale Industries has already conducted 
ten runs of these training courses which have benefited 243 cooperative and NGO members.  
Nevertheless, we will be the first to say that CSF is not perfect. In this imperfect world, there 
is always room for improvement. The key is  to have all parties involved follow procedures 
faithfully, starting with those who will screen and evaluate the loan applications.  
In the case of Albay, we see a perfect fit with CSF. Based on our monitoring, loans to deposit 
ratio  in  the  entire  Bicol  Region  remains  low.  For  instance,  while  deposits  have  reached 
P53 billion in 2009, loans were at P14 billion. Clearly, you have a loyal and growing base of 
depositors and yet your loans to deposit ratios are low. Possibly, the guarantee provided by 
the  credit  surety  fund  for  bank  lending  could  well  be  the  catalyst  that  will  move  lending 
forward here in Bicol.  
With the dynamic leadership provided by Governor Salceda and other Albay LGU officials, I 
am confident Albay Mayon CSF will serve as a positive catalyst that will further accelerate 
the  development  of  the  Bicol  Region.  As  reported  earlier,  Bicol’s  2009  GDP  already 
increased  by  an  impressive  rate  of  8.2%,  the  highest  among  the  17  regions  in  the 
Philippines. We can look forward to a repeat performance.  
With  the  CSF  in  place,  we  hope  Albay’s  MSMEs  will  develop  at  a  more  balanced  and 
sustained pace. This should exert a positive influence on the continuing development of the 
Bicol Region.  
And so, once again, we welcome Albay and Governor Salceda to the CSF movement. We 
also  look  forward  to  learning  much  from  your  CSF  as  you  start  implementation  of  this 
empowering collateral-free credit program for micro, small, and medium enterprises.  
Mabuhay  ang  Albay!  Mabuhay  ang  mahal  nating  bansang  Pilipinas!  Maraming  salamat  sa 
inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2010
