Zamani Abdul Ghani: Malaysia – seizing the opportunity to evolve 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Seminar  on  Financing  for  Overseas  Project,  Kuala  Lumpur,  14  January 
2010. 
 I am pleased to be invited today to officiate this Seminar on Financing for Overseas Project. 
On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, I wish to thank and congratulate the EXIM Bank, the 
ICD and the CIDB for their efforts in organizing this important and invaluable Seminar. The 
continuous collaboration among Malaysian private and public related organizations with the 
IDB and its related organizations demonstrate the solidarity of the Muslim Ummah and the 
community at large towards achieving a strong and sustainable economic development. This 
also reflects the growing importance of cross border trade and investment among the OIC 
member  countries.  We,  at  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  are  pleased  to  note  that  over  200 
participants  from  more  than  100  companies  in  Malaysia  are  participating  in  this  Seminar. 
Today’s Seminar which brings together participants in the related industries, not only provide 
information on the business opportunities abroad, but also serves as an excellent platform to 
establish  new  networking  links  as  well  as  sharing  of  innovative  ideas  and  invaluable 
experiences. 
Malaysia  has  always  accorded  and  will  continue  to  accord  a  high  priority  on  enhancing 
collaboration  with  the  OIC  member  countries  towards  fostering  intra-OIC  trade  and 
investment. Realizing the large business opportunities in the OIC countries, Malaysia entered 
into an MoU with the IDB in 2004. This MoU sets a framework of cooperation among OIC 
member  countries  in  key  economic  activities,  with  the  objective  of  enhancing  the 
opportunities for economic growth and development. Today’s Seminar is indeed a testimony 
to  the  continued  efforts  by  both  the  IDB  and  Malaysia  in  enhancing  the  cooperation  and 
deepening of business relationship. 
As all of us are aware, infrastructure development is a critical component to unlock potential 
economic activities, thus supporting sustainable economic growth of a nation. Malaysia has 
placed great emphasis on infrastructure development as part of its economic transformation, 
diversifying  from  agriculture  to  manufacturing  and,  in  more  recent  years,  in  the  services 
sector as well. Over the last ten years, the Government of Malaysia has allocated a total of 
nearly  RM100  billion  for  infrastructure  development  mainly  in  transport,  energy  and  public 
utilities.  The  Malaysian  government  has  also  encouraged  the  participation  of  the  private 
sector  in  the  development  of  infrastructure  through  privatization  and  the  public-private 
partnership (PPP) policies. 
On  the  global  front,  the  estimated  value  of  infrastructure  development  is  estimated  to  be 
USD35 trillion over the next 20 years. For the Asian region alone, a study done by the Asian 
Development  Bank  (ADB)  reveals  that  the  region  needs  USD750  billion  per  year  over  the 
year  2010–2020  to  meet  the  rising  needs  of  infrastructure  development.  Out  of  this,  the 
needs for the ASEAN region have been estimated to be over USD60 billion per year.  
Considering  the  vast  opportunities  of  infrastructure  projects  regionally  and  globally, 
Malaysian contractors should seize the opportunity for further expansion of their business. I 
am pleased to note that many Malaysian companies have already established their presence 
in  the  global  construction  industry  with  commendable  achievements.  The  number  of 
overseas  projects  awarded  to  Malaysian  contractors  has  increased  by  43%  to  40  in  2008 
valued at RM8.5 billion, from just 28 projects valued at RM2.9 billion in 2004. In 2008, the 
Middle  East  region  being  the  major  end-users  of  the  projects  undertaken  by  Malaysian 
contractors,  accounted  for  nearly  RM6  billion  or  68%  of  the  total  value  of  the  projects 
comprising  various  sectors  including  energy  and  transportation.  Indeed,  the  achievement 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 1
signifies  that  our  local  contractors  do  have  competitive  advantage  to  reap  the  vast 
opportunities in the global market.  
In complementing the efforts of local contractors to strengthen their international presence, 
relevant  authorities  and  institutions  should  be  continued  to  enhance  and  improve  the 
enabling  environment.  In  this  regard,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  CIDB  has  effectively 
played a key role in promoting the capabilities and strength of Malaysian contractors to the 
relevant parties in the global market.  
Apart  from  having  well  established  companies  with  excellent  track  record  to  undertake 
infrastructure projects, the other critical component in ensuring the success of infrastructure 
development  is  the  availability  and  accessibility  to  financing.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has 
always accorded and will continue to accord high priority to ensure that financing continues 
to  be  available  to  support  the  needs  of  the  economy.  I  am  pleased  to  note  the  vital  role 
played  by  the  EXIM  Bank  in  providing  the  financing  facilities  for  the  construction  sector  to 
undertake  projects  abroad.  In  today’s  Seminar,  we  have  the  opportunity  to  hear  from  the 
EXIM Bank on the various available financing facilities to contractors with overseas projects. 
Similarly,  we  will  also  be  enlightened  on  the  role  of  the  ICD  in  promoting  economic 
development  among  OIC  member  countries,  particularly  on  private  sector  project,  by 
providing financial as well as advisory services for a range of client requirements. 
Malaysia’s  Islamic  financial  industry,  as  we  are  all  aware,  distinguishes  itself  a  proven 
platform for conducting Islamic finance activities. The vibrancy and dynamism of Malaysia’s 
Islamic financial system is reflected by its continuous product innovation, the diversity and 
strength  of  its  domestic  and  international  financial  institutions,  the  wide  range  of  available 
financial  instruments,  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  infrastructure  and  the  adoption  of 
global regulatory, legal and Shariah best practices. Leveraging on the strengths of the ever 
growing domestic Islamic financial sector, Malaysia has launched the Malaysia International 
Islamic  Financial  Centre  (MIFC)  initiative  in  August  2006  to  offer  its  value  proposition  in 
Islamic finance to the world at large to leverage on its inherent strengths, advantages and 
experience to tap the trillion-dollar opportunity that awaits financial institution worldwide. 
The  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  has  evolved  as  a  competitive  component  of  the 
overall financial system, with both acting as drivers of economic growth and development. 
Bank Negara Malaysia has and will continue to play an active role in promoting the offering 
of Islamic financial products and services, including sukuks or Islamic bonds. For issuers that 
include  government  agencies,  multinational  corporations  and  development  institutions, 
sukuks play a multi-faceted role in meeting different funding requirements ranging from large 
infrastructure  and  developmental  projects  to  capital  and  business  expansion.  As  part  of 
Malaysia’s goal in promoting the issuance of sukuks, various attractive initiatives are offered. 
These  include  tax  exemption,  facilitative  approval  processes  and  liberal  foreign  exchange 
rules. 
In Malaysia, sukuks accounted for nearly 60% of outstanding corporate bonds in 2009. As at 
end  of  June  2009,  Malaysia’s  outstanding  sukuks,  both  private  and  public,  accounted  for 
about 62% of outstanding sukuks globally. Total global sukuk issued during the 12 months 
period until September 2009 is about USD41 billion, of which Malaysia’s share accounted for 
almost USD30 billion or nearly 74%. We in Bank Negara Malaysia are confident that in 2010, 
sukuk  financing  will  continue  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role  in  financing  across  the 
Malaysian  economy  including  cross-border  financing  of  overseas  projects  by  Malaysian 
companies. 
I am very confident that this Seminar and the opportunities for business networking will be a 
fruitful  one.  On  this  note,  and  with  the  lafaz  Allahuakbar,  it  is  my  pleasure  and  honour  to 
declare open the Seminar on Financing for Overseas Project. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2010
