Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula: Modernising Zambia’s payment system 
Remarks  by  Dr  Tukiya  Kankasa-Mabula,  Deputy  Governor  Administration  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia, at the Ecobank Launch of Financial Products, Lusaka, 16 December 2009. 
 • Members of the Ecobank Zambia Limited Board of Directors present; 
• The Managing Director of Ecobank Zambia Limited, Mrs Charity Lumpa; 
• Members of the Diplomatic Corps; 
• Ecobank Zambia Limited Customers; 
• Management and Staff of Ecobank Zambia Limited; 
• Members of the Press; 
• Distinguished Invited Guests; 
• Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is with great joy and gratitude that I stand to address you at this important launch of the 
“Ecobank Rapid Transfer” and the “Non-Resident African Account”. I am informed that the 
two products are designed to transfer money faster and in real time while meeting the needs 
of customers resident in countries other than those where their accounts are domiciled. I am 
also  pleased  that  these  two  products  are  aimed  at  promoting  the  efficient  transmission  of 
remittances at an affordable cost. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  briefly  highlight  the  importance  of 
remittances  to  our  economy.  Remittances  are  increasingly  growing  to  be  one  of  the  most 
important  sources  of  finance  in  Zambia.  Such  funds  are  not  simply  an  expression  of 
fondness by people in the diaspora to assist their families in adverse situations. They also 
represent an important source of finance that augments capital inflows and investments in 
the economy. Formal remittance inflows into the country for the three quarters to September 
2009  were  estimated  at  K221  billion.  This  emphasizes  the  growing  significance  of 
globalisation and thus the need to intensify efforts to improve and establish, an environment 
that could enhance the impact of remittances and their effectiveness on the economy. 
Furthermore,  remittances  when  compared  to  other  forms  of  capital  inflows,  can  have  a 
positive impact not only on the volume but also on the quality of investments. 
People in the diaspora or their relatives are more familiar with the local economic and social 
environment  and  therefore  can  make  a  better  use  of  the  capital  brought  into  the  country. 
Infact, the recent few years has seen a growing number of Zambians who were in diaspora, 
returning and trying to set up their own small or medium size businesses, bringing in, not just 
funds, but also a lot of know-how. 
The  downside  to  remittances  is  the  possibility  of  the  recipients  remaining  dependant  on 
money transfers. In Zambia remittances are mainly used to secure daily family needs and to 
improve  life  style,  as  well  as  to  construct  or  reconstruct  houses,  and  to  finance  family 
ceremonies  like  weddings  and  funerals.  Only  a  small  portion  goes  into  banks  as  savings. 
However  in  order  to  alleviate  poverty,  it  is  important  that  remittances  are  utilized  in  an 
effective manner that will contribute to economic development. 
It is therefore imperative that some of these funds are channeled into the financial sector and 
invested in meaningful projects like real estates, manufacturing and agricultural sectors. To 
achieve this, it is key that commercial banks are involved in the transmission of such funds. 
In addition, money transfer companies like Western Union and Money Gram have played a 
significant role in transferring remittances. Their wide geographical extension throughout the 
country covering many rural areas has complemented adequately the rather slow expansion 
of the banking sector in facilitating money transfers. The recent development of the payment 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
system  in  Zambia  has  also  played  a  key  role  in  the  movement  of  funds  through  official 
means. 
Nevertheless,  unofficial  flows  still  remain  high  signifying  a  business  opportunity  for  banks. 
However,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  despite  being  safer,  are  perceived  to  be 
more expensive than the alternative unofficial means to the point of inducing many people in 
diaspora to stick to unofficial means. It is therefore important for banks to be mindful of their 
cost structures for such services. 
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  welcomes  the  introduction  of  the  “Ecobank  Rapid 
Transfer” and the “Non-Resident African Account which we have been informed will be lower 
cost  products.  This  will  no  doubt  increase  the  level  of  access  to  financial  services  in  the 
country as well as enhance the level of competition by increasing the number of participants 
in  the  market.  We  hope  that  the  introduction  of  these  lower  cost  products  will  push  the 
transfer commissions in this market downwards. 
On  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  working  with  several  stakeholders,  including  Bankers 
Association  of  Zambia,  has  over  the  years  made  progress  in  modernising  the  payment 
system. The information technology which serves as a major platform for modern payment 
systems  to  operate  has  also  advanced.  These  developments  have  set  the  stage  for  the 
development  of  innovative  payment  systems  capable  of  serving  consumers  in  a  cost 
effective way. 
Further, the growth of the number of players as well as the increasing number of initiatives 
require a robust supporting legal infrastructure to govern the payment system. To this end, 
the  National  Payment  Systems  Act  No.1  (NPSA)  was  enacted  in  2007.  The  NPSA 
empowered  the  Bank  of  Zambia  to  develop  and  implement  the  national  payment  systems 
policy so as to promote the efficiency, stability and safety of the Zambian financial system. 
The Bank of Zambia thus designates players wishing to provide payment services such as 
money  transfer  services,  mobile  banking  and  other  payment  services.  This  process  has 
strengthened  the  capacity  of  the  BoZ  to  monitor  transactions  and to ensure  that only  safe 
and efficient institutions are allowed to provide payment services. 
Distinguished Guests, allow me to conclude by congratulating Ecobank Zambia Limited for 
the innovative products that we are launching today. We hope that our people can send and 
receive  money  conveniently,  safely,  and  at  a  reasonable  cost.  I  also  wish  to  call  upon  all 
banks  and  financial  institutions  to  emulate  Ecobank  by  introducing  such  products  which 
contribute to increasing access to banking services for the Zambian people. 
The opportunity, primarily for banks and other financial institutions, is to find ways to leverage 
Zambians in the diaspora to use remittance services that will both be profitable for the banks 
and will also provide them and their families with greater financial access. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2010
