Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The challenges facing the euro area 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Meeting, Abu Dhabi, 
1 November 2010. 
 Over the coming months and years the euro area will face two types of challenges. The first 
one – which is very similar to that of other major advanced economies – is to consolidate 
public finances and at the same time restore economic growth. The second challenge – more 
idiosyncratic – is to strengthen the institutional basis of the single currency so as to avoid 
having to face again the problems we experienced in the recent crisis.  
Let me address these two challenges in turn. 
Concerning  the  current  economic  challenges,  euro  area  policy  makers  share  the  following 
five points: 
1. 
The  crisis  is  the  result  of  a  combination  of  structural  and  cyclical  factors. 
Overcoming the crisis thus requires both macroeconomic and structural policies.  
Macroeconomic policies have been quite effective in counteracting depressionnary 
forces, especially after the Lehman Brothers’ crisis, but they cannot by themselves 
bring the economy back to the pre-crisis growth path. 
Structural  measures  are  essential  to  increase  growth  potential  of  euro  area 
economies  over  the  coming  years.  They  affect  different  policy  areas,  such  as  the 
labour  markets  or  the  banking  system,  which  in  many  countries  need  to  be 
strengthened and restructured. 
As  far  as  monetary  policy  is  concerned,  the  non-standard  measures  implemented 
during the crisis have contributed to the smooth functioning of financial markets. The 
flow  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  is  progressively  rebounding.  The  exceptional 
measures are being removed as economic and financial market conditions improve.  
Fiscal policy needs to be adjusted and brought on a sustainable path, with a view to 
preserve – or restore – the confidence of financial markets. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
I would like to elaborate on the last point, i.e. fiscal consolidation.  
Although  there  is  a  broad  agreement  on  the  need  for  consolidation  in  the  euro  area,  the 
situation differs across countries. Some are in a better condition, either because they kept 
firmer  control  over  public  finances  prior  to  the  crisis  or  because  they  are  experiencing 
stronger growth performance. The situation is more challenging in countries where economic 
growth is sluggish and large fiscal imbalances have been accumulated. There is a risk of a 
vicious circle, which can develop as a result of the following: 
1. 
Restrictive  fiscal  policies  are  politically  difficult  to  implement  and  thus  tend  to  be 
delayed, because of the feared negative impact on the economy. 
As  countries  show  hesitation  in  addressing  their  budgetary  problems,  access  to 
financial markets tends to become more difficult. 
When  market  access  deteriorates,  the  budgetary  measures  required  to  restore 
confidence are much more drastic and painful.  
2. 
3. 
Some observers, especially outside Europe, have suggested that European democracies are 
not able to deal with such a vicious circle. They consider that the only way out of the dilemma 
is a default, or a partial default. Some have – even recently – voiced openly this view, maybe 
with the intent to influence financial markets and increase the probability of such an event to 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 1
occur; an event from which they would presumably take profit. This view, however, does not 
take into consideration that in advanced economies a sovereign default is very damaging for 
the citizens of the country concerned, as it would drastically affect their wealth. Increasing 
the  primary  surplus,  either  by  cutting  expenditure  or  by  increasing  –  in  certain  cases  by 
starting  to  pay  –  taxes,  has  in  most  cases  less  damaging  effects  on  the  economy  and  on 
citizens’ well-being than a cut in the value of their financial assets. 
To  sum  up,  consolidating  public  finances  is  painful  economically  and  politically,  but  the 
alternative is worse. Governments in Europe are fully aware of this. 
Let  me  move  to  the  second  issue,  which  concerns  the  strengthening  of  the  institutional 
framework underlying the single currency. To understand the issue one should first consider 
what did not work as expected during the first ten years of the euro. Two main things did not 
work.  
First, in some countries the behaviour of the private and public sector was not fully consistent 
with the long run requirements of a single currency area. Divergences may occur in currency 
unions,  or  even  within  countries,  as  some  regions  may  grow  more  than  others  and 
experience booms which then burst. In the euro area, the lack of a federal budget transforms 
country-specific shocks into public finance shocks and thus financial stability shocks. This is 
why a currency union like the euro area needs a system of discipline for both the public and 
the private sector, to be exercised at the level of the member states. 
The  euro  area  had  a  system  aimed  at  disciplining  the  public  sector,  i.e.  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  (SGP),  with  rules  and  procedures  aimed  at  avoiding  excessive  deficits.  The 
Pact worked in some cases, but not all. The main reason has been that the Eurogroup, which 
comprises the Finance Ministers of the euro area and is in charge of implementing the SGP, 
has not been able to put sufficient pressure on countries to ensure fiscal discipline. To quote 
a frequently used sentence, “When potential future sinners have to judge current sinners, the 
tendency for forgiveness prevails”.  
The  euro  area  had  no  system  to  discipline  the  private  sector  and  avoid  imbalances, 
especially for catching up countries. Even when presented with evidence about the growing 
divergences in cost competitiveness, the Eurogroup did not show much interest and did not 
take  action.  However,  there  is  substantial  evidence  showing  that  in  countries  which 
experienced  major  competitiveness  losses  public  sector  wages  often  led  the  way  for  pay 
rises  in  the  private  sector.  Furthermore,  excessive  private  credit  growth,  especially 
mortgages, has often been the result of distortionary tax treatments. 
How can the problem be fixed? There are two avenues. The first is to recognize the limited 
powers of the Eurogroup and move to a rules-based system, with automatic procedures and 
sanctions. That was the approach followed by the ECB in its published proposal for reform of 
the  SGP,  and  partly  also  the  approach  of  the  European  Commission.  The  Heads  of  State 
and Government of the European Union followed a second avenue, as they wanted to retain 
the  ability  to  decide  on  budgetary  matters,  in  particular  concerning  the  imposition  of 
sanctions on countries not respecting the rules. They did not want to deprive themselves of 
their  powers  in  favour  of  the  European  Commission,  nor  to  bind  themselves  with  a  rules-
based approach. This position might be understandable from a political point of view. But it 
doesn’t  resolve  the  problem  that  I  raised  previously,  concerning  potential  sinners  forgiving 
the current ones. No change has been made to the system of governance aimed at reducing 
the perverse incentives. Why should the Eurogroup be expected to behave in the future any 
differently than in the past?  
The question remains unanswered. The discussion is not over yet, as the new mechanism 
will  now  have  to  be  discussed  and  agreed  with  the  European  Parliament.  The  Parliament 
might come up with ways to make the Eurogroup more accountable in its implementation of 
the SGP, with a view to safeguard the general interests for sound budgetary policies against 
the incentives for mutual forgiveness.  
2 
 BIS Review 145/2010
The second failure was to assume that simply by adopting a system of rules there would be 
no more crises. If there are no crises there is no need for a crisis management framework. 
This was very naïve and ultimately turned out to be a mistake. Experience shows that crises 
do occur, even in the best of worlds. Of course, it’s not easy to build a crisis management 
framework. But it might not be that complicated either, learning from the experience of the 
International Monetary Fund and the European Financial Stability Fund, which has just been 
built to address the current crisis. 
I believe that there is a broad agreement on what we don’t want. We don’t want a system 
which:  
1. 
creates  moral  hazard  and  induces  countries  to  embark  on  loose  policies  in  the 
expectation that they would be bailed out. 
makes  taxpayers  (of  other  countries)  having  to  bail  out  bad  investment  decisions 
made by the private sector. 
creates incentives for speculative attacks that could push into bankruptcy even an 
otherwise solvent country. 
2. 
3. 
To achieve these objectives, we don’t have to reinvent the wheel. We have the model of the 
IMF to guide us. I would just make three main points in this respect. 
First,  the  best  way  to  avoid  moral  hazard  is  to  attach  strong  conditionality  to  any  support 
package. In addition, any financial support has to be at penalty rates, as it is the case for the 
IMF.  Over  time  the  IMF-style  conditionality  has  led  to  a  sharp  reduction  of  the  number  of 
countries resorting to the IMF. No country turns happily to the IMF for financial support.  
Second, the best way to avoid that taxpayers bail out private investors is to ensure that any 
support  provided  by  the  new  European  mechanism  has  preferred  creditor  status,  like  the 
IMF. This means that the funds lent by the institution have to be reimbursed first, before the 
private  sector.  Again,  the  experience  shows  that  countries  do  reimburse  the  IMF.  When 
countries are in arrears with the IMF – which is currently the case of Somalia, Sudan and 
Zimbabwe – they have de-facto exited the International Community. The existing EFSF does 
not have preferred creditor status because it is the result of an inter-governmental agreement 
rather  than  a  supra-national  institution.  The  European  Investment  Bank,  instead,  which  is 
inscribed in the EU Treaty enjoys preferred creditor status. Given that the new mechanism 
will be created as a result of a Treaty change, it can have a preferred status. 
Third, the best way to avoid triggering speculative attacks against the member states is to 
link the financial support provided to countries to the latter’s ability to repay, in particular to 
debt sustainability. There should be no automatic mechanism linking financial support to debt 
restructuring, because it would attract speculative pressure and precipitate a crisis, even for 
countries that are solvent. 
This raises the issue of how to deal with countries that are not in a position to repay all their 
debt.  Such  a  possibility  cannot  be  excluded.  Again,  the  experience  of  the  IMF  shows  that 
there have been cases of debt restructuring associated with Fund programmes, even though 
debt restructuring is not considered in the Articles of Agreement of the IMF. Out of 113 IMF 
support programmes over the last 20 years, only 19 countries defaulted or restructured their 
debts.  The  countries  which  went  through  such  action  –  Algeria,  Argentina,  Cote  d’Ivoire, 
Dominican  republic,  Ecuador,  Gabon,  Grenada,  Indonesia,  Kenya,  Moldova,  Nigeria, 
Pakistan,  Paraguay,  Russia,  Seychelles,  Ukraine,  Uruguay,  Venezuela,  Zimbabwe  –  have 
characteristics which are not very similar to euro area members.  
In all these cases restructuring was done on a case-by-case basis, depending on the specific 
circumstances.  It  is  suggested  by  some  that  precise  rules  and  conditions  for  debt 
restructuring  should  be  attached  to  the  creation  of  the  new  European  mechanism,  with  a 
view to achieve an orderly restructuring. In my view this is “unnecessary, undesirable, and 
unlikely”, to quote a recent Staff paper by the IMF. 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 3
It is unnecessary because experience shows that restructuring can take place even without 
international  norms  and  without  the  IMF  being  given  specific  powers  in  this  field.  It  is 
undesirable because there is a risk that norms designed at addressing problems of the past 
are not any more valid for complex financial systems and may even aggravate the situation. 
Most crises of the past had to deal mainly with foreign creditors of developing countries. In 
advanced economies the restructuring of the public debt would have to involve a much larger 
number  of  financial  assets  and  liabilities,  including  those  of  the  domestic  banking  system  
vis-à-vis residents and non residents. It can be easily seen that there can hardly be anything 
“orderly” in such a process.  
Attempts to work on this issue should certainly not be discouraged. The IMF experience in 
this field is again telling. There studies and discussions on the design of a mechanism for 
Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  took  much  effort  and  lasted  several  years.  The  result  was 
intellectually interesting but ultimately not agreed, neither by the sovereign states neither by 
financial  market  participants.  This  doesn’t  mean  we  shouldn’t  try  again.  But  we  should  be 
aware that calling for an orderly debt restructuring mechanism sounds nice and is costless. 
Designing and implementing it is somewhat different, and has not been done yet, like many 
other nice catchwords which have attracted our intellectual interest in the past. 
Some  work  can  be  done,  and  has  been  done,  in  developing  mechanisms  which  make  it 
easier for creditors and debtors to agree on revising the contractual terms. Substantial work 
has been done for instance on collective action clauses, which set minimum thresholds for 
debtor representation needed to agree on a restructuring. These mechanisms exist currently 
in  many  national  laws.  It  might  be  more  promising  and  pragmatic  to  further  explore  this 
avenue. 
To conclude, the euro area is facing several challenges. Some are similar to those of other 
countries,  some  are  idiosyncratic.  If  the  experience  of  the  last  few  months  teaches  us 
something it is that Europeans are fully aware of these challenges and want to address them 
to make sure that the euro area gets out from this crisis stronger than before. Many of the 
actions taken so far will indeed make it stronger and more resilient. On other measures the 
discussion is still ongoing and the jury is out.  
I recognize that seen from far away, it’s sometimes difficult to understand what’s really going 
on  in  Europe.  It’s  difficult  to  follow  the  debate,  to  forecast  the  outcome.  This  is  perfectly 
understandable. As in all democracies decisions are preceded by intense debates. In Europe 
we have the additional complication that the debate takes place not only within countries but 
also  between  countries,  in  the  open.  When  decisions  are  made,  and  compromises  are 
struck, which by definition cannot make everybody happy, additional debates develop. This 
may be disorienting for outsiders. You may need a compass. 
We  have  a  clear  compass  to  use  in  Europe,  it’s  the  Treaty.  It  guides  us  every  day,  for 
instance in the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area, providing the central bank with a 
clear objective for the benefit of European citizens; an objective which has been achieved 
over the last ten years. The Treaty also guides other institutions in their functions. This might 
not be enough, as the compass may not always be sufficiently precise. What’s important is to 
recognize such shortcomings and stand ready to address them. What one should take from 
the  series  of  decisions  that  have  been  made  over  the  last  few  months,  including  that  of 
changing  the  Treaty,  is  the  willingness  to  build  a  stronger  Europe,  a  stronger  and  more 
resilient euro area, capable of facing future crises.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2010
