Jean-Claude Trichet: Macro-prudential oversight and the future 
European Systemic Risk Board 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure for me to participate in the European Banking Congress.  
We  are  meeting  at  a  very  important  time  for  Europe’s  financial  system,  of  which  so  many 
senior representatives are assembled here.  
This is also a very important time for the European economy and for the governance of the 
euro area.  
Looking  at  the  current  situation,  we  have  to  be  very  clear  as  to  what  the  issues  are  and 
where the solutions lie.  
As its name suggests, Economic and Monetary Union has two attributes: one is “Economic” 
and one is “Monetary.”  
The “Monetary” attribute refers to the ECB, its mandate and its independence. I will come to 
this in a moment.  
The “Economic” attribute comprises the fiscal regime enshrined in the Stability and Growth 
Pact; the national frameworks of economic policy; and the system of mutual surveillance.  
The  developments  we  are  currently  witnessing  in  Europe’s  economy  have  to  do  with  its 
“Economic”  functions.  They  have  essentially  three  origins:  unsound  fiscal  policies  in  a 
number  of  member  states;  inappropriate  macroeconomic  policies  in  a  number  of  member 
states; and overall an inadequate system of surveillance by all member states.  
This is the triangle that provides the perimeter of the current situation.  
There is a solution to these three elements, and this consists in: first, ensuring sound fiscal 
policies  in  each  and  every  member  state;  second,  setting  responsible  macroeconomic 
policies; and, third, designing and adhering to a far more effective system of surveillance.  
The ECB stands alongside the citizens of Europe. We understand their concerns about the 
governance of the euro area because, just like them, we are focused on the medium term.  
That is why we call for a very ambitious reform of euro area governance – a reform that will 
address  the  root  causes  of  the  current  situation  and  make  it  simply  impossible  to  happen 
again.  
I  also  have  good  news.  This  good  news  is  that  all  the  efforts  to  strengthen  the  economic 
attribute of our union will be supported by a monetary policy that will ensure price stability or, 
as you say in German, Geldwertstabilität.  
As  I  mentioned,  the  “Monetary”  attribute  of  EMU  refers  to  the  ECB,  its  mandate  and  its 
independence. By now, after almost 12 years, we also have a track record. As you know, the 
most important issue for a currency is to keep its value. There is one single measure for this, 
which  is  the  average  inflation  rate  over  a  medium  or  long-term  horizon.  This  is  how  we 
measure price stability. I will be very precise. The average annual inflation rate in the euro 
area since the inception of the euro almost 12 years ago has been 1.97%. The European 
Central Bank has therefore been fulfilling its mandate, which is to keep inflation below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term.  
BIS Review 156/2010 
 1
With  all  the  challenges  we  have  faced  since  1999  –  the  cash  changeover,  the  oil  price 
spikes,  the  internet  bubble,  the  turbulences  in  the  aftermath  of  11th  September  and,  of 
course, the global financial crisis – maintaining price stability is a notable achievement.  
What  is  more,  looking  ahead,  inflation  projections  and  inflation  expectations  are  well 
anchored in line with price stability.  
The launch of the ESRB 
My main topic for today is macroprudential oversight and the new body that the European 
Council and the European Parliament have decided to create: the European Systemic Risk 
Board  or  ESRB.  The  legislation  has  been  finalised  yesterday  and  the  ESRB  will  soon 
become reality.  
I am honoured to speak to you today not only as president of the ECB but also in my future 
role as Chair of the ESRB.  
The new European body will be part of the new European System of Financial Supervision 
and  it  will  be  located  here  in  Frankfurt.  The  city  can  therefore  be  proud  to  host  three 
European  authorities:  the  ECB,  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions 
Authority (EIOPA) and the ESRB.  
The  function  of  the  ESRB  will  be  to  provide  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the  European 
Union’s financial system. It will bring together the governors of the national central banks, the 
new  European  Supervisory  Agencies  (ESAs),  the  European  Commission  and  the  national 
supervisory authorities of all 27 member states.  
The establishment of the ESRB was first recommended in February 2009 in the report of a 
high-level  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière.  The  new  institution  is  backed  by  a 
remarkably  strong  consensus  between  the  European  Commission,  the  European  Council 
and 
the 
establishment of the ESRB was approved with an overwhelmingly large majority of 80%. This 
gives a strong backing to the ESRB and its mission.  
The  ECB  will  contribute  to  establishing  the  ESRB  as  a  credible  and  effective  body. 
Concretely, the ECB will host the Secretariat of the ESRB, thereby making it operational and 
providing analytical, statistical, logistical and administrative support.  
But  whilst  the  ESRB  Secretariat  will  be  located  at  the  ECB,  the  ESRB  will  be  a  separate 
body, distinct from the ECB. The establishment of the ESRB will not affect the mandate and 
the functioning of the ECB’s statutory role in monetary policy.  
The establishment of the ESRB will be a landmark event in how Europe deals preventively 
with systemic risk. It forms part of wider developments across the globe, including in the US 
with  the  newly  created  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC).  Very  much  like  the 
ESRB, this council is a collaborative body bringing together the relevant US authorities with 
the  aim  of  identifying  systemic  risk  and  responding  to  threats.  We  will  aim  for  close 
cooperation with the FSOC and other authorities for macro-prudential oversight. 
the  European  Parliament. 
legislation  underpinning 
the  Parliament, 
the 
In 
The case for macro-prudential oversight 
So  what  exactly  is  macro-prudential  oversight?  In  many  respects,  it  is  the  missing  link 
between the different approaches of a central bank – which has such an important stake in 
stability  at  a  macro  level  –  and  a  financial  supervisor  –  concerned  with  the  financial 
soundness of individual market participants. 
The de Larosière report argued pointedly that before the crisis, supervisory arrangements, 
whilst concentrating on the supervision of individual firms, were placing too little emphasis on 
the stability of the financial system as whole. Indeed, until the late 1990s, the dominant view 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2010
in policy circles was that if individual institutions were financially sound, the financial system 
as a whole would also be necessarily sound.  
We now know that relying only on micro-prudential supervision to ensure financial stability 
suffers from the fallacy of composition. What is true for a part, or even for all parts, is not 
necessarily true for the whole.  
Amongst other elements of systemic risk, inter-linkages between institutions, correlated and 
concentrated exposures to risk, as well as herding behaviour may contribute to a destructive 
dynamic between institutions, markets and infrastructures. This would ultimately threaten the 
stability of the whole system.  
Putting macro-prudential oversight into practice 
Putting macro-prudential oversight into practice raises two questions: who should be charged 
with macro-prudential oversight and how it should be performed?  
Let me start with the question of “who”. In most countries central banks play an important 
role in financial stability. Because of their monetary policy function, central banks have an in-
depth  knowledge  of  the  financial  system.  They  are  independent  anchors  for  monetary 
stability. They also have a clear interest in financial stability because of its beneficial impact 
on the macroeconomic environment. And, last but not least, central banks are the ultimate 
source of liquidity.  
For all these reasons, central banks often have an explicit mandate in the area of financial 
stability.  But  typically  this  mandate  is  formulated  in  very  general  terms,  and  it  would  have 
been written before growing recognition of the key role of macro-prudential oversight.  
Financial  stability  is  not  and  cannot  be  exclusively  an  issue  for  central  banks,  namely  the 
ECB  and  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  It  must  be  shared  with  micro-prudential 
supervisors.  They  have  a  key  role,  because  stable  institutions  are  an  essential  and 
necessary condition for achieving financial stability. This is also the reason why the ESRB 
and the ESAs will form together a European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS). 
So in the analysis of systemic risk, the three ESAs will also have an important role to play, 
both on their own and within the ESRB. In collaboration with the ESRB, they will develop a 
set of indicators to identify and measure systemic risk. On their own, they will further draw up 
guidelines  and  recommendations  for  individual  financial  institutions  to  take  account  of  the 
systemic risk they pose. And they will need to ensure that they have the capacity to respond 
effectively to emerging systemic risks. 
On the question of “how” to do macro-prudential oversight, the main tools that the ESRB will 
have at its disposal are warnings and recommendations. As we know, the strength of the so-
called  “soft  law”  can  be  quite  significant,  notwithstanding  the  lack  of  direct  enforcement 
power. When risks have been identified and appear to be large, the ESRB will issue precise 
risk  warnings.  When  appropriate,  it  will  complement  warnings  with  recommendations  for 
remedial action and indications of the risks of inaction. We assume that the addressees will 
give careful consideration to the measures the ESRB will propose. 
I am confident that the ESRB will quickly develop its credibility through its work, its warnings 
and its recommendations. Its authority will draw on the quality of its analysis and its deep 
understanding of the functioning of the financial sector.  
Implications for the financial industry 
I  have  described  the  rationale  for  macro-prudential  oversight  and  the  practicalities  of 
establishing the ESRB. What are the implications for the financial industry? 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 3
The  national  supervisory  authorities  will  remain  the  direct  interface  for  financial  firms  on 
micro- as well as macro-prudential issues. As mentioned in the EU regulation, the ESRB’s 
warnings and recommendations will be directed – I quote from the Regulation – “to the Union 
as a whole, or to one or more member states, or to one or more of the ESAs or to one or 
more  national  supervisory  authorities”.  Recommendations  can  be  also  directed  to  the 
European Commission, in the area of the elaboration of new EU legislation. Nowhere do the 
legal  texts  mention  that  the  ESRB  will  address  individual  firms  in  its  warnings  and 
recommendations.  
But the industry also has to be aware that with the ESRB and the overall European System 
of Financial Supervision we will be in a different environment. Following deliberations by the 
ESRB, competent authorities may decide to utilise the tools that are designed to counter the 
build-up of risk in the financial system. Their tools, as you know, include possible capital add-
ons, countercyclical capital buffers or maximum loan to value ratios.  
One of the first tasks of the ESRB could be to review existing instruments and those that are 
being  created  at  the  global  and  the  European  levels.  More  generally,  micro-prudential 
instruments that are well known in the banking sector, would be calibrated and used with a 
macro-prudential orientation.  
I want to refer here to the concrete example of counter-cyclical capital buffers. In July, the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  released  its  proposal  for  countercyclical  capital 
buffers. The aim of such buffers is to make banks build up capital when system-wide risk is 
increasing following excessive credit growth. The buffers can then be drawn on when risks 
materialise and credit losses occur.  
The case of counter-cyclical buffers is particularly interesting, first because it is one of the 
tools  with  a  clear  macro-prudential  orientation  and  second,  because  the  ESRB  and  the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  could  join  forces  for  implementing  the  framework  in 
Europe. This is suggested by the European Commission in its recent consultation paper on 
the potential role of the ESRB and the EBA in defining policies and standards that national 
authorities should follow. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  I  see  three  reasons  to  expect  relevant  changes  with  the  start  of  macro-
prudential oversight in Europe. The first and most important reason is that better supervision 
should contribute to a more stable financial system. This is as much to the advantage of all 
players in the industry as it is to everyone in the wider economy.  
Second,  integrating  a  macro-prudential  perspective  should  lead  to  better  regulation.  In 
essence,  systemic  risk  is  the  outcome  of  the  actions  of  individual  market  players  for  the 
system as a whole. Regulation, which traditionally focuses on individual market players, can 
be improved by taking account of this potentially disastrous side-effect. Initiatives such as the 
counter-cyclical  buffers  and  possible  capital  surcharges  or  other  equivalent  measures  for 
systemically important financial institutions fall into this category.  
The third reason for welcoming the ESRB is that macro-prudential supervision could improve 
financial  firms’  own  risk  analysis.  I  trust  that  it  will  provide  an  incentive  to  internalise  the 
system-wide dimension in the industry’s own risk models and stress-testing. 
Ladies and gentlemen, less than two years after the publication of the de Larosière report, 
Europe  will  have  its  own  macro-prudential  authority  up  and  running.  This  is  a  remarkable 
achievement. We are now moving from designing the framework to implementing it. We have 
to make the enhanced resilience of the financial system our highest priority.  
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2010
