Ferenc Karvalits: Current challenges and responsibility of economic 
policy in Hungary 
Speech by Mr Ferenc Karvalits, Deputy Governor of Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank 
of Hungary), at the Reuters Summit, Vienna, 13 October 2010.  
 It is a pleasure to be here today. Two years had passed since the fall of Lehman Brothers, 
and while the most acute phase of the crisis is already behind us, it can have lasting effects 
on  the  working  of  our  economies.  Let  me  have  a  look  at  how  our  economy  fared  in  this 
turbulent period, and what challenges lie ahead.  
Before going into the details, I would like to set the stage by describing the macroeconomic 
situation in Hungary just before the financial crisis unleashed its full power on us. Looking 
back  into  the  pre-crisis  years,  it  might  even  seem  to  be  a  peaceful,  relatively  prosperous 
period. It is true, that loose fiscal policy in the previous period created external imbalances; 
however until early 2008 all segments of our financial markets enjoyed ample liquidity, while 
GDP growth was driven by dynamic exports. At that time, few people thought that these can 
be the symptoms of a bubble just about to burst. Thus, despite the ongoing fiscal tightening 
that decreased their disposable income, households were rather optimistic about the future, 
and  they  kept  up  their  level  of  consumption  by  borrowing  mainly  in  foreign  currencies. 
However, it is important to emphasize that the Hungarian economy started facing difficulties 
earlier than the autumn of 2008, and that the tension had been building up below the surface 
for a while, as illustrated by the continuous increase of external and government debt ratios, 
and  the  increasing  currency  mismatches  on  household-  and  to  some  extent  on  corporate 
balance  sheets.  I  have  to  admit,  it  was  mainly  fiscal.  The  twin  deficit  made  Hungary 
fundamentally weakest country among non-member states. 
The  financial  crisis  had  gravely  impacted  the  Hungarian  economy  at  nearly  all  levels.  The 
sustainability of the debt path became uncertain, external financing suddenly dried up, the 
risk premium on Hungarian assets dramatically increased, and we had to face a free fall in 
external demand – all this happening at the same time. With the benefit of hindsight this is 
not surprising: Hungary was among the most vulnerable countries at the autumn of 2008.  
These vulnerabilities also accounted for the fact that Hungary was not in a position to engage 
in countercyclical policy measures. The high level and uncertain sustainability of government 
debt made it all but impossible to implement fiscal stimulus measures. On the contrary, in 
order to secure long term sustainability, a significant fiscal adjustment took place, which was 
necessarily  pro-cyclical  in  the  short  run.  The  fiscal  adjustment  also  contributed  to  the 
dramatic adjustment that took place within the private sector. Households increased their net 
savings, while firms cut down on their investments, which resulted in a strong trade balance 
surplus, and a net financing capacity towards the rest of the world. The financial gap was 
closed. In less than 18 month the external finance position improved by more than 8%.  
It must be stressed, that when the crisis hit, countries relying heavily on external funding to 
finance their growth suffered a more severe recession in 2009, in contrast to those where 
growth  was  financed  by  domestic  savings  to  a  greater  degree.  As  it  appears  unlikely  that 
investors’ risk appetite will return to pre-crisis levels for quite some time, over the medium 
term,  the  process  of  real-convergence  cannot  proceed  at  the  expense  of  a  significant 
deterioration in external balance. We need a new growth model. We have to rely mostly on 
domestic savings. 
Neither monetary policy was in a position to act strongly against the sharp downturn, due to 
the  high  expected  risk  premium  and  the  currency  mismatch  problem.  However,  from  the 
outset the central bank introduced liquidity support measures, and after risk appetite seemed 
to be stabilizing, we begun to lower or policy rates gradually, keeping in mind that we must 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 1
not let sudden movements in risk appetite to translate into potentially destabilising balance 
sheet effects. 
How can we address these vulnerabilities, that are a threat in themselves but also constrain 
the  effectiveness  of  economic  policies  so  much?  There  are  no  quick  fixes  here. While  the 
pre-crisis  level  of  indebtedness  of  households  was  not  particularly  high  by  international 
standards, its currency composition became very risky.  
The  debt  burden  increased  significantly  due  to  the  weakening  of  the  forint-euro  exchange 
rate  and  the  strengthening  of  the  Swiss  franc.  The  currency  mismatch  on  private  sector 
balance sheets took years to build up and cannot be undone easily. There is no simple way 
of converting foreign currency debt to domestic currency debt. If government takes over, it 
would only mean a transfer of risks, but not elimination. If the conversion would take place 
directly  and  en  masse  on  the  foreign  exchange  market,  this  would  almost  certainly  imply 
large exchange rate depreciation and possibly other unintended consequences. Moreover it 
is hard to imagine indebted households that are eager to realize their losses on their foreign 
exchange  liabilities  while  switching  to  the  more  expensive  domestic  currency  financing, 
which is also subject to interest rate risks. It seems that the only safe way forward is a slow 
process of private sector balance sheet adjustment. Policy can support this process by doing 
everything  in  its  power  to  reduce  the  country  specific  risk  premium  and  enhance  financial 
stability.  This  includes  ensuring  sustainability  of  public  finances,  anchoring  inflation 
expectations,  preventing  the  recurrence  of  irresponsible  foreign  exchange  lending  through 
prudential regulation, and last but not least creating a growth friendly environment through 
structural reforms. 
The  other  key  vulnerability,  the  high  level  of  public  debt  has  already  been  addressed  to  
some  extent  through  a  significant  fiscal  adjustment  process  that  took  place  in  the  last  
couple  of  years;  this  year  Hungary  will  register  a  cyclically  adjusted  primary  balance  of 
around +1.4 per cent of GDP. However to ensure robust and continuous debt reduction, tight 
and  credible  fiscal  consolidation  needed  with  focus  on  lasting  structural  reforms  on  the 
expenditure side. 
It is important to point out, that fiscal adjustment in and of itself will not necessarily do the 
trick.  While  one  key  aspect  of  fiscal  sustainability  is  the  size  of  the  (cyclically  adjusted 
primary) deficit, at the end of the day it is the long term growth potential of the economy that 
matters.  Thus  it  is  imperative,  that  while  keeping  a  low  average  level  of  primary  deficit 
through the economic cycle, the structural weaknesses of the Hungarian economy are also 
taken care of. By this I mean – inter alia – increasing labour force participation, enhancing 
competition  in  certain  sectors,  strengthening  the  rule  of  law,  creating  a  growth  friendly 
system  of  taxes  and  social  transfers.  In  order  to  realize  the  “growth  dividend”  from  this 
measures a well capitalised and competing banking sector, which is able and willing to lend 
to  the  private  sector  is  essential.  The  above  measures  make  a  permanent  reduction  in 
government debt more likely to happen. 
Decreasing  the  above  mentioned  vulnerabilities  by  appropriate  policy  actions  has  the 
additional  benefit  of  a  lower,  country  specific  risk  premium.  A  permanently  lower  risk 
premium has a beneficial feedback effect on both debt sustainability and the balance sheet 
vulnerabilities. A lower level of risk premium decreases the refinancing cost of the existing 
debt stock thus enhances fiscal sustainability while it decreases the cost of capital which has 
a beneficial effect on potential output through higher investments. Lower risk premium can 
lead to exchange rate appreciation and in a competing banking system decreases lending 
rates. Both of these have the potential to facilitate the ongoing balance sheet adjustment in 
the private sector. It is important to point out, that these feedback effects are also there when 
the  risk  premium  increases  –  but  with  the  opposite  sign.  These  are  the  reasons  why 
policymakers in countries where high debt burdens are coupled with currency mismatches 
must not be complacent. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2010
Let  me  now  turn  to  monetary  policy  related  issues.  Currently  we  see  a  huge  slack  in  our 
economy, which affects the behaviour of all economic actors. While there are clear signs of 
recovery in the export sector due to strong external demand, domestic demand is still very 
weak. The latter is reflected by the price setting behaviour of the private sector. While the 
evidence is still not fully conclusive, based on the latest data it seems likely that the pass-
through of exchange rate fluctuations into consumer prices has slowed down. Labour market 
data  may  point  to  the  direction  of  a  stronger  than  expected  slowdown  in  nominal  wage 
growth.  Inflation  expectations  at  one  year  horizon  are  on  the  decline.  Although  headline 
inflation is still a bit high, due to the above-mentioned factors, it seems more and more likely 
that our medium term target can be attained with the current monetary conditions. 
However, we are fully aware of possible upside risks to inflation stemming from imperfectly 
anchored  long  term  inflation  expectations  and  larger  than  expected  increases  in  food  and 
commodity prices, and will not hesitate to act if they materialize. Of course, in this case we 
would  face  a  trade  off  between  inflation  and  output  gap  stabilisation,  but  given  our  price 
stability mandate and taking into account the inflation track record of the country anchoring 
inflation expectations should be the priority.  
Another issue we faced was the recent appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro and 
the forint. Since in Hungary the majority of foreign currency loans are denominated in Swiss 
francs,  this  put  a  particularly  heavy  burden  on  indebted  households.  Beyond  the  adverse 
effect on their disposable income and thus domestic demand, borrowers’ declining ability to 
repay their debt can lead to deterioration in credit quality, which, in turn, may prompt banks 
to reduce the supply of credit. Moreover, since the share of Switzerland in Hungarian exports 
is negligible, there is no short term competitiveness effect stemming from the weaker forint-
Swiss franc exchange rate. Thus the strengthening of the Swiss franc against the euro has 
only adverse effects on the Hungarian economy. While this pressure eased somewhat lately, 
we  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  Swiss  franc  –  euro  exchange  rate  can  react  sharply  to 
sudden  movements  in  global  risk appetite.  Although  we  have  to  take  all  these  factors  into 
account when deciding about policy rate, I want to underline, I’m certain that households and 
banks  can  (have  to  and  will)  solve  the  loan  problem  on  their  own.  I  do  not  see  financial 
stability risks which would put constrain on monetary policy.  
Turning to the state of the banking sector, let me stress one important thing. When we raise 
the issues that I will talk about in a second, we do not speak on behalf of the banking sector. 
What  we  are  concerned  about  is  the  lending  capacity  of  the  financial  system,  which  is 
essential for the economic recovery, let alone long term growth. We at the central bank do 
our job for the public good, and not for the comfort of any particular sector of the economy.  
That is why we are a bit concerned, when we see corporate and household lending lagging 
behind the economic recovery. In the corporate sector the weak domestic absorption from 
demand  side  and  the  tight  lending  condition  from  supply  side  lead  to  a  long-lasting  credit 
contraction. In the household sector the over-indebtedness, the high debt burden as well as 
unemployment cause depressed credit demand. From supply side the ban on foreign currency 
mortgage-lending introduced by the government is a strong negative contributing factor. 
Banks’ willingness to lend is still low due to the unfavourable economic and financial market 
environment. While the liquidity position of the Hungarian banking system is currently strong, 
deteriorating  loan  portfolio  quality  weakens  banks’  capital  position.  The  income  generating 
capacity of banks is lower not only because of the portfolio deterioration but also the massive 
amount of the recently introduced bank levy. 
The bank levy has several unintended consequences. This special and rather arbitrary bank 
tax  may  impair  the  ability  of  the  banking  sector  to  attract  foreign  capital  and  funding 
compared  to  other  countries  in  the  region.  Since  the  profitability-outlook  and  therefore  the 
competitiveness  of  the  Hungarian  banking  system  are  deteriorating  parent  banks  may 
reallocate their financial sources and rather channel to another country. This may negatively 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 3
affect Hungarian banks’ capacity to lend, which in turn may result in a slower recovery, and if 
remains permanent can hamper long term growth.  
Main messages 
 
The  post  crisis  world  permanently  requires  less  resilience  on  external  financing. 
Hungary needs a new growth model, which rely on domestic savings. 
Robust  and  continuous  government  debt  reduction  has  to  be  in  the  focus  of 
macroeconomic strategy. 
To  preserve  real  convergence  in  the  post  crisis  world  we  need  tight  and  credible 
fiscal policy. Fiscal consolidation has to rely on long lasting structural measures on 
the expenditure side. 
To enhance long term growth potential structural weaknesses has to be addressed 
as well: 
– 
tax  and  social 
participation, 
improvement  of  the  quality  of  primary  and  secondary  education  to  strength 
employability, 
strengthening  technological  transfer  among  multinational  and  small/medium 
size businesses, to eliminate the dual structure of our economy. 
transfer  reform,  which  support 
increasing 
  force 
labor 
Stability  of  the  regulatory  environment,  strengthening  the  rule  of  law,  respect  of 
contracts and market based coordination. 
Anchored inflation expectations. 
Keep  financial  intermediation  active  and  motivated  to  provide  appropriate  level  of 
financing future business activities. 
BIS Review 134/2010
     4 
 