Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: The role of the financial services industry 
in Bahrain 
Keynote speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank of Bahrain, at the Bahrain British Business Forum, Manama, 21 November 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  Mr.  Al-Zayani  for  his  kind  invitation  to  address  you  this 
evening. I would also like to extend an especially warm welcome to those of you who may be 
visiting Bahrain for the first time. To those of you who are making a return visit, it is a great 
pleasure to have you with us again. 
As I am sure you are aware, the ties that bind Bahrain and Britain together are deep and 
long-lasting.  It  should  not  be  a  surprise  to  learn  that  these  bonds  extend  deep  into  the 
financial services industry. 
The  predecessor  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain,  the  Bahrain  Monetary  Agency,  was 
established with technical assistance from the Bank of England. We have frequently looked 
to the UK for our regulatory models, although we also have needed to adapt our policies and 
practices to our specific circumstances. 
Our aim is to adopt a regulatory approach that is open, transparent, and that involves close 
consultation  with  the  industry.  We  take  the  view  that  anything  is  permitted  unless  it  is 
explicitly  prohibited.  As  a  public  institution,  the  CBB  is  also  proud  of  the  fact  that  we  are 
bound  by  the  rule  of  law  and  we  ensure  that  there  is  a  clear  legal  basis  for  all  of  our 
decisions  and  directives.  The  hallmarks  of  our  regulatory  approach  are  consistency, 
predictability and equal treatment for both foreign and domestic firms. 
These policies have served Bahrain well and have been a major contribution to the growth of 
our financial sector. Since the 1970s, financial services have been one of the great success 
stories of our economy, along with tourism and manufacturing that have also made strong 
contributions  to  economic  growth.  Bahrain’s  economy  has  become  the  most  diversified  of 
any  in  the  GCC,  with  the  financial  sector  accounting  for  over  one  quarter  of  our  national 
output, a larger share than oil production and processing. 
At present, over 400 licensed financial institutions operate in Bahrain, including 133 banks 
and 167 insurance companies. Many are branches or offices of major financial institutions. 
Although our domestic market is small, many of the banks, insurers and asset management 
firms located in Bahrain use their presence as a hub from which to tap into the enormous 
opportunities that exist in both the GCC and the wider Middle East. As well as being attracted 
to Bahrain by our comprehensive and transparent regulatory framework, these firms also tell 
us that they are drawn here by the maturity and efficiency of our financial markets. 
Bahrain has also become one of the world’s primary locations for Islamic finance. We host 
the largest concentration of Islamic banks in the world – currently they number 27 – as well 
as many Islamic insurance and fund management businesses. 
Important standard-setting bodies for Islamic finance, such as the “Accounting and Auditing 
Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions” and the “International Islamic Finance Market”, 
are located in Bahrain. The Bahrain Institute of Banking and Finance is one of the pioneers in 
developing  courses  on  Islamic  finance  to  develop  a  pool  of  trained  professionals  with  the 
skills the industry requires. 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 1
The skills and dedication of Bahrain’s population is reflected in employment in the industry. 
Almost  two  thirds  of  people  working  in  the  financial  sector  are  Bahraini  nationals.  This  is 
testament to the skills, training, and work ethic exhibited by our population. 
Looking  now  to  the  future,  the  financial  services  industry  will  continue  to  play  a  very 
prominent  role  in  our  economy.  We  realise  that  there  are  important  lessons  to  be  learned 
from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  we  will  certainly  take  notice  of  them.  Nonetheless,  we 
believe that Bahrain will continue to play a major role as the financial centre of choice for the 
Middle  East  and  North  Africa  region.  We  will  continue  to  encourage  a  diversified  financial 
sector in which fund management and insurance will play an increasingly prominent role. 
In recent years we have already seen very strong growth in the insurance segment of our 
financial industry. Premium income has grown at an average rate of 18 percent over the past 
five years, and the growth of Takaful – Sharia-compliant insurance – has been particularly 
notable.  There  is  enormous  potential  throughout  the  region  for  Sharia-compliant  asset 
management and insurance businesses. 
Encouraging  the  growth  and  diversification  of  the  financial  sector  is  a  major  plank  in  the 
Kingdom’s 2030 Vision. This is a strategy which sets out our ambitions for a well-diversified 
domestic economy for the post-oil era. It provides the unifying vision for a series of reforms 
that are already underway or which we plan to make in the near future. Our aim is to further 
liberalize an economy that is already ranked the most free in the Arab world. 
Our liberalization strategy involves major reforms to a whole series of government institutions 
and key markets. For example, last year we became the first country in the Gulf to abolish 
the  sponsorship  system,  thus  allowing  expatriate  workers  the  freedom  to  change  their 
employers  for  the  first  time.  We  are  also  embarking  on  a  major  reform  of  our  educational 
institutions,  such  as  establishing  the  Bahrain  Polytechnic,  as  we  realise  that  there  is  still 
much work to be done to provide our young people with the types of vocational skills that 
they need to flourish in the modern world. 
Underpinning all of these initiatives is our continuing commitment to political reform. As you 
will  have  seen  in  the  news,  in  late  October  we  held  elections  for  the  lower  House  of 
Parliament,  and  these  passed  off  peacefully  and  with  a  67%  turnout  of  the  electorate. 
Outside the Kingdom, some commentators had questioned our commitment to maintaining a 
system  of  constitutional  government.  However,  their  skepticism  was  unfounded,  and  our 
commitment to political reform remains strong. 
Let  me  conclude  by  thanking  you  for  coming  to  Bahrain  and  for  attending  the  dinner  this 
evening. It is testament to the continuing strong ties between Britain and Bahrain, a relationship 
that we have always valued in the past and will continue to value in the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2010
