 Tiff Macklem: Reflections on monetary policy after the Great Recession 
Remarks  by  Mr  Tiff  Macklem,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the 
International Finance Club of Montreal, Montreal, 5 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted to be in Montréal and to address the International Finance Club of Montréal in 
the Mount Stephen Club – a beautiful and elegant venue steeped in Canadian and Quebec 
history.  It  was  founded  by  business  leaders  and  is  still  a  gathering  place  of  grace  and 
influence. As a native Montrealer, I am particularly pleased to be coming home to deliver my 
first speech as Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada. 
The Mount Stephen Club opened its doors during the Roaring Twenties. As a meeting place 
for  Montréal’s  business elite,  a  great  many  frank  discussions  must  have  taken  place  in its 
early  days  about  the  stock  market  bubble,  the  Crash  of  ’29  and  the  ensuing  Great 
Depression.  It  is  with  some  humility  that  I  suggest  those  discussions  were  likely  similar  to 
more recent conversations that have taken place within these walls about the credit boom, 
the financial crisis, and the Great Recession. 
What I thought I could do today is contribute to this tradition of frank discussion by sharing 
with you some of my reflections on monetary policy coming out of the Great Recession. My 
remarks today focus on three themes: 
 
 
 
After  spending  many  years  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  I  was  recently  at  the  Department  of 
Finance, where I was Associate Deputy Minister and Canada’s G-7 and G-20 Deputy. During 
that  time,  I  continued  to  work  closely  with  the  Bank,  as  well  as  with  the  Office  of  the 
Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI)  and  other  partners  coordinating  Canada’s 
response to the financial crisis. 
But as far as monetary policy goes, that remained solely the purview of the Bank of Canada. 
I was a spectator like everyone else here today. So I offer these reflections as someone who 
was on the outside looking in during the Great Recession.  
What’s worked well 
What’s been missing 
And what needs to be brought back after a period of neglect 
Global economic growth has returned 
Although the Great Recession is now over and global economic growth has returned, it is not 
a great recovery. Growth is uneven, and there is an unusual degree of uncertainty. Globally, 
the  financial  crisis  has  left  scars  of  lost  output  and  jobs,  declines  in  household  wealth, 
impaired  financial  systems  and  large  fiscal  deficits.  With  households,  financial  firms  and 
governments  all  deleveraging,  the  global  recovery  is  expected  to  be  modest  and 
unemployment to come down only gradually.  
In  most  advanced  countries  the  recovery  remains  dependent  on  monetary  and  fiscal 
stimulus.  Private  demand  is  recovering,  but  the  hand-off  from  public  stimulus  to  private 
demand  has  yet  to  be  accomplished.  With  fiscal  policy  expected  to  begin  to  withdraw 
stimulus in the coming year, monetary policy is likely to remain stimulative for some time. 
Globally, the modest recovery in advanced countries is being balanced by continued strong 
growth in most emerging market economies. Policy responses and strengthened economic 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 1
 frameworks  are  helping  emerging  economies  to  boost  internal  demand,  although  in  some 
cases this needs to be supported by greater exchange rate flexibility.  
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  predicts  that  annual  growth  for  2011  in  emerging 
economies  will  be  about  6½  per  cent,  while  worldwide  growth  is  projected  to  be  about 
4¼ per cent in 2011.  
As you know, Canada withstood the crisis better than most other countries, thanks to solid 
foundations – a mortar mix of good management and sound policy. 
Looking ahead, the IMF expects Canada’s economic recovery to be among the strongest of 
the G-7 countries over the next two years. Nonetheless, by historical standards, this is still a 
modest recovery. 
Globally, the costs of this crisis have been enormous. Economic output in the G-7 countries 
fell by almost 5 per cent from peak to trough with output losses of $2 trillion for the global 
economy.  
In  Canada,  GDP  fell  by  more  than  3  per  cent  from  peak  to  trough,  with  output  losses  at 
$50 billion  and  400,000  jobs  lost.  Canada  has  now  recouped  these  lost  jobs,  but  has  not 
recovered the lost momentum and opportunity the crisis left behind.  
There is a great deal to fix to prevent such losses happening again. Much of this has to do 
with  aligning  incentives  and  enhancing  risk  management  and  governance  in  the  private 
sector,  strengthening  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  and  improving  core  financial 
infrastructure.  
But today I want to focus on the lessons of the Great Recession for monetary policy. 
What’s worked well  
Let me start with what worked. In the early 1990s, price stability became entrenched as the 
primary objective of monetary policy. This reflected both the bitter experience with inflation 
since the early 1970s and a growing consensus that price stability was the best contribution 
monetary policy could make to the welfare of Canadians. 
In 1991, the objective of price stability was formalized and Canada became only the second 
country  in  the  world,  following  New  Zealand,  to  target  inflation.  That  same  year,  I  was  a 
relatively newly minted PhD working at the Bank. The move to an inflation target presented 
an exciting opportunity to translate my educational investment into real-world policy advice 
on how to implement this new inflation-targeting regime.  
It was a fascinating time, although the early days of inflation targeting were difficult. There 
was considerable skepticism about whether the Bank of Canada could control inflation and 
achieve the targets. 
In addition, in the first half of the 1990s, Canada’s government debt was high and rising. So 
when  global  risk  appetite  pulled  back  with  the  outbreak  of  the  Mexican  peso  crisis,  many 
foreign investors dumped Canadian-dollar assets. And the growing sovereign risk premium 
demanded  by  foreign  investors  to  hold  Canadian-dollar  assets  undermined  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s ability to set interest rates to achieve the inflation target.  
This offers a cautionary tale to other countries with high and rising debt. But that is the topic 
for another speech. 
With Canada’s dramatic fiscal turnaround that started in the mid-1990s, the early challenges 
facing  inflation  targeting  dissipated.  The  result  was  a  tremendously  successful  economic 
expansion that spanned 16 years.  
By 2006, when the inflation target was last renewed, it was clear that inflation targeting was 
very  successful  –  indeed,  more  successful  than  even  its  most  ardent  supporters  had 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 predicted.  Inflation  in  Canada  was  much  lower  and  more  stable  than  it  had  been  in  the 
previous  two  decades.  GDP  growth  was  higher  and  more  stable,  and  unemployment  had 
declined.  
And  Canada’s  experience  has  not  been  unique.  As  other  countries  have  implemented 
inflation  targeting  –  26  had  done  so  by  2009  –  similar  results  have  been  achieved.  Many 
point to inflation targeting as a leading factor in the extended period of strong growth and low 
inflation known as the Great Moderation.  
But the true test of a successful policy is not how well it performs in good times, but how well 
it performs under stress. 
Monetary policy during the crisis 
While the financial crisis emanated beyond Canada’s borders, we were not immune, either to 
the virtual shutdown in global credit markets or to the consequences for the real economy. In 
Canada,  industrial  production  fell  15  per  cent,  with  exporters  suffering  the  most  as  U.S. 
economic activity dropped sharply.  
The  first-line  monetary  policy  response  of  central  banks  during  the  crisis  was  to  lower  the 
policy  interest  rate.1  The  Bank  of  Canada  began  cutting  interest  rates  in  December  2007. 
This  was  followed  by  a  series  of  aggressive  reductions  until  the  policy  rate  reached 
one-quarter of one per cent in April of last year, the lowest it can effectively go and the lowest 
it has ever been in the Bank’s 75-year history.  
In addition, the Bank provided extraordinary guidance on the likely path of interest rates that 
would  be  necessary  to  achieve  the  inflation  target  in  order  to  maximize  the  monetary 
stimulus  from  its  policy  rate.  The  focus  of  monetary  policy  on  inflation  control  through  the 
financial  crisis  and  global  recession  provided  a  beacon  as  well  as  an  anchor  for  the  bold 
policy response.  
The series of decisions that resulted in the policy interest rate being lowered effectively to 
zero reflected the symmetric commitment to target 2 per cent inflation. This policy response, 
coupled with the conditional commitment to keep the rate that low for a fixed period of time, 
allowed  real  interest  rates  to  go  negative  and  helped  to  re-establish  confidence  among 
businesses and households. 
The Bank of Canada provided a conditional commitment to keep the policy interest rate at 
one quarter of one per cent from April 2009 to mid-2010 to provide additional monetary policy 
stimulus  by  influencing  rates  at  longer  maturities.  The  commitment  was  conditional  on  the 
outlook for inflation. In other words, it was based on the Bank’s view that this path for the 
policy rate was consistent with hitting the inflation target. 
Preliminary research on the effect of this conditional commitment indicates that expressing a 
specific  period  of  time  proved  particularly  effective.  Evidence  suggests  that  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s  conditional  commitment  lowered  Canadian  interest  rates  out  the  yield  curve 
relative  to  what  their  historical  relationship  with  inflation  and  unemployment  rates  would 
imply.2 
But while Canada’s inflation-targeting framework has served Canadians well, this does not 
mean  that  we  can  rely  on  the  commitment  to  price  stability  to  ensure  financial  stability.  In 
fact,  stable  inflation  and  the  associated  moderation  in  the  economic  cycle  may  have 
                                                 
1   The first response of central banks to the crisis was to inject liquidity into the financial system, but this was 
designed to address financial stability while protecting the monetary policy interest rate. 
2   Z.  He,  “Evaluating  the  Effect  of  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  Conditional  Commitment  Policy”  (Discussion  Paper 
No. 2010–11, Bank of Canada, 2010). 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 3
 encouraged  excessive  risk  taking.  The  crisis  reminds  us  that  unless  you  ensure  financial 
stability, you can’t achieve price stability either. This leads to my second theme. 
What’s been missing 
The Great Recession has forced us to look much more closely at crisis prevention. How do 
we stop history from repeating itself? The question forces us to broaden our view to consider 
the  interaction  among  price  stability,  financial  system  stability,  and  the  roles  of  monetary 
policy and other policy instruments. In particular, should monetary policy actively restrain a 
buildup of financial imbalances or are other instruments better suited for this role? 
To  the  extent  that  financial  imbalances  affect  the  inflation  outlook,  monetary  policy  does 
respond  to  them.  Canada’s  inflation  target  is  expressed  as  the  rate  of  change  of  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI).  So  if  a  financial  imbalance  affects  the  outlook  for  consumer 
price inflation, either directly through its impact on some prices in the CPI (such as house 
prices),  or  indirectly  through  its  effects  on  income  and  wealth  and  hence  overall  price 
pressures, they are taken into account when the Bank sets the policy interest rate. Inflation 
targeting necessarily requires monetary policy to take into account anything that is affecting 
the inflation outlook. 
So the real question is not whether monetary policy takes into account financial imbalances, 
but should it work to mitigate them beyond what is required to keep inflation on target over 
the  usual  two-year  monetary  policy  horizon?  Or  to  put  it  more  starkly,  under  what 
circumstances might it be worthwhile to accept greater deviations of inflation from target over 
the usual horizon to allow monetary policy to mitigate financial imbalances and potentially do 
a better job of maintaining low and stable inflation over a longer horizon? 
Prior to the crisis, many espoused the “clean doctrine”, that monetary policy should not be 
used to address financial imbalances in the build-up phase, but rather should restrict itself to 
cleaning up the mess when they unwind. This approach looks less convincing in the wake of 
this crisis. 
In considering the role of monetary policy, the first step is to understand the range of tools 
available  to  promote  financial  stability  and  what  types  of  risks  each  tool  is  best  suited  to 
address.  
The  first  line  of  defence  is  sound  regulation  and  supervision  institution  by  institution.  In 
Canada,  federally  regulated  financial  institutions  are  supervised  by  OSFI.  And  as  Julie 
Dickson,  the  Superintendent  likes  to  say,  “a  sound  financial  system  is  made  up  of  sound 
financial institutions”, so getting the regulatory rules right and applying them rigorously is key 
to ensuring resilient financial firms.  
In  this  regard,  the  recent  agreement  at  the  Basel  Committee  to  substantially  increase  the 
loss-bearing capital that financial institutions must hold relative to a more stringent definition 
of their risk-weighted assets, combined with a limit on leverage, provides a very significant 
strengthening of the rules and is an excellent outcome. With this strengthening, the rest of 
the world will look more like Canada. But here in Canada, financial firms will need to make 
adjustments as well.  
The second line of defence is system-wide regulation. This is a shared responsibility of the 
Department  of  Finance  and  all  of  the  federal  financial  regulatory  authorities,  including,  of 
course,  the  Bank  of  Canada,  OSFI,  and  the  Canada  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation.  An 
important lesson from the crisis is that regulation institution by institution is not enough. The 
risk  to  the  financial  system  is  greater  than  the  average  risk  to  individual  institutions.  This 
points  to  the  need  to  complement  institution-by-institution  prudential  regulation  with  a 
system-wide perspective. And this requires new system-wide policy instruments. 
The countercyclical capital buffer included in the new Basel Committee agreement provides 
a leading example of a new system-wide instrument. The countercyclical buffer provides for 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 additional capital to be built up during periods of excessive credit growth that are associated 
with  an  increase  in  system-wide  risk  to  provide  additional  loss-bearing  capacity  in  the 
anticipation  of  a  correction.  The  countercyclical  buffer  should  also  dampen  excess  credit 
growth. 
The development of this and other system-wide tools is a very important step forward. These 
tools have been missing or at least under developed and will fill a much-needed gap in the 
policy  arsenal.  There  remains  considerable  work  to  be  done  to  put  them  into  practice  and 
much experience will be gained in their implementation in the years to come.  
But  even  with  improved  prudential  oversight  and  effective  system-wide  instruments,  the 
question  remains:  Are  there  circumstances  when  monetary  policy  should  “lean”  to 
supplement these tools? As the costs of the recent crisis have made all too clear, this is an 
important  question  to  consider  as  we  approach  the  renewal  of  the  inflation-targeting 
agreement between the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada by the end of 2011. 
At  this  point,  what  we  can  say  is  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  to  mitigate  financial 
imbalances will depend on the sources of the shock or market failure and on the nature of 
the other regulatory instruments available.  
If financial imbalances are specific to a sector or market and a well-targeted prudential tool is 
available, monetary policy would likely have little role to play. If, however, the imbalances in a 
specific market spill over to the entire economy or if the prudential tool is itself broad-based, 
it  is  more  likely  that  monetary  policy  could  have  a  role  to  play.  In  these  instances,  there 
would likely be a need to coordinate the use of the two policy instruments.3  
What needs to be brought back  
My final reflection on monetary policy after the Great Recession is that some of what was old 
in central banking is new again.  
When I first started working at the Bank of Canada in 1984, research was focusing not on 
inflation  targeting,  but  on  finding  a  monetary  aggregate  to  target.  In  1981  the  Bank 
abandoned  the  M1  target  –  or,  as  Governor  Bouey  quipped  –  “M1  abandoned  us”.  And 
subsequently, much of the research at the Bank was aimed at finding a new M with a stable 
relationship with prices, income, and interest rates.  
The  search  proved  fruitless,  but  we  did  learn  a  great  deal  about  how  the  expansions  and 
contractions  in  money  and  credit  filter  their  way  through  the  financial  system  to  affect 
household spending and business investment.  
Moreover, a legacy of the monetary-targeting era in my early days at the Bank was that there 
was a great deal of ongoing attention devoted to tracking financial flows and the build-up and 
draw-down of money and credit balances between different players in the financial system 
and the real economy.  
But with the rise of inflation targeting in the 1990s, this analysis was relegated to the back 
seat.  Our  primary  focus  turned  to  the  policy  interest  rate  and  its  impact  on  other  interest 
rates, asset prices, the exchange rate, and these influences on output and inflation. Money 
and credit became invisible in much of our economic analysis.  
As I said earlier, the test of a good policy is how it functions under stress. Focusing on the 
transmission of interest rate changes to spending and inflation works well in normal times, 
but the crisis has reminded us of the complexity of the global financial system.  
                                                 
3   For further discussion of the potential role for monetary policy in mitigating financial imbalances, see J. Boivin, 
T.  Lane,  and  C.  Meh,  “Should  Monetary  Policy  Be  Used  to  Counteract  Financial  Imbalances?”  Bank  of 
Canada Review (Summer 2010). 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 5
 When  the  financial  system  is  not  working  normally,  we  cannot  rely  on  the  short-cut  from 
interest  rates  to  output  and  inflation.  We  need  a  deeper  understanding  of  how  the  central 
bank’s balance sheet affects financial intermediation and the credit and money balances of 
businesses and households.  
In  other  words,  we  need  a  better  understanding  of  money  and  credit  flows  at  a  more 
disaggregated level and we need to develop models that include money, credit, and the key 
institutional features of banking and capital markets.  
If  we  look  only  at  interest  rates,  inflation,  and  output,  we  may  miss  bubbles  and  other 
elements  of  systemic  risk  as  they  build.  And,  if  we  are  to  begin  to  consider  the  role  of 
monetary policy in dampening financial imbalances, we need a deeper understanding of how 
one affects the other.  
Since the onset of the financial crisis, the Bank has intensified its effort to take into account 
credit flow and money in its policy analysis. Recent research at the Bank has taken important 
steps  forward  in  incorporating  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  into  standard  macro-economic 
models.  This  will  allow  us  to  examine  how  developments  in  financial  sectors  affect  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  to  analyze  how  monetary  policy  should  deal  with 
financial  shocks,  both  international  and  domestic.  Finally,  we  are  also  developing  tools  to 
detect the emergence of financial imbalances, which has implications for credit creation.  
Our  research  efforts  continue.  The  Great  Recession  and  the  not-so-great  recovery  make 
clear that we face interesting challenges when it comes to the conduct of monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. This crisis has taught us many lessons and reminds us of past approaches 
that should be dusted off and given their due. The focus of monetary policy on price stability 
implemented through an inflation target has been the most successful monetary regime to 
date.  
It  brought  us  the  period  of  the  Great  Moderation,  or  the  decade  that  Bank  of  England 
Governor  Mervyn  King  referred  to  as  the  NICE  decade  –  non-inflationary  and  consistently 
expansionary – and it performed well under stress throughout the crisis. 
Nevertheless,  the  crisis  has  revealed  some  gaping  holes  in  our  regulatory  rules,  core 
financial  infrastructure  and  policy  tools.  While  it  is  unrealistic  to  expect  a  combination  of 
microprudential, system-wide and monetary policies to eliminate procyclicality in the financial 
system and the broader economic cycle, our objective is to make the system more resilient to 
economic downturns and other aggregate shocks and to moderate the buildup of financial 
risks.  
We learned much from history in crafting the extraordinary policy response at the height of 
this crisis. Whereas I expect that many early members of the Mount Stephen Club may have 
lived through very hard times during the Great Depression of the 1930s, this time around the 
scale of the economic fallout was considerably less severe for Canadians. Monetary policy 
focused  on  price  stability  combined  with  bold  fiscal  and  financial  stabilization  measures 
averted a much worse disaster. We now need to be equally diligent in learning from history in 
averting future crises. Ensuring that we have the policy and analytic arsenal for the job is part 
of that challenge. 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2010
