Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Farewell party for the 2010 retired staff 
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
farewell party for the 2010 retired staff, Kampala, 17 December 2010. 
 Members of the Board  
Deputy Governor  
Governor(s) Emeritus  
Invited Guests  
Retired Staff  
Staff present  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me pleasure once again to host 30 retiring staff for the year 2010 who has diligently 
served  the  Bank  and  our  country.  I  want  to  acknowledge  with  gratitude  their  selfless 
contribution in the service of the bank.  
To have served the Bank until retirement is not a simple matter. We all know that you started 
service in this Bank when you were many but some of your colleagues fell by the wayside. It 
is for this reason that we who are still in the Bank, look at you with admiration and gratitude 
for  a  job  well  done.  We  thank  you  sincerely  for  being  exemplary.  You  may  be  aware  that 
while  presiding  over  the  commissioning  of  the  new  building  for  Mbale  Bank  of  Uganda 
Regional Branch, His Excellency the President stated that Bank of Uganda staff is the most 
exemplary and professional in Uganda. To this end, I would like to congratulate the entire 
Bank staff. Bank of Uganda as you are all aware plays a leading role in the exceptional story 
of reform and development that Uganda has so far experienced.  
Distinguished  Guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  Uganda’s  banking  sector  emerged  out  of  the 
recent  financial  crisis  unscathed  and  the  outlook  for  the  sector  is  very  promising.  Credit 
growth  has  remained  robust,  largely  on  account  of  improving  business  conditions  and 
moderating credit risks. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans has been reduced to 
below 5.0 percent reflecting overall improvements in asset quality. In addition, banks have 
remained  well  capitalized  with  capital  well  above  the  regulatory  minimum.  The  sound  and 
stable  financial  sector  has  in  turn  enhanced  the  effectiveness  of  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy by the Bank of Uganda. The Bank has managed to contain inflation to a stable and 
single digit level.  
Bank of Uganda has also taken the following measures to promote financial inclusion:  
 
 
Promoted Mobile Money transfer services  
Designed a regulatory framework for Tier 4 institutions that includes the regulation of 
SACCOs  
Promoted  the  development  of  an  effective  framework  for  financial  literacy  and 
financial consumer protection  
Made proposals to amend the Financial Institutions Act 2004 to provide for Islamic 
Banking and Finance.  
  I  want  to  emphasize  that  within  the  financial  sector,  Bank  of  Uganda  with  its  regulatory 
mandate  will  continue  to  promote  financial  innovations.  Efficient  and  effective  regulation 
promotes  competition,  which  in  turn  lead  to  innovations  and  lower  costs  of  financial 
intermediation.  
In addition, Bank of Uganda has played and indeed continues to play a major role in the East 
African Monetary Integration efforts. I believe that you are aware that if we are to survive and 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 1
be competitive in the current and future international economy, regional economic integration 
is a must.  
I am happy to note that the Bank has been able to excel on the national and regional scene 
because of our performance in accordance with our strategic plan.  
As you join the wide world, I would like to assure you that you will continue to be members of 
the Bank of Uganda family. I am happy to note that the Bank has improved and will continue 
to improve post-retirement benefits such as pension and medical services to ensure that you 
maintain reasonable standard of living.  
It is unfortunate that we use the English word retirement because we all know that you are 
retired, but you are not tired. It is in this context that I wish to advise you that the Bank has 
provided you knowledge and skills which you can utilize in your transition management to an 
even better endeavour. Always bear in mind that this so called retirement should not herald 
your deterioration. It should be a point at which you transition to another prosperous career.  
I wish to thank your family members who provided you support while you worked in the Bank. 
I implore them to continue rendering you support in your transition management.  
There is no doubt that you will uphold the good corporate image you have been exhibiting 
while in the Bank because once a central banker, always a central banker.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  please  allow  me  at  this  stage  to  commend  all  staff  whose 
performance  was  outstanding  during  the  recent  appraisal  period.  Let  me  pay  special 
recognition one  of  us  who  participated  in  a  noble  cause. This  is  Augustine  Muwonge  who 
cycled  around  the  country  in  a  bid  to  promote  HIV/AIDS  awareness  in  the  country.  In 
recognition  of  this  endeavor  the  Bank  presents  a  token  of  appreciation  to  Mr.  Augustine 
Muwonge.  
It  is  now  my  honour,  on  behalf  of  Bank  of  Uganda,  to  thank  you,  once  again,  for  your 
excellent service and commission you to be good ambassadors of the Bank as you embark 
on another phase in your development process.  
I wish you all a merry Christmas and a happy new year.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 174/2010
