Sada Reddy: Economic indicators and implications – where to from here? 
Address  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Fiji  Institute  of 
Bankers’ Convention, Suva, 23 October 2010.  
 Introduction  
His Excellency the President of the Republic of the Fiji Islands, Ratu Epeli Nailatikau,  
The Attorney-General & Minister for Justice, Anti-Corruption, Public Enterprise, Industry, 
Tourism & Trade and Communications, Mr. Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum,  
The President of the Fiji Institute of Bankers, Mr. Norman Wilson,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies & Gentlemen  
Good morning and thank you for inviting me to speak to you on this occasion of the inaugural 
convention of the Fiji Institute of Bankers (FIB). The FIB, which will turn 20 years soon, plays 
a very important role in the training and development of bank professionals in Fiji.  
I must congratulate the FIB for this excellent initiative in bringing together professionals and 
partners from the financial sector as well as stakeholders from the public and private sectors 
towards  a  common  interest,  that  is,  to  establish  a  vision  and  strategic  direction  for  the 
banking sector towards 2015 – the theme of today’s convention.  
I  have  great  pleasure  this  morning  to  speak  on  the  topic  “Economic  Indicators  and 
Implications – Where to From Here?”  
First  I  will  provide  an  overview  of  the  current  state  of  the  economy  and  its  future  outlook, 
before I move on to outlining the future policy direction for our economy.  
As  bankers,  we  can  attest  to  the  prominent  role  played  by  financial  institutions  in  the 
development  of  any  economy.  In  Fiji,  the  contribution  of  the  financial  sector  to  total  real 
growth or total value added product of the economy is around 9 percent. As a measure of its 
size, total assets of the financial sector in Fiji is around 180 percent of the country’s overall 
gross domestic product (GDP). This ratio has increased from about 150 percent five years 
ago and shows the increasing importance of the financial sector in our economy.  
In  addition,  the  financial  sector  employs  around  8,800  people  which  accounts  for  around 
7 percent of paid employment in Fiji. An efficient and sound financial sector is essential for 
economic  growth.  The  intermediation  process  which  facilitates  the  transfer  of  funds  from 
savers  to  borrowers,  contributes  significantly  to  raising  investment,  generating  income, 
creating employment opportunities and supporting our economy. As someone said, credit is 
the  oxygen  on  which  businesses  grow  and  survive.  Therefore,  as  would  be  true  in  other 
developing  economies,  our  financial  institutions  play  a  very  key  role  in  the  socioeconomic 
development of Fiji.  
Central to this process is the role of the Reserve Bank in not only ensuring that monetary 
policy is appropriate but that the financial system is stable and sound. This has become more 
critical in light of the impact of the recent global financial crisis. The enormous costs borne 
from the negative impact of the crisis, is a lesson which has forced central banks to rethink 
their monetary policy strategies and strengthen macro-prudential supervision and regulation, 
in aiming to avert the adverse impact of possible future crises.  
Having said this, it is noteworthy that Fiji’s financial system was largely insulated from the 
direct  impact  of  the  global  crisis  which  began  3  years  ago.  However,  the  devastating 
economic fallout and implications of that event on both developed and developing countries 
has provided valuable lessons for small developing nations like ours. Bankers and regulators 
have  come  under  increasing  pressure  to  implement  reforms,  improve  supervision,  curb 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 1
excessive compensation and limit their appetite for risks so that the stability of the financial 
system is preserved. Nevertheless, the indirect impact of the crisis through reduced global 
demand for our exports and tourism services, together with the adverse effects of the floods 
and cyclones on major domestic industries, hugely impacted our balance of payments, which 
deteriorated significantly early last year, prompting the Reserve Bank to put in place specific 
policies  as  a  response  to  the  In  favourable  economic  situation.  As  we  saw,  the  economic 
situation turned around and the country is now on a path to recovery.  
The current economic conditions and outlook for Fiji’s economy is stable. However, there are 
some risks to be borne in mind, which can have possible adverse impact on the economy 
should they occur. Let me share a little on recent economic developments. As a background 
to  domestic  developments,  the  global  economy  continues  to  recover  at  a  better  than 
expected  rate.  The  pace  of  this  growth,  while  largely  driven  by  Asia,  varies  significantly 
across  the  major  regions  of  the  world.  In  line  with  the  improved  outlook  for  the  world 
economy, the growth of our major trading partner economies from this year onwards are all 
expected  to  be  positive.  This  positive  outturn  augurs  well  for  us  in  terms  of  expected 
increases in visitor arrivals and higher demand for exports.  
The  latest  economic  projections  for  this  year  show  that  the  economy  is  expected  to  grow 
marginally,  following  a  notable  contraction  of  3.0  percent  last  year.  This  year’s  marginal 
growth however, reflects a broad-based recovery, with the exception of the sugar sector. The 
turnaround in output is expected in the major sectors for wholesale and retail, construction, 
mining and quarrying, hotels and restaurants, manufacturing, education, fishing and finance, 
all of which declined last year.  
Not with standing the weak turnaround in overall output forecast for this year, performances 
in  some  of  our  major  sectors  so  far  have  been  encouraging.  Tourism  has  recovered  very 
strongly. Visitor arrivals are higher by around 20 percent compared to the last two years. The 
tourism  industry  is  clearly  on  track  to  achieve  its  targeted  600,000  record  arrivals  for  the 
year.  
Activity  in  the  mining  and  export  sectors  is  also  encouraging.  Exports,  particularly  of  gold, 
fish,  mineral  water  and  timber,  continue  to  gain  momentum,  supported  by  favourable 
commodity  prices.  The  outlook  for  this  sector  is  very  promising  and  bodes  well  for  our 
balance of trade. In contrast, output in the sugar sector has been very disappointing. Sugar 
production has been declining over a number of years.  
The  deterioration  in  both  cane  and  sugar  production  has  been  attributed  to  frequent  mill 
problems which have restrained cane harvests and affected mill efficiency. Unfortunately, the 
mill upgrade over the past three years has not been able to produce the desired results and 
has only added to the debt burden of the Government.  
However,  the  outlook  for  this  critical  industry  is  positive  pending  the  implementation  of  a 
range  of  reforms  to  bring  the  industry  back  to  its  glory  days.  It  is  encouraging  to  note  the 
Prime  Minister’s  recent  pledge  to  fix  the  industry  and  safeguard  the  livelihood  of  nearly 
200,000  people  who  rely  on  the  sugar  sector.  Consumer  spending  has  picked  up  slightly 
from  levels  recorded  last  year,  as  indicated  by  recent  partial  indicators.  Higher  Net  Value 
Added  Tax  (VAT)  collections  and  Pay  As  You  Earn  collections  indicate  growth  in  private 
consumption.  
This has also been supported by strong visitor arrivals and increases in inward remittances. 
Inward remittances which has fallen significantly over the last 3 to 4 years is recovering very 
strongly.  
Against  this  macroeconomic  background,  the  Reserve  Bank  continues  to  focus  monetary 
policy on ensuring that the interest rate environment is appropriate and liquidity is adequate 
at  all  times  to  allow  credit  to  grow.  Inflation  has  significantly  trended  downwards  in  recent 
months as the effect of the devaluation has fully worked through the economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 152/2010
From a peak of 10.5 percent in April, inflation has fallen to 1.1 percent in September, and is 
forecast  to  be  around  4.0  percent  or  less  by  the  end  of  the  year.  Foreign  reserves,  I  am 
pleased to say, have held up very well this year, helped by the strong growth in domestic 
exports and higher tourism receipts as well as lower import demand. Reserves are currently 
around  F$1.3  billion,  equivalent  to  4.0  months  of  import  cover.  Not  too  long  ago,  foreign 
reserves had reached critical levels of below 2 month of imports. While inflation and reserves 
are stable, domestic economic recovery this year has not been as firm as earlier expected, 
thus posing some concerns to our objectives and the economy’s future growth. As such, it is 
critical that national policies are aimed at facilitating sustainable economic growth which will 
create long term macroeconomic stability.  
To reiterate the views I shared at the private sector consultative forum on the 2010 national 
budget  as  well  as  at  the  Fiji  Institute  of  Accountants  Congress  in  June  this  year  –  the 
challenge  before  us  is  to  raise  growth  –  that  is  to  raise  investment  and  exports,  improve 
business conditions, accelerate reforms, raise productivity and diversify the economy.  
For  its  part,  the  Government  remains  committed  to  providing  the  needed  impetus  to  the 
economy through collaboration with and providing incentives to the private sector, reduction 
of  operational  costs,  facilitating  competition  in  the  economy,  caring  for  the  poor  and  the 
marginalised and pursuing plans to modernise and reform the economy.  
The Government continues to make progress on implementing structural reforms in all facets 
of the public service through various reforms including the downsizing of the civil service and 
the  implementation  of  a  more  accountable  public  financial  management  system.  The 
restructure of public enterprises is to make them more efficient and business friendly.  
Investments  in  infrastructure  also  remain  a  key  priority  given  the  Government’s  push  for 
more investment activity. Land reforms now being implemented will greatly boost investment. 
In particular this will give the farmers in the agriculture sector the opportunity to sub-lease or 
lease land from the State for investment with certainty of tenure, while improving the rental 
return to landowners and the State.  
This  may  also  provide  opportunities  for  greater  commercial  agriculture.  In  partnership  with 
Government, the Reserve Bank continues to do its best to contribute in this national effort. 
Faced  with  huge  challenges  in  financial  stability  early  last  year,  the  Bank  implemented 
various  policy  measures  which  returned  stability  to  the  country’s  balance  of  payments 
position.  Since  then,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  implemented  various  other  policy  changes  to 
support the Government’s efforts to facilitate growth in the economy.  
In this regard, the Reserve Bank has taken a number of initiatives to encourage local value 
added and to reduce imports of goods than can easily be produced locally. In relation to this, 
the  Bank  offered  sponsorship  for  training  of  a  local  chef  in  Malaysia.  More  recently,  the 
Reserve Bank rationalised its $40 million Import Substitution and Export Finance Facility to 
make  it  easier  for  eligible  businesses  to  access.  Exporters  and  agricultural  entities  that 
engage in businesses which will bring down our imports can tap this facility at concessional 
rates of interest.  
Importantly, we continue to partner with financial institutions to ensure that they provide an 
efficient  and  effective  facilitative  role  in  the  development  of  the  economy.  I  note  the 
enormous progress made towards the development of microfinance in Fiji. It is encouraging 
to  see  the  active  participation  from  banks  and  stakeholders  from  the  private  and  public 
sectors as well as nongovernment organizations in the various microfinance expositions held 
so  far.  These  expos  are  an  opportunity  for  the  public  to  learn  about  self  employment  and 
rural financial services available through microfinance.  
The training sessions offered by banks during the Expo events have greatly facilitated this 
learning curve. The RBF firmly believes that the extension of microfinance and the promotion 
of greater financial inclusion can contribute to greater economic activities in rural areas and 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 3
address  poverty  alleviation.  I  urge  all  stakeholders  to  continue  their  efforts  towards 
supporting the development of microfinance in Fiji.  
The National Financial Inclusion Taskforce (NFIT), which was established in November last 
year  and  is  tasked  with  guiding  and  monitoring  the  development  towards  greater  financial 
inclusion in Fiji, is making good progress. The three working groups under the taskforce are 
continuing diligently to develop and implement national strategies to improve financial literacy 
and statistics, and develop microfinance. Some recent work by the taskforce have included 
following up on a review by the Ministry of Education on how best to incorporate financial 
education into both primary and secondary school curriculum.  
The taskforce has also endorsed a consultancy review on a household financial competency 
baseline  study  in  Fiji.  I  am  very  pleased  that  the  commercial  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions are playing a very active role in the NFIT and its various working groups. Looking 
ahead, the NFIT will continue to work with the Government and donor agencies to innovate 
and encourage the use of new technologies, such as telecommunications and mobile money 
to expand the reach of financial services. In this respect, the Reserve Bank, in partnership 
with the two mobile companies in Fiji recently launched its E-Money Fiji Project, the first of its 
kind in the Pacific region, as a new way of providing financial services using mobile phone 
technology and network. It is very pleasing to note the positive uptake so far of mobile money 
services by the mobile customer market.  
As at September 2010, over 220,000 active users have registered with mobile money while 
total e-money in circulation totalled over $670,000. With the active pace of marketing by the 
mobile companies, we can expect more activity generated by the mobile phone market in the 
future. More pleasing to note, is the recent new development on potential inward remittances 
through  the  mobile  phone  network,  which  will  have  huge  positive  impact  on  domestic 
economic activity.  
The establishment of Local Advisory Boards (LABs) for foreign banks in Fiji is another critical 
step to assisting banks to better understand and align their strategies to the local regulatory 
and  supervisory  environment  as  well  as  national  development  objectives.  Members  of  the 
LABs themselves must have sufficient knowledge and understanding of Fiji’s business and 
socio-economic  environment  and  banking  industry  and  be  aware  of  long  term  growth 
strategies of Government.  
To date, all LABs are in place with members having met the Reserve Bank’s fit and proper 
requirements. The Reserve Bank provides special induction of all LAB members so that they 
can  fully  appreciate  and  understand  their  important  role  in  the  economy.  Another  key 
development  implemented  last  year  was  the  setup  of  Customer  Complaints  Processes  in 
place  of  a  Financial  Services  Commission  and  Banking  Ombudsman.  As  outlined  in  the 
Complaints Management Guideline of the Reserve Bank, this process ensures that customer 
complaints received by financial institutions are addressed efficiently and effectively, bringing 
confidence to the customer.  
I urge institutions to ensure that a proper policy framework for complaints management is put 
in place, to guide staff on proper handling of customer complaints. Staff training and public 
awareness  exercises  are  very  critical  to  provide  clear  direction  to  all  on  each  institution’s 
processes. More recently in May this year, the Reserve Bank implemented a new Monetary 
Policy Framework, aimed at improving the effectiveness of monetary policy implementation 
by the Bank. The implementation of the new framework marked the return to a market based 
mechanism  for  monetary  operations  following  the  removal  of  interest  rate  controls  and 
lending policies by the Bank.  
The  modernisation  of  the  framework  is  expected  to  improve  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy.  To  complement  the  changes  under  the  new  monetary  policy  framework,  the  Bank 
issued a disclosure policy which requires banks to publicly disclose in a press statement, any 
increase in interest spread above 4 percent.  
4 
 BIS Review 152/2010
Additionally,  the  banks  will  be  required  to  publicly  disclose  a  base  lending  rate,  which  will 
serve as a reference rate for customers. The Reserve Bank will be issuing a statement on 
the latter once consultations with banks are completed. Both these changes are expected to 
benefit  consumers  and  enhance  competition  in  the  market.  This  framework  was  very  well 
received by the banks and we look forward to their continuing support towards improving the 
efficient and effective transmission of interest rates in the market.  
Reducing the costs of bank intermediation is another important area that the Reserve Bank is 
pursuing  and  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  work  by  a  recently  established  joint  ABIF/RBF 
committee to drive the ATM/EFTPOS Interchange Project, is progressing well and work on 
this is expected to be completed by the end of this year.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have weathered the storm of the global financial crisis coupled 
with  several  natural  disasters  over  the  last  3  years  and  are  expected  to  recover  from  this 
year  onwards.  Partnership  between  all  stakeholders  to  ensuring  practical  solutions  are 
carried out to build our economy and nation is critical.  
While much has been done in recent times, a huge part of our growth potential is still at stake 
should we become complacent. As you know, the Reserve Bank has clearly ventured outside 
the domain of central banking, in support of Government reforms and policies to move the 
economy forward.  
We hope that, as partners with the Government and the Reserve Bank, you will continue the 
momentum  with  which  you  have  worked,  to  help  take  Fiji  forward  towards  economic  and 
financial prosperity.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 5
