Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Priorities for integration 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the 13th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2010. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
I was reminded recently that it was only 140 years ago – in 1871 – that Germany created a 
monetary union replacing the Thaler in Prussia and the Gulden in Bavaria by the Goldmark.1 
Although  it  is  said  that  relations  between  Berlin  and  Munich  are  complex,  nobody  has 
questioned  that  the  Länder  using  one  currency  are  also  using  the  same  standards  for 
payments and settlements.  
12  years  ago  the  single  currency  was  introduced  in  the  euro  zone  replacing  national 
currencies by only one means for cash payments – the euro. 
Where do we stand on payment and settlement integration now? 
Many  harmonization  and  integration  initiatives  exist  (on  paper),  but  are  not  yet  fully 
implemented and developed.  
The financial crisis has shown that we have to substantially step up our efforts in this domain:  
First, as the financial crisis has shown the crucial importance of liquidity and sound liquidity 
risk management, stable, sound and integrated payment and settlement systems can play a 
crucial  role  in  ensuring  a  secure  flow  of  liquidity  and  supporting  banks  to  manage  their 
liquidity risk. 
Second, as we have seen that payment and settlement systems have functioned well during 
the  recent  crisis  and  have  contributed  to  prevent  worse  outcomes,  continuous  work  on 
further  strengthening  and  harmonizing  payment  and  settlement  systems  will  enhance  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
And third, as more harmonized and integrated payment and settlement systems increase the 
efficiency of financial markets and ultimately lead to cost savings and welfare gains for the 
overall economy, these efficiency gains will free up more liquidity and capital for the financial 
industry.  In  fact,  the  cost  savings  from  –  for  example  –  a  more  integrated  retail  payments 
market were estimated to be around EUR 18 bn. annually for the euro area. 
When the Euro Finance week was established 13 years ago, we were at the beginning of a 
very  rich  period  in  terms  of  integration  in  the  field  of  payment  and  securities  settlement 
systems. 
We  established  the  European  Monetary  Union  with  a  single  currency  and  we  started  the 
integration of the European payments infrastructure by the creation of the Eurosystem large-
value  payment  system  TARGET/TARGET2.  Today,  TARGET2 
first  market 
infrastructure to be completely integrated and harmonised at the European level which has 
been  instrumental  to  the  integration  of  money  markets  and  wholesale  banking  activities  in 
Europe and has, hence, supported the smooth transmission of our common monetary policy 
across the euro zone.  
Despite this achievement in the field of financial integration, it has become evident that this is 
not enough. In particular, in the field of retail payments and securities settlement I see a lot 
more to do! 
the 
is 
                                                 
1   This  monetary  union  was  culminated  with  the  establishment  of  the  Central  Bank  under  the  Banking  Act  of 
1875 and the introduction of the “Deutsche Mark” as single currency. 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 1
In  my  intervention  today  I  will,  therefore,  focus  on  two  projects  that  aim  to  address  the 
fragmentation still present in the field of retail payments and securities settlement: the Single 
Euro Payments Area (SEPA) and Target2 Securities (T2S). 
Let  me  start  with  SEPA.  As  you  are  certainly  aware,  just  recently,  we  published  the 
Eurosystem’s  7th  Progress  Report  on  SEPA,  in  which  we  welcome  the  overall  progress 
made in delivering SEPA but also indicate areas where more work is still needed.  
Certainly, many stakeholders want to bring the SEPA project further and have contributed to 
its progress so far.  
First, enormous progress has been made by the payments industry in delivering SEPA. In 
particular,  the  SEPA  direct  debit  design  and  launch  in  November  2009  is,  in  my  view,  the 
most remarkable development on the payments industry side. 
The  SEPA  Direct  Debit  is  a  key  payment  instrument  as  it  is  the  first  time  that  a  utility 
company,  like,  for  example,  your  telecommunications  provider,  can  charge  your  account 
regardless of the country of its location and regardless of the location of the bank at which 
you have your account. 
This  represents  a  big  improvement  as  it  finally  allows  customers  to  conduct  all  euro 
payments  within  Europe  from  one  single  account.  The  SEPA  Direct  Debit  is  good  for 
everyone. Companies and individuals will benefit from increased competition and will be able 
to get the payments provider that best fits their needs. 
In  Germany,  the  implementation  of  the  SEPA  Direct  Debit  should  not  represent  a  big 
challenge  as  the  SEPA  Direct  Debit  scheme  is  very  similar  to  what  already  has  been 
available at national level for a long time. In this respect, I encourage German stakeholders 
to find a pragmatic solution regarding the mandate migration. Such solution should limit the 
efforts for companies as well as for customers. 
Second, I believe that we should not forget the role public authorities are playing to get SEPA 
up and running. All but one of the EU member states have finalised the transposition of the 
Payment Services Directive in their national legislation. This means that for payment service 
providers a harmonised legal framework is in place in almost the entire European Union. In 
some countries we see great progress by public authorities moving to SEPA standards. 
Another aspect in which public authorities have been very active in the last months has been 
in  the  establishment  of  the  SEPA  Council.  We,  the  ECB,  and  the  European  Commission 
recognised  that  having  both  the  demand  and  the  supply  side  around  the  same  table 
discussing SEPA related issues in a transparent way is crucial for the success of the project. 
As for “tango”, it takes two to SEPA, and to move in a co-ordinated way.  
And third, the SEPA users have shown in the SEPA Council but also in many national SEPA 
fora an increased willingness to embrace the SEPA project. 
Coming now to the areas for improvement, the progress report also indicates some of the 
barriers the SEPA project has to overcome to be a success. Let me stress only a few major 
issues. 
First, I believe that to reap the benefits of SEPA there is a need to use only and exclusively 
the SEPA instruments. In our recent progress report on SEPA, the ECB has clearly spelled 
this  out  by  stating  that  it  “expects  that  a  mandatory  timeline  for  migration  to  SEPA 
instruments  will  significantly  accelerate  the  pace  of  transition,  enabling  SEPA  to  be 
completed,  preferably,  by  the  end  of  2012  for  credit  transfers  and  by  the  end  of  2013  for 
direct debits”. 
I am looking forward to the European Commission to come in due course, after consulting 
the relevant stakeholders, with the necessary legislative proposal to make this possible.  
Second, although a lot of progress has been witnessed with the delivery of the SEPA Credit 
Transfer and the SEPA Direct Debit, less has happened on cards and innovation.  
2 
 BIS Review 151/2010
On innovation, the ECB has been strongly supporting the emergence of SEPA wide online 
e-payment solutions like the ones already existing at national level, for example in Germany, 
Austria and the Netherlands. This will provide more payments alternatives to the users, but it 
will  also  address  a  problem  which  is  a  concern  for  central  banks:  safety.  For  “internet 
shopping” the payments industry needs to deliver something that permits the customers to 
conduct such activities in a safe way. Online payment solutions are suitable to achieve such 
safety. 
T2S 
Let  me  turn  to  the  second  major  integration  project:  Target2  Securities  (T2S),  the 
Eurosystem’s  technical  platform  for  core,  neutral  and  borderless  multi-currency  securities 
settlement in central bank money across Europe.2 
T2S scope and benefits 
Let me first emphasize that T2S is not only a project for the euro-area countries but is open 
for providing settlement services for securities transactions in other currencies as well. This 
European approach does not only make sense from a financial integration perspective but is 
also driven by strict economic rationale.  
T2S will have network effects and generate economies of scale. This will not only be due to 
the  very  low  settlement  cost  but  also  due  to  the  liquidity  savings  for  participants.  In  T2S, 
participants will only have to provide liquidity for one system, instead of 30 systems today. 
Further  benefits  will  result  from  harmonised  processes  throughout  Europe,  and  last,  but 
certainly not least, T2S will – without doubt – introduce competition in the single market in 
general and in the post-trade industry in particular. 
We  have  made  a  lot  of  progress  in  T2S  so  far  and  I  would  like  to  briefly  recapitulate  the 
major recent achievements as well as the main future milestones.  
T2S recent achievements and future milestones 
The T2S project started in summer 2006 and is currently half-way towards the go-live date in 
September 2014. Right from the start, the Eurosystem has closely involved the market in its 
deliberations on T2S such as for the development of the user requirements. Transparency 
and  co-operation  have  become  core  assets  of  T2S.  After  signing  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  with  30  CSDs  in  Europe  in  2009,  the  Eurosystem  has  worked  on  a 
Framework Agreement with CSDs and we hope to finalise the negations next year.  
Regarding non euro area central banks participation in T2S we are currently discussing with 
the central banks of Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Iceland, Switzerland, the UK and Poland.  
A  crucial  topic  for  all  stakeholders  is  the  “pricing”.  The  Eurosystem  has  been  very 
transparent on its cost and on the way it intends to set its prices guided by the principle of full 
cost  recovery  that  applies  for  T2S.  The  T2S  Programme  Board  has  proposed  to  the 
Governing Council to set the price for a DvP instruction in T2S at 15 cents and to guarantee 
this price until the end of 2018 under certain conditions. The Programme Board is confident 
that it will be able to further lower settlement fees after 2018 since its proposal is based on 
rather  conservative  assumptions.  However,  even  in  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances, 
the Programme Board proposes that annual price increases will be not be more than 10% 
until 2022, the end of the cost recovery period.  
                                                 
2   See also the recently published paper by the ECB in October 2010 called “T2S: Half-way to delivery” which 
explains  in  great  detail  the  purpose,  scope  and  benefits  of  T2S  and  answers  relevant  questions  that  are 
currently asked. 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 3
For the CSD customers, of course, it depends on the fees that CSDs will add on top for their 
services but I am convinced that the final settlement price in a T2S world will be lower than 
the  current  domestic  prices  in  any  European  country.  Prices  for  cross-border  transactions 
should  even  decrease  by  around  90%.  In  an  environment  where  CSDs  will  be  able  to 
compete with each other, they will not only need to adapt their systems to T2S efficiently but 
they also can reap first mover advantages, if they adapt their systems quickly and are able to 
offer  pan-European  securities  settlement  services  to  their  customers  as  early  after  the 
opening of T2S as possible.  
T2S and harmonisation 
While cost reductions and lower settlement fees are direct benefits of T2S, further benefits 
relate to harmonization. The harmonisation of back office processes will be one of the core 
benefits  of  T2S.  T2S  will  offer  one  single  process  for  securities  settlement  throughout 
Europe,  thus  eliminating  some  of  the  Giovannini  barriers.  T2S  will  harmonise  market 
processes and market practices throughout Europe and also for this reason, it is important 
that  all  European  markets  participate  in  T2S  so  that  their  requirements  can  be  taken  into 
account when harmonised processes are being defined.  
T2S has already achieved a lot in terms of harmonisation and further initiatives are on the 
way.  The  T2S  Advisory  Group  will  have  a  discussion  in  December  2010  to  identify  the 
priorities  in  harmonisation.  This  will  be  an  extremely  important  exercise  since  only 
harmonised  procedures  will  allow  for  smooth  and  efficient  settlement  throughout  Europe. 
Thus T2S will benefit from harmonisation and, vice versa, harmonisation initiatives in Europe 
will benefit from T2S.  
Conclusion 
Some  weeks  ago  Commissioner  Barnier  asked  the  following  question:  “How  is  it  possible 
that the single market is more and more necessary, yet less and less popular?”  
I  believe  that  the  notion  exists  that  opening  markets  for  competition  would  challenge  well 
functioning business models at national level. Also, people may believe that the fastest way 
to leave the crisis behind is protecting local markets.  
However the opposite is true. The financial crisis has reinforced the need for greater financial 
integration. Moreover, European market integration is about growth, development and more 
business opportunities; Both T2S and SEPA have the potential to change and improve the 
way  business  is  organised  for  cross  border  transactions.  They  will  significantly  facilitate  to 
offer services abroad and thus introduce competition in a market segment where competition 
has been limited so far. It will lead to lower cost and thus generate dynamic effects to the 
benefit of all European citizens.  
The  Eurosystem  fosters  integration  by  different  means:  as  catalyst,  by  helping  market 
participants finding solutions or as operator by  providing pan-European infrastructures that 
allow  for  fair  and  open  access  respecting  the  level-playing  field  amongst  participants.  The 
Eurosystem is determined to foster European integration in financial markets and it is willing 
to do this in close co-operation with the market. As Adolph Kolping a German priest active in 
social  integration  said  in  the  19th  century:  “we  can  achieve  a  lot  together,  if  there  is  an 
imploring will”.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2010
