Ipumbu Shiimi: Financial inclusion – an imperative towards Vision 2030 
Speech by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the Governor’s Annual 
Address, Windhoek, 28 October 2010. 
 Honourable Speaker of the National Assembly, Dr Theo-Ben Gurirab and Madam Guriras 
Honourable Ministers  
Honourable Members of Parliament  
Captains of Industries  
Board Members of the Bank of Namibia  
Members of the Media  
Distinguished invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good evening and welcome to this year’s annual address  
I stand here this evening inspired by the opportunities for economic development before us 
and grateful for your presence, which is a demonstration of your commitment to engage in 
discussions that are aimed at making Namibia a better place.  
At  last  year’s  Annual  Address,  we  told  you  that  Namibia  is  an  envy  of  many  countries 
because  of  our  laudable  achievements  since  independence.  One  year  has  passed  since 
than, and with every tick of the clock, we are getting nearer to the year 2030. That should be 
our  solemn  reminder  to  do  the  right  things  with  more  vigour  and  urgency  with  a  view  to 
address the daunting, yet insurmountable challenges facing us.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  evening,  I  will  not  repeat  our  successes  and  challenges 
presented to you last year. Instead, I chose to talk about financial inclusion as one of the key 
strategies that will help us to address our challenges and ultimately realise Vision 2030. More 
specifically, I would like to put forward some ideas on extending financial services to the so 
called “the bottom of the pyramid” segment of our nation and may I add that it is a very large 
bottom of the pyramid. I am fully convinced that full financial inclusion is vital in achieving our 
ideals portrayed in Vision 2030.  
What is this animal we call financial inclusion?  
Financial  inclusion,  also  referred  to  by  some  as  access  to  financial  services,  has  various 
interpretations. The term “financial inclusion” gained importance since the early 2000s and is 
a  result  of  findings  that  financial  exclusion  has  a  direct  impact  on  poverty  alleviation. 
Financial  inclusion  is  now  a  common  objective  for  many  central  banks  among  developing 
countries and even among developed nations.  
In our case, Director of Ceremonies, financial inclusion means an inclusive financial system 
in  which  all  persons  who  can  use  financial  services  have  access  to  a  range  of  quality 
financial  services,  provided  at  affordable  prices,  with  dignity  to  clients.  Inclusive  financial 
services, therefore, go beyond banking products. An inclusive financial system should ensure 
that  the  excluded  people  in  our  country  currently  estimated  at  over  50  per  cent  of  the 
economically active population have access to affordable financial services. Such services 
include  credit,  reliable  access  to  an  efficient  payment  system,  insurance  services,  among 
others.  An  informed  understanding  of  how  financial  markets  work,  in  other  words  be 
financially  literate  is  another  important  element  of  financial  inclusion.  An  inclusive  financial 
system  will  ensure  that  our  SMEs  have  access  to  the  much-needed  finance,  business 
support, and relevant financial information required for the SME sector to thrive. Ultimately, 
financial  inclusion  nurtures  consumer  empowerment  through  financial  awareness  and 
consumer education.  
BIS Review 168/2010 
 1
It is, therefore, on this premise that financial inclusion, particularly SME financing, will serve 
as  an  engine  for  inclusive  growth.  The  role  that  SMEs  play  within  an  economy  cannot  be 
over-emphasised.  This  is  because  SMEs  have  the  potential  to  create  employment  and 
contribute  to  economic  growth  of  a  country.  India,  for  example,  has  registered  economic 
growth close to double digits, even at the height of the current financial and economic crisis. 
It is reported that India’s SME sector contributes about 50 percent to India’s total exports. As 
one of the ways towards achieving the ideals of our National Vision, Namibia aspires to have 
a flourishing SME sector by the year 2030. The case for financial inclusion is, therefore, not 
only  based  on  principle  of  equity  –  but  access  to  affordable  banking  and  other  financial 
services is also required for inclusive growth with stability.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, over the past 20 years, financial institutions in Namibia have been 
fulfilling  the  intermediation  function  to  a  certain  extent,  and  thereby  have  contributed  to 
economic development. Our banking institutions, in particular, have played this role without 
compromising the stability of the financial system. In fact, at the height of the financial and 
economic  crisis  in  2008,  the  World  Economic  Forum  rated  Namibia’s  banking  system 
seventh in the world, just after Switzerland. This is indeed a good achievement that we can 
be proud of and a good foundation we can build on.  
Director  of  Ceremonies,  the  Bank  of  Namibia  has  also  made  a  humble  contribution  in  the 
quest to promote financial inclusion. As part of our developmental role, the Bank of Namibia 
availed some human and financial resources to set up the Development Bank of Namibia. 
The  financial  assistance,  has,  in  a  small  measure,  facilitated  the  process  of  financial 
inclusion, especially towards the development of potential businesses and SMEs. In the area 
of  access  to  payment  services,  we  have  embarked  upon  the  national  payment  system 
reforms by ensuring the localisation of the payment, clearing and settlement systems.  
Notably the private sector has also initiated activities which will undoubtedly increase access 
to financial services. To this effect, the first mobile payment service provider was licensed to 
allow  the  transfer  of  money  using  mobile  phones.  In  the  same  spirit  of  extending  banking 
services to the unbanked, we approved a banking license to the first Micro Finance Bank in 
Namibia – that is built on the Grameen Bank concept.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  while  these  achievements  are  praiseworthy,  it  is  important  to  note 
that more needs to be done. Certain segments of our economy are still not benefiting from 
access  to  finance.  In  particular,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  rural 
communities and the poor are still experiencing difficulties in accessing the services offered 
by the financial sector. According to the latest Fin Scope Survey, more than 51 percent of the 
economic active Namibians are unbanked or do not have access to financial services. The 
picture does not get any better with SMEs. The NCCI Namibian Business Climate Survey of 
2009  indicates  that  about  55  percent  of  informal  business  could  not  access  credit,  and 
37.1 percent of those that had access to credit, obtained this from friends and relatives.  
Director  of  Ceremonies,  this  trend  is  disheartening,  especially  for  a  country  that  exports 
national savings to other countries on a daily basis. Last year alone, Namibia recorded a net 
outflow of capital to South Africa to the tune of N$7.7 billion. Year to date, the net outflows 
are  already  standing  at  N$8.9  billion.  Imagine,  what  the  impact  would  have  been,  had  we 
retained just a fraction of that money for investment within the domestic economy. This trend 
is not sustainable for a country that aspires to be a developed nation by 2030.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, we cannot and should not continue with this status quo. We should, 
therefore,  take  tough  decisions  to  reverse  these  trends,  with  the  aim  of  further  increasing 
access to financial services. Our financial sector must become an important pillar of strength 
to our economy through financial inclusion. Every economic activity, geographical region and 
segment  of  society  must  have  access  to  financial  services  to  ensure  a  more  balanced 
economic growth and development.  
Director of Ceremonies, increasingly, world leaders have realised the importance of financial 
inclusion,  as  a  critical  ingredient  for  a  stable  economic  growth  and  poverty  reduction. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2010
Therefore,  financial  inclusion  is  one  of  the  issues  to  feature  prominently  on  the  agenda  of 
G20  Summit  in  Seoul  this  November.  A  number  of  emerging  economies,  such  as  India, 
Malaysia  and  Mexico,  have  developed  and  adopted  coordinated  policies  on  financial 
inclusion, as key strategies to enhance economic growth and alleviate poverty. Malaysia, in 
particular,  has  gone  an  extra  mile  in  this  journey  with  its  financial  inclusion  agenda.  Its 
success speaks for itself. Today, Malaysia’s unemployment rate is below 3.4 percent, and its 
poverty rate stands at 3.6 percent. Thirty-seven years ago, the poverty rate in Malaysia was 
50 percent, and in 1987, the poverty rate stood at 20 percent. This is one of the countries, I 
believe, against which we should benchmark ourselves.  
It  is  imperative  that  financial inclusion  becomes  a  high  priority  in  our  national  agenda.  We 
cannot afford to ignore the major role of financial inclusion in facilitating our efforts, policies, 
and strategies of achieving the ideals of Vision 2030. In this regard, the Bank of Namibia has 
identified financial inclusion to be an important thrust in the Bank’s developmental role. We 
have,  therefore,  made  financial  inclusion  as  one  our  key  strategic  objectives  for  2011  and 
beyond.  
As a Bank, we want to pledge our support and efforts towards this very important objective of 
having an inclusive financial system. Our pledge is therefore set out in a four-point agenda:  
 
 
First, regulation and regulatory intervention  
Financial  inclusion  cannot  be  realised  without  appropriate  financial  regulation  and 
regulatory  interventions.  Regulation  ensures  that  the  financial  system  remains 
stable.  Only  with  a  stable  financial  system  would  it  be  possible  to  pursue  the 
financial  inclusion  agenda.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Namibia  will  ensure  that 
appropriate  regulations  are  in  place  and  that  we  coordinate  our  regulatory  efforts 
with  other  regulators,  such  as  NAMFISA  and  the  Competition  Commission,  to 
safeguard financial stability.  
Financial inclusion requires financial institutions to pursue innovative and alternative 
business  models.  Innovation  is,  therefore,  central  in  this  process.  The  Bank  of 
Namibia  pledges  its  support  from  the  regulatory  perspective  to  encourage 
innovation.  This  will  be  done  within  the  overall  regulatory  framework  to  ensure  a 
system of incentives and disincentives that will further financial inclusion objectives, 
without compromising financial stability. In this connection, the Bank is fully aware 
that over-regulation may stifle the upspring of innovative financial products aimed at 
closing the financial inclusion gap and we will factor this in our actions.  
Second, consumer literacy and protection  
Our  second  objective  is  to  ensure  consumer  literacy  and  protection.  Financial 
illiteracy and lack of consumer protection are major impediments to access financial 
services.  The  area  of  consumer  protection  ranges  from  excessive  pricing,  limited 
access  to  financial  information  and  financial  redress.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of 
Namibia will put in place various avenues for consumers to seek financial redress 
and  deal  with  consumer-related  issues.  Further,  to  assist  consumers  in  making 
informed  decisions  suitable  to  their  needs  and  capacity,  various  efforts  will  be 
introduced,  aimed  at  improving  consumer  literacy  through  a  comprehensive 
consumer  education  programme.  Our  efforts  will  complement  the  efforts  by  other 
stakeholders, such as Namfisa.  
Third, access to financial services and payment services  
At the heart of the financial inclusion agenda, is the issue of access by the hard to 
reach, still-neglected members of our society. The Bank of Namibia will hasten the 
process of finalising the Tier II Banking Legislation. This legislation is currently in the 
draft form. We hope that once this Law is enacted, it will encourage entrants into this 
market segment with a view to further enhancing access to financial services. The 
   BIS Review 168/2010 
 3
  banking fees and charges have often been identified as one of the key supply side 
barriers to financial services. To this effect, we have put requirements in place for 
the banking institutions to disclose and make available information on fees, charges, 
and commissions imposed on products and services. This will allow for customers to 
make  comparative  analyses  on  pricing  and  make  informed  choices.  The  recent 
amendments  to  the  Payment  System  Management  Act  also  give  the  Bank  of 
Namibia  power  to  act  if  the  market  fails  to  ensure  that  fees  and  charges  are 
transparent, competitive and commensurate with input costs.  
Another  related  issue  is  access  by  viable  SMEs  to  financial  services,  in  particular 
SME financing. The time has come for the financial sector as a whole to prioritise 
access to finance for SMEs. To this effect, the Bank of Namibia, in conjunction with 
other government bodies, will establish comprehensive mechanisms to ensure that 
viable SMEs have continued and sustainable access to financing, and other support 
services.  
Fourth, local ownership of commercial banks  
Financial  inclusion  should  not  be  viewed  from  the  receivers  (i.e.  customers) 
perspective,  but  also  from  the  side  of  the  suppliers  and  owners  of  resources.  We 
cannot  therefore  talk  of  financial  inclusion,  without  addressing  the  issue  of 
ownership, management and control of the financial sector. The recently amended 
Banking  Institutions  Act  gives  the  Minister  of  Finance  the  power  to  facilitate  the 
transformation  of  the  Namibian  banking  industry,  in  a  quest  to  diversify  the 
shareholding structure of banking institutions, and to reduce concentrated ownership 
and  control.  Local  ownership  and  management  control  is  a  necessary  factor  in 
enhancing  credit  extension  as  local  persons  know  the  domestic  conditions. 
Therefore, they can lend without solely relying on hard information. Going forward, 
we  will  use  a  consultative  approach  between  all  players  in  determining  an 
acceptable  blend  between  local  and  foreign  ownership.  This  quest  for  domestic 
ownership  and  management  control  should,  therefore,  be  viewed  as  one  of  the 
strategies  for  a  more  inclusive  financial  system  without  compromising  financial 
stability and market-based systems.  
Director of Ceremonies, you maybe asking yourself, why are we here this evening when the 
Bank of Namibia has figured it all out already?  
Financial inclusion is not a one-person show. Its success will depend on the presence of an 
institutional  environment  with  clear  lines  of  accountability  and  coordination  between 
Government, regulators, financial institutions, and other key stakeholders. It will be a fruitless 
exercise if regulators’ efforts to make relevant and enabling regulations are not matched by 
the corresponding responses from the financial institutions. I believe that the time has come 
for more concerted efforts by all stakeholders to tackle the challenge of financial inclusion as 
we navigate our way towards the ideals of Vision 2030. This calls for financial institutions to 
come up with alternative and sustainable business models. It further calls for regulators to 
provide an enabling environment, which does not compromise financial stability. It calls for 
Government to play a supporting role. In this regard, our Government should work towards 
making property rights in communal areas fully tradable, like in the rest of the country. This 
will go a long way in facilitating access to finance for our people. It is my wish that in five 
years time, property rights in rural areas will have same status as those in Windhoek. All in 
all these need a coherent coordination framework at the National level.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  my  hope  that  each  relevant  institution  represented  here  this 
evening will start internal conversations on financial inclusion. I trust that the conversation will 
result in financial inclusion strategies and relevant actions. The Bank of Namibia will in the 
coming year communicate its concrete plans as guided by our four-point agenda on financial 
inclusion. We will also put forward ideas on how best to improve coordination of the financial 
inclusion strategy.  
4 
 BIS Review 168/2010
Let me conclude by quoting the former UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who in 2003 said 
the  following:  “The  stark  reality  is  that  most  poor  people  in  the  world  still  lack  access  to 
sustainable financial services, whether it is savings, credit or insurance. The great challenge 
before  us  is  to  address  the  constraints  that  exclude  people  from  full  participation  in  the 
financial sector. Together, we can and must build inclusive financial sectors that help people 
improve their lives.”  
Director of Ceremonies, the financial inclusion strategy requires change and we know that 
change is never easy. However, I believe that the challenges before us are greater than the 
uneasiness that accompanies the change. The goals, we have set for ourselves should be 
our  guiding  and  encouraging  armour.  Let  our  action  going  forward  make  every  tick  of  the 
clock matter for tomorrow. Let our children look back 20 years from now, and say, indeed, 
our parents’ generation chose the road less travelled to ensure economic emancipation for 
Namibia.  
The challenge is indeed great, but “the journey of a thousand miles starts with a single step” 
so  goes  the  old  Chinese  adage.  The  goal  is  ambitious,  but  it  is  within  the  realm  of  the 
possible, if we but, take the necessary steps.  
Thank you for you attention and please enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 5
