Guy Debelle: The state of play in the securitisation market 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Australian Securitisation Conference 2010, Sydney, 30 November 2010. 
 Thanks to Patrick D'Arcy and Daniel Ji for their help. 
At  this  forum  last  year  I  outlined  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  Australian 
securitisation  market  and  the  prospects  for  securitisation  in  the  post-crisis  environment.  At 
that  time  my  assessment  was,  as  it  still  is  now,  that  securitisation  assists  in  the  efficient 
distribution  of  risk  across  the  financial  system  and  should  have  a  role  in  the  financial 
architecture  going  forward.  The  fundamental  logic  of  securitisation  is  well  understood  by 
those in the room today.  
Of  course,  as  is  also  widely  appreciated  in  the  industry,  the  financial  crisis  highlighted 
significant inadequacies in securitisation practices, particularly in the United States. Some of 
those inadequacies are still coming to light. This has forced participants on both sides of the 
securitisation  market  to  re-assess  the  assumptions  underpinning  their  business  models. 
These inadequacies were absent in the Australian securitisation industry, but unfortunately 
the local industry has had to deal with brand damage not of its own making. This is despite 
the asset class in Australia continuing to perform exceptionally well in terms of rate of return.  
Today,  I  intend  to  briefly  recap  the  main  changes  that  have  affected  the  securitisation 
industry as a result of the crisis and to review developments in the market over the past year. 
The main message that I want to leave you with is very similar to the one I gave last year. 
While  it  was  clear  that the  industry  will  take  some  time  to  adjust  to this  new  environment, 
there  are  sound  prospects  for  securitisation  remaining  an  important  part  of  the  financial 
landscape, albeit not at the levels seen in the heady pre-crisis period.  
Background 
Over  the  decade  leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis,  securitisation  was  a  rapidly  growing 
segment of the financial sector globally and in Australia. This is demonstrated in the share of 
housing  lending  in  Australia  financed  through  securitisation,  which  rose  from  less  than 
5 per cent  in  the  mid  1990s  to  over  20 per cent  in  2008  (Graph 1).  While  residential 
mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) accounted for the bulk of securitisation activity, growth 
in other parts of the industry, including the securitisation of commercial property, auto and 
equipment loans also grew faster than aggregate lending in these market segments.  
A  range  of  factors  on  both  the  demand  and  supply  side  underpinned  the  rapid  growth  in 
securitisation.  On  the  supply  side,  changes  in  technology  and  the  fall  in  nominal  interest 
rates  were  important  in  improving  the  competitive  position  of  non-bank  originators  in  the 
mortgage market, who tapped securitisation markets for funding because they did not have 
access to cheap deposit funding.  
 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 1
Graph 1 
  On the demand side, the dearth of supply of high quality credit instruments in the Australian 
market  made  asset-backed  securities  (ABS),  and  RMBS  in  particular,  an  attractive 
investment for many domestic investors. This domestic demand was the foundation of the 
market  in  the  early  days.  Over  time,  the  ability  to  tap  international  markets  became  an 
increasingly important source of demand for Australian RMBS, such that prior to the crisis, 
offshore issuance accounted for more than half of outstanding Australian RMBS (Graph 2).  
Graph 2 
   Offshore  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  comprised  a  sizeable  share  of  the 
international  investor  base.  As  is  now  widely  known,  these  SIVs  funded  themselves  short 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2010
and  invested  in  long-dated  assets  like  RMBS,  a  business  model  that  was  particularly 
vulnerable.  
The impact of the financial crisis 
The re-appraisal of risk brought on by the financial crisis led to demand from international 
investors retreating faster than domestic demand (Graph 3). The SIVs were particularly hard 
hit by the crisis. Their funding was severely curtailed and many of their assets turned out to 
be  poor  performing,  illiquid  or  both.  Many  were  forced  to  shut  down  and  liquidate  their 
portfolios,  in  the  process  selling  their  Australian  RMBS  into  the  secondary  market, 
notwithstanding its good performance. Indeed, Australian RMBS was often sold first because 
of its good performance.  
Graph 3 
   On  top  of  this,  investor  demand  for  new  issuance  declined  both  internationally  and 
domestically because of the brand damage to RMBS from the US in particular, where poor 
lending and servicing practices saw a material deterioration in collateral performance.  
The liquidation by the SIVs of their RMBS holdings, combined with the increased aversion to 
the product from investors because of the brand damage emanating from the US, saw the 
price in the secondary market decline significantly. Our estimate is that, in Australia, yields 
on RMBS in the secondary market widened from around 20 basis points over the bank bill 
rate pre-crisis to as much as 450 basis points. While the secondary market spread remained 
this  wide,  there  was  likely  to  be  little  new  primary  issuance.  Investors  could  satisfy  their 
demand much more cheaply in the secondary market.  
It  is  well  understood  that  as  a  consequence  of  the  demise  of  SIVs,  the  investor  base  for 
asset-backed securities is substantially narrower than prior to the crisis. This is particularly 
the  case  in  offshore  markets.  As  some  of  these  investors  relied  on  various  forms  of 
excessive  leverage  to  be  profitable,  they  are  not  likely  to  return.  But  there  are  still  natural 
investors,  both  domestic  and  offshore,  that  ought  to  be  attracted  to  the  high  quality  of  the 
Australian RMBS.  
BIS Review 160/2010 
 3
Recent developments 
RMBS issuance this year has been around $18 billion, higher than the $14 billion issued last 
year  but  well  below  the  $50 billion  plus  annual  issuance  prior  to  the  crisis  (Graph 4). 
However, this comparison exaggerates the situation. The underlying pace of housing credit 
growth has also slowed from around 15 per cent per annum to around 7 per cent. So given 
this slowing in system credit growth, comparisons of gross issuance with the pre-crisis period 
are not very informative.  
An alternative benchmark is the amount of issuance required for securitisation to hold its own 
as a share of total housing lending. A rough calculation suggests that annual gross issuance 
of around $25 to $30 billion would be required to see securitisation maintain its current share 
of housing credit.  
Graph 4 
   All of the issuance this year, with the exception of one tranche in early 2010, has been in the 
domestic  market.  The  issuance  has  been  mostly  by  the  smaller  lenders,  regional  banks, 
credit unions and originators, who have limited access to alternative funding sources. These 
issues have involved some degree of support from the AOFM. In total, only $3.2 billion of the 
RMBS issued have not had AOFM support.  
In thinking about the AOFM support for the RMBS market, I believe the AOFM program has 
a number of advantages relative to alternative means of support: it can be easily tailored to 
help  specific  types  of  institutions;  it  can  be  phased  out  easily;  the  likelihood  that  the 
Government loses money on its investment is very small; and there is no ongoing contingent 
liability to the Government from providing the support. If instead a government guarantee of 
RMBS  were  provided,  it  would  be  difficult  to  phase  out,  creating  a  commitment  that  could 
generate a large contingent liability for the Government.  
At  this  time  last  year,  and  into  the  early  part  of  2010,  there  were  signs  indicating  that  the 
market was developing some momentum. Issuance was on an upward trend and the share 
taken  up  by  the  AOFM  had  declined  from  the  very  high  levels  seen  at  the  start  of  the 
Government’s support programme (Graph 5). There were also two issues in the first part of 
the  year  that  did  not  have  AOFM  support.  However,  conditions  deteriorated  in  the second 
quarter with credit markets generally unsettled by the sovereign debt concerns in Europe.  
4 
 BIS Review 160/2010
Graph 5 
   In  response  to  these  difficulties,  the  AOFM  adjusted  the  pricing  of  its  cornerstone  RMBS 
investments  in  May  with  the  express  purpose  of  making  securitisation  a  more  competitive 
source of funding for small players in the mortgage market. Prior to May, private investor bids 
were only just within the range which made deals competitive for issuers. The AOFM started 
buying  long-dated  tranches  at  a  spread  of  around  110 basis  points  over  swap.  Private 
investors in these deals bought the shorter-dated tranches often at a spread that was around 
100 basis points. As a result, average issuance costs for senior notes declined from around 
140 basis points to close to 100 basis points over swap (Graph 6).  
Graph 6 
  BIS Review 160/2010 
 5
This tightening in primary market spreads has seen the volume of issuance pick up in the 
second  half  of  the  year.  Although  the  AOFM  has  increased  its  share  of  issuance,  private 
investors have nevertheless taken around two-thirds of the issuance since May.  
There has also been a gradual lengthening in the average maturities of tranches taken up by 
private sector investors, and some sales of first-loss tranches. The cost of the recent Bank 
West deal that priced without AOFM support, and included a soft bullet structure to attract 
investors, also suggests some improving appetite on the part of investors.  
While it is difficult to get a precise estimate of secondary market pricing, it appears to have 
remained  broadly  stable  over  recent  quarters  still  much  wider  than  prior  to  the  crisis.  The 
widening of RMBS spreads was generally larger than that of other funding instruments, such 
as unsecured bank credit, and it has not narrowed as much from the peak (Graph 7).  
Graph 7 
   It  is  difficult,  given  the  very  strong  historical  performance  of  Australian  mortgages  that 
provide the  underlying collateral, not to view this relative pricing as somewhat anomalous. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  legacy  of  the  brand  damage  the  crisis  inflicted  on  mortgage-
backed securities and a measure of the work still to be done by the industry and regulators to 
restore investor confidence and improve liquidity.  
There  is,  of  course  a  good  story  to  tell:  the  arrears  rates  on  Australian  mortgages  have 
remained  at  a  low  level  and  are  well  below  the  arrears  rates  in  many  other  countries 
(Graph 8).  
6 
 BIS Review 160/2010
Graph 8 
   The state of the securitisation market in Australia is by no means unique, with issuance in 
other markets also sluggish. Credit markets globally still remain cautious, with the sovereign 
debt concerns in the second quarter tempering investor appetite. For example, issuance in 
the  UK  RMBS  market  was  particularly  weak  in  the  early  part  of  the  year,  but  has  seen  a 
modest pick-up in activity more recently (Graph 9). One promising development has been the 
pick-up in offshore issuance by UK originators, exemplified by the recent Lloyds issue in the 
US.  
Graph 9 
  BIS Review 160/2010 
 7
A  constraint  on  offshore  issuance  more  specific  to  the  Australian  market  has  been  the 
influence of the cross-currency basis swap on the cost of issuing in the international market. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  the  international  market  was  an  important  source  of  demand  for  the 
Australian market prior to the crisis. A significant share of the issuance to offshore investors 
was in foreign currency, but post-crisis there has only been one issue with a foreign-currency 
tranche.  Part  of  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the  wide  basis  swap  has  added  to  the  hedging 
costs of offshore issues making them less economic, compared with domestic issues.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I have aimed to provide a recap of the state of play in the Australian RMBS 
market. The market is slowly returning to life and I believe it will again play a useful role in 
the provision of credit in Australia. But I do not see it returning to its pre-crisis share of the 
market any time soon. I look forward to discussing the policy issues surrounding the market 
with my fellow panel members. 
8 
 BIS Review 160/2010
