Caleb M Fundanga: The role of financial systems in capital markets 
development? 
Keynote address by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the African 
Securities Exchange Association (ASEA) conference on “The Role of Financial Systems in 
Capital Markets Development?”, Livingstone, 11 November 2010. 
  The Minister of Finance and National Planning, Hon Situmbeko Musokotwane M.P; 
The  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  
Mr Clement Sichembe; 
The Chief Executive Officer of the Lusaka Stock Exchange, Mrs Beatrice Nkanza; 
Members of the African Securities Exchange Association; 
Distinguished Resource Persons; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 
 
 
 
 
Let me begin by welcoming you all to this conference and on behalf of my fellow Zambians 
extend a warm welcome to our visiting colleagues from outside Zambia, to Livingstone.  
Allow  me  Chairperson  to  take  this  opportunity  to  commend  LUSE  and  ASEA  (African 
Securities  Exchange  Association)  for  organising  this  seminar  and  the  tremendous  efforts 
made in enhancing functions of the regional securities exchanges. As our countries continue 
to  recover  from  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  the  continent  requires  financial  platforms 
that  will  facilitate  the  recovery  efforts  and  provide  an  enabling  environment  to  meet  the 
various developmental challenges that the continent faces.  
I  am  greatly  honoured  to  have  this  privilege  to  share  some  thoughts  on  “The  Role  of 
Financial Systems in Capital Markets development”. The importance of financial systems 
has indeed been highlighted during the recent global financial crisis in which markets without 
properly  functioning  financial  systems  were  affected  more  severely  than  those  that  had  a 
semblance  of  well  functioning  systems.  Evidently,  from  the  theme  of  your  conference, 
“Integration of African Capital Markets through technology” we can see the importance 
the interrelationships of financial systems and other sectors of the economy.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  economists  and  market  players  have  long  recognized  the 
importance  of  the  financial  system.  During  each  financial  crisis  including  the  recent  global 
financial  crisis,  we  have  increasingly  heard  that  the  financial  system  was  one  of  the  main 
causes of the crisis, and that the financial system needs to be reformed in order to resolve 
the  crisis.  Many  of  these  discussions  treat  the  financial  system  in  isolation  or  link  it 
superficially  to  the  macro-economy,  however  to  put  these  issues  in  perspective  let  us  first 
look at the importance and limitations of financial markets.  
The importance and limitations of financial markets  
I would like to begin by discussing the role of the financial system and why it is different from 
other  sectors  of  the  economy.  Individual  entrepreneurs  rarely  have  enough  of  their  own 
capital to undertake investments themselves. Individual savers, without pooling their money, 
would  not  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  the  potential  increasing  returns  to  scale  of  their 
investments, and would face a large degree of risk with little liquidity. The financial system – 
including banks and other financial intermediaries, equity markets, and debt markets, solves 
these problems by agglomerating capital from many smaller savers, allocating capital to the 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 1
most important uses, and monitoring to ensure that it is being used well. At the same time, 
the  financial  system  transfers,  pools,  and  reduces  risk,  increases  liquidity,  and  conveys 
information.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me also highlight the importance of financial markets and how 
they inter-relate with firms and contribute to economic growth and enhance social welfare. 
Whether  financial  systems  are  relatively  simple  or  highly  complex,  they  perform  the  same 
broad functions and share the same key characteristics. Their primary role in any economy is 
to  mobilize  resources  for  productive  investment.  An  efficient  financial  system  channels 
resources  to  activities  that  will  provide  the  highest  rate  of  return  for  investors.  These 
resources  stimulate  economic  growth,  provide  enterprises  with  the  ability  to  become  more 
productive and generate new jobs.  
Clearly effective financial markets are indispensable to the pursuit of sustained, broad-based 
economic growth. Unfortunately, financial markets development is one of the most complex 
areas  in  the  development  field.  Every  economy  needs  to  find  modalities  that  facilitate 
financial  markets  development  and  provide  a  policy  and  regulatory  environment  that 
encourages  the  appearance  of  competitive  forces,  the  use  of  a  variety  of  debt  and  equity 
instruments, and promotes the growth of different kinds of institutions and systems that offer 
a  wide  range  of  financial  instruments  and  services  and  protects  the  interests  of  savers  by 
reducing their risks.  
In  protecting  the  interests  of  market  players,  financial systems,  i.e.  financial  intermediaries 
and financial markets, channel funds from those who have savings to those who have more 
productive uses for them. They perform two main types of financial service that reduce the 
costs of moving funds between borrowers and lenders, leading to a more efficient allocation 
of  resources  and  faster  economic  growth.  The  two  services  are  basically  the  provision  of 
liquidity and the transformation of the risk characteristics of assets.  
Role of capital in financial markets and development  
The efficiency with which financial markets contribute to economic growth largely depends on 
the  availability  of  affordable  capital  and  its  efficient  allocation  to  productive  sectors  of  the 
economy. Efficient capital allocation means that funds are channelled to investment projects 
or firms that bring the most value to the economy. Therefore, there is an intimate relationship 
between capital on one hand, and economic development on the other. In order to promote 
economic growth, financial institutions have the primary responsibility of ensuring that capital 
is allocated to the most productive projects which assure the highest return possible. Thus, 
the main mechanisms of growth stem from the improvements in the functioning of financial 
markets, and the effect this has on transforming risks and maturity of assets and liabilities of 
which capital markets development plays an important role.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, even as the private sector takes centre stage in this process, the 
government  also  has  an  important  role  to  play.  The  absence  of  government  means  that 
financial markets operate without proper regulatory structures. Without a formally regulated 
financial  system,  informal  financial  markets  tend  to  fill  in  the  gap  but  at  sub-optimal  levels 
with high transactions and other related costs. As a result, there is less efficient allocation of 
capital which in turn translates into low levels of economic growth as investment funding is 
limited by the cost of transactions.  
Therefore, efficient capital allocation relies chiefly on a properly functioning financial system, 
which enables firms and households to share risks and also facilitates the transformation of 
more liquid liabilities into illiquid but productive investments.  
2 
 BIS Review 149/2010
Instruments and the structure of capital markets  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen: Looking at the objective of every economy, it is clear 
that all countries develop the depth and breadth of their financial markets to meet the needs 
of the real economy. This includes making a wide range of choices available to investors and 
issuers of securities in fixed-income and equity markets. Bond issuers, for example, would 
ideally be able to issue a variety of maturities with both variable and fixed rates.  
Money markets: The market for securities of less than one year includes government and 
central  bank  bills,  repurchase  agreements  of  government  paper  (repos),  commercial  bank 
certificates  of  deposit,  corporate  commercial  paper  and  trade  finance  instruments  such  as 
bankers’  acceptances.  These  markets,  in  their  inter-bank  or  over-the-counter  (OTC)  form, 
have been in existence for a long time in many countries. A newer phenomenon, however, 
has  been  for  these  instruments  to  be  listed  on  organized  stock  exchanges  and  for  central 
banks  to  increasingly  conduct  monetary  policy  through  open  market  operations  in  these 
instruments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, in developing economies debt markets which include public entities 
(ministries  of  finance,  central  banks  and  specialized  government  agencies  for  housing, 
agriculture,  export  and  industry),  are  the  most  creditworthy  borrowers  and  generally 
dominate the issue of local currency debt. However, we are seeing an increasing ability to 
issue corporate obligations beyond  one year in local bond markets. The maturity structure 
(yield curve), however, generally does not extend beyond two or three years, and the central 
problem for both government and corporate borrowers is to push out maturities as far as is 
possible.  
Equity  Markets  which  are  organized  stock  exchanges  in  emerging  economies  have  been 
slow  to  develop  because  of  the  traditional  reluctance  of  closely-held  firms  to  divulge 
information to the public or an unwillingness to dilute voting power and control of the firm. For 
these reasons, closely-held private placements have historically been more important.  
Another  important  group  of  investors  in  capital  markets  are  Institutional  Money  Managers. 
These  include  insurance  companies,  mutual  funds  and  pension  funds  which  achieve 
important  economies  of  scale  through  pooling  small  savings,  diversifying  investments  and 
monitoring market information. Institutional investors raise the level of professionalism within 
markets through requiring better information and increased transparency.  
Financial  infrastructure:  Capital  market  participants  nearly  unanimously  agree  that  they 
should not engage in underwriting, trading or asset management activities in the absence of 
a secure legal and regulatory environment. Foreign investment funds usually cannot go into 
a market that lacks adequate legislation and oversight.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  many  organized  exchanges  operate  as  self-regulatory 
organizations  (SROs)  that  sometimes  do  not  meet  internationally  recognized  norms  for 
transparency  and  disclosure.  Although  exchanges  perform  a  self-regulatory  function,  most 
developed  financial  systems  additionally  have  a  securities  exchange  commission-type 
institution that provides an additional layer of oversight. Investors look to these organizations 
to  safeguard  the  markets  through  establishing  minimum  standards  of  capitalization, 
registration of securities and market participants, timely and material disclosure and effective 
enforcement.  
In addition to the legal and regulatory framework, the financial infrastructure should include a 
non-bank payments system for the organized exchanges. Commonly  called clearance and 
settlement within a central securities depository, these clearing houses depend importantly 
on legislation enabling their establishment and on the clarification of legal concepts such as 
netting and the treatment of guarantees in bankruptcy for their effective operation.  
BIS Review 149/2010 
 3
Role of financial systems  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  development  finance  it  is  recognised  that 
economic  development  is  partially  dependent  on  the  financial  system  to  help  mediate  the 
transfer  of  money  to  areas  of  the  economy  that  need  it  most.  The  financial  system  has  a 
number  of  key  functions,  which  help  facilitate  these  shifts  in  money  that  are  important  for 
sustainable economic growth. The most important of these are:  
 
 
 
 
 
Savings;  
Loans;  
Investments;  
Business Growth and  
Government Expenditure  
Responding to international capital flows  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  discuss,  though  briefly,  the  role 
international capital flows and their effects on our economies. Many of the same principles 
that  apply  in  domestic  capital  markets  also  apply  in  international  capital  markets.  The 
probability of default is essential to understanding international capital flows and exchange 
rate  movements.  Asymmetric  information,  for  instance  between  foreign  and  domestic 
investors,  can  have  important  consequences.  And,  as  in  domestic  markets,  there  is  no 
presumption that the market, left to itself, is efficient.  
Today,  developing  countries  are  more  vulnerable  to  international  capital  flows  than  ever 
before. What would have been a mistake with minor consequences in a closed economy can 
become magnified into a major crisis in an open economy. This is the lesson many people 
draw  from  the  recent  crisis  which  struck  a  number  of  economies  in  the  world.  Inadequate 
financial  supervision  and  regulation,  problems  with  macroeconomic  management,  and  a 
general lack of transparency certainly contributed to the problems.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, even with the best economic management, small open economies 
remain vulnerable. They are like small rowboats on a wild and open sea. Although we may 
not  be  able  to  predict  it,  the  chances  of  eventually  being  broadsided  by  a  large  wave  are 
significant no matter how well the boat is steered. Though, to be sure, bad steering probably 
increases  the  chances  of  a  disaster,  and  a  leaky  boat  makes  it  inevitable,  even  on  a 
relatively calm day.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let’s turn to the role of monetary policy and central banks  
Price stability  
The  interaction  between  financial  markets,  economic  growth  and  monetary  policy  is  by  no 
means  a  new  issue  for  central  bankers.  However,  financial  market  developments  have 
brought  the  question  to  the  forefront  of  the  policy  debate.  The  continued  integration  and 
deepening  of  financial  markets  is  a  significant  issue  for  policy-makers,  and  particularly  for 
central  bankers,  since  smoothly  functioning  and  efficient  financial  markets  are  crucial  in 
ensuring a smooth transmission of monetary impulses.  
The  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the  smooth  functioning  and 
integration of financial markets and to economic growth is to maintain steady medium-term 
price  stability.  Such  a  policy  will  be  beneficial,  as  it  will  minimise  the  adverse  effects  of 
inflation  and  high  inflation  uncertainty.  As  we  all  know,  price  stability  is  beneficial  in 
numerous ways. It not only creates a climate for higher economic activity over the medium 
term,  but  also  reduces  the  economic  and  social  inequalities  caused  by  the  asymmetric 
distribution of the costs of inflation among the various economic agents.  
4 
 BIS Review 149/2010
Financial system stability and the role of central banks in banking supervision  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the design of prudential regulation plays an important role from a 
growth perspective. Supervision is the guardian of financial stability, which in turn crucially 
determines the capability of the financial system to allocate resources efficiently and absorb 
liquidity  shocks.  Financial  crises  can  have  a  deep  and  protracted  impact  on  economic 
growth,  as  illustrated  by  several  episodes  of  financial  instability  that  occurred  in  many 
countries. The contribution of prudential supervision to economic growth proceeds along two 
dimensions.  From  a  preventive  perspective,  supervision  has  to  ensure  a  continuous  and 
comprehensive  monitoring  of  all  the  potential  threats  to  financial  stability.  The  role  of 
supervision is also crucial after the emergence of a crisis, in order to provide for a swift and 
ordered resolution. Supervisors can only be effective in these two respects if they are able to 
pay sufficient attention to systemic issues, namely the risk of contagion effects.  
Policy measures aimed at development of capital markets  
Ladies and Gentlemen, despite the threat of the recent global financial crisis, the Zambian 
financial  sector  is  currently  resilient.  The  level  of  liquidity  is  also  high,  spurred  largely  by 
tighter lending conditions as banks slowed down on lending to the private sector. However, 
these developments also project the improvements in regulatory and supervisory oversight 
which continues to be updated.  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  for  Zambia  the  vision  is  to  become  a  prosperous 
middle income country by the year 2030. In order for us to attain this vision, there is need to 
improve  the  financial  infrastructure  in  Zambia.  Since  2004,  the  Government  has  been 
implementing  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  with  the  view  to  improve  the 
functioning of financial markets and increase accessibility to financial services by a majority 
of Zambians. The second phase of the FSDP is currently underway after the initial five-year 
plan lapsed. We cannot deny that an improved financial infrastructure will result in efficient 
capital and money markets which in turn will attract domestic and foreign investment in the 
economy.  
Conclusion  
In  conclusion  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  I  would  just  want  to  emphasise  that  Zambia  and 
many of our regional counterparts are small countries in need of investment. However, the 
high cost of capital has hampered the increase in investment, particularly among the SMEs 
which  continue  to  face  enormous  financing  challenges.  Therefore  provision  of  appropriate 
financing to this category of firms is likely to lead to higher investment opportunities and more 
efficient  methods  of  production.  In  turn,  this  will  translate  into  poverty  alleviation  due  to 
employment creation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen you will agree with me that we have come a long way since the time 
when  many  viewed  the  financial  system  simply  as  a  sideshow,  or  a  passive  channel  that 
allocated scarce resources to the most efficient uses. Today, almost everyone agrees that 
the financial system is essential for development. Improving the financial system can lead to 
higher growth and reduce the likelihood and severity of crises. It is essential that we have a 
clear understanding of the causes of business cycles and the working of monetary policy. In 
thinking about financial reform, we need to treat liberalization as a means rather than an end. 
Instead of pushing for immediate deregulation, we should try to understand the important role 
authorities  play  in  financial  markets.  These  steps  will  not  only  result  in  a  better  and  more 
stable allocation of domestic capital, but also help countries to develop their capital markets 
with the requisite financial systems.  
In view of this I encourage you all to join hands with authorities in your countries in improving 
financial  infrastructure  so  as  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  our  regional  financial 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 5
systems  and  thereby  improving  the  availability  of  capital.  I  am  also  encouraged  by  the 
increasing number of financial service providers in our economies. As competition intensifies, 
banks and other financial institutions will start to reposition themselves by lowering the cost 
of lending to the private sector. On the policy front, central banks should continue to conduct 
monetary and supervisory policies that create incentives for the financial sector to thrive so 
as to enable them provide better services.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, with these few remarks I would like to conclude here and wish you 
success in the rest of your deliberations for this conference.  
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 149/2010
