Andreas Dombret: Challenges on the road ahead 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 13th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2010. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Professor Weder di Mauro, 
Professor Stark, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to speak to you today. Although the crisis is not over yet, making 2010 
the fourth year of the crisis, the recovery of the global economy got underway in spring 2009 
and remains on track. It is therefore all the more important for firms and policymakers alike to 
focus  on  what  will  come  after  the  crisis  and  the  challenges  on  the  road  ahead.  The  key 
question now has to be how to get the economy back onto a path of strong, balanced and 
sustainable growth. 
Our session is entitled “Economic and Financial Stability in Europe: The Road Ahead”. With 
this brief in mind, I would like to focus on two core issues on the way to an environment that 
supports  solid  growth.  First,  the  ongoing  reform  of  the  financial  system,  as  only  a  robust 
financial system provides a basis for sustainable growth. The financial sector is more than 
just a part of the economy; it also plays a crucial role in capital accumulation. In particular, 
financial stability is a prerequisite for an efficient allocation of capital. Second, the lessons the 
euro  area  should  learn  from  the  crisis,  especially  from  its  most  recent  phase  which  is 
characterised by a government debt crisis. The sustainability of public finances is essential 
for  the  confidence  of  market  participants  such  as  consumers  and  investors.  And  a  sound 
macrofinancial  environment  is  key  for  financial  stability,  as  the  last  months  have 
demonstrated.  
Providing a basis for sustainable growth: a more robust financial system  
2. 
The current crisis originated as a pure financial crisis. However, over its course, the financial 
crisis  spilled  over  to  the  real  economy  and  thereby  demonstrated  very  plainly  the  strong 
interconnection  between  the  financial  and  the  real  spheres  and  how  vulnerable  the  real 
economy is to disruptions to the financial system. 
At  this  point  in  time,  discussions  about  concrete  financial  reform  measures  are  well 
advanced. The G20 have proposed a comprehensive plan to overhaul financial regulation. 
This agenda shows that many lessons from the crisis seem to have been understood and 
that essential aspects of the regulatory framework are currently being improved. The overall 
purpose is to come up with a system that is more resilient to shocks. As a first line of defence 
at the microprudential level, the reform measures aim to tighten capital requirements, both in 
terms  of  quantity  and  quality.  The  significant  enhancements  made  to  the  original  Basel  II 
framework  will  lead  to  a  new  set  of  rules  that  has  therefore  rightly  been  termed  Basel  III. 
After the promising consensus achieved at the summit in Seoul, the task is now to transpose 
the G20 agreement into national law.  
Of  course,  the  increased  requirements  are  associated  with  adjustment  costs  for  financial 
institutions. Yet, a number of studies have been conducted. The investigations have shown 
these  costs  to  be  manageable,  not  least  due  to  the  lengthy  transition  phase  that  will 
attenuate  the  adaptation  process.  Even  the  distinctive  features  of  the  tripartite  German 
financial  system  have  been  taken  into  due  consideration.  The  sector’s  profitability  will 
probably decrease, yet so will fluctuations, thereby supporting continuous growth. Impacts on 
cost  of  credit  and  thus  on  the  real  economy  will,  however,  be  limited.  Fears  of  dire 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 1
in 
important  details  of 
their  externalities.  However, 
consequences therefore appear exaggerated, and banks should instead embark on the task 
of adjusting to the new requirements at an early stage. However, the increased risk buffer in 
the shape of higher capital requirements is no panacea. It is a central lesson from the crisis 
that  a  second  line  of  defence  is  needed  to  prevent  individual  banks  that  still  fail  from 
triggering  a  systemic  crisis.  This  issue  is  particularly  acute  in  the  case  of  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  The  discussion  of  how  best  to  treat  them  is  still 
ongoing, but the contours of the future framework are taking shape now that the G20 Summit 
has  endorsed  the  FSB’s  SIFI  recommendations:  a  core  policy  instrument  are  resolution 
regimes that are tailored to the particularities of the financial system and that allow to resolve 
even  systemic  financial  institutions  without  endangering  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system.  Higher  capital  requirements  in  a  variety  of  forms  are  a  suitable  instrument  to 
increase  the  loss  absorption  capability  of  SIFIs  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  counter  moral 
hazard  by  pricing 
these  SIFI 
recommendations and corresponding policy measures still need to be agreed on, and some 
questions remain unanswered. One important issue is how to measure systemic relevance 
and how to translate this into regulatory and supervisory action.  
The crisis has also demonstrated that systemic risks have been shifted out of the regular and 
therefore  regulated  banking  sector  into  the  so  called  shadow  banking  system.  This 
underlines  just  how  important  it  is  to  complement  traditional  microprudential  institutional 
supervision  by  macroprudential  oversight.  Yet  for  this  new  type  of  surveillance  to  be 
effective, information loopholes have to be closed by gathering more information on areas of 
the financial system that have been rather opaque up until now. The guiding principle should 
be that function matters more than form – something that looks like a bank and acts like a 
bank should also be treated like a bank.  
All  these  reform  efforts  require  internationally  coordinated  action.  Otherwise,  a  shift  of 
business  activities  into  less  regulated  countries  could  result  in  a  by-passing  of  regulation. 
Individual  countries  should  not  seek  advantages  by  reluctantly 
the 
internationally agreed reform agenda. 
Reluctance would also be the wrong attitude with regard to my second core issue: the road 
ahead to regain sound public finances and rebuild confidence in states. Though the problem 
of  unsustainable  government  debt  is  basically  an  international  one,  strengthening  EU 
governance is of the outmost importance in the current situation. 
implementing 
Providing a basis for a strong and stable monetary Union: EU Governance  
3. 
After the financial crisis had grown into a full-blown economic crisis at the end of 2008, the 
state had to ride to the rescue. It supported ailing companies and institutions whose failure 
might have triggered a chain reaction with guarantees or capital injections. The pivotal role 
that fiscal policy played in stabilising the economy and the financial system can be attributed 
to  the  high  degree  of  creditworthiness  that  governments  enjoy  –  much  higher  than  that  of 
most private debtors. It is based on their ability to fund themselves by levying taxes – ie the 
ability to force others to make a financial contribution and not having to rely on their powers 
of  conviction.  However,  the  severity  of  the  crisis  resulted  in  a  sharp  deterioration in  public 
finances, which had in many cases not been in good shape even before the crisis. Ultimately, 
this  led  to  a  reassessment  of  sovereign  risk,  and  investors  lost  confidence  in  the  public 
finances  of  some  countries,  particularly  at  the  periphery  of  the  euro  area.  This  loss  of 
confidence in the state constituted the third phase of the crisis and culminated in the debt 
crisis in May 2010.  
The current reform efforts must therefore extend beyond the financial system and include the 
body  of  European  rules  and  regulations.  These  rules  were  not  sufficient  to  ensure  solid 
public finances in all member countries. Given the spillover effects in a financial market as 
closely  integrated  as  that  of  the  European  Monetary  Union,  the  risk  of  contagion  for  other 
euro-area  member  states  and  beyond  implied  a  substantial  risk  –  including  for  the  global 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2010
economy. Far-reaching ad hoc countermeasures had to be taken earlier this year. Therefore, 
restoring  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  is  key  in  the  quest  for  a  sustainable  growth  
path – across the world, but particularly within the euro area. With the Stability and Growth 
Pact  (SGP),  and  especially  its  debt  criterion,  the  euro  area  already  possesses  the  right 
instrument.  Yet,  implementation  has  been  slack  to  date.  The  SGP’s  rules  need  to  be 
tightened – in its preventive arm as well as in its corrective arm – and measures must be 
taken  to  ensure  that  member  states  abide  by  them.  At  the  end  of  October  the  European 
Council adopted proposals to change the SGP. These changes would be an improvement 
compared to the status quo. However, a firm establishment is still to come and, judging from 
past  experience,  we  would  have  wished  for  more  far-reaching  suggestions.  Alongside  the 
changes  of  the  fiscal  framework  a  more  intensive  macroeconomic  surveillance  is  to  be 
installed to diagnose erroneous developments early on. 
This reflects that especially the countries hit hardest by the debt crisis have posted persistent 
current account deficits. Still, the focus on the current account can easily lead to the wrong 
conclusions.  Even  persistent  and  sizable  current  account  positions  are  not  a  problem  in 
themselves. Technically, a surplus or deficit reflects the difference between domestic saving 
and investment. For countries with an ageing population it is only rational to save more today 
rather  than  invest  domestically,  as  the  number  of  profitable  investments  is  declining  and 
households want to maintain their level of consumption in old age. Conversely, countries that 
are catching up in terms of economic development have ample opportunities for investment 
but  are  short  of  domestic  capital.  By  allowing  economies  to  separate  domestic  absorption 
from  output,  current  account  imbalances  enhance  welfare.  Consumption  is  smoothed  over 
time and capital directed into its most efficient use.  
However, current account imbalances are less benign when they are caused by distortions. 
When  they  reflect  underlying  barriers  to  economic  growth  they  can  add  an  element  of 
instability, not only domestically but also in other economies. A number of deficit countries 
did  not  always  invest  capital  inflows  efficiently.  In  some  cases,  this  allocation  increased 
domestic  demand  and,  with  inflexible  labour  markets,  wages  outpaced  productivity.  The 
results  were  a  loss in  price  competitiveness  and  a  further widening  of  the  current  account 
deficit. Here macroeconomic surveillance could help detect problematic developments with 
the  potential  to  destabilise  the  currency  union  as  a  whole  at  an  early  stage.  This  is 
particularly  important  in  cases  when  these  developments  are  not  immediately  reflected  in 
deteriorating public finances which would already be dealt with under the SGP.  
However, we should refrain from macro fine-tuning – be it at the European or at the national 
level. Such efforts would definitely overburden economic policy and raise expectations that 
are  bound  to  be  disappointed.  Instead,  reasonable  macroeconomic  surveillance  should 
confine  itself  to  the  early  detection  of  harmful  domestic  imbalances  that  have  significant 
negative spillover effects on other member countries or even the euro area as a whole. This 
in principle also precludes the symmetric treatment of current account surpluses and deficits: 
divergences within the euro area were caused by distortions and the inefficient use of capital 
in deficit countries. Hence, the brunt of the adjustments has to be borne by these countries, 
whereas – as studies demonstrate – additional stimuli by surplus economies would do little to 
ease this burden.  
At the current juncture, the fundamental characteristics of the macroeconomic surveillance 
procedure are still very vague. In my view, the details need to be worked out first. Only once 
this has been done, can we decide whether it makes sense to complement the procedure 
with sanctions and what these sanctions might look like. 
Conclusion  
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  economic  and  financial  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  there  is 
ample room for improvement and need for reform in our financial system as well as in the 
area of EU governance. A look at the global agenda shows that the main messages that the 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 3
crisis has taught us seem to have been understood. As the recovery proceeds, it is of the 
essence not to relent in our efforts to implement the necessary measures. If the momentum 
for structural reforms in the various fields of economic policy can be maintained, we will have 
made significant progress on the path towards strong, balanced and sustainable growth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2010
