K C Chakrabarty: Developing the humanware to improve customer service 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
launch  of  the  course  “Customer  Service  &  Banking  Codes  and  Standards”,  at  the  Indian 
Institute of Banking & Finance (IIBF), Mumbai, 12 November 2010.  
 Assistance provided by Shri D G Kale in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Mrs  Udeshi,  Chairperson,  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  (BCSBI), 
Shri  O.  P.  Bhatt,  President,  Indian  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  (IIBF)  and  Chairman, 
IBA, Shri B. M. Mittal, CEO, BCSBI, Shri Bhaskaran, CEO, IIBF, distinguished guests, ladies 
and  gentlemen.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  to  launch  the  Certificate  Course  on 
“Customer Service and Banking Codes and Standards” that has been designed by IIBF in 
association with BCSBI. IIBF has played a pivotal role in developing the professional skills of 
bankers,  and  in  tune  with  times,  it  is  also  a  leading  organization  in  providing  training, 
consultancy and counselling to the business correspondents, recovery and marketing agents 
of banks. 
2.  
The IIBF was set up in 1928 as Indian Institute of Bankers (IIB) with a mission to 
“develop  professionally  qualified  and  competent  bankers  and  finance  professionals 
primarily  through  a  process  of  education,  training,  examination,  consultancy  / 
counselling  and  continuing  professional  development  programmes”.  The  mission 
statement of the IIBF and the timing of the launch of the new certificate course in customer 
service go hand in hand. I must compliment and congratulate Shri Bhatt and Shri Bhaskaran 
and his team for conceptualising, designing and developing this particular course. I am also 
happy to note that BCSBI was closely involved in designing this course. As you are aware, 
the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, which has been in existence for some time now, does not 
look into systemic issues with a view to enforcing a prescribed quality of service. It was in 
this context that the BCSBI was set up as an autonomous body to monitor and ensure that 
the Banking Codes and Standards voluntarily adopted by the banks are adhered to in their 
true  spirit.  The  codes  represent  the  minimum  standards  of  service  which  a  customer  can 
expect  from  a  bank  including  transparency  in  services,  prohibition  of unsolicited marketing 
and  compensation  for  delays  or  losses  incurred  by  a  customer.  Two  separate  codes,  one 
catering to customers and the other to MSMEs have been brought out. While the codes are 
intended to instil confidence in the customers when dealing with banks, the ultimate objective 
in  following  these  codes  is  to  forge  a  long-lasting  and  harmonious  customer-  banker 
relationship  which  will  stand  the  test  of  time.  It  is  indeed  very  appropriate  that  IIBF  is 
launching a course in association with BCSBI on the subject. 
3.  
Let me first begin by asking why, as a regulator, am I here today? The reason is 
two-fold. The Reserve Bank of India, as you know, dons many hats which many other central 
banks do not. One of its many roles is developmental in nature, i.e. nurturing and promoting 
institutions that have gone on to play a key role in our financial system. It is coincidental that 
the RBI has had a role in development of all the three institutions whose representatives are 
present  here  on 
institutions 
promoted/sponsored by RBI. The other reason has to do with a question which I am often 
asked and which is, “why, as a regulator, are you concerned about customer service? Why is 
it not left to the market forces and competition to take care of?”. The answer to this lies in the 
fact that in any service industry where market forces and competition play out freely, it may 
well  have  been  the  case,  but  banking  is  a  highly  regulated  service  industry  with  very  stiff 
entry norms and customer service cannot entirely be left to the market forces and, hence, the 
regulator has a role. In fact, as per the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, banking business has 
to be carried out in the public interest and, as a corollary, wherever customers interest are 
involved,  regulator  has  an  obligation  towards  the  customers.  Customer  service  in  banking 
institutions  are  gems  among 
the  dais.  These 
the 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 1
and finance industry has certain special features that need to be very carefully understood 
and appreciated by all concerned. As such the free market mechanics of competition may 
not be easily replicated here in terms of a choice for the customer to switch on or switch off a 
relationship merely on the basis of pricing. Further, globally the trend is towards Treating the 
Customers Fairly (TCF) which is becoming an integral part of the regulatory and supervisory 
manual. Those who are following international developments will be aware that regulations 
on TCF will become more and more stringent in the days to come.  
4.  
Customer service is a challenging issue in any service industry as there are many 
intangibles that define a customer’s satisfaction or otherwise with a particular bank / branch / 
product  or  process.  The  advertisement  and  marketing  campaigns  that  seem  to  evoke 
heightened customer response would come to zero if the service standards do not match the 
perceived quality aspirations of the customers. The task is even more challenging in banking 
field as banks are required to deliver improved and efficient customer service to match the 
increasing  aspirations  of  the  people  while  increasing  their  reach  and  penetration  by  giving 
access to existing as well as new customers both through the brick and mortar structure and 
the  virtual  world.  Faced  with  the  dilemma  of  improving  customer  service  and  increasing 
access to finance, some of our banks have done a pioneering and commendable work and 
all  are  committed  to  financial  inclusion.  However,  some  aggrieved  customers  still  say  that 
RBI is soft on banks on customer service issues. But, what must be appreciated is that in our 
country where only 40% have access to finance and only 5% of villages have bank branches, 
at this stage if we become very stringent, then universal access to finance will be in jeopardy. 
Customer  service  will  not  improve  by  regulatory  directives  but  will  improve  when  banks 
genuinely  feel  for  the  customers  and  treat  the  customers  as  king.  This  task  can  partly  be 
achieved by leveraging appropriate technology. Apart from enabling increased penetration of 
the  banking  system,  improving  productivity  and  efficiency,  and  making  small  value 
transactions  viable,  technology  also  allows  transactions  to  take  place  faster  and  offers 
unparalleled convenience through various delivery channels. The need of the hour, therefore, 
is on harnessing technology for making banking transactions a matter of customer delight. 
But mere adoption of technology may not deliver the goods unless it is accompanied by the 
will and desire to render service to the “customer” who truly is the purpose of any business. 
5.  
What  is  customer  care  all  about?  Is  it  mere  courtesy  and  material  service  and 
branch layout or is it about the attitude of staff at a branch towards customer service? The 
banks  have  understood  the  need  and  importance  of  customer  care  in  a  competitive 
environment. But the actualization and implementation of the strategies to reach the desired 
goals  necessarily  involves  the  human  resources.  We  must  appreciate  the  benefits  a 
customer-centric organization can bring to all the stakeholders. Today, customer service, as 
was understood by many of us present here in the past, has undergone a sea change. This 
has  also  resulted  in changing  customer  expectations  and behaviour.  Are  we  really  able  to 
exactly guess or bet on what a customer really wants or are we really able to describe what 
“good” customer service is? While the businesses including banks focus on expanding the 
customer  base,  we  need  to  remember  that  customer  retention  is  an  equally  important 
business  objective.  The  customers  of  banks  today  are  a  very  discerning  lot  and  clearly 
distinguish between personalized service and material service. Are we equipped to handle 
this transition? Have we looked at change management from the customer service point of 
view?  Call  centres,  internet  banking,  Customer  Relationship  Management  tools  and 
strategies, these are a part of the modern day jargon defining customer care or the approach 
to customer care. Irrespective of the approach or the strategy, no one in the banking industry 
can lose sight of the service – profit chain. 
6.  
We  may  not  realize  that  increased  emphasis  on  customer  service  may  result  in 
some  banks  gaining  competitive  advantage.  Customer  is  the  foundation  of  business  and 
keeps it in existence. Management experts and authors on competitive strategy have opined 
that service driven organizations can grow twice as fast as an average corporation. Within 
the financial services sector, banks are going to face increased competition from retailers, 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2010
insurance companies, housing finance companies, NBFCs, mutual funds etc. So be vigilant 
and remember what the late Prof. Peter Drucker wrote way back in 1954 and I quote “There 
is only one valid definition of business purpose – to create a customer”. If this is the case, 
then retaining the customer is even more important. 
7.  
The benefits of a customer-centric banking organization are many. These banks are 
able to differentiate themselves from the competition and improve their image in the eyes of 
the customer. Increased customer satisfaction results in higher customer retention enhancing 
the reputation of a bank that can be trusted for fair treatment of its customers. Improving staff 
morale  and  productivity  are  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  If  the  staff  is  properly  trained, 
nurtured,  motivated  and  rewarded,  profitability  through  improved  customer  service  is 
automatically  ensured.  Bring  about  continuous  improvement  in  the  operations  of  banks  is, 
therefore, central to quality customer care. 
8.  
Why does a customer choose a particular bank? There are many reasons for this. 
The main reasons can be divided into two broad groups as tangible and intangible factors. 
The  tangible  factors  may  concern  performance,  quality,  reliability,  cost  of  services  and 
convenience. The intangible factors may be reputation, sense of caring, courtesy, willingness 
to help, problem solving ability of staff, etc. The tangible and the intangible factors primarily 
drive  home  the  point  about  customer’s  perception  about  how  he/she  is  being  treated  by  a 
bank. Is the bank being fair to him/her in matters of interest rates, penalties, service charges 
and that he/she has not to fear any hidden costs and charges at a later date. Further, the 
customer also draws comfort from the fact that he or she is not being discriminated against 
vis-à-vis a new customer. We only advocate that customers be treated fairly. Everyone would 
like to have cheaper services. However, the minimum we  can offer is fairness, speed and 
delivery. And this is entirely in banks interest. 
9.  
Appropriateness  of  the  “sell”  is  an  important  aspect  that  cannot  be  lost  sight  of. 
Customization,  tailoring  the  products  to  suit  individual  needs  and  always  ensuring  that  a 
customer’s  individuality  is  respected  are  necessary  ingredients  of  the  bank  marketing 
strategies.  We  have  to  give  what  the  customer  wants  and  not  merely  sell  what  we  have! 
While  doing  this  exercise,  aspects  such  as  pricing,  product  features,  service  quality 
standards, grievances redressal mechanism, etc need to be properly documented, disclosed 
and explained to the customer in simple understandable terms. The broad principles of fair 
treatment  of  customers  would,  therefore,  have  certain  basic  tenets  like  transparency,  non-
discriminatory  pricing,  full  and  proper  disclosure  about  product  /  service  quality  standards, 
risks to which a customer could be exposed, ability to exit if the product / service is not what 
the customer wanted and a host of such other issues. 
10.  
Now, let me revert to the role of technology in customer service. It is no one’s case 
that banks have not embraced technology. In fact, most public sector banks in India in the 
last  decade  have  gone  through  a  phase  of  technology  up-gradation  and  have  migrated  to 
Core Banking Solution (CBS) platform. Adoption of technology has changed the face of the 
banking sector which is manifest in the various transformational developments of the recent 
past.  The  benefits  of  technology  are,  however,  not  commensurate  with  the  developments. 
The  speed,  cost,  convenience  and  efficiency  of  banking  services  have  not  improved  by 
factors that technology enables one to achieve. A part of the problem is that banks are yet 
trying out fledgling delivery models rather than putting in place a cost-effective, decentralized 
and  realistic  delivery  model.  Fixing  a  problem  /  glitch  when  it  happens  thus  becomes  the 
weakest link in providing efficient customer service. 
11.  
A  large  number  of  complaints  to  the  Banking  Ombudsman  relates  to  this  area.  If 
banks  can  bring  in  cost-effective  technology  with  appropriate  delivery  model,  it  would 
improve speed, efficiency and quality of banking services. It will also ensure that customers 
are  treated  fairly  as  technology  has  this  unique  characteristic  of  bringing  in  equity. 
Unfortunately, IT has not been properly implemented which has led to a rise in the number of 
complaints.  This  is  because  of  lack  of  IT  strategy  and  vision,  business  process  re-
BIS Review 151/2010 
 3
Commercial  banks  must  also  resolve  to  reduce  customer  grievances  by  adopting 
engineering,  business  model,  etc.,  on  the  banks’  part.  Many  complaints  could  have  been 
avoided  had  the  banks  taken  adequate  care  of  these  aspects.  The  key  to  improving  this 
deficiency  is  in  adopting  appropriate  delivery  model.  Banks  must  improve  their  technology 
delivery model to bring substantial reductions in the number of customer complaints. Banking 
Ombudsmen  will  be  working  closely  with  the  banks  to  help  them  in  this  endeavour.  An 
introspection  by  banks  as  to  why  so  many  of  their  cases  landed  up  in  the  Banking 
Ombudsmen offices would perhaps reveal that attitude of the front-line staff concerned could 
have made a difference to the customer as also to the bank. 
12.  
the following eight principles on Treating Customers Fairly: 
1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
Minimum courtesy and behavioural standards  
Transparency  
Non-discriminatory policy  
Deliver what is promised  
Allow seamless “switching” of products without excessive penalty  
Establish a suitable mechanism for customer grievance redressal within a specific 
timeframe  
7.  
Appropriateness of “sell” and 
8.  
Firm and polite stand against unreasonable customer demands 
13.  
So, having identified the problem, what needs to be done? It is neither the hardware 
nor  the  software  but  the  humanware  which  is  going  to  improve  the  customer  service. 
Therefore,  for  every  employee  to  be  able  offer  good  customer  service,  apart  from  good 
governance,  training  and  development  of  staff  is  extremely  important  and,  hence,  the 
relevance  of  this  course  of  IIBF.  However,  the  introduction  of  a  Certificate  Course  in 
Customer  Service  must  not  be  an  end  in  itself.  It  needs  to  be  carried  forward  from  the 
individual to the institutional level by suitably tweaking the performance recognition / rewards 
system to send out a positive feedback to other aspiring bank personnel to try and get this 
recognition and practice it in workplace. I urge upon the bank managements to provide the 
necessary encouragement to their staff to take up this examination. May be in due course 
IIBF may like to carry out an impact evaluation of this course to see if it has made a real 
difference  to  the  people  and  their  attitudes  in  the  banking  industry  and  that  we  are  really 
moving in the direction of making our banks truly customer-centric organizations. 
14.  
I am sure that all the member banks and their staff, individual members, students 
and  bank  customers  alike  will  find great  value  in  this  initiative  that  aims  to  streamline  and 
structure the knowledge / information in the area of customer care and customer protection. 
The  true  test  of  the  success  of  this  initiative  is  going  to  be  the  attitudinal  change  that  is 
expected  to  be  brought  about  by  a  professionally  qualified  person  in  rendering  customer 
service  compared  to  another  individual  who  is  not  bestowed  with  this  qualification.  The 
certificate  course  I  am  sure  has  lot  of  built-in  tests,  simulations  and  exercises  to  act  as  a 
feedback for an individual to improve himself and his performance too. Last but not the least, 
I wish IIBF and all its faculty members and trainers the best of luck for this pioneering effort 
and sincerely hope that this will be warmly received by the banking industry.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2010
