José Manuel González-Páramo: Household finance and consumption 
Opening remarks by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, at the conference organised by the European Central Bank and 
the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 25 October 2010.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  open  this  joint  BCL/ECB  conference  in  Luxembourg.  This  is  the 
second  conference  organised  in  the  context  of  the  Eurosystem  Household  Finance  and 
Consumption  Network.  This  network  is  unique  as  it  brings  together  experts  from  a  wide 
range of fields and institutions in one single forum. Participants in today’s meeting include 
survey  experts,  statisticians  and  economists.  Institutions  represented  are  the  ECB,  the 
Eurosystem’s  national  central  banks  and  a  number  of  national  statistical  institutes  and 
research institutes, as well as central banks from outside the Eurosystem.  
Historical background of the Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption 
Network  
Developing,  implementing  and  analysing  a  survey  on  the  finances  and  consumption  of 
households for the entire euro area does not happen overnight. The history of this network 
dates back to December 2006. A task force was then established to investigate the feasibility 
of a survey on household finance and consumption in the euro area.  
On the basis of the task force’s report, the Governing Council decided to establish a network 
of Eurosystem experts to prepare a proposal for such a survey. For one and a half years the 
network  worked  diligently  at  developing  such  a  proposal.  Based  on  this  proposal,  in 
September  2008  the  Governing  Council  approved  the  conduct  of  the  survey  and  gave  a 
three-fold mandate to the network: (1) to complete the implementation work, (2) to take care 
of the survey development and (3) to serve as a forum for research with the survey data.  
After all this preparatory work, the fieldwork of actual data collection of the first wave of the 
Household Finance and Consumption Survey could finally start, with many countries in the 
euro area conducting their survey in the course of 2010 and 2011. At the current juncture, we 
are therefore looking forward to the analysis that will result of using the collected data.  
Even  though  the  data  of  the  first wave  of  the  euro  area  wide  survey  are  not  yet  available 
today, there is already a large literature on household finance that analyses existing micro 
household data. The work that will be presented at this conference shows this very clearly, 
with contributions based on a wide array of datasets ranging from existing public household 
surveys to private datasets from credit card companies. 
The Household Finance and Consumption Network is a good example of what is possible 
when  the  Eurosystem  co-ordinates  its  efforts  as  a  team.  Central  banks  around  the  world 
have  either  collected  household  data  or  supported  the  collection  of  such  data  by  other 
institutions for a long time. The strength of the network is that it has been able to tap into that 
valuable expertise from many sources. 
Household surveys on wealth date back to 1962 when the US Board of Governors’ Survey of 
Consumer  Finances  started  as  the  Survey  of  Financial  Characteristics  of  Consumers.  Not 
long  thereafter,  in  1965,  the  Bank  of  Italy  started  its  Survey  of  Household  Income  and 
Wealth. Those two pioneers, as I may call them, were followed later by national statistical 
institutes and Eurosystem central banks.  
BIS Review 141/2010 
 1
In  the  eighties,  INSEE  started  its  Enquête  Patrimoine  and  Statistics  Finland  its  Survey  of 
Household  Wealth.  In  1994  a  survey  of  Portuguese  households’  wealth  and  debt  was 
conducted  by  the  National  Statistical  Office  in  Portugal,  encouraged  by  the  Banco  de 
Portugal.  In  1999  the  first  Cyprus  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances  was  launched  as  a  joint 
project between the University of Cyprus and the Central Bank of Cyprus. In 2002, the Bank 
of  Spain  started  its  Survey  of  Household  Finances.  In  the same  year  Greece  launched  its 
survey of household debt and the Netherlands Bank began participating in what was formerly 
known as the CentER Savings Survey, a survey running since 1993, and currently known as 
the Household Survey of De Nederlandsche Bank.  
Throughout  the  work  of  the  network,  experts  from  these  existing  surveys  have  given  their 
valuable advice. Allow me to especially mention today’s keynote speaker, Arthur Kennickell 
from  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  As  the  Chief  of  the 
Microeconomic Surveys Section he is “the” expert of the US Survey of Consumer Finances 
with a long and deep experience in this field. He has put a relentless effort in providing the 
most valuable advice to the network.  
Through  the  years,  the  network  has  also  drawn  on  the  expertise  of  academics  who  have 
provided invaluable advice and guidance throughout. Some are present at the conference, 
such  as  Michalis  Haliassos  of  Frankfurt  University  who  has  been  involved  since  the 
beginning of the project, and Peter Tufano of Harvard Business School, who volunteered to 
be part of the scientific committee of this conference. Tomorrow, you will listen to an expert 
on financial literary: Annamaria Lusardi of Dartmouth College will give a keynote lecture on 
how financial literacy affects economic decisions of households.  
What can we learn from a Household Survey? 
Once  the  data  of  the  Eurosystem  Household  Finance  and  Consumption  Survey  are 
available,  they  will  provide  a  wealth  of  comparable  information  on  micro-level  household 
decisions  with  regard  to  the  holding  of  real  and  financial  assets,  the  taking  of  debt, 
employment,  income,  pensions,  intergenerational  transfers,  gifts,  consumption  and  saving, 
and  risk  attitudes.  Anonymised  euro  area  micro  data  will  be  made  available  to  the  wider 
research community.  
To  understand  better  the  reasons  for  a  conference  on  household  finance,  it  is  worth 
elaborating on why central banks get involved in the development and production of micro-
level  data.  Fundamentally,  micro-level  household  data  provide  information  that  is  not 
available  from  national  accounts  or  flow  of  funds  data.  Central  bank  policymakers  expand 
their knowledge if they complement information from macro aggregates with micro-insights. 
Micro-insights are a natural counterpart of the macro models used in monetary policy that are 
traditionally  based  on  analyses  of  the  aggregates  such  as  GDP,  consumption  and 
investment. But how precisely can micro level data serve the purpose of central banking?  
It seems to me that there are multiple answers to this question. I will stress here three.  
First, the reaction functions of various categories of agents that are built into macro models 
have to be ultimately based on micro-level analysis.  
Second,  the  micro-level  data  provide  us  with  a  wealth  of  distributional  information, 
information  that  is  not  available  from  the  macro  aggregates  and  that  is  valuable  to 
understand the reaction of different groups of households to shocks and the distribution of 
risks.  
Third, micro-level household data can give insights into new trends.  
Reaction functions of agents must be based on micro-data. 
Let  me  first  express  in  more  detail  what  we  can  learn  about  the  reaction  functions  of 
households from micro data. Household survey data link information on income, assets, debt 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2010
and consumption at the household level. To understand consumption and saving behaviour 
of households, it is crucial to combine these various elements in the analysis. Households 
respond in a quite heterogeneous way to shocks depending, among many other factors, on 
the form their wealth takes.  
For  instance,  wealth  can  be  very  illiquid  when  it  is  concentrated  in  home  ownership,  thus 
affecting  households’  possibilities  for  adapting  their  consumption  behaviour  to  various 
shocks. Understanding how consumption is affected by changes in either stock market prices 
or house prices is relevant for policymakers. Especially during times of big shocks, such as a 
financial  or  economic  crisis,  policymakers  are  interested  in  understanding  how  the 
fluctuations  in  assets  prices  will  affect  aggregate  demand.  During  these  times,  knowledge 
provided by the surveys comes at a premium.  
In particular, the way household spending reacts to changes in interest rates is of continuing 
relevance  for  monetary  policy,  not  only  during  crisis  periods.  Important  elements  of  this 
reaction  are  the  demand  for  housing  and  the  different  homeownership  ratios  across  euro-
area countries. Residential investment is an important channel through which interest rates 
changes  are  transmitted  via  households  through  the  economy.  As  purchase  of  a  house  is 
often financed with a mortgage, understanding the access of households to mortgage credit 
increases our understanding of the transmission of interest rate changes to credit demand. 
Central banks regularly monitor the evolution of credit aggregates. Mortgages make up the 
bulk of household liabilities and are an important element of total credit.  
Two interesting puzzles in this context are: (1) the origins of the enormous diversity of home-
ownership  levels,  and  (2)  the  large  differences  in  mortgage  types  that  we  see  across  the 
countries  of  the  euro  area.  In  some  countries,  with  Germany  and  France  as  examples, 
households tend to hold fixed rate mortgages, whereas in other countries, such as Spain and 
Portugal, households typically hold adjustable rate mortgages. Despite big advances in the 
integration of financial markets in the euro area, differences in the fixation of mortgage rates 
seem to persist.  
Micro  household  data  can  shed  light  on  the  origins  of  these  differences,  namely  whether 
these  are  caused  by  household  characteristics,  institutions,  government  policies  or  just 
different  tastes.  Understanding  these  differences  is  important  because  the  way  the  assets 
and  liabilities  of  households  are  structured  has  implications  for  their  relative  sensitivity  to 
market interest rates and, ultimately, for the transmission of monetary policy. For instance, 
the  transmission  of  interest  rate  shocks  is  likely  to  be  stronger  and  more  immediate  in 
countries with adjustable-rate mortgages.  
Importance of distributional information 
Household  survey  data  are  not  only  useful  to  estimate  more  precisely  the  behaviour  of 
households with respect to spending, saving and credit, it also provides unique information 
on  the  distribution  of  assets  and  liabilities.  Distribution  of  assets  and  liabilities  across 
households and possible mismatches between assets and liabilities of individual households 
affect  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  macro  aggregates:  different  distributions  of 
wealth  will  generally  lead  to  different  aggregate  fluctuations  in  the  macro  aggregates  in 
reaction to shocks.  
This  brings  me  to  the  second  reason  for  the  usefulness  of  micro  data.  The  distribution  of 
assets  and  liabilities  has  an  effect  on  how  risks  are  distributed  across  different  household 
subpopulations. In that respect, policy makers cannot be content to just rely on aggregate 
numbers. Aggregate statistics on the indebtedness of households can be misleading if debt 
is  concentrated  among  some  household  groups.  For  instance,  it  poses  fewer  risks  if  it  is 
concentrated mainly among the relatively wealthy households.  
In this regard, it is equally important to understand how households choose their portfolios: 
the  risks  stemming  from  the  household  sector  will  depend  largely  on  how  household 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 3
portfolios are structured. Household portfolios are prone to all sorts of biases. The home bias 
in  equity  holdings  is  a  well-known  example.  Well-functioning  financial  markets  are  a 
prerequisite  for  a  well-functioning  monetary  transmission.  Important  topics  for  further 
analyses are: what influences households in their choices of assets? What role do financial 
intermediaries such as banks play? What determines the risk-taking behaviour of households 
and what are its implications for financial stability?  
In the European Union we are currently in the process of setting up the European Systemic 
Risk  Board  (ESRB),  a  new  body  responsible  for  the  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the 
financial system. It is clear that macro-prudential risks may stem not only from the balance 
sheets  of  banks  or  other  financial  intermediaries,  but  also  from  the  balance  sheets  of 
households.  The  aggregated  data  of  the  household  sector  are  not  always  sufficient  to 
understand the magnitude and the location of these risks: they need to be complemented by 
distributional  information.  I  therefore  foresee  that  the  household  survey  on  finance  and 
consumption will also be an important source of information for the ESRB, in spite of its low 
frequency, especially if it can be enhanced to encompass the entire EU. 
Monitoring of new trends 
My  third  point  is  that  survey  data  are  also  useful  to  monitor  new  important  developments. 
The  relationship  between  aging,  pension  provision  and  consumption  is  a  field  of  research 
that will become more important as European populations grow older. As of this day, many 
countries  faced  with  the  budgetary  consequences  of  an  aging  population  have  already 
embarked on policy changes in pension provision. Retirement ages are being increased and 
pension  entitlements  have  changed.  The  micro  survey  data  can  shed  light  on  the  saving 
behaviour of the households when they are faced with these changes.  
New developments will also come from financial innovation. As households are faced with 
new types of assets to invest in, or with new types of debt, these innovations will have an 
effect  on  consumption  smoothing.  New  types  of  debt,  for  instance,  may  reduce  the 
importance of borrowing constraints and could therefore have financial stability implications 
and change households’ reaction to shocks.  
I am happy to see that all three elements I just discussed are present in this conference. For 
instance,  in  your  first  session  today  you  will  be  discussing  how  stock  market  participation 
depends  on  financial  advice.  In  your  second  session,  you  will  discuss  how  consumption 
reacts to mortgage interest rates. Tomorrow, you will go deeper into issues of inheritance, 
household wealth and borrowing.  
I hope I was able to convince you that what you will be discussing in these two days is not 
only  of  purely  academic  interest,  but  also  of  importance  for  us  policymakers.  I  wish  you  a 
fruitful conference and I look forward to your presentations and discussions.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2010
