William C Dudley: Regional economy and housing update 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York 
City, 19 October 2010. 
 Good morning and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Quarterly Regional Economic 
Press Briefing. As always, I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists 
covering our region – and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will focus 
on regional economic conditions, with particular attention to the housing sector in the nation 
and especially the Second Federal Reserve District, which covers New York, northern New 
Jersey, Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. My colleagues 
will follow my remarks and provide more detail. As always, what I have to say reflects my 
own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal 
Reserve System.  
National economic conditions 
To provide context, let me start with a few comments about national economic conditions. As 
I discussed in a recent speech, the long and deep recession that ended in June 2009 has 
been followed by a very tepid recovery. Since June 2009, economic activity has grown – but 
only slowly from levels far below the productive capacity of the economy. 
In recent months, the momentum of the recovery has slowed. For example, after rising at a 
3.25  percent  annual  rate  during  the  second  half  of  2009,  there  has  been  a  progressive 
slowing – to a 2.75 percent annual rate during the first half of 2010 and, most likely, to an 
even  slower  rate  when  the  third-quarter  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  figures  are 
released at the end of this month. 
With  demand  growth  barely  keeping  pace  with  firms’  ability  to  increase  productivity,  job 
creation  has  been  too  weak  to  significantly  reduce  unemployment,  which  stands  today  at 
9.6 percent.  And,  as  is  typical  in  such  circumstances  of  considerable  slack,  the  rate  of 
inflation has declined. 
Viewed through the lens of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate – the pursuit of the highest 
level  of  employment  consistent  with  price  stability,  the  current  situation  is  wholly 
unsatisfactory. Given the outlook that the upturn appears likely to strengthen only gradually, 
it will likely be several years before employment and inflation return to levels consistent with 
the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 
Why are we experiencing this soft patch now? There are several reasons: 
 
As  is  typical  for  the  early  stages  of  a  recovery,  the  economy  over  the  past  four 
quarters has benefited from a strong inventory cycle. The swing in inventories from 
liquidation  back  to  restocking  contributed  about  1.75  percentage  points  of  the 
3 percent growth of real GDP over that period. But this effect is now petering out.  
The growth impulse from the 2009 fiscal stimulus package is beginning to wane.  
The usual hand-off from inventory-led growth to private final demand is not yet fully 
established. 
 Instead,  we  have  ongoing  sluggishness  in  two  key  sectors  that  have  led  past  recoveries: 
consumer spending and housing. 
The  slow  recovery  of  consumer  spending  and  housing  in  the  face  of  very  substantial 
monetary and fiscal stimulus reflects the painful unwinding of the dynamics at work during 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 1
the  expansion  that  preceded  it.  Beginning  around  2003,  underwriting  standards  for 
residential  mortgages  were  significantly  relaxed,  leading  to  a  sharp  rise  in  household 
borrowing and in home prices. The rise in home prices helped to support additional demand 
for credit as households used the collateral represented by their homes to borrow large sums 
of money via home equity lines of credit and second mortgages. This also fueled a strong 
boom in home construction. But house price increases could not be sustained without limit. 
When home prices peaked and started to turn down, the dynamic linking house prices, credit 
and  consumption  went  into  reverse,  forcing  substantial  adjustments  on  the  part  of  the 
household sector and in the housing market itself. 
I’ve discussed in recent speeches the role monetary and regulatory policy can play in helping 
to  support  economic  activity  and  in  improving  economic  outcomes  relative  to  what  would 
otherwise be experienced in the absence of this support. These steps include critical reforms 
that  make  the  financial  system  safer  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  that  make 
mortgages more affordable and make the investments that create jobs are more attractive. 
Today I will focus on the economic trends themselves. 
Let’s  consider  first  the  consequences  of  this  dynamic  for  consumer  spending  –  that  is, 
households’  purchases  of  goods  and  services.  Families’  expenditures  rose  at  a  slow 
2 percent  annual  rate  over  the  first  half  of  2010  and  (so  far)  this  sluggishness  appears  to 
have  continued  in  the  third  quarter  of  2010.  Families  have  not  yet  boosted  their  spending 
above  the  levels  preceding  the  severe  cuts  they  made  during  the  recession.  This  frugality 
stands in stark contrast to the first year of recovery from previous deep recessions. Several 
factors are inhibiting families from spending. Many people have lost their jobs and are still 
unemployed, or have had their hours or pay reduced. Confidence in the economy remains 
quite low. And households’ net worth, which fell substantially as real estate and stock prices 
dipped,  remains  well  below  its  previous  peak  compared  with  disposable  income.  So, 
households have been saving more. The personal saving rate, which rose to 5.5 percent by 
the end of 2009 from a recent low of 1.2 percent in the third quarter of 2005, seems headed 
even higher in the third quarter. Households are “deleveraging”; they are paying down their 
debts.  Of  course,  lenders  have  also  reinforced  this  tendency  as  they  have  tightened 
underwriting standards for consumer credit, relative to their pre-recession standards. 
Have households completed their deleveraging, so they will soon spend more? Although we 
believe  that  substantial  progress  has  been  made,  it  is  hard  to  tell  how  much  further  this 
process has to run. For example, the share of household after-tax income that families owe 
for servicing debts and paying for housing (including property taxes, homeowners insurance 
and rents) has declined sharply over the past two years and is now back to levels last seen 
in  the  late  1990s.  Households  have  cut  the  total  amount  of  debt  they  owe.  They  are  also 
refinancing outstanding debt to take advantage of the lowest mortgage interest rates since 
the  mid  1950s.  We  expect  the  increased  rate  of  mortgage  refinancing  now  in  place  to 
continue over the near term. This represents another means by which households can free 
up income for other uses. 
Now,  let’s  consider  the  slow  housing  recovery.  Housing  market  activity  –  both  new 
construction and sales – remains depressed. On the construction side, total housing starts 
are running at just 600,000 units per year (seasonally-adjusted) in recent months. This is up 
from 530,000 units at the trough in the first quarter of 2009 but it is still extremely low by the 
standards of the last 50 years. In fact, the rate of new construction is so low that there is 
barely any net growth in the U.S. housing stock these days. 
One reason why so little housing is being built is that many existing homes stand vacant. We 
estimate  that  there  are  roughly  3  million  vacant  housing  units  more  than  usual.  And  more 
vacancies  are  added  daily  as  the  foreclosure  process  moves  homes  from  families  to 
mortgage lenders. This stock of vacant homes will shrink when fewer are foreclosed upon 
and more of these homes are sold or rented out. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2010
On  the  sales  side,  even  though  low  mortgage  interest  rates  and  falling  home  prices  have 
together  boosted  housing  affordability  to  its  highest  level  in  40  years,  the  current  pace  of 
sales is quite sluggish. Impediments to home sales include tight lending standards, a weak 
job  market  and  continued  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  path  of  home  prices.  The  large 
decline in home prices that occurred between 2006 and 2008 is also important. This decline 
reduced the amount of equity that owners have in their homes, making it difficult for people to 
come up with the funds needed to “trade-up” and move into better homes. 
In  addition,  the  steep  decline  in  home  prices  put  many  families  at  risk  of  mortgage 
delinquency and, ultimately, losing their homes to foreclosure. With lower home prices, many 
families  now  owe  more  on  their  mortgage  than  their  home  is  worth.  This  means  that  they 
cannot refinance or sell their homes easily if they experience a financial crisis, such as a job 
loss  or  a  serious  illness.  Recent  developments  on  foreclosures  have  been  mixed.  While 
RealtyTrac reports that foreclosure completions in the United States exceeded 100,000 for 
the first time in September, it is important to remember that foreclosure is a lengthy process 
in most states. Our data indicate that, in recent quarters, borrowers are becoming less likely 
to  fall  behind  on  their  mortgages,  so  fewer  households  are  now  entering  the  foreclosure 
process. At the same time, though, major lenders have acknowledged serious problems in 
the  processes  they  have  used  to  repossess  homes  and  announced  moratoria  on  new 
foreclosures.  Taken  together,  these  developments  suggest  that  the  situation  in  housing 
remains uncertain for the foreseeable future. 
The  Federal  Reserve  actively  encourages  efforts  to  find  viable  alternatives  to  foreclosure, 
like loan modifications, or deeds in lieu. We also support due process and access to legal 
counsel for homeowners facing foreclosure, for instance through legal aid programs. At the 
same time, it is important that foreclosures that properly comply with state and federal law 
can ultimately take place, as this is a necessary part of the adjustment that will eventually 
return us to more normal conditions in the housing market. 
At  present,  the  extent  of  the  documentation  problem  and  its  wider  ramifications  are  still 
uncertain. In conjunction with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  therefore  seeking  to  establish  the 
facts  through  a  review  of  the  foreclosure  practices,  governance  and  documentation  at  the 
major  bank  mortgage  servicers.  We  want  to  ensure  that  the  housing  finance  business  is 
supported  by  robust  back-office  operations  –  for  processing  of  new  mortgages  as  well  as 
foreclosures  –  so  that  buyers  of  homes  and  investors  in  mortgage  securities  have  full 
confidence in the process. We are monitoring developments closely in order to evaluate any 
potential impact on the housing market, financial institutions and the overall economy. 
The key role that housing has played during this recession and recovery makes it a timely 
topic for our regional economic briefing. 
Regional economic conditions (update since the July regional press briefing) 
Now, let me turn to regional economic conditions. Overall, the recession seems to have been 
less  severe  in  much  of  our  region  than  in  many  other  parts  of  the  country,  though 
unemployment remains unacceptably high. 
As attendees at previous Regional Press Briefings may recall, the New York Fed produces 
Coincident  Economic  Indicators  to  help  track  the  performance  of  the  regional  economy. 
Since July, these indicators point to recovery in New York State, and particularly in New York 
City. 
Although  New  York  City  and  New  York  State  are  recovering,  elsewhere  in  the  region,  the 
story is different. In New Jersey, although activity is no longer declining, there has yet to be a 
sustained  recovery.  New  Jersey’s  economy  remains  essentially  flat.  An  index  produced  in 
Puerto  Rico  by  the  Government  Development  Bank  shows  that  the  pickup  in  economic 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 3
activity  there  in  late  spring  and  early  summer  has  retreated  and  activity  in  the  past  few 
months has again turned down. 
Now, let’s look at jobs, which are the key for people to truly feel the recovery in their lives. I 
am pleased to note that private-sector jobs have continued to grow moderately across much 
of the region in the past few months, just as they have in the nation. Growth in private-sector 
jobs – which is not affected directly by hires and layoffs from the decennial census – signals 
that, on balance, firms are expanding their workforces to meet their business needs. While 
state and local government job cuts have also reduced total employment, the fact that the 
private sector is creating jobs is a good sign and necessary for a sustainable recovery. 
The number of private-sector jobs has increased in and around New York City, in northern 
New Jersey and in some parts of Upstate New York. The latest job market report for New 
York shows a continuation of the generally rising trend of employment in the state at a pace 
that  roughly  matches  the  nationwide  growth  rate.  In  New  York  City,  employment  has 
expanded  at  rates  substantially  above  the  nation.  Since  we  last  met,  employment  in  New 
Jersey  has  expanded,  and  while  that  growth  has  been  quite  modest,  it  is  an  encouraging 
sign. In Puerto Rico, employment reports continue to give mixed signals, showing a see-saw 
pattern that has yet to add up to a strong rebound. 
Despite  these  employment  gains,  unemployment  in  the  region  remains  painfully  high.  In 
August, New York City’s and New Jersey’s rates were very close to the national jobless rate 
of 9.6 percent. The rate for New York State, which has been improving since the first quarter, 
is noticeably lower at 8.3 percent. Puerto Rico, which has had much higher unemployment 
than the mainland for the past several decades, saw a modest decline in its jobless rate, but 
at 15.6 percent is still showing little evidence of a recovery. 
Regional housing trends in New York and New Jersey 
We focus on housing at today’s briefing because it represents the most important asset that 
many households own, provides a substantial number of high-wage jobs and is often a key 
driver of regional as well as national business cycles. 
I’ll  start  with  a  key  observation:  During  this  recession,  the  housing  sector  contributed  less 
volatility to the regional economy than it did in much of the nation. We have, of course, seen 
painful losses of homes, construction jobs and housing equity in New York and northern New 
Jersey. This pattern can be seen quite directly in the construction sector, where many jobs 
were  created  during  the  housing  boom,  but  then  were  lost  as  the  housing  market 
deteriorated.  However,  our  housing  markets  tend  to  be  less  influential  in  our  economy 
because we are a relatively mature region. That is, we are not adding population as rapidly 
as  some  other  parts  of  the  country,  so  housing  construction  –  which  tends  to  be  very 
cyclical – and associated purchases account for a smaller share of aggregate activity here 
than it does in faster growing regions. 
In  addition,  much  of  our  region  was  spared  the  worst  effects  of  the  non-prime  mortgage 
boom and bust. There was generally lower penetration of nonprime loans into our housing 
markets, and in general, our region shows better performance, with fewer delinquencies and 
foreclosures. This pattern was particularly true across Upstate New York. However, as can 
be seen on the New York Fed’s U.S. Credit Conditions maps, there are significant pockets of 
housing distress around the greater New York City metro area, especially in communities in 
the Bronx, Dutchess County and Long Island. Indeed, we recently documented the severity 
of problems on Long Island in our Facts and Trends publication. Moreover, New Jersey had 
non-prime mortgage activity closer to the national average and now has more delinquencies 
and foreclosures than is the case for much of the region. 
As  the  uneven  pattern  of  nonprime  lending  suggests,  the  region  is  hardly  uniform.  The 
housing section fared better in Upstate New York than it did in much of the region during the 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2010
recession. In fact, the housing boom and bust largely bypassed Upstate New York, where 
construction activity is a relatively small part of the overall economy. 
Relative to Upstate New York, most areas in downstate New York and northern New Jersey 
more closely tracked the national cycle. Sales activity and home prices ramped up during the 
housing boom, but then dropped sharply. 
More  recently  –  over  the  past  year  –  home  sales  and  prices  in  the  region  have  followed 
different paths. Home prices have generally stabilized across upstate New York, with some 
parts, such as Buffalo, Rochester and Syracuse, even experiencing price increases over this 
period. However, home prices have continued to decline in the greater New York and New 
Jersey area. By contrast, the number of home sales have generally increased throughout the 
region  over  the  past  year.  But  the  pattern  has  been  erratic  because  of  various  policy 
changes.  In  particular,  the  introduction,  initial  expiration  and  subsequent  extension  of  the 
home  buyer  tax  credit  introduced  volatility  as  it  boosted,  slowed  and  then  boosted  sales 
again. With the final expiration of this tax credit, the recent rise in home sales across New 
York and northern New Jersey may well be short-lived. 
Regional housing trends: focus on New York City 
I’ll end with a few remarks about New York City’s housing market – a very large market that 
stands out as unique in many respects. 
Let me remind you of some of these key differences: 
 
Compared with the rest of the region, and with the rest of the country, New York City 
has  an  exceptionally  large  share  of  rental  housing:  67  percent  of  homes  citywide 
versus 33 percent for the United States.  
The market is dominated by multi-family structures, especially in Manhattan and the 
Bronx. When these units are owner-occupied, they are more likely to be co-ops than 
condominiums, and, thus, to have comparatively low leverage rates.  
New York City has very high housing prices and long construction lags. Since the 
number of homes cannot adjust quickly, rising demand during a boom typically leads 
to rapid rises in prices and unregulated rents. Eventually, of course, the amount of 
housing supplied responds to changes in demand. 
  So, how did the economic expansion and contraction affect New York City’s housing market? 
For a mature city, the city saw an unusually strong boom in housing sales, construction and 
prices.  This  expansion  actually  began  in  1996  and  continued  even  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
9/11  attack.  Since  2007,  however,  New  York  City’s  market  has  turned  down.  This  decline 
started later than the nation’s and prices have fallen less sharply. Now, prices appear to have 
stabilized. 
This  pattern  can  also  be  seen  in  Manhattan’s  rental  market.  After  a  long  period  of  rising 
rents,  the  market  weakened  substantially  from  2007  to  2009,  and  rents  have  rebounded 
moderately in 2010. 
New  York  City  has  not  been  spared  from  the  high  rates  of  mortgage  delinquencies 
characteristic  of  this  recession.  Manhattan’s  delinquency  rates  are  elevated  although  they 
remain markedly below the national average. By contrast, pockets of distress are much more 
prevalent  in  the  outer  boroughs,  all  of  which  have  delinquency  rates,  per  owner-occupied 
unit, above the national average. 
The relatively mild recession and the recovery in the City are lending support to both home 
prices  and  sales.  Also  positive,  compared  with  the  rest  of  the  country,  are  the  City’s  low 
mortgage leverage rates and a low share of homes with underwater mortgages. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 5
Nevertheless,  several  risks  to  home  prices  in  the  City  remain.  These  risks  include  the 
ongoing completion of a considerable number of new apartment buildings – ones that were 
started at the end of the boom. Another risk comes from the slow pace of job growth in high-
pay  sectors  (including  the  securities  industry)  in  New  York  City.  Finally,  during  the  boom, 
prices rose substantially faster than rents. Going forward, this disparity could exert downward 
pressure on home prices as renting has become a more affordable alternative. 
Conclusion 
In  sum,  after  a  recession  that  was  milder  than  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  the  region  is 
showing signs of a modest recovery in New York, but little growth elsewhere. The housing 
sector  played  a  pivotal  role  in  the  recent  national  downturn.  In  the  region,  the  fact  that 
housing activity has a smaller weight in the regional economy helped to limit the recession’s 
impact on many communities. Going forward, given housing’s significance to the well-being 
of people in our region and beyond, the New York Fed will continue to focus on the sector as 
we monitor regional and national economic conditions. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I will now ask James Orr to provide more details on current 
regional economic conditions. 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2010
