Philipp Hildebrand: Global and Swiss economic outlook 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2010. 
 The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  is  maintaining  its  expansionary  monetary  policy.  It  is 
leaving the target range for the three-month Libor unchanged at 0.00–0.75%, and intends 
to keep the Libor within the lower part of the target range at around 0.25%. 
The  global  economic  recovery  is  continuing.  While  the  growth  dynamic  in  emerging 
economies  is  vigorous,  the  recovery  in  the  industrialised  economies  remains  modest 
overall. Growth in Switzerland was robust in the third quarter of 2010, but the weakening 
of exports, in particular, points to a significant reduction in growth in the quarters ahead. 
The SNB expects GDP to grow by some 1.5% in 2011, following growth of about 2.5% in 
the current year. 
Monetary policy operates in an environment of heightened uncertainty. Concerns about 
stability  in  the  euro  area  have  led  to  renewed  financial  market  tensions.  Against  this 
backdrop, the Swiss franc has again appreciated. Should these tensions be exacerbated 
and  put  a  strain  on  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area,  this  would  also  have  a 
detrimental effect on the Swiss economy. If a deflation threat emerges, the SNB would 
take the measures necessary to ensure price stability. 
The  SNB’s  conditional  inflation  forecast  for  2012  and  2013  is  slightly  below  the 
September  forecast.  This  correction  is  the  result,  in  particular,  of  the  less  favourable 
economic outlook for Europe compared with the last assessment. For 2011 it is marginally 
higher, due mainly to a higher price for oil. Assuming an unchanged three-month Libor of 
0.25%, average inflation for 2010 is expected to amount to 0.7%, for 2011 to 0.4% and 
for 2012 to 1.0%. The conditional inflation forecast shows that there is no threat to price 
stability  in  the  short  term.  However,  the  rising  path  in  2012  and  2013  shows  that  the 
current  expansionary  monetary  policy  cannot  be  maintained  over  the  entire  forecast 
horizon  without  compromising  long-term  price  stability.  The  inflation  forecast  is  still 
associated with a very high level of uncertainty. 
Global economic outlook 
I  would  now  like  to  take  a  closer  look  at  the  economic  situation  and  at  monetary 
conditions. 
Overall,  the  recovery  in  the  global  economy  continued,  encouraged  by  expansionary 
economic policies and vigorous economic activity in the emerging economies. In the euro 
area,  however,  growth  slowed  markedly 
favourable 
developments in Germany’s economy differ from those in the peripheral countries of the 
euro area, with their weak growth. The recent financial market turmoil is likely to hamper 
activity in the euro area. Although domestic demand is gradually firming up in the US, the 
momentum  is  insufficient  for  a  sustainable  reduction  in  unemployment,  which  remains 
high. In addition, construction investment is suffering from the situation on the real estate 
market.  Consequently,  GDP  growth  in  the  US  will  remain  modest.  The  vigorous 
economic momentum in the emerging economies is likely to provide positive stimulus for 
global growth in the future. 
third  quarter.  The 
the 
in 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 1
The  SNB  has  made  slight  downward  revisions  to  its  growth  forecasts  for  the  global 
economy, mainly for Europe in 2011 and 2012. Uncertainty with regard to global economic 
developments remains very considerable and the risks are still to the downside. 
Swiss economic outlook 
Growth  of  the  Swiss  economy  remained  robust  in  the  third  quarter.  Consequently, 
utilisation of production factors increased. Technical capacity utilisation has returned to a 
normal level in manufacturing, while in the construction industry it is in fact considerably 
higher  than  the  long-term  average.  Employment  also  increased  moderately  and 
unemployment  declined  further.  However,  the  indications  of  a  significant  slowdown  in 
growth increased. Goods exports stagnated from June to October, mainly due to weaker 
demand from Europe. Exports of services declined most recently. 
Inflation, as measured by the national consumer price index, fell to 0.2% in November. 
The decrease over recent months is mainly attributable to the fall in the prices of imported 
consumer  goods.  Accordingly,  the  core  inflation  indices  calculated  by  the  SNB  were 
somewhat higher, and have remained steady since the last monetary policy assessment. 
For the coming months, the SNB expects economic growth to continue. However, it is 
likely to be significantly lower in the quarters ahead – a development attributable to both 
the  generally  subdued  economic  activity  in  the  industrialised  countries  and  the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. Consequently, the SNB expects GDP to grow by some 
1.5% in 2011, following growth of about 2.5% in the current year. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
Monetary  and  financial  conditions  in  Switzerland  are  shaped  by  the  expansionary 
monetary  policy.  Since  mid-September,  the  three-month  Libor  has  remained  fairly 
constant  within  the  lower  part  of  the  target  range.  Yields  on  high-quality  Swiss  bonds 
remain  at  a  low  level,  despite  the  latest  increase.  This  also  applies  to  long-term  real 
interest  rates,  which  are  ultimately  decisive  in  investment  and  consumption  decisions. 
Historically low interest rates for corporate loans and mortgages also create conditions 
which stimulate domestic final demand. 
Concerns about stability in the euro area have led to renewed financial market tensions. 
Against this background, the Swiss franc has again appreciated. As shown in the survey 
carried  out  by  the  delegates  of  the  SNB  regional  contact  network  and  published  next 
week in the Quarterly Bulletin, business activities of numerous companies are hampered 
by this development. An aggravation of the crisis in the euro area would inevitably have 
further negative consequences for the Swiss economy. 
As  my  colleague,  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  will  outline  in  more  detail  later,  liquidity-
absorbing  operations  have  continued  since  the  monetary  policy  assessment  of 
September  2010.  As  a  result,  bank  sight  deposits  with  the  SNB  have  fallen  further. 
Nevertheless,  the  monetary  base  is  still  significantly  higher  than  its  level  prior  to  the 
financial  crisis.  The  broader  monetary  aggregates  have  continued  to  expand  strongly 
since the last assessment, and pose a potential threat to long-term price stability. 
In  view  of  the  expansionary  monetary  conditions,  lending  business  remained  brisk. 
According to the SNB survey on bank lending, banks maintained their lending standards 
for companies and households in the third quarter of 2010. Several banks reported that 
household demand for mortgages increased again. This is reflected in the continued high 
growth rate of mortgage volume. Moreover, real estate prices continue to rise. The situation 
on the mortgage and real estate markets still requires the full attention of the SNB. 
2 
 BIS Review 173/2010
Impact of foreign exchange market interventions on the SNB balance sheet 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  SNB  balance  sheet  has  lengthened 
considerably  and  its  composition  has  changed,  in  particular  due  to  the  SNB’s  foreign 
exchange market interventions. Since the beginning of 2010, the balance sheet total has 
increased  from  CHF  207  billion  to  some  CHF  280  billion.  Moreover,  the  significant 
appreciation in the Swiss franc has resulted in considerable exchange rate losses on the 
SNB’s  foreign  currency  investments.  My  colleague,  Thomas  Jordan,  will  take  a  closer 
look at the risks for the SNB associated with the lengthening of the balance sheet. 
After the beginning of the financial crisis, the SNB lowered money market interest rates 
to virtually zero. Despite these decisive reductions in interest rates, the Swiss economy 
faced the threat of deflation from March 2009 onwards. This required the SNB, as part of 
its mandate, to undertake a further monetary policy easing. In view of the limited size of 
the  domestic  capital  market  compared  to  other  countries,  foreign  currency  purchases 
seemed  the  most  appropriate  course  of  action  for  Switzerland.  This  allowed  for  the 
absorption  of  extreme  exchange  rate  developments,  which  could  have  triggered  a 
deflationary  dynamic.  In  absorbing  the  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc,  the  SNB 
may have taken on a higher balance sheet risk, however, in doing so, it countered the 
risk of a deflationary trend. 
Although the Swiss franc has appreciated sharply since the beginning of the year, the 
deflation threat has declined as the economic recovery has strengthened. The appreciation 
of  the  Swiss  franc  has  impaired  the  competitive  position  of  Swiss  exporters.  However, 
the negative impact on export demand has been reduced by robust economic growth in 
the economies importing Switzerland’s goods and services. 
Chart of conditional inflation forecast 
I would now like to comment on the new, conditional inflation forecast in more detail. 
The (dashed) red curve on the chart represents the new, conditional inflation forecast. It 
shows the future path of inflation, assuming that the three-month Libor remains constant 
at 0.25% over the entire forecast horizon, and it covers the period from the fourth quarter 
of 2010 to the third quarter of 2013. For purposes of comparison, the (dash-dotted) green 
curve shows the inflation forecast published in September, which was also based on the 
assumption of a three-month Libor of 0.25%. 
The new conditional forecast shows that inflation remains low for 2011 and 2012. The 
forecast  for  the  next  few  quarters  is  revised  because  new  data  has  been  taken  into 
account.  The  new  forecast  for  2011  is  slightly  above  that  published  in  September 
because the oil price has increased. The increase in inflation in the third quarter of 2011 
is  attributable  to  a  base  effect,  because  inflation  in  the  third  quarter  of  2010  was 
comparatively low. Compared to the forecast published in September, inflation in 2012 
and  2013  rises  less  steeply,  particularly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  economic  outlook  for 
Europe is less favourable than in the previous quarter. Towards the end of the forecast 
horizon,  inflation  rises  briskly  and  exceeds  the  upper  bound  of  2%,  assuming  that  the 
three-month Libor remains at the current level. This shows that the current expansionary 
monetary policy cannot be pursued for the entire forecast horizon without compromising 
long-term  price  stability.  Due  to  the  risks  mentioned  previously,  this  forecast  is 
associated with a very high level of uncertainty. 
 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 3
  4 
    BIS Review 173/2010
