Mark Carney: Employment in a modest recovery 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Windsor-Essex 
Regional Chamber of Commerce, Windsor, Ontario, 30 September 2010. 
 It is a pleasure to be here to discuss current economic conditions with the Windsor-Essex 
Regional Chamber of Commerce. I look forward to this opportunity to hear insights directly 
from business leaders.  
Insights from financial markets are somewhat fleeting at the moment. A broad range of asset 
prices  from  the  Canadian  dollar  to  S&P500  futures  to  European  sovereign  spreads  are 
unusually correlated and volatile (Appendix, Chart 1). Every morning by looking at any one 
of these variables you can readily tell whether markets are in a risk-on or risk-off mode.  
In the current environment, the macro dominates the idiosyncratic. The good and bad moves 
you  make  as  business people  will, for  the  moment,  go  largely  unrewarded  or  unpunished. 
What matters most is the daily perception of the answers to three very big questions: 
 
Will  the  U.S.  recovery  falter  under  the  weight  of  balance-sheet  repair  and  slow 
employment growth? 
Can the rest of the world sustainably decouple? 
Will there be another systemic event concerning sovereigns or banks? 
 
 
In this time of unusual uncertainty, businesses on either side of the border are responding in 
different ways. In the United States, investment has been relatively strong and productivity 
growth  has  been  robust.  However,  hiring  has  been  unusually  weak,  particularly  by  small 
businesses. In Canada, the opposites have been the case: investment has been unusually 
weak;  productivity,  poor;  and  hiring,  strong,  particularly  amongst  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs).  
I would like to speak today about the possible reasons for these divergences, how long they 
are likely to persist, and their implications for growth and inflation in Canada. 
The global economic outlook 
The  global  recovery  is  entering  a  new  phase.  The  easy  bit  is  now  over.  In  advanced 
economies, the temporary boost from the turn in the inventory cycle is largely complete. In 
many  countries,  fiscal  stimulus  is  turning  to  fiscal  drag.  The  panicked  postponement  of 
consumption  and  investment  has  been  unwound.  The  question  now  is  whether  growth  in 
advanced economies will be self-sustaining in the face of broad forces of bank, household, 
and sovereign deleveraging.  
The  evidence  is  mixed,  depending  on  proximity  to  the  crisis.  For  example,  in  Germany, 
where  household  and  government  finances  are  sound  and  the  economy  is  externally 
oriented,  growth  has  picked  up  smartly.  In  peripheral  Europe,  where  households  and 
governments  are  extremely  leveraged  and  economies  have  been  domestically  focused, 
growth is slowing rapidly.  
Similar forces threaten renewed weakness in the United States. For Canada, this prospect is 
of concern.  
Financial  markets  are  currently  constructive  but  remain  vulnerable  to  event  risk.  Renewed 
pessimism over the U.S. outlook has sharply reduced global bond yields. In effect, there has 
been  a  Goldilocks  deterioration  in  the  macro-financial  environment  as  major  government 
bond  yields  have  fallen  sharply  but  corporate  spreads  have  not  increased  (Chart  2).  For 
large corporations who want it, finance is readily available at historically low all-in costs.  
BIS Review 127/2010 
 1
In  emerging  economies,  growth  has  persistently  surprised  on  the  upside.  Healthy  financial 
sectors  and  very  stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  have  overcome  the  drag  from 
weaker export markets. However, with the limits to non-inflationary growth approaching and 
the  challenges  of  shadowing  U.S.  monetary  policy  increasing,  this  above  trend  growth  is 
likely to come to an end.  
In sum, there are several reasons to expect a modest and uneven global recovery. Not all 
countries  can  simultaneously  export  their  way  to  growth.  The  ongoing  process  of  balance 
sheet  repair  in  major  industrialised  countries  will  restrain  household  consumption  and 
business  investment.  The  ability  of  some  major  emerging  markets  to  maintain  persistently 
higher  domestic  demand  remains  unproven.  Finally,  necessary  real  exchange  rate 
adjustment  threatens  to  come  through  inflationary  pressures  in  emerging  economies  and 
deflationary  pressures  in  major  advanced  economies  rather  than  (far  easier)  changes  in 
nominal exchange rates.  
These forces make the economic outlook and policy environment unusually challenging for 
countries caught in the middle, like Canada. 
The U.S. economic outlook 
When faced with a potential collapse in private demand in the wake of the financial panic, 
U.S. authorities instituted massive and timely monetary and fiscal stimulus. This bought time 
for the necessary adjustments in the economy to begin. With U.S. fiscal policy transitioning 
from  expansion  to  contraction,  that  time  is  now  coming  to  an  end.  The  success  of  the 
necessary handoff of growth from the public to the private sector is still in question (Chart 3).  
The U.S. housing sector remains very weak, despite substantial falls in prices and housing 
starts.  Valuations  are  more  in  line  with  historical  averages,  and  inventories  of  unsold  new 
homes have reached their lowest level since 1968. However, effective supply is much larger, 
given the overhang of distressed properties and the pent-up supply of “shadow inventories” 
in  the  resale  market.  Housing  demand  continues  to  be  held  back  by  subdued  consumer 
confidence,  the  weak  labour  market,  and  the  inability  of  some  households  to  access 
financing, at historically low mortgage rates. While there appears to be limited prospect for 
substantial  further  deterioration  in  U.S.  housing,  a  sharp  rebound  in  the  near  term  looks 
unlikely.  
U.S. businesses have responded to the challenging environment by increasing productivity. 
While  commercial  real  estate  investment  has  been  unusually  depressed,  investment  in 
equipment and software has been robust and consistent with prior recoveries (Chart 4).  
The  same  cannot  be  said  of  the  U.S.  labour  market,  which  has  borne  the  brunt  of 
adjustment. The unemployment rate remains very high at 9.6 per cent, the incidence of long-
level  above  40  per  cent  (Chart  5),  and 
term  unemployment  reached  a  record 
underemployment in the form of involuntary part-time work is rampant.  
The  prolonged  weakness  in  the  U.S.  labour  market  reflects  factors  that  go  beyond  weak 
output  growth.  The  jump  in  the  unemployment  rate  has  been  higher,  by  about  5  million 
workers,  than  the  decline  in  GDP  would  have  traditionally  suggested.  The  restructuring  of 
major  industries  such  as  autos,  finance  and  of  course,  construction  has  deepened  the  job 
losses. In addition, credit constraints facing U.S. SMEs have contributed to the employment 
dynamics.1 
The  natural  rate  of  unemployment  may  be  increasing  sharply.  The  scale  of  industry 
restructuring  means  that  some  unemployed  workers  do  not  have  the  skills  suitable  for  the 
                                                 
1   About 80 per cent of job losses in this recession have been from enterprises with less than 500 employees. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2010
is  also  self-reinforcing.  As 
labour  market.  The  current  cycle 
expanding  sectors.  Other  jobseekers  are  tied  to  their  local  area,  due  to  an  inability  to  sell 
their homes in distressed markets, hampering the mobility that has been a hallmark of the 
American 
long-term 
unemployment becomes more entrenched, workers’ skills deteriorate and their reintegration 
into the labour force becomes more difficult.  
Reflecting weakness in the labour market and an ongoing need to repair stretched personal 
balance sheets, U.S. real personal expenditures are not yet back to pre-crisis levels. Two of 
the most visible indicators of this weakness matter tremendously to Canada: housing starts 
and motor vehicle sales (Charts 6a and 6b).  
The good news is that recent data revisions indicate that the personal savings rate is now at 
6  per  cent,  which  is  consistent  with  ultimately  rebuilding  U.S.  household  wealth  to  historic 
averages and stabilizing the U.S. net foreign liability position. If savings hold at this level (that 
is,  absent  a  further  shock  to  confidence),  then  consumption  should  grow  next  year  at  a 
moderate pace. 
The Canadian economic outlook 
Despite  this  challenging  external  environment,  Canada’s  recovery  has  been  stronger  than 
that  of  its  G-7  peers.  As  a  result  of  the  combination  of  the  scale  and  speed  of  the  policy 
response  and  our  well-functioning  financial  system,  Canada’s  economy  is  now  back  at  its 
pre-crisis peak in output. However welcome, our recovery is relatively modest in comparison 
to its predecessors and has relied heavily on housing and personal consumption.  
The  limitations  of  this  reliance  are  becoming  evident.  In  recent  months,  the  speed  of  the 
recovery has diminished. A modest pace of growth can be expected in coming months as our 
economy  faces  considerable  headwinds  from  both  the  external  sector  and  the  limits  of 
household balance sheets.  
Allow me to expand.  
Housing activity in Canada is declining markedly from high levels, as the Bank had expected. 
The slowing since the spring in resale, renovation, and new home construction activity has 
been  driven  by  a  number  of  factors,  including  the  passing  of  pent-up  and  pulled-forward 
demand; the expiration of the federal Home Renovation Tax Credit in January; the tightening 
of  standards  for  government-backed  insured  mortgages  that  came  into  effect  in  April;  the 
introduction of the HST in Ontario and British Columbia in July; declining affordability; and 
subdued  income  growth.  I  will  come  back  to  that  last  factor  in  a  moment,  but  overall  it 
appears unlikely that private consumption will be bolstered by substantial house price gains 
going forward.2 
The  fiscal  stimulus  is  also  coming  to  an  end.  After  making  a  major  contribution  to  growth 
since  the  onset  of  the  recession  (Chart  7),  the  Bank  estimates  that  the  contribution  of 
government spending to real GDP growth will turn negative in 2011.  
Until recently, business investment has disappointed relative to past experience as well as to 
the  imperatives  of  lagging  productivity,  increasing  international  competition,  and  the 
development of major opportunities in emerging markets. Survey evidence and recent data 
suggest that is now changing. The Bank expects that business investment will increase to 
                                                 
2   House prices matter principally because of the “financial-accelerator effect.” When the value of a house rises, 
the owner can typically borrow against this increased equity to fund home renovations, a second house, or 
other goods and services. These expenditures can “accelerate” a rise in house prices, reinforcing the increase 
in collateral values, access to additional borrowing, and, thus, an increase in household spending. Of course, 
this  accelerator  effect  can  also  work  in  reverse:  a  decrease  in  house  price  tends  to  reduce  household 
borrowing capacity and amplify the decline in spending. 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 3
levels  consistent  with  previous  recoveries,  reflecting  competitive  imperatives,  firms’  strong 
financial position, and easy credit conditions (Chart 8).  
The auto sector provides an example. The recession crystallised a major restructuring, with 
North American capacity reduced by 3 million motor vehicles.3 More than 576,000 jobs were 
lost since December, 2007. Today, U.S. demand for motor vehicles is about 11 million per 
year versus the average from 2000 to 2006 of 17 million, and while there will be some growth 
from here, the U.S. market is likely to be persistently smaller as households reduce debt.  
As  a  consequence,  business  models  are  now  being  substantially  adjusted.  Canada  is 
competing  to  host  some  of  the  handful  of  global  OEM  (original  equipment  manufacturer) 
platforms, training, R&D, and capital investment are being ramped up, and some Canadian 
tier 1 suppliers are aggressively expanding into emerging markets.  
Similar  bold  moves  will  be  required  across  our  economy  to  create  sustainable,  wellpaying 
jobs. 
Labour market dynamics in Canada 
The most striking thing about the Canadian recovery has been the performance of the labour 
market (Chart 9). All 400,000 jobs lost in the recession have now been recovered. While the 
unemployment rate remains high at 8.1 per cent, this reflects in the aggregate the movement 
of more people into the labour force. With this, the incidence of longer term unemployment in 
Canada is about half that in the United States.  
However  welcome,  these  headline  figures  mask  some  important  details.  Much  of  the 
employment growth is in the public sector, with only half of the new jobs in the private sector. 
Many  jobs  are  involuntary  part-time.  In  fact,  although  employment  has  regained  its  pre-
recession level, hours worked have not. Overall labour input (the combination of employment 
and hours worked) has made up only two-thirds of its decline during the recession.  
Since the crash, on the margin, the composition of labour demand has shifted from jobs in 
the goods sector to jobs in the services sector. The change accounts for the majority of the 
gap between the current level and the pre-recession level of average hours worked. In the 
current cycle, the goods sector, such as autos, has experienced far more adjustment than 
services, such as retail. This appears to be largely a result of the export-oriented nature of 
the shock and the strength of the Canadian dollar. These dynamics would be familiar here in 
Windsor-Essex,  where  the  unemployment  rate  is  about  3  percentage  points  above  the 
national average.  
The Bank expects that average hours worked will return to its trend, but only very gradually. 
Those  in  involuntary  part-time  positions  should  eventually  find  full-time  ones.  This  view  is 
anchored by an expected slow recovery in goods sector employment, which in turn reflects 
our  expectations  for  the  pace  of  recoveries  in  U.S.  demand  and  Canadian  business 
investment. If the U.S. falters or the acceleration in Canadian business investment flags, then 
the pace of improvement in the labour market will be slower.  
Household balance sheets and the outlook for consumption 
With  Canadians  working,  but  not  as  much  as  they  would  like,  they  have  been  borrowing. 
Real  household  credit  expanded  rapidly  throughout  the  recession,  in  contrast  to  previous 
downturns, and has continued to grow through the recovery. Canadian households have now 
                                                 
3   R.  Harbour,  “Automotive  Manufacturing  Transition,”  a  presentation  delivered  at  the  Center  for  Automotive 
Research, Management Briefing Seminars, Traverse City, Michigan, 4 August 2010. Found at: 
<http://mbs.cargroup.org/2010/content/view/235>. 
BIS Review 127/2010
 4 
 collectively run a net financial deficit for 37 consecutive quarters. That is, their investment in 
housing has outstripped their total savings for over nine straight years. In effect, households 
are demanding funds from the rest of the economy, rather than providing them, as had been 
the case through the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s and 1990s (Chart 10).  
This cannot continue. The ratio of Canadian household debt to disposable income reached 
146 per cent in the first quarter of this year, an all-time high and very close to the current 
level in the United States (Chart 11). In a series of analyses over the past year the Bank has 
found that Canadian households are increasingly vulnerable to an adverse shock and that 
this vulnerability is rising more quickly than had been previously anticipated.4, 5 
It  is  true  that  the  strength  of  housing  and  other  assets  has  meant  that  the  net  worth  of 
Canadians remains about six times their average disposable income compared with slightly 
below  five  times  in  the  United  States.  However,  while  asset  prices  can  rise  or  fall,  debt 
endures. Despite the buoyancy of the housing market, the debt-to-asset ratio has risen to its 
highest level in more than 20 years.  
In  short,  Canadian  household  balance  sheets  are  becoming  increasingly  stretched.  It  is 
possible that Canadians are beginning to address some of these vulnerabilities. This would 
be  consistent  with  recent  data  that  indicate  a  slowdown  in  household  consumption 
expenditures and housing activity, amid a labour market recovery that has been longer on 
jobs than on hours or incomes.  
The Bank expects balance-sheet considerations will remain important ahead, likely limiting 
consumption  growth  to  a  rate  more  consistent  with  income  growth  over  the  medium-term 
horizon.  
Reflecting recent developments, inflation in Canada has been slightly lower than the Bank’s 
expectations, with core CPI of 1.6 per cent and total CPI of 1.7 per cent in August. However, 
its  dynamics  are  essentially  unchanged.  Inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored  at  the 
2 per cent  target.  Developments  in  the  labour  market  described  earlier,  combined  with 
expenditure  restraint  in  the  public  sector  and  a  pickup  in  labour  productivity,  should 
contribute to restrained growth of unit labour costs. This downward pressure on inflation is 
expected to be offset by the gradual absorption of excess supply as the economy grows. As 
has  been  the  case  with  previous  changes  in  indirect  taxes,  for  the  purposes  of  monetary 
policy, the Bank will look through the first-round effect of recent changes in provincial sales 
taxes on prices. 
Policy implications 
A durable global recovery requires a major rebalancing of global supply and demand. This 
will be a slow process, measured over a decade. During this period of adjustment, we should 
expect  subdued  growth  in  major  advanced  economies.  Consider  that  in  the  10  years 
following  a  typical  financial  crisis,  the  median  rate  of  output  growth  in  the  crisis  economy 
decreases by 1 per cent and the unemployment rate increases by 5 percentage points.6 The 
United States is tracking this path.  
In  such  an  environment,  very  low  policy  rates  could  be  in  place  for  longer,  and 
unconventional  monetary  policies  could  even  be  expanded  in  some  major  countries.  But 
                                                 
4   Bank of Canada Financial System Review, June 2010 and December 2009. 
5   This  analysis  has  been  conducted  with  data  from  the  Canadian  Financial  Monitor  survey  by  Ipsos  Reid 
Canada. 
6   See C. Reinhart and V. Reinhart, “After the Fall,” Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26–28 August 2010. 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 5
clearly,  monetary  policy  alone  will  not  be  enough.  Advanced  economies  need  to  chart  a 
course for fiscal sustainability, complete an ambitious restructuring of their financial systems, 
and implement domestic structural reforms. Emerging economies need to expand domestic 
demand  and  fulfill  commitments  to  enhanced  currency  flexibility.  Ultimately,  all  countries 
need  to  create  a  more  flexible,  open  international  monetary  system  to  complete  the 
transformation to a multi-polar world.  
The  Bank  of  Canada  is  working  with  other  major  central  banks  on  this  vital  international 
agenda but, ultimately, our most important contribution to the economic welfare of Canadians 
is to continue to deliver price stability as defined by our 2 percent inflation target.  
In  response  to  the  sharp,  synchronous  global  recession,  the  Bank  lowered  the  target  rate 
rapidly  over  the  course  of  2008  and  early  2009  to  its  lowest  possible  level.  We  almost 
doubled our balance sheet to provide the financial sector with exceptional liquidity. With our 
conditional  commitment,  the  Bank  provided  exceptional  guidance  on  the  likely  path  of  our 
target rate. These policies provided considerable additional stimulus during a period of very 
weak economic conditions and major downside risks to Canadian economy.  
With the initial rapid narrowing of the output gap, the return of employment to its  precrisis 
peak,  the  highly  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  Canada,  and  the  sustained 
momentum in household borrowing, the need for such emergency policies passed.  
Since  the  spring,  the  Bank  has  unwound  the  last  of  our  exceptional  liquidity  measures, 
removed the conditional commitment, and raised the overnight rate to 1 per cent. Following 
these  actions,  financial  conditions  in  Canada  have  tightened  modestly  but  remain 
exceptionally stimulative. This is consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an 
environment  of  still  significant  excess  supply  in  Canada  and  the  demand  headwinds 
described  earlier.  While  Canada’s  circumstances  and  the  discipline  of  the  inflation  target 
dictate a different policy stance than in the United States, there are limits to this divergence.  
At this time of transition in the global recovery, with risks of a renewed U.S. slowdown, with 
constraints  beginning 
in  emerging  economies,  and  with  domestic 
considerations  that  will  slow  consumption  and  housing  activity  in  Canada,  any  further 
reduction  in  monetary  policy  stimulus  would  need  to  be  carefully  considered.  The  unusual 
uncertainty surrounding the outlook warrants caution.  
Historically  low  policy  rates,  even  if  appropriate  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  create  their 
own risks. Aside from monetary policy, Canadian authorities will need to remain as vigilant as 
they  have  been  in  the  past  to  the  possibility  of  financial  imbalances  developing  in  an 
environment of still low interest rates and relative price stability. 
to  bind  growth 
Conclusion 
Today’s  venue  honours  Giovanni  Caboto,  who,  more  than  500  years  ago,  combined  the 
navigation skills of his home in Genoa with the commercial initiative of his Bristol sponsors to 
make landfall in Canada. His voyage marked the start of the opening of North America to 
global commerce. Similarly today, Canadian business must open new markets.  
The world’s economic centre of gravity is again shifting. With the integration of one-third of 
humanity  into  the  global  economy,  the  world  is  rapidly  becoming  multi-polar.  Emerging-
market economies are now the main drivers of commodity prices, they represent almost one-
half of the growth in all imports over the past decade, and they currently account for about 
two-thirds  of  global  growth.  In  contrast,  the  United  States  is  undergoing  a  protracted 
adjustment, which will subdue demand for Canadian goods for the foreseeable future.  
Canadians  must  respond.  As  a  country  we  are  under  exposed  to  the  economies  that  will 
drive  global  growth.  The  imperatives  for  business  appear  clear:  new  suppliers  need  to  be 
sourced;  new  markets  opened;  and  a  new  approach  to  managing  for  a  more  volatile 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2010
environment developed. Workers need to build skills and be prepared to shift jobs and even 
careers, if necessary.  
Business in Windsor-Essex has started. Our auto sector is undergoing a major restructuring 
and is emerging more competitive. There are recent signs that other sectors are beginning to 
follow. If business can sustain and then broaden this early momentum, all Canadian workers 
will be fully and productively employed.  
BIS Review 127/2010 
 7
Appendix 
 8 
   BIS Review 127/2010
  BIS Review 127/2010 
   9
  10 
   BIS Review 127/2010
 BIS Review 127/2010 
   11
  12 
   BIS Review 127/2010
 BIS Review 127/2010 
   13
