European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement  
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
4 November 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting. 
Based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council continues to 
view the current key ECB interest rates as appropriate. It therefore decided to leave them 
unchanged. Taking into account all the new information and analyses which have become 
available since our meeting on 7 October 2010, we continue to expect price developments to 
remain moderate over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon. Recent economic data are 
consistent  with  our  assessment  that  the  underlying  momentum  of  the  recovery  remains 
positive.  At  the  same  time,  uncertainty  is  prevailing.  Our  monetary  analysis  confirms  that 
inflationary pressures over the medium term remain contained. We expect price stability to 
be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area 
households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation 
expectations remains of the essence.  
Overall,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative.  The  stance,  the 
provision  of  liquidity  and  the  allotment  modes  will  be  adjusted  as  appropriate,  taking  into 
account the fact that all the non-standard measures taken during the period of acute financial 
market  tensions  are  fully  consistent  with  our  mandate  and,  by  construction,  temporary  in 
nature. Accordingly, the Governing Council will continue to monitor all developments over the 
period ahead very closely. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Recent  data  releases  and  survey  evidence  generally  confirm  our  view  that  the  positive 
underlying momentum  of the economic recovery in the euro area remains in place. In line 
with previous expectations, this implies ongoing real GDP growth in the second half of this 
year. The global recovery is expected to proceed, and this should imply a continued positive 
impact  on  the  demand  for  euro  area  exports.  At  the  same  time,  private  sector  domestic 
demand  should  contribute  to  growth,  supported  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy 
stance  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system. 
However,  the  recovery  in  activity  is  expected  to  be  dampened  by  the  process  of  balance 
sheet adjustment in various sectors.  
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  this  economic  outlook  are  still  slightly 
tilted  to  the  downside,  with  uncertainty  prevailing.  On  the  one  hand,  global  trade  may 
continue to grow more rapidly than expected, thereby supporting euro area exports. On the 
other  hand,  some  concerns  remain  relating  to  the  re-emergence  of  tensions  in  financial 
markets. In addition, downside risks relate to renewed increases in oil and other commodity 
prices,  protectionist  pressures,  and  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, as anticipated, euro area annual HICP inflation rose to 
1.9% in October, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, compared with 1.8% in September. 
In  the  next  few  months  HICP  inflation  rates  will  hover  around  current  levels  before 
moderating again in the course of next year. Overall, in 2011 inflation rates should remain 
moderate.  Inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  continue  to  be  firmly 
anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term.  
BIS Review 146/2010 
 1
Risks to the outlook for price developments are slightly tilted to the upside. They relate, in 
particular, to the evolution of energy and non-oil commodity prices. Furthermore, increases in 
indirect taxation and administered prices may be greater than currently expected, owing to 
the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  risks  to  domestic 
price and cost developments are still expected to be contained.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 was broadly unchanged, at 
1.0%  in  September  2010,  after  1.1%  in  August.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the 
private sector, at 1.2%, remained unchanged from August. Looking beyond developments in 
individual months, broad money and loan growth remains low and continues to support the 
assessment that the underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that inflationary 
pressures over the medium term are contained. 
The annual growth rate of M1 has continued to moderate, standing at 5.9% in September 
2010, while the annual growth rate of other short-term deposits has become less negative. 
This  reflects  the  widening  spread  between  interest  rates  paid  on  short-term  time  deposits 
and those paid on overnight deposits.  
The annual growth rate of bank loans to the private sector is increasingly supported by the 
flow  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  these  loans  is  still 
slightly  negative,  but  developments  in  recent  months  suggest  that  a  turning  point  was 
reached  earlier  in  2010.  This  would  be  consistent  with  the  lagged  response  of  loan 
developments to economic activity over the business cycle that was also observed in past 
cycles.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  stood  at  2.8%  in  September  and 
thereby remained at levels seen in previous months.  
Banks have continued to gradually increase the weight of credit to the private sector in the 
overall size of their balance sheets, but the challenge remains to expand the availability of 
such  credit  when  demand  picks  up  further.  Where  necessary,  to  address  this  challenge, 
banks should retain earnings, turn to the market to strengthen further their capital bases or 
take full advantage of government support measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. We therefore decided to 
leave them unchanged. Taking into account all the new information and analyses which have 
become  available  since  our  meeting  on  7  October  2010,  we  continue  to  expect  price 
developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon.  Recent 
economic  data  are  consistent  with  our  assessment  that  the  underlying  momentum  of  the 
recovery remains positive. At the same time, uncertainty is prevailing. A cross-check of the 
outcome  of  our  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  that 
inflationary pressures over the medium term remain contained. We expect price stability to 
be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area 
households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation 
expectations remains of the essence.  
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  there  is  a  clear  need  to  strengthen  public  confidence  in  the 
capacity  of  governments  to  return  to  sustainable  public  finances,  reduce  risk  premia  in 
interest rates and thus support sustainable growth over the medium term. To this end, it is 
essential  that  countries  pursue  credible  multi-year  consolidation  plans  and  fully  implement 
the  planned  consolidation  measures.  In  their  2011  budgets,  they  need  to  specify  credible 
fiscal  adjustment  measures, 
fiscal 
developments that may emerge, reflecting factors such as a more favourable than expected 
environment, should be exploited to make faster progress with fiscal consolidation.  
The  urgent  implementation  of  far-reaching  structural  reforms  is  essential  to  enhance  the 
prospects  for  higher  sustainable  growth.  Major  reforms  are  particularly  necessary  in  those 
countries that have experienced a loss of competitiveness in the past or that are suffering 
from  high  fiscal  and  external  deficits.  The  removal  of  labour  market  rigidities  and  the 
strengthening of productivity growth would further support the adjustment process of these 
the  expenditure  side.  Any  positive 
focusing  on 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2010
economies. Increasing product market competition, particularly in the services sectors, would 
also facilitate the restructuring of the economy and encourage innovation and the adoption of 
new technologies.  
At their meeting on 28–29 October 2010 the EU Heads of State and Government agreed on 
the reform of the European Union’s economic governance. The proposals put forward by 
President  Van  Rompuy  represent  a  strengthening  of  the  existing  framework  for  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic  surveillance  in  the  European  Union.  However,  the  Governing  Council 
considers  that  they  do  not  go  as  far  as  the  quantum  leap  in  the  economic  governance  of 
Monetary Union that it has been calling for. 
In particular, the Governing Council is concerned that there would be insufficient automaticity 
in the implementation of fiscal surveillance, that there is no specification of the rule to reduce 
the  government  debt  ratio,  and  that  financial  sanctions  have  not  been  explicitly  retained 
under the macroeconomic surveillance procedure. 
With regard to the macroeconomic surveillance procedure in particular, the new system of 
mutual  surveillance  would  need  to  concentrate  firmly  on  euro  area  countries  experiencing 
sustained  losses  of  competitiveness  and  large  current  account  deficits.  It  should  be 
determined by transparent and effective trigger mechanisms. It would be essential that the 
assessments of macroeconomic imbalances and recommendations for corrective action be 
given broad publicity at all stages of the surveillance process.  
The  public  and  the  markets  can  be  confident  that  the  Governing  Council  remains  firmly 
committed to delivering on its mandate of maintaining price stability over the medium term. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 3
