Christian Noyer: International financial stability 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Lloyd’s  City  Dinner,  London, 
29 September 2010. 
 Although the financial crisis originated in one country, it quickly became apparent that it was 
truly global in nature, both in terms of its mechanisms and its consequences. It brought home 
a  simple  message:  capital  markets  are  closely  interlinked  around  the  world  and,  thus, 
domestic and international financial stability cannot be dissociated.  
Today, I would like to reflect upon international financial stability: what it means, whether or 
not it should be pursued as a major policy objective; and finally, what actions should be taken 
and which instruments should be employed. The views expressed are my own and do not 
represent  an  official  position.  However,  as  you  know,  next  year  France  will  hold  the 
Presidency of the G20 and, bearing this in mind, I will try and offer my own thoughts. 
increasingly 
International financial stability: what does it mean? 
Over  the  last  decades  increased  financial  integration  has  led  to  greater  reallocation  of 
savings  across  countries.  The  expansion  of  gross  and  net  capital  flows  has  been 
spectacular. As a result current account imbalances have increased both in amplitude and 
durability.  In  fact,  they  have  become  a  permanent  feature  of  our  economic  environment. 
Many  analysts  would  argue  that  these  imbalances  are  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  crisis.  I 
would  not  go  that  far.  But  it  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  some  common  causes  lay 
behind both the crisis and the imbalances themselves.  
International  capital 
interconnected  and 
flows  have  made  countries 
interdependent. At the same time, major transformations have occurred over the past decade 
in  our  international  environment.  The  monetary  and  financial  system  has  become  truly 
“multipolar”. An increasing number of countries, both developed and emerging, have become 
active participants in the global capital market. While there are currently three main currency 
blocs, at least one (the Chinese RMB) and maybe other additional systemic currencies will 
emerge in the future.  
Participants  in  the  international  financial  system  are  increasingly  diverse  from  the  point  of 
view  of  their  economic  structure,  their  demography,  their  level  of  development,  and,  more 
importantly, their social choices and preferences. For instance, different saving rates may be 
seen  as  resulting  from  divergent  time  preferences.  Likewise,  diversity  in  capital  account 
regimes may, to some extent, reflect different choices and tradeoffs between efficiency and 
stability in the financial infrastructure.  
These characteristics will most likely persist over time. A large number of different countries, 
with  different  preferences,  will  permanently  be  linked  and  interdependent  through  growing 
and active international capital markets.  
It is not clear, at this stage, how the coexistence and interaction between national financial 
systems worldwide will finally play out. Looking beyond short‐term volatility, the real question 
is whether this architecture will be conducive to the efficient and stable allocation of capital 
over the long run; or whether, on the contrary, it will lead to an accumulation of imbalances 
and recurrent bouts of instability.  
An optimistic view can be found in the “Bretton Woods II” theory, which posits that the pattern 
of  international  capital  flows  results  from  a  mutually  beneficial  equilibrium  between  two 
groups  of  countries.  On  the  one  hand,  emerging  economies  follow  an  export‐led 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 1
development  strategy  and  seek  to  prevent  appreciation  of  their  real  exchange  rates  by 
constant  foreign  exchange  intervention  (together  with  capital  controls).  As  a  consequence, 
they accept to accumulate increasing stocks of liquid assets denominated in dollars. On the 
other hand, the United States is happy to receive both reserve inflows to finance its deficits 
and cheap imports to fuel their demand for consumption goods. Such equilibrium is stable by 
virtue of the mutual benefits it brings to both groups. Moreover, the longer it lasts, the more 
impossible it is to change since both groups become mutually dependant through the stock 
of claims and debts they have reciprocally accumulated. This “financial balance of terror” is 
supposed to keep the system in place for a long period of time.  
A  more  recent,  and  pessimistic,  explanation  is  provided  by  the  “asset  shortage”  theory 
according  to  which  the  world  has  a  shortage  of  liquid  and  riskless  assets.  Moreover,  the 
supply of these assets is asymmetrically distributed between regions, with the US providing a 
large chunk of the total. Hence, there is a structural excess demand for dollar‐denominated 
securities,  which  sustains  permanent  capital  inflows  from  emerging  economies  into  the 
United States.  
This approach has deep implications.  
It  shows  why,  for  more  than  a  decade  now,  capital  has  been  continuously  flowing  “uphill”, 
i.e. from  poor  to  rich  countries,  with  current  account  surpluses  in  emerging  economies 
reflected in growing deficits in the United States.  
It  also  helps  to  explain  why  asymmetries  in  financial  development  between  countries 
generate both payment imbalances and asset bubbles. To the extent that the US financial 
system did not generate enough “pure” safe assets, this created an incentive for the financial 
sector to manufacture such assets through the securitization of lower quality loans, but at the 
cost  of  greatly  increased  (if  hidden)  financial  fragility.  This  fragility  became  apparent  when 
the whole architecture of securitization collapsed under the weight of excessive leverage and 
maturity transformation.  
The point here is that internal and external financial stability are two sides of the same coin. 
Domestic  financial  imperfections,  on  the  one  hand  and  distortions  in  international  capital 
flows,  on  the  other,  interact  with  each  other  to  create  and  amplify  imbalances.  Ultimately, 
financial instability is a product of this through this interaction. International financial linkages 
therefore can be a source of increased fragility for many national economies, including the 
largest ones.  
International financial stability: does it matter? 
International  financial  instability  manifests  itself  through  various  channels.  Assessing  its 
impact is difficult. Opinions may differ as to whether volatility in capital flows and exchange 
rates  is  excessive  or,  rather,  a  pure  reflection  of  variations  in  fundamentals.  By  the  same 
token, movements in asset or commodity prices can be seen to reflect the balance of supply 
and demand forces, or, alternatively, to be the product of speculative activity.  
Looking at the behaviour of most countries during the crisis, however, it is very apparent that 
they  felt  threatened  by  the  instability  of  capital  flows  and,  accordingly,  sought  to  protect 
themselves from its consequences.  
The provision of international liquidity, in particular, has been severely disrupted during the 
crisis. Emerging (and some industrialised) countries have suffered from acute dollar liquidity 
shortages  which  had  to  be  remedied,  inter  alia,  through  a  network  of  currency  swaps 
between central banks. The crisis is a powerful reminder that liquidity – both domestic and 
international ‐ can never be taken for granted. In today’s world, most international liquidity is 
privately provided and represented by claims on private institutions. Interbank markets play a 
crucial role in this process. The more capital markets become integrated at the short end, the 
more international liquidity is provided by the private sector.  
2 
 BIS Review 127/2010
The  importance  of  global  private  liquidity  conditions  was  apparent  in  the  period  which 
followed  Lehman’s  failure.  Output  and  trade  fell  across  the  world  with  astonishing 
simultaneity. It seemed natural to assume, at the time, that “traditional” forms of contagion  
–  through  goods  or  capital  markets  –  were  at  work.  Policy  makers  were  looking  to  trade 
finance as a major channel. However, contagion takes time and cannot fully account for the 
exceptional synchronisation in the drop in output. With hindsight, the phenomenon may best 
be  seen  as  a  global  liquidity  shock.  Net  supply  of  liquidity  dried  up  at  the  same  time 
everywhere in the world. International banks faced a sudden and ample shortage of dollars. 
Firms started to hoard liquidity. Investment and, in part, production, came abruptly to a halt.  
When such a shock occurs, public provision of liquidity has to replace private provision. In a 
domestic context, this is the function of the lender of last resort. But when there is a shortage 
of foreign currency liquidity, this role has to be played by foreign exchange reserves.  
Following the 1997–98 crisis, emerging countries constantly sought to expand their foreign 
exchange  reserves.  The  average  reserve  ratio  of  emerging  markets  has  more  than 
quintupled  from  4  percent  to  over  20  percent  of  GDP  since  1990.  One  cannot  assume, 
however, that equilibrium has been reached and that the demand for reserves will stabilise. 
On the contrary, there are strong indications that this trend will persist, or even be amplified, 
following the crisis.  
This may be seen as undesirable but also unavoidable in the current financial architecture. 
No amount of reserves will fully protect a financially open economy against a systemic shock. 
It is notable that countries, such as Korea, which had very significant amounts of reserves 
prior to the crisis and a flexible exchange rate regime, nevertheless felt the need to enter into 
currency swaps with the Federal Reserve.  
During  the  crisis,  foreign  exchange  reserves  were  used  as  a  tool  for  internal  –  as  well  as 
external  –  financial  stability.  National  central  banks,  especially  in  Latin  America,  acted  as 
dollar lenders of last resort to their domestic banks. This function will develop in the future 
and is bound to impact the demand for reserves. Financial openness and integration means 
that  domestic  banks  will  engage  increasingly  in  foreign  currency  operations.  In  turn,  the 
expansion  of  international  balance  sheets  will  increase  the  potential  demand  for  liquidity 
support in the event of shocks. This trend should be accepted as a normal consequence of 
open  capital  markets  and  international  banking,  together  with  the  predominance  of  a  very 
limited number of currencies in international finance.  
One general lesson can be drawn from that experience. In the current environment, there is 
an  inescapable  trade‐off  between  financial  openness,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  need  for 
protection  against  external  financial  volatility,  on  the  other.  An  essential  question  for  the 
future is whether we can improve this trade‐off and avoid the costs and distortions associated 
with  growing  amounts  of 
further  restrictions  on 
international capital mobility.  
foreign  exchange  reserves  and/or 
International financial stability: what should be done? 
Looking at the next decade, a number of different developments in the international financial 
system are possible.  
Capital  markets  could  go  through  a  process  of  progressive  and  partial  fragmentation:  no 
significant capital account opening would occur in many parts of the world. Conversely, new 
barriers  could  be  erected  either  in  the  form  of  “soft”  capital  controls  or  through  national 
regulations forcing financial institutions to ring‐fence local pools of capital and liquidity. There 
would be little convergence in domestic financial systems and regulations. Foreign exchange 
reserves would keep growing, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of world GDP.  
This  scenario  may  be  seen  as  the  only  realistic  response  to  increased  diversity  in  a 
multipolar  world.  The  systemic  consequences,  however,  are  not  clear.  In  such  a  world, 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 3
for 
the 
their  domestic  and 
regarding  many  aspects  of 
instance,  capital  account  regimes, 
current  account  imbalances  would  be  heavily  influenced  by  public  actions  and  policies. 
Regulatory competition would determine the location of financial activities and the allocation 
of  savings.  In  the  absence  of  some  “rules  of  the  game”,  tensions  would  naturally  arise 
between  countries 
international 
macroeconomic policies.  
The opposite scenario would involve the progressive opening of all capital accounts, together 
with some (more or less intensive) convergence in financial systems and regulations. This 
would  allow  for  the  emergence  of  a  unified  world  capital  market,  an  efficient  allocation  of 
savings across countries and a smooth financing of current account imbalances. Experience 
shows,  however,  that  an  open  international  financial  system  is  not  inherently  stable  and, 
therefore, very dependent on strong infrastructure.  
Two elements of such an infrastructure seem especially important.  
First,  countries  could  come  to  a  common  understanding  about  the  core  elements  and 
principles governing their financial markets development and regulations. Full harmonisation 
is neither desirable nor feasible. But policy‐induced divergences may prove very destabilising 
and  lead  to  a  reduction  in  welfare.  It  should  be  possible  to  agree  on  the  core  principles 
governing, 
treatment  and  resolution  of 
internationally‐active  financial  institutions,  deposit  insurance,  and  the  organization  and 
functioning  of  securities  markets.  Divergences  in  financial  development  are  a  fact  of  life. 
Some  of  them  reflect  true  social  choices  and  preferences  that  must  be  respected  and 
accommodated. Others result from deliberate or inadvertent policy‐induced distortions, which 
should have been reduced or eliminated. Disentangling these two sources of divergences in 
financial development should be a priority in the international agenda.  
Second,  the  search  for  an  efficient  and  powerful  “financial  safety  net”  should  be  pursued. 
Stabilising the demand for international reserves would bring huge benefits in terms of world 
welfare. At present, reserve accumulation can only occur through a conjunction of balance of 
payment surplus and some degree of exchange rate intervention. In addition, if sterilisation 
proves  difficult  or  impossible,  it  also  leads  to  unwanted  changes  in  monetary  policy. 
Precautionary reserve accumulation, however legitimate, unavoidably creates side effects for 
domestic  macro  policies  as  well  as  spillover  effects  on  other  countries.  All  countries, 
therefore have a common interest in finding ways to disconnect reserve accumulation from 
exchange  rate  management  and,  more  generally,  from  balance  of  payment  situations  and 
monetary policies. 
The  difficulties,  however,  are  huge.  The  search  for  new  liquidity  sources  through,  for 
instance, multilateral mechanisms, meets with an inevitable moral hazard problem. First, to 
be equivalent to reserves going forward, multilateral liquidity must be available ex ante and 
without condition. Second, there is a danger that fully unconditional liquidity be used to deal 
with  fundamental  “solvency”  imbalances.  A  delicate  balance  will  have  to  be  struck,  either 
within  the  framework  of  current  IMF  facilities,  or  by  setting  up  new  and  innovative 
mechanisms.  
Let me now conclude. I am aware that I have raised more questions than provided answers. I 
also  know  that  many  of  the  issues  I  have  mentioned  are  hotly  debated  and,  often  quite 
contentious. This is normal. No one can claim to fully understand the dynamics of the new 
financial world we shall be facing in the coming decades. We also know that, after a crisis of 
this magnitude, “business as usual” is not an option. The last three years have shown how 
much  countries  are  mutually  dependant  on  each  other.  There  would  be  no  excuse  for 
inaction  and  there  are,  on  the  contrary,  many  opportunities  for  cooperating  and  building 
together a better and safer international financial system.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2010
