Durmuş Yilmaz: Press conference for the presentation of the Inflation 
Report 
Press  conference  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, at the presentation of the Inflation Report, Ankara, 29 April 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests and Members of the Press, 
Welcome  to  the  press  conference  held  to  convey  the  main  messages  of  the  April  2010 
Inflation  Report,  one  of  the  most  important  communication  tools  of  the  inflation-targeting 
regime of the Central Bank. 
The  report  typically  summarizes  the  economic  framework  addressed  in  monetary  policy 
decisions, elaborates global and domestic macroeconomic developments and presents the 
medium-term  inflation  forecasts,  which  have  been  revised  in  view  of  previous  quarter 
developments, along with the monetary policy stance. 
Before moving on to the Central Bank’s assessments on the inflation outlook and economic 
activity,  which  I  will  share  with  you  in  detail  shortly,  I  would  like  to  summarize  the  current 
global  conditions.  The  recovery  in  global  economic  activity  and  the  normalization  of  the 
international  financial  system  have  continued  during  the  first  quarter  of  2010  (Figure  1). 
However,  distressing  levels  of  government  debt,  lingering  problems  across  credit  markets, 
and  high  levels  of  unemployment  rates,  all  suggest  that  completely  resolving  problems 
across  developed  economies  is  not  likely  over  the  near  term  (Figure  2).  Although  the 
recovery  across  developing  economies  seems  to  be  stronger,  ongoing  problems  across 
developed economies – with their prominent role in global trade – still create downside risks 
for  developing  economies.  Moreover,  constraints  related  to  external  finance  remains  as  a 
potential factor that might delay the recovery in many developing economies. 
Notwithstanding  the  lingering  uncertainties  regarding  medium-term  growth,  developing 
economies  faced  inflationary  pressures  stemming  from  a  relatively  rapid  rebound  in 
economic activity, base effects, and ongoing increases in commodity prices. In this regard, 
inflation dynamics in developed and developing countries have started to decouple since the 
first  quarter  of  2010  (Figure  3).  This  decoupling  is  more  pronounced  in  core  inflation 
(Figure 4). 
  Inflation developments 
1. 
The inflation outlook in Turkey changed in line with the developments I have just mentioned 
pertaining to developing countries. However, in addition to these factors, the rise in inflation 
can largely be attributed to the high-rates price increases linked to the January tax hikes in 
fuel, alcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Moreover, the rate of change in unprocessed 
food  prices  also  led  the  rise  in  inflation  in  Turkey  to  be  relatively  more  pronounced. 
Therefore,  annual  consumer  inflation  continued  to  rise  and  pushed  inflation  up  by  around 
3 percentage points to 9.56 percent during the first quarter of 2010, compared to figures of 
end-2009 (Figure 5). 
An  analysis  of  the  subcategories  with  respect  to  the  rise  in  inflation  indicates  that 
unprocessed food prices displayed the highest quarterly increase in the index history in the 
first quarter of 2010, as was the case in the last quarter of 2009 (Figure 6). This increase is 
mainly attributable to the hikes in meat prices. Structural reasons led domestic supply to fall 
resulting in a remarkable increase in livestock prices. This hike, in turn, had significant effects 
on both processed and unprocessed food prices (Figure 7). 
 Thus, the contribution of meat and meat products to annual inflation reached 1.67 points by 
March. This reflects a situation mainly exclusive to Turkey. As a matter of fact, as illustrated 
in  the  slide,  meat  prices  went  up  by  35  percent  in  Turkey  within  the  last  year,  while  no 
significant change was observed in meat prices in other countries (Figures 8 and 9). 
  Along with the surge in meat prices, vegetable prices increased to relatively high levels and 
led the trend of increase in food prices to become more pronounced. As a consequence, in 
the first quarter, food group inflation realized above our projections presented in the January 
Inflation Report. 
Meanwhile, energy prices registered a significant increase in the first quarter of 2010 due to 
the January tax adjustments and the low base effect generated by plummeting prices in the 
same period of 2009 (Figure 10). We estimate that owing to the base effect, annual inflation 
in the energy group will continue to rise in the second quarter of 2010 as well. Accordingly, 
due to tax adjustments and price hikes in food, energy and tobacco, the contribution of food, 
energy and tobacco products to annual inflation has reached 6.7 percentage points by the 
end of the first quarter (Figure 11). 
The  impact  of  soaring  food  and  energy  prices  on  catering  and  transport  services  became 
more  significant  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010  (Figure  12).  Consequently,  annual  services 
inflation,  which  has  been  declining  since  the  third  quarter  of  2008,  increased  by 
1.9 percentage points in the first quarter of 2010. Seasonally adjusted data also indicate that 
price  increases  in  the  services  group  accelerated  compared  to  the  previous  quarter 
(Figure 13). 
 The low base of the previous year caused by the tax cuts in durable goods and the inventory 
destocking  process  have  been  major  factors  accounting  for  the  increase  in  core  inflation 
indicators (Figure 14). Reverberations of the rise in cost factors and the limited rebound in 
demand are also seen in the seasonally adjusted data (Figure 15). 
  
Parallel  to  these  developments,  medium-term  inflation  expectations,  which  started  to 
increase  in  the  last  quarter  of  2009,  maintained  this  trend  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010 
(Figure 16).  While  expectations  displayed  an  increase  in  all  maturities,  the  difference 
between  expectations  and  targets  became  wider  (Figure  17).  However,  the  increase  in 
medium-term expectations remained relatively limited. 
 Monetary policy response 
2. 
After  commenting  briefly  on  inflation  developments,  I  would  now  like  to  cover  the  policies 
pursued by the Central Bank during the last quarter. 
Anticipating  that  inflation  would  decrease  sharply  following  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the 
Central  Bank  of  Turkey  (CBT)  focused  on  alleviating  the  potentially  harsh  impact  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  on  the  domestic  economy.  In  this  respect,  the  CBT  has  delivered 
sizeable  cuts  in  policy  rates,  while  providing  liquidity  support  to  facilitate  the  smooth 
operation of credit markets. Accordingly, policy rates were cut by 1025 basis points between 
November  2008  and  November  2009.  Considering  the  favorable  developments  in  credit 
markets and the moderate recovery in economic activity, the Monetary Policy Committee (the 
Committee) has kept policy rates constant since December 2009 (Table 1). 
Following the policy rate cuts implemented by the CBT since November 2008, market rates 
have plummeted to historic lows since the second quarter of 2009 (Figure 18). The stable 
course of market rates had implications on medium-term real rates in this period (Figure 19). 
 Lower policy rates and stabilizing liquidity measures continued to be effective on money and 
credit  markets  during  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  In  this  context,  while  consumer  loan  rates 
remained at historic lows, commercial loan rates continued to decline in the first quarter as 
 well (Figure 20). With the easing of financial conditions, the expansionary impact of CBT’s 
monetary policy has become more pronounced in this period. 
 As I have just mentioned, the pronounced elevation in inflation since the last quarter of 2009 
had  adverse  effects  on  inflation  expectations.  Therefore,  taking  account  of  the  adverse 
effects  of  the  high  inflation  levels  on  expectations,  albeit  temporary,  the  Central  Bank 
signaled the transition to a more cautious stance as of March. Meanwhile, considering that 
the  problems  in  the  global  economy  have  not  been  completely  eliminated  despite  recent 
improvements, I would like to remind you that as we have already pointed out, policy rates 
may need to be kept at current levels for a while and may need to follow a low course for an 
extended period. 
In  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  central  banks  mostly  implemented  exit  strategies  from 
expansionary  monetary  policies  and  therefore  the  global  monetary  policy  outlook  became 
partially  tighter.  In  the  said  quarter,  a  limited  number  of  central  banks  tightened  their 
monetary  policy  stance  by  increasing  policy  rates,  while  most  of  them  kept  their  rates 
unchanged  at  low  levels.  In  the  meantime,  these  central  banks  started  to  terminate  the 
expansionary  monetary  policy  implementations,  which  are  conducted  with  the  use  of 
unconventional  policy  tools.  Accordingly,  while  drawing  attention  to  the  risks  regarding 
pricing behaviors and taking account of the normalization in both money and credit markets; 
we decided to gradually withdraw some of the measures taken in the foreign exchange and 
Turkish lira markets during the crisis. Owing to the importance that we attach to transparency 
and predictability, I would like to remind you that we informed the public about the general 
framework  of  our  exit  strategy  in  our  Press  Release  of  14  April  2010,  before  putting  the 
strategy into practice. 
Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
3. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  the  monetary  and  financial  conditions,  as  well  as  the 
economic  outlook  underlying  our  forecasts.  Then,  I  will  outline  the  Central  Bank’s  inflation 
forecasts presented in the Inflation Report that will be posted on our website shortly. 
In the first quarter of 2010, as perceptions regarding recovery in the global economy became 
more pronounced, the trend of increase in risk appetite in global financial markets continued. 
Accordingly,  as  had  been  the  case  since  the  second  half  of  2009,  emerging  markets 
attracted  more  capital  through  increased  portfolio  movements.  On  the  other  hand,  risk 
premium indicators in most developing countries remained below those of pre-crisis levels. In 
this  period,  Turkey’s  risk  premium  indicators  continued  their  positive  trend  and  did  not 
differentiate from the general trend except for short periods when developments specific to 
our country were pronounced (Figure 21). 
The  improvement  in  global  risk  perceptions  in  the  first  quarter  led  the  currency  of  many 
developing countries to appreciate. In terms of changes in currency values, the Turkish lira 
did not significantly differ from currencies of other emerging markets in this period and the 
relatively stable course of the Turkish lira in the crisis period continued throughout the post-
crisis process as well (Figure 22). 
 National  income  data  of  the  last  quarter  of  2009  were  consistent  with  the  outlook  we 
presented in the January Inflation Report. In this period, while the mild recovery in private 
sector  demand  continued,  public  sector  consumption  expenditures  increased  more  than 
envisaged due to temporary factors. Meanwhile, persisting problems in the global economy 
restricted foreign demand, whereas stock accumulation started, albeit slowly, along with the 
improvement  in  domestic  demand.  In  this  regard,  while  the  Gross  Domestic  Product 
increased  by  6  percent  on  an  annual  basis  in  the  last  quarter  of  2009,  it  decreased  by 
4.7 percent across the year (Figure 23). Seasonally adjusted data indicate continuance of the 
recovery process in national income as of the second quarter of 2009 (Figure 24). 
  
Data  regarding  the  first  quarter  of  2010  indicate  that  the  rebound  in  Domestic  Demand  is 
gradually  becoming  stable  and  broad-based.  The  influence  of  policy  rate  cuts  besides  the 
hikes  in  public  expenditures  are  getting  more  pronounced  and  a  relatively  more  robust 
activity  in  sectors  sensitive  to  domestic  demand  is  being  witnessed.  In  this  respect,  the 
analysis of the recovery process in industrial production indicates that besides the sectors 
stimulated  by  fiscal  incentives  and  their  intermediate  input  suppliers  as  well  as  the  non-
durable goods sector and sectors with strong links to the construction sector have been on 
the rebound (Figure 25). 
There is no significant improvement in external demand. The global growth outlook continues 
to  dampen  economic  activity,  particularly  in  sectors  that  are  relatively  more  sensitive  to 
foreign demand. Following the recent crisis, manufacturing firms that mostly serve external 
markets have been operating at lower capacity than local market oriented firms (Figure 26). 
Thus, in line with our previous forecasts, domestic demand has remained more robust than 
foreign  demand.  Yet,  aggregate  demand  uncertainty  continues  to  be  a  major  concern,  as 
inventory buildups have remained limited. Against this background, the gradual recovery in 
 domestic demand is expected to continue into the first quarter (Figure 27). However, I would 
also  like  to  emphasize  that  the  achievement  of  a  two-digit  annual  growth  rate  is  highly 
probable in the first quarter of 2010 due to the low base of the same period last year. 
 The  weak  course  of  external  demand  continues  to  restrain  economic  activity  and 
employment growth through its impact on industrial production. As a matter of fact, despite 
the recent partial recovery, indicators such as per capita hours worked across industries and 
capacity  utilization  rates  of  firms  oriented  towards  export  markets  suggest  that  resource 
utilization remains low throughout the economy (Figure 26). 
The recovery in the labor market that started in the third quarter of 2009 continued into the 
fourth quarter, albeit at a slower pace. Unemployment declined in seasonally adjusted terms, 
but still remains elevated (Figure 28). Given that ample slack would continue to be a drag on 
investment and employment, signs of improvement in employment data during the second 
half  of  2009  are  not  expected  to  turn  into  a  robust  recovery,  suggesting  that  the 
unemployment rate will likely remain elevated for an extended period. Therefore, unit labor 
costs would continue to support disinflation (Figure 29). 
 
Overall, recent data releases suggest that the economic recovery has become more robust. 
Domestic demand would continue to recover, while the weak outlook for global growth would 
dampen economic activity and employment in the tradable sector for sometime. Accordingly, 
we predict that aggregate demand conditions would not restrain inflation for a while. In this 
context, our revised medium-term forecasts are based on a disinflationary output gap – albeit 
narrower than envisaged in the previous Report. 
As I mentioned earlier in my speech, the tightness in credit conditions tend to attenuate with 
the effect of easing global liquidity conditions and improving risk appetites. The healthy state 
of the Turkish banking system is conducive for a rapid recovery in credit volumes. In fact, 
credit  markets  have  been  increasingly  supportive  of  domestic  activity  in  the  recent  period. 
Accordingly,  the  first  quarter  of  2010  was  marked  by  the  increasingly  benign  outlook  for 
credit  markets  (Figure  30).  Consumer  loans  have  continued  to  recover  while  commercial 
loans  have  accelerated.  Credit  extended  to  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises  has  also 
begun to recover after a long period of stagnation, indicating the support of easy monetary 
conditions on economic activity (Figure 31). 
 Assuming that external finance conditions continue to ease steadily and that the fiscal stance 
does  not  crowd  out  domestic  funding,  we  expect  that  credit  volumes  would  continue  to 
expand  in  the  forthcoming  period.  However,  expectations  that  unemployment  rates  will 
remain at high levels for a long period, and ongoing problems in the global economy are still 
potential factors that might restrain credit expansion. 
Although  economic  activity  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010  has  been  broadly  in  line  with  the 
outlook  presented  in  the  January  Inflation  Report,  there  have  been  some  developments, 
which  necessitated  an  upward  revision  of  the  inflation  forecast  for  2010.  As  I  believe  that 
interpreting these developments accurately is very important, I would like to further elaborate 
on these developments. 
First  of  all,  the  revisions  to  the  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  series,  and  somewhat 
stronger than expected domestic demand have led to an upward revision in the output gap 
estimates, which have pushed the inflation forecast for end-2010 up by 0.4 percentage points 
(Table 2). 
Considering recent developments, our oil price assumptions stated in the past Report have 
been  revised  slightly  upwards  (Figure  32).  In  this  context,  the  previous  assumption  of  oil 
prices  are  revised  up  from  80  USD  per  barrel  to  85  USD  for  2010,  and  from  85  USD  to 
90 USD for 2011 and thereafter (Table 2). Besides, in April, commodity prices surged to their 
highest  levels  for  2010  on  the  back  of  ongoing  favorable  growth  expectations  (Figure  33). 
Therefore,  while  producing  medium-term  forecasts,  in  line  with  oil  prices,  imported  input 
costs are also assumed to increase gradually throughout the forecast horizon in response to 
the recovery in the world economy. This revision has shifted the 2010 inflation forecast up by 
0.15 percentage points. 
The  January  Inflation  Report  envisaged  food  inflation  to  be  7  percent  at  end-2010, 
6.5 percent for 2011 and 6 percent for the following years (Table 2). However, worse than 
expected  outcomes  regarding  unprocessed  food  prices  and  ongoing  supply-side  structural 
problems  led  to  an  upward  revision  in  the  assumption  for  food  inflation  from  7  percent  to 
9 percent  for  2010,  which  added  0.55  percentage  points  to  end-2010  inflation  forecast 
(Table 2). Similarly, assumptions for 2011 food inflation have been raised to 7 percent from 
6.5 percent, and 7 percent from 6 percent for the following years (Table 2). At this point, I 
would like to highlight that the recent measures regarding meat prices posed a downside risk 
especially for our assumption on food prices in 2010. 
 In  the  previous  Report,  the  impact  of  the  tax  measures  implemented  in  January  on  fuel, 
alcohol, and tobacco products on 2010 inflation were estimated to be around 1.5 percentage 
points. However, the realization was 1.9 percent, partly reflecting the change in the weighting 
 scheme  of  the  CPI,  and  thus  shifting  the  inflation  forecast  path  by  around  0.4  percentage 
points throughout 2010. Here I would like to particularly underline once more that the impact 
of the tax hikes would disappear at the beginning of 2011. 
Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that, in line with the Medium Term Program, the fiscal 
stance will remain expansionary – but less so than in 2009 – throughout 2010, and that fiscal 
consolidation would gradually ensue starting from 2011 as guided by the fiscal rule set out in 
the Medium Term Program. In this respect, as implied by the fiscal rule, it is assumed that 
the  fiscal  space  created  by  the  stronger  than  expected  economic  activity  leading  to  better 
than  expected  performance  in  budget  revenues  since  the  second  half  of  2009,  would  be 
used mostly to reduce the government debt stock; therefore, the goals set out in the MTP be 
implemented through institutional and structural improvements in 2011 and onwards. In other 
words, it is assumed that tax adjustments would be consistent with the inflation targets and 
automatic pricing mechanisms throughout the forecast horizon. Accordingly, it is envisaged 
that the rising debt-to-GDP ratios would gradually reverse course starting in 2011, and hence 
the risk premium would not display any significant changes throughout the forecast horizon. 
Against this background, assuming that liquidity measures are normalized gradually over the 
short term and that policy rates are kept constant at current levels for some time followed by 
limited increases starting in the last quarter of 2010, with policy rates staying at single digits 
throughout  the  three-year  forecast  horizon,  the  medium-term  forecasts  suggest  that,  with 
70 percent  probability,  inflation  will  be  between  7.2  and  9.6  percent  with  a  mid-point  of 
8.4 percent at end-2010, and between 3.6 and 7.2 percent with a mid-point of 5.4 percent by 
the end of 2011. Furthermore, inflation is expected to decline to 5.0 percent by the end of 
2012 (Figure 34). 
 Despite  the  upward  revision  in  the  output  gap,  it  is  expected  that  the  economic  recovery 
would be gradual. However, owing to the effects of tax hikes, increases in food and energy 
prices, and base effects, the inflation rate is hovering significantly above the target, which is 
having  an  adverse  impact  on  inflation  expectations,  and  leading  to  risks  regarding  pricing 
behavior.  Therefore,  the  revised  forecasts  are  based  on  the  assumption  of  gradually 
withdrawing the excessive amount of liquidity provided to the market, and increasing policy 
rates  at  a  measured  pace  starting  in  the  last  quarter  of  2010.  However,  based  on  the 
prediction that resource utilization will likely remain at low levels for sometime, the baseline 
scenario  envisages  that  the  increases  in  interest  rates  would  be  limited  with  policy  rates 
remaining at single-digit levels throughout the forecast horizon. 
As shown in the slide, inflation will follow a volatile path throughout 2010 owing to the base 
effects  driven  by  the  temporary  tax  cuts  and  unprocessed  food  price  fluctuations  that 
occurred during 2009 (Figure 34). The temporary tax cuts implemented in March 2009, which 
were withdrawn partly in June and fully in October, would cause headline inflation to increase 
during March and April, and to decrease during June, July and October of 2010. Accordingly, 
inflation  is  expected  to  increase  slightly  during  the  second  quarter  and  then  fluctuate  at 
around 10 percent in the third quarter (Figure 34). 
Inflation is expected to drop significantly in the last quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 
2011 (Figure 34). The fall in the last quarter of 2010 would reflect the base effects caused by 
the  indirect  tax  hikes  and  the  sharp  increases  in  food  prices  that  occurred  during  the  last 
quarter of 2009. Similarly, the impact of the tax hikes, which added around 1.9 percentage 
points to headline inflation in the first quarter of 2010, would largely disappear during January 
and  February  of  2011.  Accordingly,  inflation  would  fall  to  8.4  percent  at  end-2010,  and 
display a significant drop during the first quarter of 2011, converging to levels consistent with 
the targets (Table 3). Afterwards, with the transmission of the lagged impact of the envisaged 
monetary tightening, inflation is expected to further decline and stabilize at around 5 percent 
over the medium term. 
 The projection that inflation would remain at elevated levels – albeit temporarily – over the 
forthcoming  period,  highlights  the  importance  of  expectations  management.  As  of  April, 
medium-term  inflation  expectations  are  significantly  above  the  revised  inflation  forecasts 
(Table 3). In this respect, it is critical that economic agents, with an awareness of temporary 
factors, focus on medium-term inflation trends, and therefore, take the inflation targets as a 
benchmark for their pricing plans and contracts. 
At this point, I would like to emphasize once more that any new data or information regarding 
the inflation outlook may lead to a change in the monetary policy stance. Therefore, I would 
like  to  particularly  highlight  that  assumptions  regarding  future  policy  rates  underlying  the 
inflation forecast should not be perceived as a commitment on behalf of the CBT. 
Risks 
4. 
In  the  last  part  of  my  presentation,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  risks  with  respect  to  the 
inflation  outlook  in  the  upcoming  period  and  provide  some  information  pertaining  to  the 
probable monetary policy strategy should these risks materialize. 
The  fact  that  inflation  will  remain  elevated  for  some  time  warrants  the  close  monitoring  of 
price  setting  behavior.  The  combination  of  several  unfavorable  developments,  such  as 
unprocessed food and oil price increases, administered price hikes and base effects has led 
to a significant increase in inflation since the last quarter of 2009. Although these factors are 
temporary, they cause headline inflation to significantly exceed the inflation target, leading to 
an  adverse  impact  on  inflation  expectations.  Apart  from  items  that  are  directly  affected  by 
cost push effects, current pricing behavior does not reveal any deterioration to the extent that 
might endanger the achievement of medium-term targets.  However, I  would like to remind 
you  that  monetary  tightening  may  be  implemented  sooner  than  envisaged  in  the  baseline 
scenario, should inflation expectations continue to rise and lead to a deterioration in general 
price setting behavior. 
Although  downside  risks  regarding  global  economic  activity  have  been  decreasing,  they 
remain  a  concern.  Rising  budget  deficits  and  ongoing  problems  in  credit,  real  estate  and 
labor markets across developed economies continue to pose downside risks for the recovery 
in  global  activity.  Should  the  global  conditions  deteriorate  again,  and  consequently  delay 
domestic recovery, the policy rate may remain constant for a longer period than envisaged 
under the baseline scenario. 
Uncertainties regarding the lagged effects of the strong monetary stimulus pose upside risks 
on both domestic and global economic activity. Given that the recovery in domestic demand 
has been relatively robust, a faster than envisaged recovery in external demand could lead to 
a rapid narrowing in the idle capacity, which, coupled with cost push pressures, may delay 
the  attainment  of  the medium-term  inflation  targets.  In  this  respect, should  the  recovery  in 
economic activity turn out to be faster than expected, the monetary tightening implied in the 
baseline scenario may be implemented sooner than envisaged. 
Prospects  regarding  the  pace  of  growth  in  developing  economies,  especially  in  China  and 
India,  have  been  posing  upside  risks  regarding  oil  and  other  commodity  prices.  The 
increasing  share  of  these  economies  in  world  demand  has  been  creating  additional 
pressures on commodity prices. I would like to emphasize that if commodity prices rise faster 
than expected in the forthcoming period and delay the disinflation, then we, as the Central 
Bank,  may  implement  the  monetary  tightening  described  in  the  baseline  scenario  sooner 
than envisaged in order to eliminate the risks of deteriorating price setting behavior. 
The  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  fiscal  policy  developments  closely  while 
formulating monetary policy strategy. Since the second half of 2009, economic activity has 
been  stronger  than  envisaged  in  the  Medium  Term  Program,  leading  to  a  better  than 
expected  performance  in  budget  revenues.  Using  this  fiscal  room  mostly  to  reduce  the 
government  debt,  as  implied  by  the  fiscal  rule,  would  enhance  demand  management  and 
ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more flexibility regarding the conduct 
of a stabilizing monetary policy. In this respect, we believe that should the goals set out in the 
Medium  Term  Program  be  implemented  through  institutional  and  structural  improvements, 
such as enacting and establishing the fiscal rule, it would be possible to keep policy rates at 
single-digit levels over the medium term. 
Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, without conflicting with its primary objective of price 
stability, has focused on containing the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic 
economy, which has, to a large extent, been achieved. Monetary policy will continue to focus 
on price stability in the period ahead. Adhering to the commitment for  fiscal discipline and 
strengthening  the  structural  reform  agenda  would  support  the  improvement  of  Turkey’s 
sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability in the medium term. In 
this respect, while reiterating once more that timely implementation of the structural reforms 
envisaged  by  the  Medium  Term  Program  and  the  European  Union  accession  process 
remains to be of the utmost importance, I would like to thank you for your participation. 
