Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Macro-prudential policy from an Asian perspective 
Speech by  Mr Kiyohiko G  Nishimura, Deputy  Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the high-
level seminar on macro-prudential policies, Shanghai, 18 October 2010. 
 I am honored to have been invited to this prestigious Conference, and particularly thrilled to 
have been given the opportunity to talk about macro-prudential policy from an Asian, or more 
specifically,  Japanese  perspective.  This  perspective 
in  considering 
macroeconomic  policy  in  general,  and,  in  my  opinion,  all  the  more  so  given  the  current 
international  discussions  of  regulatory  reforms  after  the  global  financial  crisis.  In  this  short 
presentation, I will explain how the Bank of Japan has been actually implementing macro-
prudential  policy  to  date,  from  this  perspective,  and  the  implications  for  the  policy’s  best 
practices.  
important 
is 
Japanese macro-prudential policy  
1. 
Heightened  interest  in  macro-prudence  clearly  reflects  the  severity  of  the  recent  global 
financial crisis, and the necessity to learn lessons from it. Central banks have been asking 
themselves  whether  they  paid  sufficient  attention  to  the  risks  being  accumulated  in  the 
financial  system  before  the  crisis,  when  inflation  was  moderate  and  stable.  Regulatory 
authorities  have  come  to  regret  a  possible  lack  of  concern  in  their  policy  perspectives, 
regarding  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Now,  with  deep  deliberation, 
policymakers are focusing on macro-prudential policy to fill the gap between macroeconomic 
policies and micro prudential policies, so as to avoid any future large-scale financial crisis.  
Here  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that,  as  a  central  bank,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  a  clear 
mandate  to  ensure  not  only  price  stability,  but  also  financial  system  stability.  Under  this 
mandate, the Bank has been taking de facto macro-prudential measures since the 1990s.  
The Bank of Japan’s mandate with regard to the financial system is stipulated in Article 1 of 
the Bank of Japan Act. Clause 1 of this Article states that the purpose of the Bank is “to issue 
banknotes  and  to  carry  out  currency  and  monetary  control”.  Furthermore,  Clause  2  of  the 
same Article states that the Bank’s purpose is “to ensure smooth settlement of funds among 
banks and other financial institutions, thereby contributing to the maintenance of stability of 
the financial system”. Thus, the Bank of Japan Act clearly requires the Bank to contribute to 
the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
To  understand  what  should  be  done  to  fulfill  this  mandate,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to 
realize  that  a  distinctive  feature  of  the  Asian,  and  in  particular,  the  Japanese  financial 
system, is that bank lending plays a dominant role in financial intermediation. The non-bank 
sectors,  such  as  securitization  markets,  are  relatively  less  important.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons  why  Asian  and  Japanese  financial  sectors  were  not  seriously  affected  by  the 
financial crisis of 2008, a crisis which was triggered by the gross under-evaluation of the risks 
embedded in US subprime securitized loans and related structured products. However, the 
flip side of this coin suggests that the real economy in Japan could be gravely affected if the 
risk-taking capacity of the banking sector is seriously damaged.  
A  financial  crisis  starts  with  excessive  risk  taking  or  an  outbreak  of  euphoria,  while  its 
aftermath  leaves  the  economy  burdened  with  excessive  risk  aversion  or  a  lack  of  animal 
spirits. Consequently, the objective of  macro-prudential policy is, first, to detect and rectify 
financial anomalies that may signal excessive risk taking, and second, if a crisis does occur, 
to support and ensure the risk-taking capacity of the banking sector. Historically, the Bank of 
Japan has learned a lot from the experience of the burst of the bubble around 1990, and it 
has  used  this  experience  to  prevent  or  at  least  to  lessen  the  impact  of  the  recent  global 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 1
financial crisis. So, I will begin by explaining the macro-prudential measures employed by the 
Bank  of  Japan  in  the  aftermath  of  Japan’s  financial  crisis  since  the  1990s,  and  then  I  will 
outline the measures the Bank is implementing now to prevent any future crisis.  
After-crisis macro-prudential measures – purchase of stocks held by financial 
institutions 
Since  1990,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  introduced  a  number  of  measures  to  restore  the  risk-
taking capacity of Japan’s banking sector, which had been hampered by problems relating to 
non-performing loans. Among these measures was the stock purchasing program introduced 
in the autumn of 2002, which could be interpreted as a proto-typical macro-prudential policy.  
The program was introduced when the risk-taking capacity of Japanese banks was severely 
eroded by non-performing loans. The Bank of Japan purchased stocks held by commercial 
banks,  liberating  the  capital  these  banks  held  against  the  risks  associated  with  their  stock 
holdings,  and  thus  improving  their  risk-taking  capacity.  Seen  in  this  way,  the  Bank’s  stock 
purchasing  was  akin  to  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  now  being  discussed  in 
international forums as a possible macro-prudential policy option.  
In February 2009, shortly after the global shock wave of seized financial markets, the Bank of 
Japan  reinstituted  the  stock  purchasing  program  as  a  temporary  measure.  Three  months 
later, the Bank adopted another temporary facility to provide subordinated loans to banks. In 
this  way,  the  Bank  took  various  steps  to  prop  up  the  risk-taking  capacity  of  the  financial 
system when it was placed under severe stress.  
Crisis-preventing measures – on-site examination and off-site monitoring 
Now I will illustrate the crisis-prevention measures taken by the Bank of Japan. Above all, I 
want  to  emphasize  the  utmost  importance  of  the  Bank’s  on-site  examination  and  off-site 
monitoring of individual financial institutions. Financial anomalies or imbalances are likely to 
be  accumulated  through  undue  risk-taking  activities  by  individual  financial  institutions,  and 
crises are usually triggered by their liquidity problems.  
Since the 1990s, some central banks in advanced economies, such as the Bank of England, 
have  shifted  their  micro-prudential  functions  to  newly  established  supervisory  agencies. 
However, having learned the lessons of the latest financial crisis, there has been a tendency 
to  restore  the  micro-prudential  functions  back  to  the  central  banks  again.  Unlike  these 
counterparts, the Bank of Japan has been continuously executing on-site examination and 
off-site  monitoring  over  a  wide  range  of  individual  financial  institutions,  including  securities 
firms.  
The Bank of Japan’s on-site examination makes a thorough and comprehensive assessment 
of the risks of each financial institution, and strongly encourages the institution to take the 
necessary  action  to  reduce  them,  where  appropriate.  The  Bank’s  off-site  monitoring  also 
enables  a  continuous  evaluation  of  various  risks.  This  off-site  monitoring  pays  particular 
attention  to  liquidity  risks,  and  allows  the  liquidity  position  of  individual  institutions  to  be 
assessed  on  a  daily  basis.  These  micro-prudential  functions  by  the  Bank  are  critical  for 
identifying and responding to risks, since financial crises usually occur as a result of liquidity 
crises.  Indeed,  since  the  failure  of  Northern  Rock  in  2007,  the  importance  of  liquidity  risk 
monitoring has been widely stressed in international forums.  
Moreover, every fiscal year, the Bank of Japan revises and publishes a document called “On-
Site Examination Policy”. This document is based on the information obtained from on-site 
examination  and  off-site  monitoring,  as  well  as  on  other  information  concerning  economic 
and  financial  conditions  and  the  overall  state  of  the  financial  system.  The  Bank  examines 
individual financial institutions in line with the policy in this document. For their part, individual 
financial  institutions  are  expected  to  take  appropriate  measures  in  light  of  this  published 
examination policy, thus contributing to the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
2 
 BIS Review 136/2010
“Two perspectives” of monetary policy 
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  relation  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy. 
Monetary policy does not directly reflect changes in asset prices or in the financial system. 
Nonetheless, there is a common understanding among advanced economies that variables 
such as asset prices and bank lending contain important information that should be brought 
to bear on monetary policy decisions.  
Since 2006, the Bank of Japan has adopted a framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
that  consists  of  “two  perspectives”.  This  means  that  the  Bank  may  respond  to  changes  in 
asset prices or credit expansion under the “second perspective”, that is, if there is reason to 
believe  that  such  changes  are  “risk  factors  that  significantly  impact  economic  activity  and 
prices”. Through this framework, while price stability remains the primary goal of its monetary 
policy, the Bank is able to respond flexibly to any excessive accumulation of financial risk. In 
this  regard,  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  framework  continued  to  provide  appropriate 
monitoring of financial-sector risks in advance of the outbreak of the current global financial 
crisis.  
In search of best practices in macro-prudential policy  
2. 
As  the  experience  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  suggests,  there  are  a  number  of  conditions  that 
should be satisfied in order for macro-prudential policy to be effective.  
Scope of monitoring – adequate information 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  both  micro-  as  well  as  macro-
information in pursuing macro-prudential policy.  
In  many  cases,  financial  crises  are  triggered  by  risk  accumulation  in  individual  financial 
institutions.  Moreover,  most  of  the  policy  tools  being  discussed  in  the  context  of  macro-
prudential policy, such as changes in the required capital ratio, loan loss provisions ratio or 
loan-to-value ratio, are intended to be applied to individual institutions. This means that it is 
all the more important for the central bank to have in hand adequate information from micro-
perspectives, in order to pursue macro-prudential policy in an effective manner.  
Here liquidity issues should also be duly emphasized. Financial crises usually break out as 
liquidity  crises.  Thus,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  central  bank  to  know  where  in  the 
market  liquidity  tension  exists,  and  who  is  under  extreme  tension,  in  order  to  identify  and 
respond effectively to liquidity problems. Quarterly-disclosed balance sheet figures may be 
grossly insufficient for such crisis management operations. We only have to recall that the 
capital  adequacy  ratio  of  Lehman  Brothers  was  double-digit,  even  immediately  before  its 
collapse. Indeed, the information obtained through the Bank of Japan’s on-site examination 
and off-site monitoring has proved to be extremely useful, and enabled the Bank to respond 
swiftly to the liquidity drain in the recent global financial crisis.  
Consistency among macro-prudential, micro-prudential and monetary policy 
Secondly, consistency with other policies is another important precondition for the efficiency 
of macro-prudential policy. To put it another way, macro-prudential policy alone is not likely 
to  bring  financial  stability,  without  consistent  macro-economic  policy  and  micro-prudential 
policy.  
When  the  asset  bubble  was  at  its  height,  Japan’s  regulatory  authorities  tried  to  impose  a 
ceiling on the aggregate amount of real estate-related bank loans. Although the term “macro-
prudence” was not on everybody’s lips at that time, the restriction imposed on overall real 
estate-related  lending  had  a  strong  tinge  of  macro-prudential  policy.  Unfortunately,  such 
regulation was not able to stabilize the whole financial system.  
BIS Review 136/2010 
 3
A similar instance is also found in the current global financial crisis. In recent discussions on 
macro-prudential policy, the counter-cyclical provisioning in Spain has often been mentioned 
as  one  of  the  few  macro-prudential  responses  that  have  actually  been  implemented. 
Although such ground-breaking policy efforts by the Spanish authorities are commendable, 
the  current  state  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  seems  to  underline  the  difficulty  of 
responding  to  asset  price  bubbles  solely  with  macro-prudential  tools.  Since  we  do  not  yet 
have a good track record of averting financial crises solely with macro-prudential policy tools, 
it  would  be  prudent  for  policymakers  to  assume  that  macro-prudential  policy  can  only 
succeed when other policies are conducted in a consistent manner so as to influence market 
expectations effectively.  
It  seems  to  me  that  the  precise  definition  of  macro-prudential  policies,  in  isolation  from 
monetary and micro-prudential policies, does not lead to productive discussion. Rather, we 
should  recognize  that  all  these  policies  partly  overlap.  Based  on  this  understanding,  it  is 
necessary to make use of all available resources, always with a macro-prudential viewpoint, 
so as to maintain overall financial stability.  
Cross-border perspectives – avoid straightjacket measures 
Thirdly,  I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  cross-border  perspectives  on  macro-
prudential policy.  
The business models of financial institutions differ substantially, reflecting the different needs 
for  financial  services  in  each  country.  Moreover,  we  should  also  recognize  the  significant 
differences in legal and regulatory frameworks for financial services among jurisdictions, as a 
consequence  of  the  authorities’  best  efforts  to  tailor  them  to  the  people’s  needs.  In  some 
jurisdictions a traditional “buy-and-hold” model is dominant, in which banks generally rely on 
stable household deposits in their funding and make commercial loans. In such cases it is 
especially important for supervisors to grasp credit risks in banks’ loan portfolios. However, in 
other  jurisdictions,  where  an  “originate-to-distribute”  model  with  market-based  wholesale 
funding is more pronounced, supervisors should pay more attention to liquidity structure, the 
risk-profile of structured products and where the ultimate risk lies.  
“Level-playing-field” is undoubtedly important. Nonetheless, what we really need is a playing-
field  that  should  lead  to  fair  competition  among  financial  institutions  of  different  types  and 
backgrounds,  both  in  a  theoretical  and  a  practical  sense.  Thus,  a  global  regulatory 
framework  should  have  sufficient  flexibility  in  order  that  regulators  can  take  account  of 
regional and functional heterogeneity. A one-size-fits-all regulation, which some institutions in 
a specific jurisdiction could more easily circumvent, might eventually prove rather harmful to 
social  welfare.  Moreover,  too  rigid  regulation  might  encourage  less-transparent  entities  to 
replace  banks’  businesses  and  thereby  stimulate  “shadow-banking”  in  some  countries.  A 
one-size-fits-all  approach,  which  would  put  carnivorous  lions  and  herbivorous  elephants  in 
the same cage, can never produce good results. We need to strike the right balance between 
rules and discretion in financial regulation, making full use of the “Three Pillars” framework of 
the Basel Accords, especially Pillar II.  
I  also  reiterate  that  liquidity  issues  are  critical,  especially  from  a  cross-border  perspective. 
Central banks are strongly required to monitor liquidity risk, and provide liquidity if necessary, 
so as to contain cross-border spillovers. In this regard, the Bank of Japan, through its off-site 
monitoring, observes closely the liquidity position of branches, subsidiaries and affiliates of 
overseas financial institutions. Moreover, bilateral swap agreements between major central 
banks,  such  as  the  Fed,  the  ECB  and  the  BOJ,  contributed  to  the  containment  of  cross-
border spillovers during the initial stages of the global financial crisis.  
Looking back at the history of central banks, most of those established before the Second 
World  War  were  brought  into  existence  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  order  to  a  financial 
system  in  turmoil.  Macro-prudential  perspectives  are  therefore  nothing  new  to  central 
banking.  Rather,  macro-prudence  might  be  part  of  the  original  reason  why  an  economy 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2010
needs a central bank. Ultimately, it could be argued that all the activities of central banks, 
from issuing banknotes to operating payment and settlement systems, acting as the lender-
of-last-resort  and  implementing  monetary  policy,  cannot  be  pursued  without  a  “macro-
prudential perspective”.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 5
