Andrew Sentance: Getting back to business 
Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of 
England,  at  the  lunch  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Confederation  of  British 
Industry (CBI), Belfast, 24 November 2010. 
 I would like to thank Tomasz Wieladek and Matt Corder for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
It is a great pleasure to be back here in Northern Ireland for the fourth time in my capacity as 
a  member  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  As  a  former  business  economist,  I  greatly 
value the opportunity to visit individual businesses and meet with business groups in different 
parts of the UK, as I am doing on this two-day visit to Northern Ireland. And I would like to 
thank Frances Hill and her colleagues at the Bank’s Northern Ireland Agency for all the work 
they do with the business community here and for organising this visit.  
It is over twenty years since I first came to Belfast when I was working for the CBI in the late 
1980s.  It  was  so  long  ago  that  Nigel  Smyth  was  not  yet  then  the  CBI  Director  here  in 
Northern Ireland! And it may even have been before Nigel joined the CBI as Deputy Director 
to  Alasdair  MacLaughlin,  over  twenty  years  ago.  Indeed,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  in 
particular  today  the  very  substantial  contribution  that  Nigel  has  made  to  the  business 
community  here  in  Northern  Ireland  over  the  past  two  decades,  in  the  face  of  many 
challenges and over a period of great change and opportunity.  
The Northern Ireland economy has made great progress since those days in the late 1980s 
and early 1990s when I came here with my CBI economist hat on. Through the 1990s and in 
the 2000s prior to the financial crisis, Northern Ireland achieved an average rate of growth of 
3%  a  year  –  significantly  above  the  growth  rate  recorded  in  the  UK  as  a  whole.1 
Unemployment fell by two-thirds, from over 12% of the labour force in the early 1990s to just 
4%  in  the  mid-2000s.  As  in  the  rest  of  the  UK,  the  unemployment  rate  here  in  Northern 
Ireland has risen in the recession. But it remains below the UK average – in contrast with the 
1980s and 1990s when unemployment here was significantly above the national average. 
There are clearly some particular challenges facing the economy here in Northern Ireland as 
we  move  into  the  recovery  phase  of  the  cycle.  Compared  with  the  rest  of  the  UK, 
employment is more dependent on the public sector and the participation rate in the labour 
force is lower. Ireland’s fiscal and banking problems may well have a bigger impact on the 
economy  here  than  elsewhere  in  the  UK.  However,  the  political  and  economic  progress 
made over the last two decades, as well as some of Northern Ireland’s traditional economic 
strengths – a high-quality education system, a close-knit business community and a strong 
manufacturing  tradition  –  should  provide  grounds  for  encouragement  about  recovery 
prospects, despite these challenges. 
Here in Northern Ireland, and throughout the rest of the UK, it is the strength and vitality of 
business which will determine how well the economy recovers from recession. After a period 
in which the public sector has played an important role in helping to support demand in the 
aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  government  spending  now  needs  to  be  restrained  to  put 
public finances on a sounder footing. Against that background, the key challenge now facing 
the UK economy is to ensure that the private sector and the nation’s business community 
                                                 
1   Average  annual  growth  of  Gross  Value  Added  in  real  terms  in  Northern  Ireland  in  the  years  1990  to  2007 
averaged 3.0%, compared with 2.4% in the UK over the same period. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 1
can  be  a  powerful  and  sustained  engine  of  job  creation  and  growth  as  the  public  sector 
rebalances.  
I can think of no better place to discuss this challenge of “getting back to business” than at an 
event jointly hosted by the CBI, the UK’s leading business organisation – which I am still very 
proud to have been associated with earlier in my career. In my speech today, I will highlight 
three grounds for optimism that a healthy, business-led recovery can be sustained in the UK 
while  public  spending  is  restrained  and  the  deficit  is  brought  down:  the  progress  of  the 
recovery so far; the resilience of UK businesses through the recession; and the experience of 
the  previous  recovery  in  the  mid-1990s,  when  there  was  also  a  significant  rebalancing  of 
public finances. However, for a healthy recovery to be sustained, it also needs to build on a 
platform  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  And  this,  in  my  view,  has  implications  for  the  way  in 
which the MPC should be responding to the current economic situation – an issue I will come 
back to later in this speech. 
Progress of the recovery so far 
Since the second half of 2009, the UK economy has been recovering from recession. This 
recovery has not been uniform across different sectors of the economy, with manufacturing 
growing  faster  than  services.  There  has  also  been  some  variability  in  growth  rates  from 
quarter  to  quarter,  with  relatively  weak  growth  through  last  autumn  and  winter,  but  much 
stronger growth over the spring and summer of this year. GDP has risen by 2.8% over the 
last  year,  a  faster  pace  than  the  2%  or  so  seen  in  the  first  year  of  the  previous  two 
recoveries.2  A  recovery  has  also  started  at  an  earlier  stage  in  the  cycle  than  in  the  early 
1990s,  when  the  economy  “bumped  along  the  bottom”  for  a  number  of  quarters  before 
growth became firmly established. 
It  is  particularly  encouraging  that  manufacturing  output  has  been  growing  particularly 
strongly, up by 5.3% on a year ago in the third quarter. This is the strongest year-on-year 
manufacturing  growth  we  have  seen  since  the  end  of  1994,  sixteen  years  ago.  The  latest 
business  surveys  are  generally  positive  about 
the  growth  of 
manufacturing output. And the CBI’s latest quarterly Industrial Trends Survey, released last 
month, shows the strongest investment intentions in manufacturing since 1997 and the most 
significant  employment  growth  since  1989.  These  are  all  encouraging  signs  for  the 
rebalancing of the UK economy – towards manufacturing and away from services – which 
most  economic  analysts  have  suggested  is  likely  to  be  needed  over  the  course  of  this 
recovery.  
These rates of growth – across the UK economy as a whole and in manufacturing – would 
not be possible unless the demand climate had changed very significantly over the course of 
the last 12–18 months. The global economy has bounced back strongly, with the IMF now 
projecting world growth of 4.8% this year and 4.2% next year. Asia and a number of other 
emerging market economies are providing a powerful engine of growth to the world economy 
at present. Though the news is more mixed from the US and Europe, their economies are 
still on a recovery track. Indeed, the current gloomy mood about the US economy does not 
seem to be borne out by the most recent economic data – with the value of retail sales up by 
7.3% on a year ago in October and manufacturing output up by 6.1% over the same period. 
Within Europe, a strong performance from the “core” European economies is outweighing the 
drag from the fiscal and banking problems of some countries on the periphery. The German 
economy has been particularly resilient, with GDP up nearly 4% on a year ago in the third 
quarter and unemployment down to its lowest level since 1992.  
the  continuation  of 
                                                 
2  
In the year to 1982Q1, GDP in the United Kingdom grew by 2% and in the year to 1993Q2, it grew by 2.1%. In 
this  and  subsequent  reference  to  the  latest  GDP  growth  data,  the  figures  quoted  in  the  text  do  not  take 
account of any revisions published in the second GDP release on Wednesday 24th November. 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2010
This strong performance in overseas markets, coupled with a competitive exchange rate, has 
lifted the volumes of UK non-oil goods exports by close to 15% over the past year and is 
supporting  the  rebound  we  are  seeing  in  the  manufacturing  industry.  Chart  1  shows  that 
overseas  markets  account  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  the  demand  for  the  output  of  UK 
businesses,  with  domestic  demand  from  the  private  sector  –  consumer  spending  and 
investment  –  accounting  for  a  further  two-thirds.  Exports  and  domestic  private  sector 
spending therefore make up over 90% of the demand for the output of the business sector in 
the UK with public sector procurement and capital spending accounting for less than 10% of 
the total. So while the global economy continues to perform strongly and as long as private 
sector demand is still growing at a reasonable rate, UK  plc should be well-placed to cope 
with the squeeze on public spending flowing from the October Spending Review (OSR). 
 
 Alongside the recovery in overseas markets, domestic demand in the UK economy has also 
bounced back following the sharp declines seen in late 2008 and early 2009. In cash terms, 
domestic  spending  in  the  UK  economy  by  consumers,  government  and  business  grew  by 
6.8% in the year to the second quarter of 2010. As I pointed out in a speech last month, this 
is relatively strong demand growth by comparison with the decade prior to the financial crisis, 
when the growth of domestic demand in money terms averaged 5.8%.3 
These  data  do  not  suggest  that  lack  of  demand  is  the  main  problem  currently  facing  the 
private  sector  in  the  UK.  We  may  see  some  slowdown  in  demand  early  next  year  as  the 
fiscal  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  and  the  spending  review  take  effect  and 
consumers adjust to a higher rate of VAT. But this variability in the growth rate should not be 
confused with a genuine double dip which is still a remote possibility in my view. That would 
only be a problem if the world recovery faltered seriously. While Asia and emerging markets 
continue to power ahead, and the US and the European Union are also recovering steadily, 
we should not expect to see a significant interruption to growth across the world economy.  
                                                 
3   See Sentance, A., “Sustaining the Recovery” Speech hosted by British American Business Council and RSM 
Tenon in London, 13 October 2010. Available on the Bank of England website. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 3
Business resilience through the recession 
The turnaround that we have seen in the UK economy over the last year mainly reflects a 
change  in  demand  conditions.  But  economic  growth  cannot  be  generated  simply  by 
stimulating  demand  if  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  is  not  in  good  shape  and  able  to 
respond.  In  the  UK,  we  saw  this  most  clearly  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  when  British 
business  was  encumbered  by  problems  of  poor  industrial  relations,  low  productivity  and 
inflexible labour markets – the symptoms of what became known as “The British Disease”. 
Since that time, we have seen quite a bit of evidence that the supply side of the UK economy 
has indeed become more flexible and supportive of growth. Surveys of the business climate 
in  the  UK,  which  aim  to  take  into  account  the  impact  of  regulation  and  other  factors  as 
barriers to doing business, show that we are well placed internationally, as the latest “Doing 
Business” survey from the World Bank shows (see Chart 2).4 
 
 
The  performance  of  the  economy  through  the  recession  and  in  the  early  phases  of  the 
recovery has provided further encouraging evidence of the resilience and strength of British 
business.  There  are  three  particularly  positive  features  which  should  make  us  relatively 
optimistic about the supply-side performance of the UK economy in this recovery.  
The first is the resilience of employment through the recession and evidence of a pick-up in 
jobs  at  a  relatively  early  stage  of  the  recovery.  Though  the  GDP  figures  currently  suggest 
that the downturn in output in the UK in the 2008/9 recession was relatively severe, the latest 
labour market data suggest this has been a much milder recession than earlier episodes in 
terms  of  employment.5  At  this  stage  of  the  economic  cycle  in  the  early  1980s  and  early 
1990s, employment was about 5% down on its peak. As Chart 3 shows, the latest data from 
                                                 
4   The  index  measures  the  impact  of  a  range  of  regulations  dealing  with  starting  a  business,  property  and 
construction transactions, contract enforcement, tax payment, etc. For latter details see 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/rankings. 
It is possible that this discrepancy between the different view of the recession given by GDP and employment 
data could be reconciled by future upward revision to the GDP estimates, which also occurred after the early 
1990s recession. 
BIS Review 158/2010
 
5  
4 
 the Labour Force Survey suggest that UK employment is currently just over 1% down on its 
peak level, and over the last six months, employment has risen by 350,000.6 As a result, the 
unemployment rate has stabilised at below 8% of the workforce – and has recently edged 
down slightly – whereas it had risen to over 10% at this stage of the cycle in the early 80s 
and  90s.7  Given  the  personal  difficulties  and  waste  of  resources  created  by  high 
unemployment,  the  fact  that  employment  has  held  up  well  in  the  recession  –  and  is  now 
rebounding – is very encouraging. 
 
 Though we do not have fully up-to-date estimates, the most recent figures do not suggest 
that  recent  jobs  growth  has  been  in  the  public  sector.8  Instead,  it  is  the  private  sector  
– which employs over three-quarters of the workforce in the UK – which has been increasing 
employment over the first half of this year. It might be unrealistic to expect the recent rate of 
job growth to continue – and business surveys do suggest that employment growth is easing. 
But recent employment trends provide positive indications of the flexibility of the UK labour 
market and the confidence of business about future economic prospects.  
Why have we seen a much better employment outcome in this economic cycle than following 
previous recessions? One reason is the rapid policy response here in the UK and worldwide, 
which communicated to businesses that policy-makers were actively seeking to reverse the 
downturn  in  demand  –  using  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  direct  interventions  in  the 
financial sector. This contrasts with earlier recessions in the UK in which the downturn was 
preceded by a surge in inflation and economic policy could not be relaxed so readily because 
of the need to bear down on inflation.  
                                                 
6   The  total  number  of  people  aged  16  or  more  in  employment  was  29.19  millions  in  July-September  2010 
according to the Labour Force Survey, compared with 28.84 millions in January-March 2010. 
7   The  latest  Labour  Force  Survey  measure  of  unemployment  is  7.7%  of  the  workforce.  By  contrast, 
unemployment peaked at 11.9% in mid-1984 and 10.6% in early 1993. Approximately two years after the start 
of the recession in both cases, unemployment was 10.2% at end-1981 and 10.4% at end-1992. 
8   The latest figures available show public sector employment falling from a peak of 6.10 millions at the end of 
2009 to 6.05 millions in June 2010. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 5
Another factor supporting employment has been the flexibility in wages and working hours 
which  helped  companies  weather  the  stresses  and  strains  of  recession.  Many  companies 
imposed or negotiated pay freezes, and in the downturn employees were willing to accept 
reduced working hours or a pay sacrifice in order to help preserve their jobs. This points to a 
high degree of flexibility about pay and conditions of employment in the short-term. But the 
likely “quid pro quo” of this approach is that, when company fortunes improve, employees will 
expect  to  share  in  the  benefits  of  the  upswing  to  compensate  for  sacrifices  made  in  the 
downturn. For this reason, I would expect private sector wage growth to pick up now that the 
economy is recovering, returning quite quickly to the rates we saw before the recession.  
Employment  has  also  been  sustained  by  the  long-term  confidence  of  management  in  the 
viability  and  future  success  of  their  businesses.  In  past  recessions,  when  this  longer-term 
confidence  was  much  weaker,  employment  has  fallen  more  sharply.  For  example,  in  the 
early 1980s, UK manufacturing companies entered the recession facing many problems of 
low productivity, poor industrial relations and an unstable macroeconomic environment, with 
high cost and price inflation. It was therefore not surprising that the early-80s recession was 
the last straw which saw many UK manufacturers closing down operations and international 
businesses shifting their production bases elsewhere. In the recent downturn, the bulk of UK 
businesses have felt more confident about their longer term prospects and have sought to 
retain their resources of skilled labour and experienced workers so they would be well placed 
to benefit from the upswing when it came. That attitude and approach is in my view a positive 
signal for our future prosperity and business success. 
 
A second positive aspect of UK business performance through this recession has been the 
ability  of  companies  to  maintain  their  financial  strength  through  the  downturn.  As  Chart  4 
shows,  the  retained  profits  of  private  companies  in  the  UK  fell  only  slightly  during  the 
downturn and have already begun to recover. In the first half of 2010, the financial balance of 
the private sector (excluding financial companies) was back above its average level over the 
last two decades, as reduced interest payments offset a squeeze on profits. Companies have 
also  sustained  profits  by  exploiting  flexibility  in  their  cost  base  –  including  measures  to 
contain  labour  costs.  They  also  conserved  cash  during  the  recession  by  aggressive  de-
stocking and holding back on investment.  
 6 
 BIS Review 158/2010
This more healthy financial position puts the corporate sector in a better position than it has 
been  coming  out  of  previous  recessions  to  increase  investment  as  they  see  demand 
recovering. The most recent reports from the Bank of England Agents around the country are 
relatively  positive  about  the  investment  outlook  and  this  is  consistent  with  investment 
intentions  indicated  by  other  business  surveys.9  These  indications  of  rising  business 
investment also suggest that constraints in the banking sector – which are making it more 
difficult for many small and medium sized companies to obtain finance – are not acting as a 
serious obstacle to a recovery in business investment. 
The  third  positive  development  for  the  supply-side  of  the  UK  economy  following  the 
recession is the low level of company failures. Company failure rates are normally pushed up 
by  a  recession  and  in  the  early  1990s  the  liquidation  rate  peaked  at  close  to  3%  of  the 
number  of  UK  companies.  However,  as  Chart  5  shows,  the  failure  rate  of  businesses  has 
remained  below  1%  in  this  recession  and  has  recently  turned  down  as  the  economy  has 
begun to recover. Even adjusting for changes in the legal framework for insolvencies in the 
mid-2000s,  the  rate  of  company  liquidation  is  lower  than  in  the  last  recession  and  the 
increase during the recession has been much lower than expected when the recession first 
hit. 
 
With the pressures on the banks following the financial crisis, we might have expected the 
opposite result. If the banks had quickly sought to realise value from bad loans made in the 
global credit boom, we might have seen more business failures. One reason that this has not 
happened  is  because  of  government  interventions  in  the  banking  sector  which  have 
encouraged UK banks to sustain lending to companies from which they might otherwise have 
withdrawn support. Another mitigating factor against business failures in the recent downturn 
has  been  the  willingness  of  the  government  to  allow  greater  flexibility  for  companies  in 
                                                  
9   The  Bank  of  England  Agents’  Report  for  November  shows  investment  intentions  back  to  the  level  last 
recorded  in  late  2007  and  early  2008,  before  the  recession.  For  more  details,  see  the  Bank  of  England 
website:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/agsum10nov.pdf.  The  CBI  Industrial 
Trends Survey shows that in manufacturing industry investment intentions are the strongest recorded since 
1997. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 7
making tax payments to ease cash flow constraints. And a further supporting influence has 
been the relative strength of company cash flows I commented on earlier.  
The flip side of the fact that more companies have survived the recent recession is that there 
has  been  a  fall-off  in  measured  productivity.  Instead  of  slack  being  created  in  the  labour 
market  through  company  failures  and  job  losses,  there  is  the  possibility  that  more  spare 
capacity  has  been  retained  within  companies  which  have  survived  the  recession  – 
particularly in the services sector, which accounts for the bulk of business activity in the UK. 
However,  the  extent  of  this  margin  of  spare  capacity  and  the  way  it  will  impact  on  the 
performance of the economy going forward is a big uncertainty at present, as I will discuss 
later.  
The 1990s recovery  
A  third  reason  for  optimism  about  the  private  sector  and  business  activity  to  drive  the  UK 
economy forward in the current recovery is the experience of the previous recovery from the 
early 1990s recession. Through the mid-90s, the UK economy grew healthily – with annual 
GDP growth averaging close to 3.5% while the public sector deficit was being brought down 
in  a  broadly  similar  way  to  the  reduction  planned  by  the  current  government.  Though  the 
latest Budget and OSR plans imply a somewhat bigger fall in the public spending share of 
GDP than in the mid-1990s, this is offset by a smaller rise in the tax burden. Taking tax and 
spending  together,  the  projected  impact  is  broadly  similar.  Public  borrowing  fell  by  over 
8 percentage  points  of  GDP  between  1993/4  and  1998/9,  compared  with  a  9  percentage 
point fall projected over the next five years in the coalition government 2010 Budget.10 
It  is  also  important  to  recognise  the  profile  for  total  public  spending  conceals  significant 
variations between different areas of spending. But the overall total is not being cut back as 
dramatically  as  some  of  the  media  headlines  suggest.  The  broadest  measure  of  public 
spending – Total Managed Expenditure – is still set to rise in cash terms at 1.5% per annum 
over the four years to 2014/15, not far below the targeted inflation rate of 2%. The profile for 
real spending in future years is not dissimilar to the mid-1990s when there was also a virtual 
standstill in the real growth of spending. In the 1990s, the public spending squeeze was also 
accompanied by a significant reduction in employment in the public sector, not dissimilar to 
the  figures  currently  projected  by  the  Office  of  Budget  Responsibility.  Despite  this, 
unemployment fell in the 1990s from over 10% of the labour force to around 5% later in the 
decade because the private sector generated many more jobs than were lost in the public 
sector.  
The  private  sector  and  a  business  recovery  supported  the  growth  of  the  UK  economy 
following the early 1990s recession. And economic conditions we currently face are not that 
dissimilar  from  the  world  of  the  mid-1990s.  If  anything,  the  external  stimulus  to  growth  is 
stronger – the global economy has bounced back more strongly from the recent downturn 
and the sterling exchange has depreciated more sharply and at an earlier stage of the cycle 
than in the early 1990s. There is a worry that domestic demand could be held back by the 
legacy of the financial crisis and public sector deficit reduction. But that does not appear to 
be reflected in the most recent data for domestic demand and from the evidence on business 
investment intentions. And while we should expect a relatively muted recovery in consumer 
spending,  the  impact  of  high  household  debt  levels  should  not  be  overstated.  This  was  a 
                                                 
10   Public sector net borrowing was 7.7% of GDP in 1993/4, moving towards a surplus of 0.5% in 1998/9, a swing 
of 8.2% in the public sector financial balance as a share of GDP. The Budget plans show a 9 percentage point 
swing – from borrowing of 10.1% in the current financial year to 1.1% in 2015/6. 
8 
 BIS Review 158/2010
major concern in the early 1990s too, when repossessions and mortgage arrears were higher 
than we have seen through this recession.11 
Inflation and UK monetary policy  
In  my  view,  the  business  sector  of  the  UK  economy  has  shown  a  great  deal  of  resilience 
through  the  recent  financial  crisis  and  global  recession.  Growth  has  bounced  back  more 
strongly than we might have expected in the depths of the crisis, and policy measures have 
played an important part in supporting this recovery. But we have also experienced relatively 
high  inflation.  That  is  contrary  to  the  normal  view  of  what  should  happen  to  inflation  after 
recessions  –  when  excess  capacity  generated  in  the  recession  is  expected  to  depress 
increases in prices and costs. It is also not consistent with the forecasts made throughout 
last  year  by  the  MPC  which  suggested  that  inflation  would  we  below  2%  by  now  (see 
Chart 6) and would continue below target through 2011. Instead, the Governor has had to 
write four letters this year to explain why inflation is over 3%, and he may well have to write 
another four next year as well, as the latest Inflation Report forecast suggests that inflation is 
set to rise further in the early part of next year and not be back close to the 2% target until 
2012.  
 
Part of the reason for this period of above-target inflation is that we are currently facing a 
period of upward price shocks from a range of different sources – the exchange rate, VAT 
rises  and  upward  pressure  on  commodity  prices.  We  could  afford  to  accommodate  these 
upside pressures on inflation last year when there were worries that a broader deflationary 
trend  could  emerge  and  the  recession  was  threatening  to  deepen  further.  But  the  serious 
downside risks to the economic outlook we saw then have since receded. The UK economy 
has  actually  bounced  back  more  strongly  than  in  previous  recoveries,  supported  by  both 
domestic and overseas demand.  
                                                  
11   According to data from the Council for Mortgage Lenders, both house repossessions and arrears peaked in 
the recent recession at lower levels than in the early 1990s, and the numbers have been falling since early 
2009. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 9
These upside pressures on inflation from import prices and VAT have been one reason that 
inflation has not fallen back in the way we expected in the aftermath of recession. The other 
significant factor is that spare capacity has not exerted as much downside pressure on cost 
and  price  increases  as  expected.  That  is  partly  because  the  margin  of  spare  capacity 
appears to be less than we have seen in previous economic cycles. In the labour market, this 
is the flip-side of the resilience of employment and a lower level of unemployment relative to 
the early stages of previous recoveries.  
But survey evidence also suggests that there is limited spare capacity within firms to take up 
the  slack  as  demand  recovers.12  For  example,  the  most  reliable  measure  of  capacity 
utilisation in manufacturing – the CBI Industrial Trends Survey – shows capacity utilisation at 
around its average level, which is quite surprising at this stage of the recovery. There is more 
survey  evidence  of  spare  capacity  in  the  services  sector.  But  this  does  not  seem  to  be 
exerting much downward pressure on inflation. The CPI measure of services price inflation 
has picked up from 2.4% at the end of last year to average around 3.8% in recent months. 
This is considerably in excess of the 2% target and also slightly above the average rate of 
services  price  inflation  we  experienced  during  the  decade  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  as 
Chart 7 shows. This does not appear consistent with the view that spare capacity in the UK 
services sector is serving to hold down inflation.  
 
 With  the  economy  recovering  at  home  and  abroad,  inflation  above  target  and  set  to  rise 
further, I believe there are three powerful arguments for a gradual rise in interest rates which 
have  been  evident  for  several  months.  First,  the  main  elements  of  demand  for  UK 
businesses  –  overseas  markets  and  domestic  private  sector  spending  –  have  been 
recovering  for  over  a  year  now  and  look  set  to  continue  to  grow.  The  outlook  for  growth 
suggests the UK economy should be able to withstand a gradual rise in interest rates, even 
taking into account the impact of fiscal consolidation. Indeed, it is worth noting that in 1994, 
                                                 
12   This lack of spare capacity in firms is hard to reconcile with the relatively sharp drop in GDP in the recession 
and the resilience of employment. However, it is possible that future data revisions may change the profile of 
GDP during the recession. It is also possible that underlying productivity growth trends were overestimated 
during  the  long  expansion  of  the  1990s  and  2000s,  and  that  the  economy  was  further  above  capacity  in 
2006/7 than was appreciated at the time. 
10 
 BIS Review 158/2010
when the early 90s fiscal consolidation began, the UK economy grew by over 4%, which is 
still  the  strongest  rate  of  GDP  growth  we  have  seen  in  any  calendar  year  since  the  late 
1980s.  The  strength  of  growth  surprised  forecasters,  who  had  greatly  underestimated  the 
momentum of growth which would be generated by a rebound in private sector demand, a 
strong world economy and a competitive exchange rate.13 There is a risk that we are making 
the  same  mistake  again  because  of  the  preoccupation  with  downside  risks  following  the 
financial crisis.  
The second key argument is that higher interest rates should help to exert a brake on above-
target  inflation  and  keep  inflation  expectations  anchored  around  the  2%  target.  There  are 
significant upside risks to the forecast recently published in the Bank’s Inflation Report which 
could  sustain  the  period  of  above-target  inflation  into  2012  and  2013.  Continued  strong 
global  growth  could  generate  further  upside  pressure  from  rising  energy  and  commodity 
prices.  Wage  growth  could  also  pick  up  more  quickly  as  the  recovery  proceeds,  as  pay 
settlements  recoup  some  of  the  ground  lost  in  the  recession  and  employees  seek 
compensation  for  relatively  high  inflation.  And  the  longer  this  period  of  relatively  strong 
growth in consumer prices continues, the greater is the risk of a more fundamental upside 
shift in future expectations of inflation.  
Raising  Bank  Rate  sooner  rather  than  later  would  provide  more  protection  against  these 
upside  risks,  by  restraining  the  ability  of  firms  to  pass  through  higher  costs  into  domestic 
prices and helping to limit import price inflation through the effect on the value of the pound. 
With inflation significantly above target and set to go higher, such a policy would reinforce the 
credibility of the MPC’s commitment to stable prices – helping to keep inflation expectations 
in line with the 2% target. It should also help build confidence that the Bank of England is “on 
the  case”  in  terms  of  its  remit,  taking  appropriate  policy  action  to  return  inflation  to  target 
rather than appearing to just hope for the best. 
The third important argument is the extremely low level of interest rates we are starting from. 
Taken together with the monetary stimulus from Quantitative Easing, there is still likely to be 
a  considerable  support  for  growth  from  monetary  policy  even  if  interest  rates  are  raised 
somewhat  from  their  current  level.  Indeed,  it  is  most  unusual  for  the  UK  to  experience  a 
period as long as eighteen months or more with no change in the official interest rate, as we 
have done since March 2009. The period over which Bank Rate has been held constant at 
0.5% is now the longest period without a change in the official interest rate since 1951 (prior 
to  which  the  Bank’s  official  interest  rate  had  been  held  at  2%  since  the  1930s).  I  do  not 
believe that the current economic conditions justify a continuation of this policy. The longer 
we keep interest rates at an exceptionally low level, the greater is the risk that Bank Rate 
would  need  to  rise  sharply  in  the  future  –  creating  a  serious  setback  to  business  and 
consumer  confidence.  We  should  seek  to  avoid  such  a  sudden  lurch  in  policy.  A  gradual 
transition  to  higher  interest  rates  appears  much  more  likely  to  provide  a  stable  and 
predictable  approach  to  policy-making  which  enables  the  business  community  to  plan 
sensibly for the future.  
As the private sector of the economy “gets back to business” and we get accustomed to a 
resumption in growth following the financial crisis, so monetary policy also needs to “get back 
to business”. It is quite right for the MPC to support the economy in recession when there are 
significant  deflationary  risks.  But,  as  the  economy  recovers,  a  key  task  for  the  MPC  is  to 
maintain  monetary  discipline  and  confidence  in  a  world  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  As  the 
Governor  wrote  in  his  letter  to  the  Chancellor  last  week,  echoing  the  MPC  remit:  “price 
stability is a precondition for high and stable levels of growth and employment”. Confidence 
                                                 
13   For example, the average forecast for 1994 real GDP growth made by the Treasury “Panel of Wise Men” in 
October 1993 was 2.7%, over 1.5% below the out-turn of 4.3%. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 11
in  a  world  of  stable  prices  in  the  UK  has  been  hard-won  in  recent  years  and  we  need  to 
safeguard it carefully.  
I worry that monetary discipline and confidence in the inflation target risks being eroded by 
keeping emergency settings for monetary policy in place for too long, when the growth and 
inflation  outlook  points  in  a  different  direction.  That  is  why  I  have  argued  for  a  gradual 
withdrawal of monetary stimulus and why I will continue to do so, in the absence of material 
and  significant  changes  in  the  economic  outlook  relative  to  the  picture  I  have  described 
today. 
12 
 BIS Review 158/2010
