Thomas Jordan: Macroprudential instruments and balance sheet risks 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2010. 
 In my following remarks, I will address two issues in depth. I will start by detailing the set of 
instruments  which  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  should  have  at  its  disposal  for  the 
prevention of financial crises. I will then take a look at the risks on our balance sheet. 
Macroprudential instruments at the SNB 
More  than  three  years  have  passed  since  the outbreak  of the  international  financial  crisis. 
The crisis made two things very clear. First, the capital and liquidity buffers in the financial 
system were far too low. Second, systemic risks had been grossly underestimated prior to 
the crisis or had not even been identified. Almost nobody suspected that the risks were so 
closely interlinked, nor that problems in a small segment of the US mortgage market could 
rock  the  global  financial  system  and  the  world  economy.  In  order  to  make  the  financial 
system  more  resilient,  one  thing  that  needs  to  be  done  is  to  strengthen  the  capital  and 
liquidity buffers. Significant progress has already been made in this regard with the approval 
of  Basel  III  and  the  new  “too  big  to  fail”  (TBTF)  regulations.  These  measures  should  help 
ease  the  problems  in  connection  with  the  TBTF  issue  significantly.  But  there  will  be  other 
crises in the future, too. That is why it is equally important to identify the build-up of risks in 
the financial system at an early stage and to take countercyclical measures to mitigate them. 
It  is  in  this  area  –  referred  to  as  macroprudential  policy  –  where  there  are  still  major 
deficiencies. 
The  National  Bank  has  the  statutory  mandate  to  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. In its function as lender of last resort, the SNB plays a key role in managing financial 
crises. It can provide emergency liquidity assistance to a bank that runs into difficulties, thus 
preventing the negative impact the bank’s default could have on both the banking sector and 
the  economy.  This  remedial  measure  proved  highly  effective  during  the  crisis.  However, 
emergency liquidity assistance should only be provided in exceptional cases, as it creates 
false incentives for banks and entails considerable financial risks for the SNB. In order for the 
National  Bank  to  fulfil  its  mandate,  it  is  imperative  that  it  also  be  able  to  take  more 
preventative action in the future. This is the only way the SNB can guard effectively against 
future crises. 
Preventative  action  is  only  possible  if  the  National  Bank  has  efficient  and  effective 
instruments at its disposal. However, there is currently a glaring deficiency in this area. Up 
until now, the only precautionary measure the SNB could employ was to issue a warning. Yet 
experience has shown that warnings alone are not enough. Before the crisis, the National 
Bank had repeatedly drawn attention to the high leverage of the big banks and warned that 
their ability to absorb losses was not adequate. These caveats did not result in any voluntary 
change in behaviour. For this reason, it is essential that our set of preventative instruments 
for  financial  stability  be  improved  in  three  areas;  namely,  improved  access  to  information, 
closer  involvement  in  regulatory  procedures  with  regard  to  financial  stability  issues,  and 
direct  macroprudential  decision-making  powers.  I  would  now  like  to  take  a  closer  look  at 
these. 
First,  it  is  crucial  that  we  have  all  the  necessary  information  quickly  to  hand  in  order  to 
identify  the  build-up  of  risks  in  the  financial  system  at  an  early  stage.  While  the  SNB’s 
statutory authority to compile statistical data is both necessary and helpful, the latest crisis 
clearly demonstrated that the National Bank must be able to request additional information. 
With this I mean, for example, quantitative, non-standardised data on banks’ risk exposure. 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 1
Unlike  FINMA,  Switzerland’s  financial  market  supervisory  authority,  the  SNB’s  stance  is 
primarily  a  macroeconomic  or  systemic  one.  This  is  why  we  must  be  able  to  act 
independently  in  certain  situations  when  gathering  information.  At  the  same  time,  we  also 
want to keep our access to information to an absolute minimum and avoid a duplication of 
activities with FINMA. 
Second, clarification of the SNB’s participation rights and obligations is needed in the area of 
regulation  essential  for  financial  stability.  In  order  to  give  appropriate  consideration  to 
financial stability aspects, we feel that the SNB should be involved in regulatory procedures 
at an early stage. In other words, in the conceptual phase. The authorities responsible for 
issuing  financial  market  regulations  should,  therefore,  be  obliged  to  consult  with  the  SNB 
early on in the process. 
Thirdly, the National Bank must have clearly defined decision-making powers with regard to 
regulations  that  either  bear  direct  relation  to  monetary  policy  or  to  emergency  liquidity 
assistance. I would like to take two current regulatory proposals to explain more clearly what 
I mean: the countercyclical capital buffer and the implementation of the TBTF regulations. 
The countercyclical capital buffer represents a capital requirement that can be adjusted over 
time. This buffer will be introduced within the framework of Basel III and has the important 
tasks  of  protecting  the  banking  sector  from  the  risks  posed  by  excessive  lending  and  of 
curbing  the  banking  sector’s  procyclical  behaviour.  In  the  event  of  excessive  growth  in 
lending, the capital requirement can be increased; then when growth in lending is weak, it 
can be lowered again or even reduced to zero. The countercyclical capital buffer thus has a 
direct  impact  on  banks’  lending  activities  and  can,  as  a  result,  strengthen  or  weaken  the 
effect of the SNB’s monetary policy significantly. Therefore, whoever determines the level of 
this  buffer  also  influences  the  effect  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  –  in  our 
opinion – the responsibility for the countercyclical capital buffer for domestic lending must lie 
with the SNB. The National Bank must be able to decide when the buffer is activated and 
how high it should be. It goes without saying that it would do so within legally defined limits. 
The same should also apply to the activation of loan-to-value ratios and affordability criteria 
for mortgage loans. All of these instruments are closely linked to monetary policy. 
Within the context of the implementation of the TBTF regulations, the systemically important 
banks  will  have  to  be  determined.  This  is  because  the  more  rigorous  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements are only intended for these banks. And because emergency liquidity assistance 
is also reserved for systemically important banks, the decision as to the systemic importance 
of  a  bank  has  a  direct  impact  on  the  SNB  in  its  function  as  lender  of  last  resort.  These 
decision-making powers, too, must therefore be placed in the National Bank’s hands. 
This proposed solution should give the SNB the formal responsibilities it needs in order to 
fulfil its mandate in the area of financial stability in a preventative manner. In many countries, 
a  transfer  of  banking  supervision  to  the  central  bank  is  currently  the  subject  of  intensive 
discussion. In contrast, the National Bank is by no means calling into question the separation 
of  banking  supervision  and  central  bank  activities  with  the  solution  presented  here.  This 
separation  has  worked  for  Switzerland.  The  aim  is  not  to  infringe  on  FINMA’s  jurisdiction. 
Instead, FINMA and the SNB need to clearly define how the new responsibilities and tasks 
arising  from  the  urgent  need  for  more  rigorous  analysis  and  regulation  of  systemic  risk 
should be divided between them. At this point, I also want to stress that this macroprudential 
task  does  not  call  into  question  the  SNB’s  primary  mandate,  which  is  the  maintenance  of 
price stability. Instead, it supports the long-term fulfilment of this mandate. The SNB has also 
expressed its opinion – along the lines of this proposal – on the recommendations made by 
the  business  audit  commissions  of  the  National  Council  and  the  Council  of  States  in  their 
report on the financial crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 173/2010
SNB balance sheet risks 
In  my  following  remarks,  I  would  like  to  look  at  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  risks.  As  the 
Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board,  Philipp  Hildebrand,  has  already  mentioned,  it  was 
primarily the large-scale purchases of foreign currency that contributed to the expansion of 
our  balance  sheet  to  its  current  level  of  approximately  CHF  280  billion.  Of  this  amount, 
CHF 260 billion is made up of currency reserves, which comprise not only foreign exchange, 
but also gold and the IMF’s special drawing rights. If we add to that the SNB’s loan to the 
stabilisation fund, over 95% of our assets are denominated in foreign currency. 
Not only is the balance sheet longer as a result, it also carries more risk. Without doubt, the 
exchange  rate  risk  is  now  our  most  significant  risk.  While  fluctuations  in  annual  earnings 
running  into  the  billions  have  also  occurred  in  the  past,  they  are  likely  to  be  even  more 
pronounced  in  the  future  owing  to  the  greater  size  of  the  balance  sheet.  In  this  context,  I 
would like to point out two factors in particular. 
First, experience has shown that losses on foreign currency positions decline over time. On 
the one hand, strong currency fluctuations are often followed by corrections, since markets 
tend to overreact, while on the other, interest and dividend payments help to reduce losses 
on foreign currency investments. 
Second, the SNB has, for a long time now, placed a great deal of value on a robust balance 
sheet. Established mechanisms for the steady build-up of provisions and smoothing of profit 
distribution have helped build up an equity capital buffer over the years, and this makes it 
possible for us to carry losses. Owing largely to this foresighted approach, the level of equity 
capital on our balance sheet is, by international standards, still above average, in spite of its 
current size. 
A  gratifying  reduction  in  the  balance  sheet  risk  was  achieved  in  2010  for  the  stabilisation 
fund.  Given  that  the  market  situation  improved  considerably  this  year,  holdings  of  some 
USD 3  billion  were  sold  and  a  number  of  derivative  positions  were  closed.  In  addition, 
interest payments and repayments on investments amounted to approximately USD 3 billion. 
Overall,  the  SNB’s  loan  to  the  StabFund  at  the  end  of  November  2010  was  down  to  just 
roughly USD 13 billion, compared to almost USD 20 billion at the end of 2009. At the same 
time,  the  overall  risk  for  the  SNB  decreased  from  USD  24  billion  to  USD  16  billion.  This 
USD 16  billion  corresponds  to  the  maximum  possible  loan.  This  upper  limit  exceeds  the 
current loan, since part of the StabFund’s portfolio does not require any financing at present. 
Owing  to  the  continued  favourable  market  situation  in  the  fourth  quarter,  the  value  of  the 
fund’s  assets  is  now  considerably  higher  than  the  value  of  the  loan.  The  risk  of  the  SNB 
suffering a loss upon liquidating the fund has thus decreased further. 
As long as we have to maintain high levels of foreign exchange reserves for monetary policy 
reasons,  the  currency  risks  in  our  balance  sheet  will  not  be  easy  to  reduce.  We  have, 
however, taken two measures in an effort to strengthen our balance sheet further. First, we 
decided back in 2009 to double the annual allocation to provisions over the course of five 
years. Second, in recent months, we have reduced risk concentrations in currency holdings 
and borrower categories – which arose from the interventions – through diversification. My 
colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will discuss this in greater depth. 
As previously mentioned, the higher level of risk will be evidenced by greater fluctuations in 
the  SNB’s  annual  earnings.  It  is  too  early  to  say  whether  this  will  eventually  affect  the 
distribution of profit to the Confederation and the cantons. There is no need for action at this 
stage. The profit distribution agreement between the Federal Department of Finance and the 
SNB sets out clearly defined threshold values for a review. The current agreement – which 
runs until the end of 2017 – will be reviewed at the latest with regard to the distribution for the 
2013 financial year. Should the distribution reserve, which has been built up over the last few 
years, be depleted before then, the agreement calls for an immediate review. 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 3
It is currently too early to say anything definite about the outcome of the review. Seen from 
the current perspective, it would come as no surprise, however, if the annual distribution had 
to  be  reduced  somewhat.  We  have  repeatedly  emphasised  that  an  annual  distribution  of 
CHF 2.5 billion cannot be guaranteed in the long term. 
4 
 BIS Review 173/2010
