Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The lessons of managing risks during the global 
financial crisis – the Malaysian banks’ experience 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the Asian Institute of Finance (AIF) and Institut Bank-Bank Malaysia (IBBM) Risk 
Roundtable Forum 2010, Kuala Lumpur, 12 October 2010. 
 My  opening  remarks  will  consist  of  three  parts.  Part  I,  I  will  make  comments  on  global 
financial  reform  and  regulatory  priorities.  Part  II,  I  will  share  some  regulatory  initiative 
embarked upon by BNM. Part III, I will conclude by giving you an assessment of the banking 
industry during the recent financial crisis and why it had remained resilient. 
Global financial reform and regulatory priorities 
The global financial reform initiative to strengthen the financial sector is consistent with our 
priorities to enhance prudential regulation and supervisory framework in Malaysia. Efforts to 
further  improve  risk  management  and  corporate  governance,  strengthening  the  role  of 
supervisors  in  the  oversight  of  financial  institutions  and  improve  market  discipline  are  not 
new to Malaysia. We have been doing this well before the global financial crisis and these 
initiatives will continue into the future. For example stress testing on banking institutions was 
introduced many years ago. 
In carrying out our regulatory responsibility, we will continue to ensure an effective balance 
between maintaining prescriptive rules and allowing some degree of flexibility under a more 
principle-based approach to regulation. Our principled based approach to regulation will be 
supported by effective supervisory oversight. Therefore, we do not foresee a significant shift 
in our current approach to regulation following the proposed global financial reforms. In fact, 
this reinforces our thinking that the approach we are taking is appropriate for our system.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  been  engaging  the  banking  industry  to  better  understand  the 
impact  that  the  proposed  reforms  have  on  Malaysia’s  economy  and  financial  system.  This 
will  allow  us  to  develop  implementation  strategies  for  Malaysia  after  taking  into  account 
specific  characteristics  of  the  domestic  financial  system,  including  compensating  tools  and 
arrangements within the financial system that mitigate risks to financial stability. An important 
point  to  consider  is  that,  the  implementation  process  does  not  result  in  any  unintended 
consequences. This is where engagement with the banking industry is of utmost importance. 
We  used  inputs  from  the  industry  and  share  the  inputs  at  regional  and  international-level 
regulatory  fora,  thus  providing  an  emerging  market  perspective  to  the  recommended 
proposals. 
Malaysian financial reform, regulatory framework and conduct of supervisors 
Some  key  regulatory  initiatives  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  further  enhance  its prudential 
regulatory framework and conduct of supervision moving forward.  
 
First,  to  strengthen  financial  sector  legislation  through  the  modernisation  and 
consolidation  of  existing  regulatory/oversight  laws  under  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s 
purview. The enhanced legislation ensures that Bank Negara Malaysia is entrusted 
with the necessary mandate and power to maintain financial stability and to conduct 
effective supervision of financial institutions. 
    Second,  complement  existing  micro-prudential 
rules  with  macro-prudential 
instruments to address system-wide risks with the aim of ensuring greater resilience 
of individual institutions, and the financial system as a whole.  
Third,  enhance  comprehensive  cross-border  crisis  management  and  financial 
stability  surveillance  arrangements.  This  can  be  done  via  channels  such  as  the 
EMEAP Monetary and Financial Stability Financial Committee, which was established 
in  2007  to  enhance  regional  collaboration  and  cooperation  in  the  area  of  macro-
monitoring and crisis management. Efforts are also directed to strengthen financial 
safety  nets  within  the  region  (e.g.  cross-border  collateral  arrangements,  currency 
swap  arrangements).  We  are  quite  confident  these  arrangements  will  further 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  regional  financial  systems  and  economies.  These 
measures will become increasingly important in the light of our effort to increase the 
integration of financial systems within the region. 
Fourth, establish a holistic framework for consolidated supervision. All the activities 
of financial conglomerates are within appropriate risk levels and not overly complex, 
and the large groups are not a source and channels for amplifying contagion effects. 
Supervisory  cooperation  initiatives  at  the  regional  level  will  also  be  directed  at 
enhancing existing or introducing additional platforms (e.g. creation of supervisory 
colleges)  for  discussing  issues  related  to  the  supervision  and  resolution  of 
cross-border financial institutions. 
Fifth, promote fair and transparent market conduct practices by financial institutions 
through  heightened  market  conduct  surveillance  and  transparency  requirements, 
while  also  raising  the  level  of  financial  capability  of  consumers  through  education 
and awareness programmes. 
 How Malaysia survived the global financial crisis 
Let me conclude by outlining why we had not been adversely affected by the recent financial 
crisis. 
Banking system maintained strong financial and capital buffers at end 2008 during the peak 
of the crisis as evidenced by:  
 
 
Strong capital position with RWCR of 12.6% and core capital ratio of 10.6%. 
Ample liquidity with total interbank placements of more than RM150 billion with BNM 
that can be unwound to release RM liquidity to the system at any time. 
Low exposures to foreign currency (FX) denominated assets. 
Banks’  leverage  position  remains  manageable  and  lower  than  foreign  institutions 
abroad.  
– 
Balance sheet leverage (i.e. total assets / common equity) for the Malaysian 
banking system of about 15 times (vs. global average of about 20 to 30 times).  
Banks had strengthened institutional set-up and capacity post Asian Financial Crisis through: 
 
 
 
More robust risk management standards and practices. 
Stronger corporate governance structure. 
Smooth  implementation  of  the  Standardised  Approach  of  Basel  II’s  Capital 
Adequacy Framework.  
Balanced and diversified business portfolios. 
 Enhanced financial infrastructure post Asian Financial Crisis through:  
 
 
Enhanced depth and size of bond and Sukuk market (about 107 % of GDP). 
Strengthened  financial  safety  nets  (e.g.  establishment  of  Malaysian  Deposit 
Insurance Scheme)/Danajamin/CDRC/SDRS. 
Strengthened  regulatory  and  supervisory  approach  (e.g.  gradual  move  towards 
principles based regulations, adopting of risk based supervision). 
Legislative  reforms  (e.g.  introduction  of  the  Central  Banking  Act  to  articulate  the 
financial  stability  mandate;  amendments  to  the  Companies  Act  to  codify  directors’ 
duties). 
Enhanced role by the training institute too develop talent and leaders of tomorrow 
(ICLIF,INCEIF, AIF). 
   