Gabriel Loza Tellería: The role of central banks in macroprudential 
regulation – the case of Bolivia 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Gabriel  Loza  Tellería,  Acting  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Bolivia, at the Primera Jornada de Estabilidad Financiera, La Paz, 29 September 2010. 
 Translated and slightly revised from the Spanish original, available at 
www.bcb.gob.bo/jfinanciera/sites/default/files/presentaciones/GabrielLozaBolivia.pdf. 
Today  I  will  speak  about  the  experience  of  Bolivia,  a  small,  open,  partially  dollarized  and 
commodity  export-oriented  economy.  Gathered  here  are  representatives  from  the  central 
banks  of  Argentina,  Brazil,  Chile  and  Colombia  with  whom  we  usually  meet  within  the 
framework of Mercosur, CEMLA and FLAR to discuss not only monetary policy issues but 
also issues regarding the financial system. I would like to highlight the presence of the Bank 
for  International  Settlements’  (BIS)  Chief  Representative  for  the  Americas,  because  of  the 
close relationship we have been building in recent years. As you know, the BIS is the leader 
in  macroprudential  regulation  issues.  I  am  also  pleased  to  welcome  the  European  Central 
Bank, as well as the Bank of Spain. From  Argentina, the Center for  Financial Stability will 
present us its private-sector point of view on the subject.  
Macroprudential regulation is not an isolated issue, but is closely related to macroeconomic 
policy,  specifically  central  banks’  monetary  policy  and  so-called  macroprudential  policy 
instruments, which are the general topic of this conference. We will be speaking about stress 
tests  and  reviewing  the  experiences  of  Argentina  and  Bolivia,  the  latter  as  part  of  our 
Financial Stability Report. 
With  regard  to  Bolivia,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  our  experience  is  perhaps  not  widely 
known,  and  that,  furthermore,  each  country’s  experience  is  unique.  I  will  briefly  highlight 
some lessons from the international crisis and recent reforms in macroprudential regulation, 
particularly the role of central bank in macroprudential regulation, then describe the Bolivian 
experience, and finally draw some conclusions. 
Lessons from the international crisis 
1. 
One of the main lessons from the crisis is that, after Lehman, financial markets will not return 
to  their  pre-crisis  level.  The  most  likely  scenario  is  one  of  successive  crises/shocks  of 
different magnitudes and intensities. Some experts, for instance Roubini, foresee a number 
of  big  crises  yet  to  come.  Stock,  bond  and  foreign  exchange  markets  are  currently 
characterized by higher levels of volatility than those observed during the Lehman period. 
After  Lehman,  world  economies  had  to  deal  with  the  Greek  crisis  and,  more  recently,  the 
Irish  one.  Some  financial  stress  has  also  been  observed  in  emerging  markets  due  to 
transmission effects, although not of the magnitude seen in previous crises. 
A recent work by Blanchard et al. (2010)1 questions the ability of policy makers to conduct 
macroeconomic  policy,  and,  among  other  things,  concludes  that  one  of  the  lessons  of  the 
international crisis is that financial intermediation used to be considered – at least by most 
economists – as not relevant, despite its importance for the credit channel and for the role of 
central bank as lender of last resort. The financial system as such received little attention, 
whereas emphasis was given to inflation targeting, low inflation and the role of interest rates. 
                                                 
1  Blanchard, O., Dell’ Aricia, G. and Paulo, M. “Rethinking of macroeconomic policy”. IMF Staff Position Note 
No. 10/03. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 1
Lessons  drawn  from  the  crisis  suggest  that  financial  intermediation  is  important  and  that 
proper  attention  should  be  given  to  supervision  and  systemic  regulation.  On  top  of  that, 
central  banks  should  follow  household  prices  and  other  asset  prices  –  in  addition  to 
consumer prices – to prevent or take action during bubbles, like the one we have just seen in 
the real estate sector in several advanced economies. 
 The policy interest rate, as a traditional instrument, was not enough to prevent the recession 
and  should  be  complemented  with  other  instruments  such  as  capital  and  leverage  ratios. 
Central  banks  have  also  asked  themselves  if  they  should  have  regulatory  capabilities  in 
macroprudential  issues.  Recent  experience  points  to  using  a  variety  of  instruments  for 
several  objectives,  and  within  this  mix  of  objectives  and  available  tools  macroprudential 
regulation is a key issue. As I said before, the predominant opinion before the crisis was that 
macroprudential  regulation  was  not  part  of  macroeconomic  policy;  instead,  regulation  had 
mainly  microeconomic  objectives.  In  addition,  since  the  1990s  there  had  been  a  trend 
towards deregulation.  
Another lesson from the crisis is that macroregulation is not neutral: insufficient regulation led 
to the crisis, and it follows that it is necessary to combine monetary policy and regulation. In 
addition,  central  banks  should  not  only  be  responsible  for  monetary  policy,  but  also  for 
macroprudential  issues.  In  the  end,  we  have  learned  that  financial  markets  do  not 
necessarily move to equilibrium. Government intervention is necessary to achieve stability. 
Macroeconomic policy alone was not sufficient to prevent the crisis, especially in advanced 
economies. 
Regulation should be one element alongside macroeconomic policy instruments: before the 
crisis  systemic  risk  was  not  trivial,  it  was  latent,  and  it  turned  out  to  have  been  extremely 
costly to have neglected this variable. Price stability is not a sufficient condition to guarantee 
financial stability; the relationship between monetary and macroprudential policy should be 
taken into account. What is required is: proper risk management, awareness of procyclicality 
and of how risk is distributed, removing the notion of banks as “too big to fail”, surveillance 
and individual and systemic risk assessment, and awareness of credit growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2010
Recent reforms and macroprudential regulation 
2. 
I  will  only  briefly  summarize  stylized  facts,  since  throughout  the  conference  we  will  dig 
deeper into these issues. The establishment of the Financial Stability Board within the G20 
framework was an excellent initiative, as was taking into account macroprudential risks and 
the  establishment  of  anticyclical  capital  buffers  and  a  capital  conservation  buffer,  among 
others. 
Some  additional  work  was  also  undertaken  by  the  Obama  administration,  in  particular 
updating the legal framework of the Federal Reserve and exit rules for big banks; enhancing 
consumer  and  depositor  protection;  strengthening  deposit  insurance;  regulating  derivatives 
markets; requiring a higher level of capital for banks; and improving control over credit rating 
agencies (which ahead of the crisis did not work properly and could not send early warnings 
to the markets). 
There was, and still is, a debate about taxing banking activity, for instance in the U.S. and 
Europe. Germany is assessing how to handle the social cost of future financial crises and 
possible government intervention. We must decide who will face the burden of future crises. 
Hence the current debate on taxing banking activity – although it is important to keep in mind 
a global tax, since a mere national tax may lead to disequilibrium. The level of tax for each 
country  may  be  dependent  on  risk  and  the  size  of  the  financial  system.  We  must  be  very 
diligent in this, since imposing taxes does not in itself eliminate the possibility of future crises, 
and coordination among countries may be required. 
Regarding the reforms to the capital adequacy framework, known as Basel III, one lesson 
drawn from the crisis was that financial institutions’ capital was not enough to protect them 
from losses. Currently, banks have to keep a Tier 1 (primary capital) of 4%. From 2013, this 
proportion  will  be  raised  to  4.5%  and  to  6%  in  2019.  By  the  end  of  the  decade,  quality 
reserves of banks should be around 8.5%. 
In parallel, the European Union has made progress on transparency and safety of derivatives 
trading,  on  regulating  swaps  and  hedge  funds  and  on  improving  a  new  framework  for 
banking supervision.  
Prudential regulation and the role of central banks 
3. 
In the end, the key issue is: what is the role of central banks in prudential regulation? If the 
traditional approach has revealed itself to be narrow, then we need a systemic approach that 
incorporates  economic  cycles  and  macroprudential  regulation.  In  times  of  crisis,  central 
banks  tend  to  react  quickly,  either  because  they  have  a  mandate  or  because  they  are 
lenders  of  last  resort:  central  banks  are  usually  the  first  to  try  to  extinguish  the  fire.  The 
reason that underlies the former should be clear: central banks oversee monetary stability, 
financial stability, macroeconomic policies (in our case, monetary and exchange rate policy) 
and macroprudential regulation. 
Several reasons point to the need for central banks to be involved in prudential regulation (in 
Bolivia  there  is  currently  an  institutional  separation  between  the  central  bank  and  the 
Financial Supervision Authority (ASFI)). Central banks have daily flows of information coming 
not  only  from  the  financial  system  but  also  from  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Therefore, 
monetary policy decisions should be made in coordination with those decisions related to the 
macroprudential  area  in  order  to  smooth  the  economic  cycles.  We  should  take  preventive 
measures before illness appears. The central bank’s reputation plays a key role in systemic 
regulation, as does its role of lender of last resort. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 3
Nevertheless, there are some pending issues2:  
 
 What financial stability mandate should central banks have? Is there a need for a 
new mandate in terms of macroprudential policy? 
Close coordination with government agencies plays a fundamental role. In Bolivia, 
we  thought  hard  about  the  true  meaning  of  central  bank  independence.  Central 
banks had to act immediately, pushed by governments. How do these relationships 
impact on institutions and their management? Obviously, policy decisions regarding 
financial stability have some political aspects: whether Lehman should be bailed out 
or not, or whether any other corporation should be. There is still some debate about 
this.  We  can  discuss  such  issues  for  a  long  time  after  a  given  event,  but  taking 
decisions at the right moment is harder to do. 
Macroprudential policy is not a substitute for sound macroeconomic policies; macroprudential 
policies alone do not fix everything, so there has to be close coordination. Who decides the 
timing  and  the  design  of  these  policies?  What  is  the  relationship  between  the  macro-  and 
microprudential issues? 
The Bolivian experience 
4. 
The consensus within the Bolivian financial system is that the international financial crisis did 
not have a direct impact on our economy. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Bolivia  implicitly  recognizes  that  financial  stability  is  a  public  policy 
objective,  but  not  an  end  in  itself.  Financial  stability  has  to  contribute  to  the  economic 
development of the country. Our approach, therefore, includes close coordination between 
the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance (Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas Públicas, 
MEFP) and ASFI. 
One of the factors that contributed to the small impact of the international crisis in Bolivia is 
our  low  vulnerability  –  not  only  in  the  financial  system,  but  also  low  fiscal  and  external 
vulnerability.  We  were  ready  to  face  exogenous  shocks  a  result  of  prudential  and  sound 
macroeconomic management in the years before, during and after the crisis. The following 
table shows some relevant data in this regard. 
Ratios (%)
Capital
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital
Assets quality
Nonperforming loans to total loans
Provisions to nonperforming loans
Management
Administrative expenses to total assets
Administrative expenses to financial income
Earnings 
Return on equity
Return on assets
Liquidity risk
Liquid assets to total assets
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities
Foreing investments to financial investments
Bolivianización
Loans in domestic currency to total loans
Deposits in domestic currency to total deposits
Foreign liabilities to total liabilities
 Dec-08 Dec-09 Aug-10
13,7
-7,7
4,3
132,3
4,2
56,4
18,7
1,7
43,3
91,2
10,3
32,1
46,8
3,8
13,3
-7,0
3,5
135,5
3,9
59,4
19,6
1,7
48,0
96,8
17,9
38,4
47,7
2,8
12,5
-8,5
2,7
147,5
4,9
71,3
20,2
1,7
41,2
82,2
18,0
50,5
49,6
2,2  
                                                 
2  Heinrich, G. (2010). “El papel de los bancos centrales en la supervisión macroprudencial”. CEMLA-LXXXIX 
Meeting of Central Bank Governors of Latin America and Spain. 13–14 May 2010. Buenos Aires. Argentina. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2010
fiscal  surplus,  price  and 
foreign  exchange  stability.  On 
As can be noted, the Bolivian financial system has sound capital, adequate asset quality and 
profitability ratios, as well as good ratios of deposits and loans in local currency relative to 
foreign currency – which is something I would like to highlight. The Bolivian case is still the 
one of a highly dollarized economy. Financial dollarization, i.e., deposits and loans in foreign 
currency,  used  to  be  around  90%  of  total  deposits  and  loans.  As  a  result  of  close 
coordination among the central bank, MEFP and ASFI, the ratios of loans and deposits in 
domestic currency over total loans and deposits are, for the first time in several decades, a 
little  higher  than  50%  for  loans  and  close  to  50%  for  deposits.  Banks’  foreign  currency 
liabilities are less than 3% of total liabilities due to low involvement in international financial 
markets, as explained before. 
In  Bolivia  we  view  financial  regulation  as  important.  The  prudential  regulation  measures 
taken by the Central Bank of Bolivia have improved in recent years and have been closely 
coordinated internally (monetary and exchange rate policies) and with the MEFP and ASFI. 
The  challenge  ahead  is  to  give  this  coordination  a  more  formal  framework.  What  are  the 
decisions we should make to arrive at coordinated results and decisions?  
On  the  one  hand,  our  experience  is  based  upon  a  sound  macroeconomic  policy:  current 
account  and 
the  other, 
microprudential  analysis  is  performed  with  emphasis  on  individual  entities,  while  we  also 
perform macroprudential analysis, for example, our Financial Stability Report, which includes 
an analysis of stress tests. 
The  following  chart  uses  an  approach  presented  by  the  governor  of  the  central  bank  of 
Argentina at the conference “Jornadas financieras y bancarias 2010”. It is based upon the 
following variables: current account, financial regulation, exchange rate flexibility, monetary 
policy,  fiscal  policy  and net  foreign asset  accumulation.  As  can  be  seen,  before  the  crisis, 
emphasis  was  on  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  flexibility.  The  exchange  rate  was 
endogenous  and  little  progress  was  made  in  capital  account  and  financial  regulation;  net 
foreign asset accumulation and fiscal policy were not that important before the crisis. Bolivia, 
before the crisis, had a broader scope on these issues. 
Exchange rate stability and net foreign asset accumulation policy were very important for us. 
This policy has led us to reach the current level of $9 billion in international reserves (45% of 
GDP). Some of the central banks represented here will be telling us their experiences in this 
area. Colombia and Mexico would be cases worth hearing about. 
Adequate fiscal policy led to consecutive fiscal surpluses. In order to manage capital flows, 
the  Central  Bank  of  Bolivia  imposes  fees  of  1%  for  outflows  and  0.6%  for  inflows.  These 
measures have been carefully analyzed, and the Bank continues to monitor them closely. In 
the wake of the crisis, recommendations have pointed to an equilibrated approach, and we 
have followed this line.  
 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 5
Rethinking macroeconomic policy and lessons from the crisis 
Before the crisis
Capital account regulation
Regulación Cuenta Capital
Exchanege rate flexibility
Exchange rate flexibility 
Flexibilidad Cambiaria
Política Monetaria control de la inflación
Monetary policy
1 0 0
9 0
8 0
7 0
6 0
5 0
4 0
3 0
2 0
1 0
0
Política Fiscal
Fiscal policy
Regulación Financiera
Financialregulation
Acumulación de reservas
International reserves 
accumulation
  Consenso internacional antes de la crisis
Pre crisis internationalconsensus
Bolivia
 After the crisis
Regulación Cuenta Capital
Capital account regulation
Exchanege rate flexibility
Exchange rate flexibility 
Flexibilidad Cambiaria
1 0 0
9 0
8 0
7 0
6 0
5 0
4 0
3 0
2 0
1 0
0
Política Monetaria control de la 
Monetary policy
inflación
Regulación Financiera
Financialregulation
International reserves 
Acumulación de reservas
accumulation
Nuevos planteamientos  a partir de la crisis internacional
Post crisis proposals
Bolivia
Política Fiscal
Conclusion 
5. 
The financial crisis is not over; we are not going back to pre-crisis levels, and the financial 
environment  will  continue  to  be  one  of  uncertainty.  The  challenge  for  central  banks  is  to 
make  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  in  times  of  stress.  The  current  lack  of 
macrofinancial regulation is part of the problem, but it is not the only one. There are market 
failures, but it is not possible to assess their intensity: there was not an automatic adjustment 
or a smooth transition back to equilibrium; there were also drawbacks derived from dominant 
macroeconomic policy thinking. Financial stability should be a public policy goal and a means 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2010
to stimulate economic growth. In this context, that the role of the central bank is important: 
monetary stability is not enough, and sound macroeconomic and macroprudential policies to 
promote financial stability are needed. Integrated market regulation and supervision should 
include  all  agents  and  instruments  as  well  as  oversee  leverage,  liquidity  and  provisions. 
Macroprudential regulation is still in the process of being defined, and it is a pertinent issue. It 
is necessary to define and identify its tools and aims. As usual, these definitions should be 
done case by case, with a pragmatic approach. 
I would like to thank you all for your presence at this conference, and I would like to extend a 
particular welcome to the university students in the audience, because ultimately you will be 
able to apply the information disseminated today, since you are, in the last analysis, the final 
users of the information. We have a very large audience today, and may I now invite all our 
speakers to share their experiences. Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 7
