Rundheersing Bheenick: Surfing the second wave of the crisis and major 
developments in the banking and financial landscape of Mauritius 
Statement by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, in the Bank of 
Mauritius Annual Report 2009–10 transmitted to the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development on 29 October 2010, Port Louis, 12 November 2010. 
 What a challenging and eventful year it has been! From my vantage point at the helm of the 
Central Bank during these stressful and extraordinary times, there is so much to say. But, 
confined by space, let me stick to the pattern of my previous Statements, briefly recapture 
highlights of the year in review, touch on the present outlook and share my thoughts on the 
very uncertain future that lies ahead. 
The world economy in perspective 
The  global  context  exerted  a  determining  influence  on  our  small  open  economy  and 
heightened our vulnerability to external shocks, originating far from our shores. 
Governments in developed economies and their central banks responded to the global crisis, 
the worst since the Great Depression of the 1930’s, by resorting to unconventional measures 
and embarking on fundamental financial sector reforms.  
International financial institutions, and their governing bodies, having failed to be pro-active in 
anticipating and circumscribing the initial crisis, reacted with a plethora of initiatives while the 
economics  profession,  never  a  model  of  unity,  polarised  into  opposing  camps,  with  neo-
Keynesians  plugging  the  virtues  of  fiscal  stimulus  and  monetary  easing  pitched  against 
“austerians” sounding dire warnings about fiscal profligacy and debt sustainability, even as 
all agreed on the need to dump failing hypotheses on the efficiency of markets and the faulty 
models that had brought the world to the edge of financial Armageddon. 
When the global economy showed signs of a gradual recovery in the second half of 2009, 
economists generally agreed that we had seen the worst of the crisis until the timid recovery 
hit  another  zone  of  turbulence  in  May  2010  with  Europe’s  Sovereign  Debt  crisis.  The 
Euro 750 billion package, assembled by the European Union and the International Monetary 
Fund, the austerity plans as well as the results of the European banking sector stress tests 
which indicated that the banking sector was in better shape than feared, appeased some of 
the worst fears and restored some calm on nervous markets.  
As  I  write  this  Statement,  the  world  economy  is  showing  visible  signs  of  recovery,  with 
greater momentum coming from emerging-market economies. The exceptional stimulus from 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  continues  to  prop  up  economic  activity.  There  is  growing 
concern that the recovery in the major advanced economies may stall as balance sheets are 
adjusted and the stimulus packages gradually withdrawn. As public debt, fiscal deficits and 
unemployment surge turning developed economies into “submerging economies”, fears of a 
double-dip recession and of a Japanese-style deflation exercise the minds of policy-makers. 
Considerable risks and policy challenges remain and central banks find themselves with a 
greater role in promoting financial stability and systemic oversight. 
On the home front 
Mauritius has faced formidable economic challenges this last year. Given our openness, we 
had very little lead time to respond to global challenges as they unfurled and this kept us on 
our toes all year round. As the Central Bank of the country, our role has probably never been 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 1
more  intense  and  our  focus  on  macroeconomic  issues  never  sharper.  The  challenge  of 
maintaining  a  credible  currency  amidst  difficult  global  conditions,  coupled  with  the  need  to 
nurture the nascent signs of recovery of our economy, kept us on high alert. 
My  first  term  of  office  as  Governor  expired  in  February  2010  and  I  was  entrusted  a  new 
mandate  late  in  May  2010.  In  the  interval,  the  country  went  through  general  elections,  a 
feverish  moment  for  our  vibrant  democracy,  and  our  export-oriented  enterprises  were 
buffeted by the Euro crisis. Our vulnerability is such that it suffices for a European butterfly to 
flap its wings for the Mauritian export sector to be ablaze. In the days preceding my return to 
the Bank of Mauritius, not a single day passed by without the Euro crisis making headlines in 
the  local  press.  The  speed  and  virulence  of  the  crisis  caused  much  distress  to  our  textile 
companies which  suffered  severe  export  revenue  declines,  igniting calls  for  a  quick  fix  via 
currency  depreciation  failing  which,  it  was  claimed,  they  would  have  to  envisage  leaner 
structures  and  significant  lay-offs  to  remain  in  business.  I  was  very  much  alive  to  the 
potential dangers of this crisis for our export-driven sector and could not be oblivious to its 
ripple effects on the rest of the economy. During the first week that I was back in office, this 
issue monopolised the agenda. I intensified dialogue with private/real sector stakeholders, to 
assuage their fears on this latest and most direct threat to our economic prospects, the more 
so that the Euro crisis was coming on the heels of the global financial crisis from which we 
were still reeling.  
It  required  a  good  dose  of  persuasion  to  appease  markets  and  restore  confidence.  In 
December  2009,  we  had  introduced  a  Short  Term  Foreign  Currency  Swap  facility  for  the 
benefit  of  operators  in  the  export  and  tourism  sectors  to  reactivate  the  domestic  foreign 
exchange  market  in  the  face  of  declining  volumes  of  transactions.  From  December  2009  
to  June  2010,  we  conducted  swaps  for  a  total  of  USD89.2  million,  or  approximately 
Rs2.7 billion – a clear indication of the providential nature of this measure. 
Apart  from  our  export  worries  which  caused  us  sleepless  nights,  the  crisis  was  also  an 
opportunity  for  Mauritians  to  show  their  mettle  and  for  our  economy  to  display  unusual 
resilience  as  we  played  to  our  strength  –  a  quick  and  flexible  policy  response  capacity, 
anchored in social cohesion and consensus. We can safely say that Mauritius has weathered 
the first wave of the global crisis quite well. Our timely policy response helped lower domestic 
inflation,  shore  up  employment,  avert  an  economic  crisis  and  fight  off  the  spectre  of 
recession.  Well-timed  and  concerted  measures  by  the  Bank  and  the  Treasury  were 
instrumental  in  keeping  the  economy  on  track.  International  institutions,  including  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  and  other  observers  commended  the  economic 
performance  of  Mauritius  and  even  cited  us  as  an  example  of  resilience  during  the  crisis. 
Growth remained positive at 3.1 per cent in 2009 and is forecast at 4.2 per cent in 2010.  
Even as we remain cautiously optimistic about the future, we cannot escape the conclusion 
that  the  depressed  growth  prospects  of  our  traditional  export  markets  call  for  a  strategic 
review  of  our  export  priorities  in  a  world  where  the  balance  of  economic  power  may  be 
rapidly shifting. 
The  new  modern  global  configuration  with  its  deeply-woven  interdependence  is  such  that 
imported  contagion  and  domino  effects  will  always  represent  challenges  for  small  open 
economies  like  ours.  It  has  become  imperative  to  develop  a  framework  for  Contagion 
Management to trigger the alarm at the least indication of distress in the economy. 
Highlights of last financial year  
From the kaleidoscope of events which have marked the year, let me focus on a few chosen 
scenes. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2010
Performance of the banking sector 
– 
Our banking sector remained in good shape, and showed commendable resilience, 
due  mainly  to  our  prudent  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  Although  the 
growth  of  1.8  per  cent  in  total  assets  recorded  by  the  sector  in  the  period  under 
review  did  not  match  the  performance  of  10.9  per  cent  in  the  preceding  year,  it 
should still be considered quite robust, viewed against the backdrop of the gradual 
recovery  of  the  global  economy  from  the  economic  crisis  and  the  sorry  state  of 
banking and finance in major economies.  
We  did  not  relent  in  strengthening  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  We 
enhanced  existing  guidelines,  e.g.  on  liquidity  risk  management,  released  new 
guidelines on country risk management, and finalised work on guidelines relating to 
fair  valuation  of  financial  instruments.  All  three  pillars  of  the  Basel  II  Capital 
Adequacy Framework have now been put in place with the issue of the Guideline on 
the Supervisory Review Process.  
We admitted new players in the banking sector and, in my next Statement, I hope to 
report on our new full-fledged Sharia-compliant banks as they start operations later 
this year.  
Preliminary  work  on  the  setting  up  a  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  in  Mauritius  was 
initiated in consultation with the banks. I hope to elaborate further on progress in this 
area in our next Report. 
Savings mobilization continues to be an area where I feel that more effort is needed. 
We will relentlessly pursue efforts to improve the savings rate, to induce our citizens 
to  save  for  the  proverbial  rainy  day  and  to  reduce  our  dependence  on  external 
financing.  
Monetary policy  
– 
At the core of the central bank, our Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) helped us to 
fulfill our mission of maintaining price stability. 
In  the  light  of  the  conditions  prevailing  during  FY  09/10,  the  MPC,  which  had 
reduced the key Repo Rate by 100 basis points in March 2009, considered it more 
appropriate  to  leave  it  unchanged  at  5.75  per  cent  all  through  the  five  meetings 
convened from June 2009 to June 2010.  
I am happy to record that our monetary policy stance succeeded in maintaining price 
stability. The headline inflation rate which stood at 6.1 per cent in July 2009 declined 
steadily to 1.7 per cent in June 2010, which was low by historical standards. 
I take the opportunity here to express my appreciation to our two foreign Members, 
Prof  Stefan  Gerlach  and  Mario  Blejer,  whose  extensive  experience  have  greatly 
benefited the debate and enhanced the decision-making process at MPC meetings 
during these trying moments. 
Exchange rate developments  
– 
We  can  proudly  say  that  we  have  been  successful  in  maintaining  monetary  and 
financial stability in spite of uncertain and unusually volatile conditions.  
Despite sustained criticism from certain quarters, we remained steadfast in our duty 
to  conduct  exchange  rate  policy  in  the  wider  national  interest.  We  felt  vindicated 
when  the  IMF  validated  the  monetary  and  exchange  rate  framework  used  by  the 
Bank  as  being  well-suited  to  the  needs  of  the  Mauritian  economy.  The  last  IMF 
Article  IV  mission  of  October  2009  commended  our  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policy framework, which they qualified as a “hybrid system of inflation targeting”. The 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 3
           Against  the  backdrop  of  high  uncertainty  in  global  financial  markets,  the  rupee 
behaved well and, on a real effective basis, the rupee recorded a slight appreciation 
of  0.5  per  cent  over  FY  09/10.  We  are  satisfied  that  our  free-float  exchange  rate 
regime worked well.  
Our close monitoring of the domestic foreign exchange market indicated that it was 
not  functioning  in  a  satisfactory  manner  during  mid-May  2010.  We  had  reason  to 
suspect  that  there  might  have  been  some  domestic  currency  manipulation  in  the 
wake of the Euro crisis. In such an environment when the rupee was being talked 
down,  adding  fuel  to  domestic  uncertainty  in  a  thin  forex  market,  we  thought  it 
proper to probe further. We enlisted the services of a forensic consultancy firm to 
conduct a review.  
As  we  took  these  bold  steps,  exchange  rate  volatility  subsided  and  the  market 
returned to a fairly normal pattern, aided in this by our decision to meet the currency 
requirements of the State Trading Corporation, the largest local forex buyer. 
Open market operations  
Our  money  market  remained  liquid  throughout  FY  09/10.  The  build-up  of  excess  liquidity 
towards the end of 2009 accentuated downward pressure on money market rates. We thus 
raised the minimum Cash Ratio by 0.5 percentage point in June 2010 and, despite severe 
balance sheet constraints, we undertook a series of open market operations, namely special 
deposits, reverse repo transactions, and the issue of Bank of Mauritius Bills, in an attempt to 
normalize liquidity conditions.  
Bank’s balance sheet  
Traditionally,  the  Bank  has  been  very  conservative  in  managing  its  foreign  exchange 
reserves. Our foreign reserves are mainly invested with major central banks.  
– 
In the wake of the global crisis, these central banks systematically reduced the rate 
of interest payable on deposits. We suffered a drastic decline in our income derived 
from interest on foreign investments and this severely affected our profitability. Our 
operating  profit  for  FY  09/10  has  nosedived  to  Rs72.4  million,  compared  with 
Rs1.4 billion in the previous year.  
This  development  only  served  to  place  in  sharper  focus  the  concern  which  I  had 
expressed when times were better over the state of the Bank’s balance sheet and 
the severe constraints this might place on our ability to conduct monetary policy. It 
will be recalled that I had advocated dynamic provisioning during the last financial 
year.  Dynamic  provisioning  is  forward-looking  and  consists  inter  alia  in  making 
provisions out of profits in good times to meet expected losses in future years. It is 
an  approach  that  is  increasingly  favoured  by  many  central  banks  to  finance  open 
market operations. I am somewhat dismayed that our balance sheet has borne the 
predictable consequences and registered a significant hit during the year in review 
because my call went unheeded.  
However,  the  current  state  of  our  balance  sheet  has  strengthened  my  resolve  to 
press for the early adoption of dynamic provisioning to preserve the integrity of the 
Central  Bank’s  balance  sheet  –  to  emulate  the  farsighted  and  hardworking  Ant 
preparing for wintry times and not the laid-back Grasshopper enjoying the country’s 
sun and sand, to paraphrase Aesop slightly. 
  4 
 BIS Review 150/2010
Foreign exchange reserves management  
Last year we announced a review of our Foreign Exchange Reserves Management Strategy 
along with peer reviews conducted by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the 
Reserves Advisory and Management Program  of the World Bank’s Sovereign Investments 
Partnership (SIP). 
– 
We completed our review exercise and decided to entrust a fresh mandate for euro 
instruments  to  the  BIS  and  a  new  mandate  to  the  SIP.  These  arrangements  still 
awaited finalisation at the time of writing. 
Purchase of gold  
We  purchased  two  metric  tons  of  gold  from  the  IMF  in  November  2009  under  the  Fund’s 
Limited Gold Sales Programme to diversify our portfolio of foreign assets and to mitigate the 
impact of currency volatility. Our holdings of gold, as a percentage of the Bank’s total foreign 
exchange reserves, rose from 2.3 per cent to around 6 per cent after the purchase.  
Net international reserves  
The net international reserves of the country breached the Rs100 billion-mark for the first time 
in November 2009.  Gross official international  reserves stood at  USD2.2 billion  at  end-June 
2010. Our net international reserves represented roughly 48 weeks’ import cover – more than 
adequate to meet unexpected short-term external shocks.  
Public debt management  
Now that we have taken over debt management functions from the Government, we want to 
promote the development of an active secondary market for government securities in order 
to  generate  a  yield  curve  that  could  be  used  as  a  reference  for  the  pricing  of  corporate 
bonds. The Bank has started issuing benchmark Government of Mauritius bonds as well as 
auctioning single maturity instruments for the medium and long term. 
– 
We  have  also  embarked  on  a  project  to  modernise  and  streamline  the  auction 
process.  The  on-line  auctioning  system  which  is  being  run  on  a  pilot  basis  is 
expected to go live this year, while the review of the primary dealers system is on 
course. 
Financial stability  
Let us rewind a little in time: an economic crisis surfaces, a financial institution – little-known 
beyond  financial  circles  –  fails,  triggering  a  string  of  counterparty  defaults  across  financial 
systems.  The  shock  ripples  across  oceans  and  rapidly  spreads  globally.  The  contagion 
spreads  at  epidemic  rates,  threatening  market  functioning  and  financial  stability  –  and  the 
blame  game  begins.  It  was  perhaps  inevitable  that  central  banks  and  regulators  would  be 
blamed after the crisis for having had a narrow and segmented vision of their mandate. 
– 
Financial Stability moved centre stage for central banks and became the main item 
on the agenda at Governors’ Meetings. 
At the Bank, we embraced this new role well before it became fashionable. I set up 
a Financial Stability Unit at the Bank three years ago to identify vulnerabilities and 
risks in the system and develop tools and policies to incorporate financial stability in 
our policy framework. We introduced semi-annual Financial Stability Reports. 
The  domestic  economic  landscape  is  characterised  by  concentration  of  economic 
power, with a web of companies and local conglomerates operating across different 
sectors,  and  relatively  large  complex  financial  institutions.  These  raise  a  host  of 
  BIS Review 150/2010 
 5
Payments system  
We modernised our payments infrastructure by switching to new-generation software for the 
Mauritius Automated Clearing and Settlement System.  
– 
Real-time interbank payments can be made in three major foreign currencies, the 
US  dollar,  the  pound  sterling  and  the  euro,  in  addition  to  the  Mauritian  rupee  –  a 
première in Africa.  
Central banks in the region are avid for placements and visits to study our payments 
and settlement system. The Bank thus hosted delegations from the central banks of 
Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, Ethiopia, Seychelles and Nigeria during the year.  
 Mauritius Credit Information Bureau  
We  have  extended  the  coverage  of  the  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  to  have  a 
complete picture of the problem of multi-borrowing and over-indebtedness in the country.  
Memorandum of Understanding  
We  extended  our  network  of  Memoranda  of  Understanding  with  other  institutions,  namely 
with  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority,  in  an  effort  to 
combat money laundering and terrorist financing and fiscal evasion. By the end of the review 
period,  we  were  at  an  advanced  stage  of  discussion  with  the  Competition  Commission  of 
Mauritius.  
Regional cooperation  
We hosted the 14th Meeting of the COMESA Committee of Governors of Central Banks in 
October 2009. The chairmanship of the COMESA Committee of Governors of Central Banks 
passed to the Bank of Mauritius.  
– 
To mark the event, we invited two renowned speakers to make presentations on two 
issues  of  critical  importance  for  central  bank  Governors  –  “The  evolving  structure 
and  role  of  Monetary  Policy  Committees”  and  “Issues  of  Governance  in  Central 
Banks”. This initiative to invite external parties to meetings of Governors was so well 
received  and  appreciated  that  the  COMESA  Committee  decided  that  it  would 
become a permanent feature in future meetings. 
We marked our presence in regional and international fora and participated actively 
in the SADC Committee of Central Bank Governors, the meeting of Governors of the 
Association  of  African  Central  Banks  and  the  Commonwealth  Central  Bank 
Governors Meeting, which I had the honour of chairing.  
 Extending regional footprint  
The dynamism, with which the Bank has gone regional, has heightened our visibility on the 
international  front  and  has  earned  us  much  respect.  With  the  support  of  COMESA 
Governors, our country was successful in its candidature to host AFRITAC (South), one of 
the two new African Technical Assistance Centres which the IMF is establishing in Africa, in 
the face of strong regional contenders. 
– 
The Bank offered to house AFRITAC (South) on one of the floors of the old Bank of 
Mauritius Building which would be refurbished for the purpose.  
6 
 BIS Review 150/2010
Membership of Islamic Financial Services Board  
During  the  year,  we  moved  from  being  an  Associate  Member  to  full  membership  of  the 
Board, with a seat on the Governing Council of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB). 
– 
To support our plans to develop Islamic banking and finance in Mauritius, we joined 
IFSB  initiatives  to  develop  Islamic  liquidity  management  instruments  with  other 
participating countries. We participated fully in the preparatory work for the launch of 
a Special Purpose Vehicle and envisage participation in its share capital. 
Bank’s admission to the Irving Fisher Committee  
We  were  admitted  as  a  full  institutional  member  of  the  Irving  Fisher  Committee  (IFC)  on 
Central Bank Statistics. Mauritius is the second country in sub-Saharan Africa, after South 
Africa, to become a full institutional member of the IFC, which has a total of 66 members.  
– 
Our  membership  of  the  IFC  comes  at  a  time  when  our  efforts  are  currently  being 
directed  towards  improving  the  coverage  and  quality  of  our  data  to  enable  us  to 
graduate to the Special Data Dissemination Standards of the IMF. 
Platinum commemorative coin  
Mauritius  joined  the  select  list  of  countries  that  have  issued  platinum  coinage.  Three 
beautifully-crafted platinum coins constitute the “Father of the Nation” Platinum Series. The 
first  coin  was  launched  on  30  October  2009  by  Dr  the  Honourable  Navinchandra 
Ramgoolam,  our  Prime  Minister.  The  second  coin  in  the  series  will  be  launched  later  this 
year.  
Training  
The financial turmoil undeniably posed new challenges for central banks and imposed new 
demands and new burdens on them. The leadership of central banks are under pressure to 
ensure that their institution is equipped to deal with the challenges which this crisis brought 
– and ready to face the next one. 
– 
We  put  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  training  our  key  staff,  expose  them  to  new 
thinking and raise their professional competence and skills to enable them to deal 
with a rapidly-changing external environment. 
In  the  course  of  the  year,  our  Staff  members  benefited  from  124  training 
opportunities  in  different  areas  of  central  banking  from  reserve  management  to 
talent building, an increase of 33 per cent on the previous year. 
The credibility of our central bank rests on the quality of its Staff, its work culture and 
its  leadership  abilities.  I  wish  here  to  thank  the  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank (SARB) who has graciously agreed to assist us in our endeavour to 
enhance the skills-set of our middle management with a dedicated programme on 
effective  leadership  and  executive  management.  We  were  also  delighted  to  have 
had the Honourable Tito Mboweni, former Governor of SARB, as a special guest to 
our Annual Dinner in honour of Economic Operators in December 2009. 
  Salary review and staff matters  
In August 2009, a Report on the Review of Salary and Terms and Conditions of Service was 
implemented,  following  a  majority  decision  (mostly  external  directors)  of  the  Board  of 
Directors of the Bank, with the Governor, the First Deputy Governor, and Me Kader Bhayat, 
external Director, dissenting.  
BIS Review 150/2010 
 7
     This  Report  was  commissioned  by  the  Board  after  an  earlier  report  by  the  Hay 
Group, a well-known pay and remuneration consultancy selected by the Bank after 
an open competitive tender, was rejected in toto by the Board. It followed the first 
report  from  the  consultant  proposed  by  the  Board,  which  the  Board  also  found 
unacceptable.  The  second  report  of  the  consultant  was  prepared  along  lines 
acceptable to the Board. 
This last report was based on the organisation structure prevailing before the 2007 
restructuring exercise. Predictably, its implementation led to much litigation in Court 
as  well  as  to  a  string  of  cases  before  the  Labour  Tribunal,  charging  the  Bank 
amongst others of breaching a fundamental tenet of labour law relating to “equal pay 
for equal work”. The Bank could have done without the strained industrial relations 
that resulted from this imbroglio. Following the judgment of the Supreme Court (see 
below), this matter is now taking a different course. The latest development at the 
time of writing is that the Bank has now been declared non-compliant by the Labour 
Tribunal. I shall come back to this in the next Report. 
The introduction of new technology and new work processes – as well as the need 
to change the competency mix at the Bank to enable it to deliver effectively on its 
widening  mandate  –  necessitated  the  introduction  of  a  Voluntary  Retirement 
Scheme.  Fifteen  long-serving  officers  of  the  Bank  opted  to  proceed  on  early 
retirement under the Scheme. This will enable the Bank to recruit extra staff with a 
different profile without increasing our head count. 
Well beyond the Salary Review exercise, it is my earnest resolve to channel more 
effort towards achieving operational excellence. We shall strive to align our business 
processes with international standards and best practices. We propose to implement 
a  Performance  Review  system  tagged  to  productivity.  I  believe  strongly  in 
periodically reviewing our scorecards. 
We  will  also  push  for  innovative  approaches  to  manage  and  develop  our  people, 
fortify our management team, and continuously restructure in order to adjust to the 
requirements of an ever-evolving financial landscape. 
Landmark Supreme Court judgment and Fact Finding Committee   
Pursuant  to  an  enduring  feud  between  a  majority  of  (external)  Members  of  the  Board  of 
Directors  of  the  Bank  and  the  Executive  Management,  the  Supreme  Court  delivered  a 
significant judgment in March 2010, finding in favour of management. 
– 
The Supreme Court clarified that the Board’s statutory remit is to formulate general 
policy  and  not  to  be  involved  in  the  day-to-day  administration  of  the  Bank.  This 
judgment not only helps to clearly situate responsibilities but also paves the way for 
much healthier deliberations in the Boardroom. 
The  year  was  also  marked  by  the  establishment  of  a  Fact-Finding  Committee, 
chaired  by  a  highly-respected  retired  Chief  Justice,  Sir  Victor  Glover,  Kt,  GOSK. 
Coming  just  after  the  Supreme  Court  judgment,  the  report  of  the  Fact-Finding 
Committee put paid to the smear campaign against the Governor and confirmed that 
he had acted intra vires, without any abuse of power or authority as charged by his 
detractors. 
 Words of appreciation 
I  wish  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Dr  the  Honourable  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam,  Prime 
Minister,  for  his  support  and  the  confidence  he  has  placed  in  me  by  entrusting  me  this 
second term of office. I also thank Honourable Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, Vice Prime Minister 
and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  for  his  support  and  an  excellent 
8 
 BIS Review 150/2010
working relationship. I am happy that we are guided by a shared commitment to serve the 
general  good  and  by  a  common  desire  to  build  on  the  country’s  strong  fundamentals  and 
make things better for our fellow-citizens. 
I extend my appreciation to the Chairman and the Chief Executive of the Mauritius Bankers 
Association,  the  Chief  Executives  of  banks,  the  representatives  of  the  various  business 
chambers and associations and other stakeholders with whom I have a regular dialogue, and 
the  members  of  the  various  committees  and  sub-committees  at  the  Bank  for  their  active 
collaboration during the past year.  
My sincere appreciation also goes to Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor, for 
his  unflinching  support  during  very  difficult  times.  I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  Mr  Iqbal 
Belath, the new Second Deputy Governor, who assumed office in July this year. 
Looking forward 
If the past three years have taught us anything, it is that things are never static and we can 
never bank on the continuation of the status quo. Looking ahead, we need to continuously 
improve, strengthen our frameworks and re-engineer if we are to achieve greater levels of 
efficiency and promote financial stability. 
As Governor, I will ensure that as one team, we at the Bank – the Deputy Governors, the 
Senior Management team, and all our Staff – spare no effort in furthering the objectives of 
the Bank, that is improve the economic and financial well-being of all our countrymen, keep 
inflation well under check at low and predictable levels and participate in promoting strong, 
balanced, equitable and durable economic growth. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 9
