Glenn Stevens: Inquiry into competition in the Australian banking sector 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
Senate Economics References Committee inquiry into competition in the Australian banking 
sector, Sydney, 13 December 2010. 
 The  Reserve  Bank  has  provided  a  submission  to  the  Committee  that  details  trends  in 
lending, costs, margins, fees and other factual material the Committee may find of use. We 
of course will seek to answer any questions on that submission.  
Perhaps I should note a few general points.  
First, risk has been re-priced since early 2007. All of us are still adjusting to this change and 
its implications.  
It  is  widely  held  that  risk  was  under-priced  for  some  years  before  then.  That  is  to  say, 
investors demanded very little risk compensation in their expected returns – perhaps in some 
cases because they didn’t understand the risks. So financial institutions of all types could get 
ample funding cheaply, and this could be passed on to their borrowers. Business models that 
took  particular  advantage  of  low-cost  wholesale  funding  and/or  securitisation  were  able  to 
provide a very competitive edge to certain markets, particularly (though not only) to markets 
for mortgage lending.  
But  investors  around  the  world  changed  their  attitude  to  risk  in 2007  and 2008.  The 
compensation  they  require  for  taking  on  risk  has  increased.  Wholesale  funding  and 
securitisation are now more expensive. In the case of securitisation, costs have also risen in 
part because some investors have left the market altogether.  
The increase in costs has affected all financial institutions, but to varying degrees. As such, it 
has  also  affected  the  competitive  landscape.  Some  business  models  that  did  well  in  the 
earlier state of the world find it harder going now. Part of the competitive advantage they had 
has  been  eroded  by  market  developments.  The  current  relationship  between  variable 
mortgage rates and market funding costs is making it more difficult than it used to be for the 
lenders relying on securitisation to compete with the major banks.  
This  changed  attitude  to  risk  has  affected  the  locus  of  competitive  forces.  Whereas  four 
years ago the environment was one in which the competition among financial institutions to 
lend money was intense, more recently it has been the competition to raise money that has 
been  intense.  Various  other  things  have  happened  that  also  have  a  bearing  on  the 
competitive landscape, but this is a very fundamental change in the state of the world.  
That said, the market remains a good deal more competitive than it was in the mid 1990s 
and  borrowers  have  access  to  a  much  larger  range  of  products.  Moreover,  the  overall 
availability of finance to purchase housing in particular seems to be adequate.  
The  second  theme  is  that,  the  market  price  of  risk  having  risen,  various  players  want  the 
public  purse  to  take  on  some  of  this  higher  price  through  various  forms  of  support  or 
regulatory change.  
The various ideas should, of course, be assessed on their merits. But an important high-level 
point  is  that,  in  some  instances  at  least,  it  would  appear  the  taxpayer  is  being  asked  to 
shoulder more risk, one way or another, in order to facilitate the provision of private finance.  
Whether,  and  in  which  areas,  that  might  be  a  good  idea  –  and  if  so  how  much  might  be 
charged  for  such  support  –  is  of  course  for  governments  and  legislatures  to  determine. 
Hopefully your inquiries will be able to assist this process.  
BIS Review 169/2010 
 1
