Goh Chok Tong: Challenges and opportunities for Singapore’s insurance 
industry 
Speech by Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC) INCOME 
40th anniversary gala dinner, Singapore, 22 October 2010. 
 1. 
In 1990 and 2000, I had the pleasure of celebrating with you INCOME’s 20th and 
30th anniversaries. I am very happy to see that INCOME has grown from strength to strength 
as  it  celebrates  its  40th  anniversary.  Naturally,  I  am  anxiously  looking  forward  to  your 
50th anniversary. 
Formation of INCOME and adhering to sound principles 
INCOME was another of the many initiatives of the late Dr Goh Keng Swee. At the 
2. 
“Modernisation of the Labour Movement” seminar in 1969, he mooted the idea of setting up a 
life insurance co-operative (“co-op”). A year after, INCOME was formed. 
3. 
Dr Goh believed that a life insurance co-op would advance the cause of the labour 
movement. Such a co-op would be fulfilling a genuine social need. By getting members of 
the working class to take out life insurance policies at a cost they can afford, the co-op will 
help them alleviate hardship at times of unexpected events and build up valuable savings for 
old age. Besides, the labour movement is an inclusive one, bridging different communities, 
languages  and  even  to  some  extent,  status.  The  network  of  trade  unions  and  branches 
would provide the life insurance co-op with a clear advantage over private enterprise. 
4. 
To  ensure  that  the  co-op  would  succeed,  the  realist  in  Dr  Goh  laid  down  a  few 
principles for its operation. First, the co-op must be fully competitive with private enterprises 
and cannot expect privileged treatment from the Government. Second, the co-op must have 
effective management. Third, all levels of staff should be recruited based on merit and not 
affiliations with the labour movement or government. It was the steadfast adherence to these 
sound principles that has kept INCOME successful over the past 40 years. 
The growth of Singapore’s insurance industry 
At INCOME’s 30th anniversary celebration, I had sketched out the changes in the 
5. 
global financial landscape, and how MAS had to liberalise the domestic insurance industry. 
Reputable  foreign  insurers  were  allowed  to  set  up  in  Singapore  or  enter  into  strategic 
alliances with existing local insurers. The hope was for the entry of new players to engender 
competition, which would in turn promote greater innovation and raise the efficiency of the 
incumbent insurers. MAS also worked on deepening the local talent pool and fine-tuned the 
already prudent regulatory framework. 
6. 
Ten  years  on,  these  efforts  have  yielded  significant  results.  The  Singapore 
insurance  industry,  which  saw  a  number  of  acquisitions,  consolidations  and  new  entrants, 
experienced strong growth, with total assets tripling to S$136bn over the past decade. The 
industry  has  also  matured  in  terms  of  the  breadth  and  depth  of  products  and  services 
offered.  For  example,  we  see  increased  capacity  in  writing  specialised  risks  like  aviation, 
energy, marine and political risks. For the life insurance industry, we have also seen greater 
product  innovation  as  well  as  increased  interest  from  insurers  offering  more  sophisticated 
products catering to the needs of the high net-worth and mass affluent segments. 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 1
Future challenges and opportunities 
7. 
But greater challenges and opportunities lie ahead. 
Enhancing risk management capabilities 
8. 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  for  financial 
institutions to have strong risk management capabilities. The use of risk management tools 
such  as  stress  testing,  for  example,  helps  identify  potential  risks,  and  allows  counter-
measures  to  be  instituted  early.  Insurers  in  Singapore  would  have  to  keep  abreast  of 
developments  internationally,  and  should  continually  look  for  ways  to  deepen  their  risk 
management tools and capabilities. INCOME is no exception. But unlike some of the other 
insurers that are part of larger global financial institutions and can therefore leverage on their 
parents’  risk  management  expertise,  INCOME  does  not  have  such  an  advantage.  These 
global  financial  institutions  have  widely-tested  risk  management  practices  and  more 
established risk management cultures, given their richer experience. INCOME would have to 
grow its risk management expertise internally, but it would do well to learn from these global 
players’ recent experiences. 
Strengthening governance 
9. 
However, having risk management tools and capabilities alone will not be enough. 
The  challenge  is  often  in  successfully  integrating  enterprise  risk  management  into  the 
insurer’s  business,  and  this  would  require  effective  governance.  As  we  have  seen  from 
numerous  case  studies  during  the  financial  crisis,  weak  corporate  governance  is  often  the 
key reason for the failures of financial institutions. 
10. 
Much  work  continues  to  be  done  in  developing  regulatory  requirements  on 
governance  in  many  jurisdictions.  In  Singapore,  MAS  has  proposed  enhancements  to  its 
corporate governance regulations and guidelines, drawing lessons from the recent financial 
crisis and international developments. The key proposals include strengthening the Board of 
Directors’ independence and oversight on risk management; ensuring that the Board has the 
appropriate  skills  and  time  to  perform  its  role  effectively;  and  requiring  the  Board  to  set 
appropriate remuneration policies to prevent excessive risk-taking. INCOME should benchmark 
itself against the best governance practices even though it is set up as a co-operative. 
Addressing the gaps in insurance needs 
11. 
As  for  opportunities,  there  remain  gaps  in  Singaporeans’  insurance  protection 
needs. Studies commissioned by the insurance industry have suggested that Singaporeans 
are  under-insured.  Many  are  not  insured  at  all  while  of  those  who  are,  many  are  under-
insured.  The  under-insurance  is  greatest  in  the  30–49  age  group.  This  is  not  surprising. 
Singaporeans in that age group tend to have heavier financial commitments and a greater 
number of dependants. So they find the cost of having to pay insurance premium a stretch. 
Unfortunately,  if  they  were  to  meet  an  untimely  death,  critical  illness  or  physical  disability, 
their  dependants  would  be  caught  without  a  breadwinner  and  saddled  with  financial 
commitments like mortgages and so on. 
12. 
There are many reasons for the under-insurance. It could be due to complacency 
and a false sense of security that misfortune would not befall the individual. Or it could also 
be a general lack of awareness of how much coverage would be considered adequate. But 
the more likely reason is the perception that getting the recommended amount of insurance 
protection  is  costly  and  beyond  their  means.  Hence,  it  is  given  lower  priority  amidst  other 
more pressing financial commitments like housing, children’s education and other day-to-day 
needs. 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2010
What  can  we  do  to  keep  insurance  protection  affordable?  I  urge  the  insurance 
13. 
industry  to  make  a  more  concerted  effort  to  address  this.  Part  of  the  problem  lies  in  the 
conventional practice of insurers in bundling the savings and protection elements into what is 
known as Whole Life Plans. Since the savings element in such Whole Life Plans can be very 
significant,  the  insurance  premiums  could  be  3–5  times  that  of  pure  protection  Term 
Assurance  plans,  for  the  same  level  of  protection.  I  faced  the  same  problem  when  I  first 
started work. I could not afford a Whole Life Plan but had the good sense to choose a Term 
Assurance policy. Protecting my young family then was more important than leaving them my 
Whole Life insurance payout after they are all grown up when they need the sum of money 
the least. 
14. 
The insurance industry should not always push for a Whole Life Plan as it may result 
in under insurance. It needs to place more emphasis on a pure protection plan like a simple 
Term Assurance which is a more cost-effective way of addressing the protection needs of 
Singaporeans. The insurance adviser plays a critical role here. He or she is the first line of 
contact with the consumers and wields the greatest influence over what they purchase. He 
should sell what is appropriate to the protection needs of the customer and not maximise his 
or his company’s returns. He should always place the interests of his clients above his own. 
And it is the responsibility of every insurer to ensure that its advisers are properly trained and 
incentivised. This is especially important for customers from lower-income households where 
there  are  competing  demands  for  limited  income.  Otherwise,  getting  adequate  insurance 
protection will be relegated to a lower priority in a working  adult’s life, hence exposing his 
dependants to risks of the breadwinner’s premature death. 
15. 
The  insurance  industry  should  also  find  ways  to  reach  out  to  more  Singaporeans 
who  are  either  uninsured  or  underinsured,  and  be  prepared  to  go  beyond  the  tied  agency 
distribution  model.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  over  the  years,  the  insurance  industry  has 
diversified  its  distribution  channels  to  include  banc  assurance  and  direct  sales.  I  urge  the 
industry to do more, such as working with more employers and associations to offer group 
term insurance to cover the lives of their employees or their members. Though group term 
insurance does not offer guaranteed renewability like individual Term Assurance policies, it 
nonetheless helps to supplement the shortfall in insurance coverage at an affordable rate. 
Given its social mandate and objectives, INCOME should take the lead to address 
16. 
the shortfall in insurance protection. Here, I must add that when my insurer notified me, upon 
my reaching 65, that my Term Assurance has lapsed, I heaved a sigh of relief that it expired 
before me! I treated the premium paid as an expense. 
17. 
MAS  will  also  play  its  part  in  helping  consumers  make  informed  decisions  when 
purchasing  insurance.  It  will  be  working  with  the  industry  to  enhance  transparency  in  the 
disclosure of bundled insurance products such as the Whole Life plan. Currently it is unclear 
how  much  of  the  premium  paid  for  a  bundled  insurance  product  goes  towards  providing 
protection,  how  much  to  savings  and  what  the  return  on  the  investment  is.  This  will  help 
consumers make a better decision in planning his protection and financial needs. 
Conclusion 
18. 
As you have declared publicly in your rebranding exercise, INCOME was born with a 
difference. Indeed, INCOME’s mission is to serve the interests of the policyholders first and 
foremost,  before  that  of  the  shareholders.  Its  social  role  is  to  provide  essential  insurance 
cover  which  is  accessible  and  affordable  to  the  population.  As  you  venture  into  wider 
segments  of  the  market  in  line  with  the  rising  affluence  of  Singaporeans,  you  should  not 
forget the basis of INCOME’s formation. 
19. 
past and present, for bringing INCOME to where it is today. 
20. 
I wish you continued success in the years to come. 
I congratulate the Board, Senior Management team and the staff of INCOME, both 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 3
