 Javier Aríztegui: Reform of the banking system 
Speech by Mr Javier Aríztegui, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 5th Conference 
for financial professionals, Barcelona, 26 November 2010. 
 Good morning. Firstly, I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to participate in this 
forum.  In  view  of  the  programme  and  the  participants,  I  am  sure  that  this  is  a  good 
opportunity to debate the challenges facing the Spanish banking system and what the future 
holds for it.  
I shall broach the subject of the transformations currently taking place at banks in two parts. 
The first part will describe developments in our banking sector since summer 2007 and the 
second will look in greater depth at the aspects I consider essential for assuring the progress 
which  has  already  been  achieved.  At  times  like  the  present,  when  international  financial 
markets are showing their aversion to risk and their discomfort with banking systems that are 
highly  reliant  on  external  financing,  it  is  vital  to  consolidate  this  progress  and  to  continue 
using transparency as the main means of showing investors the soundness of our banking 
system.  
From summer 2007 to date 
The crisis which erupted in summer 2007 has gone through various phases. At the risk of 
over-simplifying matters, I shall split it into three stages.  
The  first  phase  was  characterised  by  a  widespread  loss  of  confidence:  the  complex 
structured products created in previous years came to be considered “toxic”. The institutions 
exposed  to  them  and  the  amount  of  their  exposure  were  unknown.  Liquidity  dried  up  and 
many  banks  experienced  very  heavy  losses.  These  increased  when  off-balance-sheet 
transactions  had  to  be  returned  to  the  books.  The  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008 was the trigger that brought the international financial system to the verge 
of collapse and marked the end of this period. Consequently, the authorities had to rescue 
the largest banks. This phase left us with a legacy of profound risk aversion which will take a 
long time to fade.  
Throughout 2009, the second phase of the financial crisis interacted with a sharp decline in 
global economic activity. Corporations and households experienced a loss of wealth which, 
in turn, weakened the quality of assets on banks’ balance sheets.  
The third and most recent phase of the crisis, which particularly affects Europe, has unfolded 
throughout 2010. It stems from the rapid deterioration of public finances in a climate in which 
markets are reluctant to keep financing increases in public debt that they consider may run 
into  problems  of  sustainability.  Simply  put,  this  deterioration  is  explained  by  the  loss  of 
momentum of the European economy, the attempts of public authorities to alleviate its most 
painful effects on society and the consequences of States’ efforts to avoid the collapse of the 
financial system. 
How have these three successive phases affected the Spanish banking system?  
Spanish banks held up reasonably well in the first phase of the crisis. On various occasions, 
the reasons why they performed differently have been pointed out.  
On the one hand, their business is “traditional retail banking”, which hardly involves structured 
products that can ultimately become “toxic”.  
BIS Review 161/2010 
 1
 On  the  other,  Spanish banking  regulation  and supervision retained  its conservative  stance 
and  did  not  follow  the  international  trend  which  advocated  low-intensity  regulation  and 
supervision.  Well-known  examples  are 
“dynamic  provisions”  and 
the  compulsory 
consolidation of any “off-balance-sheet structure” that might involve a risk.  
Nonetheless,  our  banking  system  has  not  been  insulated  from  the  consequences  of  the 
crisis. The sector built up imbalances during the long twelve-year expansionary period of our 
economy from 1995 to 2006. The interplay of these sectoral imbalances, which began to be 
tackled  at  end-2006  with  the  outbreak  of  the  international  crisis,  suffices  to  explain  the 
resulting impact.  
On the assets side, there was a strong, sustained increase in lending. Coming in unison with 
one of the defining features of the Spanish economy’s growth pattern, the exposure to real 
estate developers turned out to be excessive, all the more so considering that it is a highly 
cyclical activity which is currently contracting sharply.  
In  this  respect,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  in  Spain  there  are  fundamental  differences 
between  credit  for  real  estate  development  and  that  extended  to  households  for  house 
purchase. Thus, while the former shows, as I have said, pronounced cyclical behaviour, retail 
mortgage lending is the type of credit which has the lowest default rates during recessions.  
This  is  so  not  only  now,  when  the  doubtful  assets  ratio  for  deposit  institutions  as  a  whole 
stands at 2.5%, approximately 3.5 pp below that of credit to the private sector, but also in the 
past. For instance, in 1993, when the unemployment rate amply exceeded 20% and interest 
rates were substantially higher than at present, the doubtful assets ratio for house purchase 
loans was approximately 4.5 pp lower than that for total credit to the private sector.  
The retail mortgage business in Spain is characterised by its simplicity, by having avoided 
innovations that tend to lower banks’ incentives to manage borrowers properly, and by the 
incentives to build relationships with customers, not only because the asset being financed is 
so  important  to  them,  but  also  because  of  the  guarantees  supplementing  the  mortgaged 
asset. Furthermore, the ratio between the loan value and the appraisal value is low, at 62% 
on average, and is similar across the various deposit institutions. 
That  said,  I  should  emphasise  that  the  protracted  growth  of  activity  resulted  in  redundant 
capacity.  Under  a  traditional  retail  banking  model,  in  which  knowledge  of  customers  and 
proximity to them are defining characteristics, it is natural to increase capacity in an upturn, 
for example, by opening more customer service points. It seems obvious, however, that the 
size  attained  by  the  branch  network  and  central  services  at  their  peak  did  not  match 
foreseeable developments in the banking business.  
On the liabilities side, there were also imbalances. During the upturn, a growing share of the 
rise  in  lending  was  met  by  banks  turning  to  the  international  wholesale  markets.  Savings 
banks,  for  example,  which  traditionally  based  their  liabilities  on  attracting  retail  deposits, 
increasingly and irreversibly used foreign funding sources.  
It should be underlined that the banks tapped this source of funding in a relatively prudent 
manner. Thus, most of these liabilities mature at medium and long term. Nevertheless, this 
greater  reliance  on  the  international  markets  has  made  institutions  more  vulnerable  to  a 
financial  crisis  which,  as  I  have  said,  is  marked  by  increased  risk  aversion  and  by  the 
suspicion aroused by highly leveraged firms.  
The impact of these tensions on assets, liabilities and structure has been more significant at 
savings  banks  or,  to  be  more  accurate,  at  some  of  them.  They  built  up  more  imbalances 
because their decision-making mechanisms made them more sluggish when the time came 
to react and because their corporate model did not allow them to readily raise high-quality 
external capital and reduced the discipline imposed by the market on management.  
2 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 Measures adopted to restructure the Spanish banking system  
The larger imbalances at savings banks, together with the limitations inherent in their model, 
explain why the reforms centre on this segment in particular. The changes have consisted of 
pressing them to restructure and amending their legal framework.  
The  Fund  for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the  Banking  Sector  (“FROB”  by  its  Spanish 
acronym) came into operation in September 2009. As you know, it can pursue two courses of 
action. The first, aimed at facilitating mergers of viable institutions, focuses on improving their 
efficiency in the medium term, strengthening the solvency of the post-merger institution and 
promoting a reduction of capacity. Thus, for example, the merger plans approved within the 
framework of the FROB envisage cuts of approximately 20% in the number of offices.  
The  aid  given  is  conditional,  since  the  institutions  have  to  comply  with  a  plan  previously 
approved by the Banco de España; it is temporary, because the funds provided in the form of 
preference shares will have to be returned within five years; and it involves a cost, because 
these funds bear interest at 7.75%.  
The second course of action open to the FROB is designed to achieve a swift and efficient 
resolution of the institutions which have not been able to overcome their difficulties and are 
no longer viable. If it is necessary for the Banco de España to take control of an institution 
and to replace its directors, the FROB contributes financial resources and ability to act. To 
date, this second form of action has only had to be used at CajaSur.  
Consequently, the FROB has predominantly used the first course of action. Eight mergers 
have been approved and €10.58 billion in government assistance have been requested. The 
request yet to be made by Banca Cívica will be for an estimated further €1 billion.  
Additionally, there are another five mergers under way which have not involved a request for 
assistance.  In  total,  in  the  savings  bank  sector,  there  are  13  mergers  taking  place  which 
affect 94% of assets and will reduce the total number of savings banks or groups of savings 
banks from 45 to 17.  
The reform of the legal framework for savings banks, approved on 9 July 2010, has three 
objectives:  first,  to  facilitate  the  issuance  of  top-quality  capital;  second,  to  contribute  to 
promoting  more  professional  management  and  governing  bodies;  and  third,  to  enhance 
market discipline.  
In order to facilitate access to capital markets, the reform sets out two possibilities. First, it 
provides  for  the  issuance  of  equity  units  with  voting  rights.  Second,  particularly  for  those 
institutions with a business vocation which takes them beyond their traditional markets and 
businesses, three options are available. The first option is to join an Institutional Protection 
System (IPS) under the centralised coordination of a commercial bank. The second option is 
the transfer of the whole loan and deposit business to a commercial bank controlled by the 
savings bank. And the third option is the conversion of the savings bank into a foundation 
which manages welfare projects. This foundation is supported by the income from its assets, 
most  notably  dividends  from  the  shares  of  the  bank  to  which  it  transferred  its  financial 
business in exchange for the shareholding.  
The goal of making the savings banks more professional is to reduce the maximum weight of 
public-sector stakeholders and to establish a regime regulating incompatibility.  
Once  it  had  completed  this  legal  reform,  Spain  announced  ahead  of  other  European 
countries  that  it  was  going  to  stress-test  its  banking  system  to  show  that  the  market’s 
perception of bank solvency was clearly lower than it actually was. Other European partners 
joined this initiative and by end-July 2010, the results of the stress tests had been published. 
As you are aware, compared with our European partners, the Spanish stress tests were far 
superior in terms of scope and transparency. In Spain, the decision was taken to stress-test 
the whole sector and not only institutions representing 50% of the sector. Furthermore, very 
extensive and detailed information was published.  
BIS Review 161/2010 
 3
 The  stress  tests  showed  that  Spanish  banks  as  a  whole  were  sound,  despite  taking  into 
consideration  very  extreme  and  highly  unlikely  scenarios.  However,  they  also  served  as  a 
channel of communication because a lot of important information was disseminated.  
At present international markets are once again questioning the reliability of the European 
stress test exercise. As I mentioned earlier, the Banco de España published bank-by-bank 
information, not only about the assumptions made, but also about the various portfolios and 
the funds available to cover hypothetical losses.  
The  Banco  de  España  has  recently  once  again  revised  the  assumptions,  parameters  and 
estimates  published  four  months  ago  and  considers  that  they  appropriately  describe  the 
current  situation  of  the  banking  system  and  its  exposures.  The  markets  made  a  highly 
positive assessment of this transparency exercise and the banks, which are responsible for 
providing information to investors, should be the parties most interested in persevering with 
these market communication efforts.  
From the approval of the measures to the current situation  
The functioning of financial markets in the first half of 2010 was complicated considerably by 
the lack of confidence in the sustainability of public finances. At the height of the tension, the 
funding  markets  shut  down  and,  consequently,  many  European  institutions,  including 
Spanish  ones,  resorted  increasingly  to  funding  from  the  Eurosystem  since  borrowers  and 
lenders were no longer directly in contact.  
As  a  result  of  the  economic  measures  approved  by  the  Government,  the  reforms  of  the 
banking sector and the publication of the stress tests, this tension eased from July.  
Not only did the interbank market begin to function again, but many institutions were able to 
place  €12  billion  of  bonds  and  notes  on  primary  markets.  This  was  reflected  in  the  sharp 
reduction  in  funds  requested  by  Spanish  banks  from  the  Eurosystem.  At  end-November 
2010, funding from the ECB, which in July 2010 stood at €150 billion, fell back to €65 billion. 
This means that the Spanish banking system absorbs 12% of the loan from the European 
Central Bank, a proportion fully commensurate with its size and importance in the euro area 
and which represents 2.5% of its balance sheet.  
The immediate future: consolidating the measures taken and putting the reforms on a 
firm footing  
In  recent  weeks  international  financial  market  dynamics  have  continued  to  be  influenced 
considerably by the high degree of risk aversion and by fragile confidence levels.  
There has been a resurgence of the doubts – first seen in the case of Greece – about the 
solvency  of  euro  area  Member  States.  The  uncertainty  over  the  euro  area’s  fiscal 
sustainability cannot be explained merely by the economic downturn and its impact on public 
finances.  The  measures  taken  by  authorities  to  avoid  the  collapse  of  the  financial  system 
have involved, in the case of Ireland, guaranteeing the funds lent to the banking system by 
depositors and wholesale investors. Markets are suspicious about the ability of certain small 
States, with relatively large banking systems, to meet these commitments.  
The  European  Union  has  come  to  the  aid  of  Ireland,  which  has  experienced  problems 
precisely because it used substantial amounts of public funds to shore up a banking system 
bloated with real estate assets, particularly offices and houses in the Dublin area.  
In  Spain  the  situation  is  very  different  as  regards  both  the  public  sector  and  the  banking 
sector. Despite the substantial rise in the budget deficit in 2008 and 2009, public debt as a 
percentage of GDP remains relatively small in comparison with the euro area average, which 
is 20 percentage points higher. Furthermore, the Spanish State is committed to ending next 
year with a deficit of 6%, more than 5 percentage points lower than in 2009.  
4 
 BIS Review 161/2010
       As for the quality of bank balance sheets, it is well known that non-performing loans have 
increased  in  recent  years,  and  also  that  lending  to  the  construction  and  real  estate 
development  sector  was  excessive.  However,  the  stress  tests  have  shown  not  only  that 
banks have the capacity to absorb potential losses arising from extreme and highly unlikely 
scenarios,  but  also  that  most  balance  sheets  comprise  healthy  assets  in  the  various 
consumption and investment segments of the Spanish economy.  
Despite  these  fundamental  differences,  the  climate  of  uncertainty  makes  it  advisable  to 
reaffirm the adjustments promised by the authorities and to demonstrate to the international 
community that each major goal will be scrupulously met. I would like to point out four actions 
which I consider essential within this framework:  
– 
First,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  to  restructure  bank  assets  and  full  information 
should be provided in this connection.  
In the last three years, credit institutions have made notable efforts to recognise the 
impairment of assets on their balance sheets. This impairment recognition, effected 
through  profit  and  loss accounts,  amounts  to  more  than  €40  billion. To  this  figure 
should  be  added  the  possible  use  of  a  further  €20  billion  built  up  as  a  “general 
provision” since the introduction of countercyclical provisioning in 2000, and another 
€20 billion provisioned with a charge to equity in the mergers.  
In this asset restructuring drive, the Banco de España has considered it essential 
that the recognition of losses should not be deferred, in particular when real estate is 
acquired or accepted in payment of debts. These are not improper practices. They 
may be perfectly correct. But their use cannot lead to real estate assets becoming 
locked indefinitely into balance sheets.  
Accordingly, the approach followed by the Banco de España combines the detailed 
supervision of these operations with changes in provisioning regulations, so that the 
assets  are  valued  at  prices  close  to  market,  and  are  available  for  disposal  at  the 
best opportunity.  
These efforts must be fully and properly communicated. The Banco de España is 
going to require additional efforts from the banking sector in terms of transparency 
when  the  annual  accounts  are  released  and  in  the  quarterly  estimates  the  sector 
offers to analysts. Banks and savings banks will offer standardised supplementary 
information  on  the  real  estate  development  and  construction  portfolio  and  on  the 
residential  mortgage  portfolio,  detailing  the  corresponding  collateral,  the  related 
loan-to-value  data,  their  payment  status  and  the  coverage  set  aside  for  their 
potential  impairment.  The  central  bank,  in  coordination  with  the  accounting 
authorities – ICAC and CNMV – is going to convene a meeting of the representative 
banking associations to agree on the technical formats for this information which, in 
any  event,  should  be  available  by  late  March  next  year,  when  the  consolidated 
financial  statements  of  the  new  groups  resulting  from  the  mergers  processes  are 
released.  
In  striving  for  clarity,  the  merged  groups  should  place  particular  emphasis  on 
explaining  clearly  and  transparently  how  they  have  treated  potentially  impaired 
assets in the mergers. They should offer not only quantitative information but also 
explanations so that this information is interpreted correctly.  
Second, banks should continue resorting to international markets to roll over their 
wholesale  funding.  As  stated,  the  loan  from  the  Eurosystem  has  progressively 
declined  and  institutions  should  persevere  along  these  lines.  It  is  vital  to  remain 
active in euro interbank markets, to participate in the central counterparty clearing 
houses and to resort to the primary markets and, insofar as the latter allow them, to 
extend the average maturities on their funding.  
BIS Review 161/2010 
 5
        But  they  must  also  report  to  investors  that  business  is  as  normal.  The  regular 
supplementary  information  I  referred  to  in  the  previous  point  should  include  a 
section  that  reports  on  the  status  of  wholesale  funding,  with  a  breakdown  of 
instruments, the corresponding collateral and their duration.  
Third,  perseverance  in  the  mergers  under  way,  particularly  in  the  savings  bank 
sector, is vital. The progress to date has been most significant and institutions are 
meeting the deadlines.  
But further progress in this connection is needed, and there must be no wavering in 
the integration plans agreed upon. This phase foresees creating the new institutions 
and  setting  out  the  terms  of  their  governance.  Entities  that  integrate  through 
“institutional protection systems” should have the attendant banks set up before the 
end of the year, with their boards of directors appointed and their managerial line 
perfectly defined. Achieving this, and the fact that, from January, the new institutions 
arising from integration processes will be operational, rolling over wholesale funding 
and  negotiating  on  the  markets  on  behalf  and  on  account  of  the  newly  created 
groups, will lend consistency and reliability to the reform.  
Thereafter, a more technical and silent phase will begin, involving IT and operational 
adaptation, the elimination of redundant structures and staff adjustments which, as 
in all mergers, will take months. I am convinced that banks will tackle this process as 
professionally as they are completing the current phase.  
Fourth and finally, cost structures must be speedily and thoroughly revised. In a 
Monetary  Union,  a  country  must  compete  in  real  terms  abroad,  as  must  financial 
intermediaries  with  one  another,  as  a  devaluation  entailing  an  exogenous 
competitiveness  shock 
the  crisis,  reduce 
unemployment and improve the future outlook for the profitability of banking assets, 
there  is  no mechanism  available  other  than  to raise  productivity  and  efficiency,  to 
reduce labour and structural costs, and, consequently, to lower margins and prices 
so  that  all  sectors,  including  banking,  may  offer  better  services  within  the  country 
and sell more abroad.  
In the coming quarters, banks’ and savings banks’ profit and loss accounts will be 
subject to different factors of pressure. On one hand, because, despite the fact that 
the rate of increase of doubtful assets has eased, the setting aside of provisions for 
impairment  will  continue  to  weigh  down  profits.  And  on  the  other,  because  the 
narrowing of the net interest margin resulting from higher financial costs will hardly 
be offset by bigger volumes of activity.  
Accordingly, reducing overheads, which must be quickly and resolutely done, is the 
main  instrument  for  softening  these  adverse  effects  on  profits.  Spain  and  the 
Spanish  banking  system  need  their  creditors  to  roll  over  the  funding  they  have 
extended to them. The best way of achieving this is to demonstrate day by day that 
banks and savings banks are healthy and profitable, and that their profit and loss 
accounts  provide  them  with  the  flow  of  funds  needed  to  honour  all  their 
commitments.  
is  not  an  option.  To  overcome 
Conclusions 
I shall conclude by reiterating the central idea in my speech.  
The government has already taken various measures in the right direction. What is important 
now  is  to  persevere  along  these  lines,  adhering  to  two  underlying  principles:  budgetary 
austerity that provides for fiscal consolidation, and structural reforms.  
As regards the banking sector, those responsible for its supervision and regulation, and most 
importantly the institutions comprising the sector, must complete the restructuring under way. 
6 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 There  can  be  no  room  for  wavering,  as  that  can  only  give  rise  to  interpretations  that 
undermine our creditors’ confidence.  
In sum, the reforms in train must be seen through, so as to cement international investors’ 
confidence.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 7
