Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic and Monetary Union – current situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
the International Club of Economic Journalists, Frankfurt am Main, 13 December 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a true pleasure for me to participate in the meeting co-organised with the International 
Club  of  Frankfurt  Economic  Journalists.  I  vividly  remember  the  interesting  discussions  we 
had in December 2008. At the time, I took the opportunity to discuss the changes in central 
banking  communication.  Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  current  situation  regarding 
Economic and Monetary Union.  
Let me start by quoting from a famous speech that, according to the ancient Greek historian 
Thucydides,  the  Athenian  statesman  and  leader  Pericles  delivered  to  his  fellow  citizens 
during the Peloponnesian War more than 2400 years ago: 
“Our constitution does not copy the laws of neighbouring states; we are rather a 
pattern  to  others  than  imitators  ourselves.  Its  administration  favours  the  many 
instead of the few; this is why it is called a democracy.”1 
As democracy in Periclean Athens 2400 years ago, the construction of Europe does not have 
established institutional patterns to copy. The European Union and the euro area are shaping 
new forms of cooperation and integration between sovereign states. The founding fathers of 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) built the European house from its foundations. They 
could count neither on guidelines nor on predetermined rules. We are still progressing. An 
ambitious agenda lies in front of the European Leaders. It is a visionary agenda, and despite 
all the current challenges it is being pursued with determination.  
Serious work is currently under way to underpin macroeconomic and financial stability in the 
euro area. We all know that it calls for determination, resolve and a solid sense of direction. 
For what concerns monetary policy, you can rest assured that the European Central Bank 
will continue to deliver the most efficient policy response and retain the posture of “credible 
alertness” that was adopted since the outbreak of the financial turmoil back in August 2007. 
This posture includes both standard monetary policy, which is implemented through interest 
rate  changes,  and  non-standard  policies,  which  are  implemented,  in  essence,  through 
special liquidity operations and interventions in some bond markets.  
The ECB’s  Governing  Council has demonstrated a strong ability to preserve price stability 
during one of the most challenging period of modern monetary history, a period that could 
have led to a repeat of the Great Depression of the 1930s.  
Not surprisingly all advanced economies, being stressed by the worst financial and economic 
crisis  since  World  War  II,  are  called  to  reflect  on  the  weaknesses  of  their  economic  and 
financial structures and on the appropriate reforms to redress their medium and long term 
macroeconomic and macro-financial strategies. This is the case in the United States. This is 
the case in Japan. It is the case in the European Union and in the Euro area as well. 
My  plan  for  tonight  is  precisely  to  assess  the  institutional  framework  of  the  Euro  area  by 
highlighting  the  origin  of  the  tensions  we  are  currently  experiencing  and  the  plausible 
solutions that would help to restore market confidence and consolidate the building blocks of 
EMU.  
                                                 
1  
Thucydides (431 BC): The History of the Peloponnesian War (translated by Richard Crawley). 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 1
As its name suggests, “Economic and Monetary Union” has two attributes: one is “Economic” 
and one is “Monetary.” The Monetary attribute of our Union refers to the ECB, its mandate 
and  its  independence.  The  “Economic”  aspect  of  our  Union  comprises  the  fiscal  regime 
enshrined  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact;  the  national  frameworks  of  economic  policy, 
including  macroeconomic  policy  and  financial  supervision;  and  the  system  of  mutual 
surveillance.  
The  developments  we  are  currently  witnessing  in  Europe’s  economy  have  to  do  with  its 
“Economic”  functions.  They  have  essentially  three  origins:  unsound  fiscal  policies  in  a 
number  of  member  states;  inappropriate  macroeconomic  and  supervisory  policies  in  a 
number  of  member  states;  and  overall  an  inadequate  system  of  surveillance.  This  is  the 
triangle that lies behind the current situation. And let me make this very clear: the triangle 
does not include monetary policy.  
 The “monetary” side: price stability in the euro area  
The “M” side of the EMU is relatively straightforward to assess. The Treaty assigns the ECB 
the  primary  responsibility  for  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium 
term. We now have almost 12 years of experience with the euro: this is a sufficiently long 
span of time to provide an evaluation of how successful the ECB has been in delivering on its 
mandate. 
You all know that from the outset the ECB has set itself a very clear numerical benchmark, 
which is a public and transparent yardstick. The ECB’s Governing Council has defined price 
stability to be an annual rate of inflation in the euro area of below 2% over the medium terms. 
The Governing Council has also declared that, in pursuing its mandate, it aims – within that 
range of values – at an inflation rate over the medium terms close to 2%.  
Let me emphasize that the track record is solid. Over the first 12 years of existence of the 
euro,  the  average  annual  inflation  rate  in  the  euro  area  has  been  1.97%.  This  is  the  best 
result in the euro area for at least 50 years and despite the number of economic and political 
shocks we had to face since we began, in 1999, with a new institution, a new currency and a 
new  framework  for  monetary  policy-making.  It  has  been  achieved  in  an  environment  of 
positive growth that in per capita terms was virtually the same as in the United States. It has 
been achieved in an environment of employment growth with employment rising by over 14 
million. And it has been achieved for an entire continent of 330 million people.  
Furthermore, over the same period, inflation expectations have generally been aligned with 
our definition of price stability. Even at the height of the financial crisis, in a situation of high 
uncertainty,  inflation  expectations  have  remained  anchored.  Today,  as  witnessed  by  the 
October  reading  of  the  Consensus  Forecast,  as  well  as  of  the  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters and Euro zone Barometer, they remain anchored, with both readings at 1.9% at 
a 5 years horizon. The more recent Eurosystem staff economic projections – that spans a 
shorter time horizon – also reflect the stability of inflation looking forward.  
Our monetary policy strategy has communicated a clear sense of direction. The sustained 
anchoring  of  expectations  has  made  it  possible  for  the  ECB  to  ease  its  policy  stance  in 
response to the crisis without entering pre-commitments about the future path of the policy 
rate. Our definition of price stability has guided our citizens in their economic decisions and 
has acted as a built-in stabiliser in the deepest phases of the crisis.  
The “economic” side: sound and sustainable fiscal policy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  main  contention  of  my  remarks:  the  tensions  we  are  experiencing 
today in the Euro area sovereign debt markets find their deep causes in the countries’ policy 
2 
 BIS Review 171/2010
slippages of the past years. These slippages are all concentrated on the “E” side of EMU. 
First, fiscal policies in some countries have not been aligned with the requirements laid out in 
the Stability and Growth Pact. Second macroeconomic policies in some Euro area countries 
were not fully consistent with the participation in a monetary union that is founded on price 
stability.  
To be sure, looking at the euro area as an aggregate, and comparing the euro area with its 
major global partners, the fiscal problem appear relatively modest. Next  year, the average 
Euro area budget deficit will be in the order of 4.6%. By 2012 it is expected to decline further 
to 3.9% (Source EC Autumn 2010 economic forecast). These expected numbers are about 
half the corresponding expected figures for the US and Japan. The problem, the source of 
the  current  tensions  clearly  reside  with  national  fiscal  developments,  notably  localised  in 
those countries that have not done enough to correct imbalances or to prepare for difficult 
times, when times were still good. 
We know that for several years, fiscal policies in some European countries have breached 
both the letter and the spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact calls for budgets that 
are close to balance or in surplus over the cycle, deficits always below 3% of GDP and a 
public debt level of below 60% of GDP. When a few years ago it became clear that in some 
important  countries  fiscal  policies  would  not  be  able  to  meet  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact, it was not the policies that were changed but the Pact. This was clearly a dark 
moment in the history of European policy decision making. 
In 2004 and 2005, the governments of the three largest Member economies coalesced to try 
and dismantle the Stability and Growth Pact. It was a very fierce battle at the time, and the 
ECB publicly voiced its grave concerns.  
The recent crisis has demonstrated that growing underlying macroeconomic imbalances can 
also destabilise fiscal policies and place a country on an unsustainable trajectory. A boom-
bust cycle can mask a fiscal problem for a long time and suddenly expose the problem when 
it  turns.  High  fiscal  elasticities  tend  to  curb  budget  deficits  –  and  even  produce  overall 
surpluses  –  when  asset  price  run-ups  boost  revenues  from  financial  and  housing 
transactions.  The  same  elasticities,  however,  will  send  the  budget  into  distress  when  the 
boom reverses.  
The  second  area  of  policy  slippage  concerns  macroeconomic  policies.  Here  what  stands 
clearly  in  front  of  the  policymakers  is  the  sustained  increase  in  unit  labour  costs  whose 
growth  in  some  member  countries  has  consistently  outpaced  both  domestic  inflation  and 
euro-area  average  union  labour  costs.  Such  competitiveness  losses  cannot  be  sustained 
forever, and catching-up phenomena can only explain a limited part of the process. Sooner 
or  later  adjustments  in  unsustainable  economic  policies  have  to  be  made.  Fiscal  and 
structural policies need to keep domestic demand in line with rates of sustainable growth and 
price stability.  
Reinforced  fiscal  surveillance,  for  all  its  critical  importance,  is  not  enough.  We  need  to 
scrutinise  more  closely  the  macroeconomic  policies.  We  need  reinforced  macroeconomic 
surveillance.  You  know  that  the  monitoring  of  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  policies  in  the 
European  Union  and  the  Euro  area  is  performed  by  peer  group  fora:  the  Eurogroup  and 
Ecofin  meetings  of  finance  ministers.  The  European  Commission  typically  supports  the 
activity of these fora. Of course, effective monitoring requires adherence by members to the 
policy  framework,  it  requires  peer  pressure  and  consequences  to  deal  with  deviant 
behaviour, and it requires reliable statistics.  
Europe’s economy: the current challenges and the way ahead 
Let me come to the third part of my remarks: what is expected of national governments and 
of European Union institutions?  
BIS Review 171/2010 
 3
Starting from fiscal policies, in some countries there remain significant concerns about the 
sustainability  of  their  own  fiscal  positions.  It  is  not  possible  to  procrastinate  further  the 
solution  to  these  problems  and  fiscal  authorities  need  to  act  in  order  to  strengthen  public 
confidence  in  sound  public  finances,  thereby  reducing  risk  premia  in  interest  rates  and 
supporting  sustainable  growth  over  the  medium  term.  More  generally,  all  euro  area 
governments  should  step  up  consolidation  efforts  in  a  way  that  is  credible  and  lays  the 
foundation for sustainable long-term growth. To this end, it is essential that countries pursue 
credible  multi-year  consolidation  plans  and  fully  implement  the  planned  consolidation 
measures. Positive fiscal developments that may emerge, reflecting factors such as a more 
favourable  than  expected  economic  environment,  should  be  exploited  to  make  faster 
progress  with  fiscal  consolidation.  In  their  2011  budgets,  countries  need  to  specify  the 
necessary fiscal adjustment measures in detail, while standing ready to correct any slippages 
from the fiscal objectives announced.  
In this context, let me express the appreciation of the Governing Council for the economic 
and financial adjustment programme which was recently agreed by the Irish government with 
the European Commission, in liaison with the ECB, and the International Monetary Fund. I 
am sure that the programme is suited to bring about a sustainable stabilisation of the Irish 
economy and sooth the tensions in financial markets that are associated with the Irish fiscal 
problems  and  the  reorganisation  of  its  banking  sector.  Furthermore,  by  addressing  in  a 
decisive manner the economic and financial causes underlying current market concerns the 
programme will also contribute to restoring confidence and safeguarding financial stability in 
the euro area as a whole.  
Equally  important  is  that  structural  reforms  are  rapidly  implemented  that  enhance  the 
prospects for higher sustainable growth especially in those countries that have accumulated 
over the past years significant loss of competitiveness or are suffering from high fiscal and 
external  deficits.  Removing 
increasing  product  market 
competition  –  particularly  in  the  services  sectors  –  would  further  support  the  adjustment 
process  of  these  economies.  Measures  working  in  this  direction  will  also  facilitate  the 
restructuring  of  the  economy  and  foster  innovation,  productivity  growth,  which  ultimately 
leads to sustainable long-term economic growth. At the current stage it cannot be stresses 
enough  how  important  it  is  that  the  banking  sector  of  the  euro  area  be  appropriately 
restructured. By repairing their own balance sheets, implementing sound and effective risk 
management strategies the banks in the euro area will increase their resilience to domestic 
and external shocks, which would allow them to make their contribution to sustainable growth 
and financial stability. 
Finally, let me state clearly – also on behalf of the Governing Council of the ECB – that we 
are  not  completely  satisfied  of  the  proposals  put  forward  by  the  Commission  and  the 
European  Council  Task  Force  that  should  aim  at  strengthening  the  system  of  economic 
governance in Europe. These proposals in our view do not yet represent the quantum leap in 
economic governance that is needed to be fully commensurate with the monetary union we 
have created. 
Most important, we need to strengthen in particular two areas of the economic and financial 
structure in the EU. The first area is the surveillance on domestic fiscal policies with a view to 
preventing excessive deficits and unsustainable public debt. The second one is the adoption 
of a mutual surveillance framework on macroeconomic policies in the euro area focussing on 
those  countries  which  experience  sustained  losses  of  competitiveness  and  large  current 
account deficits as these countries face the greatest sustainability challenges.  
To  be  specific,  I  think  that  for  these  two  broad  areas,  one  can  highlight  six  main  lines  of 
reform  that  the  ECB  deems  it  is  necessary  to  purse  further.  Starting  from  the  fiscal  policy 
side, I am convinced that, as far as the euro area is concerned, one should: 
1. 
The  deadlines  for  action  on  the  side  of  governments  under  excessive  deficit 
procedures should be shortened, and the system of sanctions should operate much 
labour  market  rigidities  and 
4 
 BIS Review 171/2010
2. 
3. 
the  spectrum  of  possible 
earlier  in  the  EDP  process.  In  the  past  lenient  applications  of  the  rules  were 
exploited by short-sighted policymakers for irresponsible delays in adjustments and 
laid the premises for the current situation. 
Sanctions should be applied in a way that is quasi-automatic and based on clearly 
defined  criteria  and  with  less  discretion  over  outcomes.  This  will  mean,  first  to 
diversify 
financial  and  non-financial  enforcement 
mechanisms.  Among  the  financial  mechanisms,  I  include  fines,  deposits  and 
reduced access to EU funds. Under the non-financial mechanisms, I include country 
missions,  recommended  adjustment  programmes,  possible  limitations  of  voting 
rights for Member State in persistence violation. Quasi-automaticity will also imply 
the  limitation  of  the  scope  for  discretional  intervention  at  the  political  level,  for 
example  by  implementing  to  the  maximum  possible  extent  the  “reversal  of  voting 
majorities” at the European Council.  
Place  more  ambitious  targets  for  the  reduction  of  public  debt  towards  the  60% 
ceiling. We should assign the debt criterion the importance it is given in the Treaty 
by combining a clear and sufficiently ambitious rule on public debt reduction with the 
prescriptions on deficit developments that are typically the exclusive focus of EDP 
procedures.  
For what concerns the mutual surveillance framework, three other main lines of reform are 
necessary in our opinion: 
1. 
The design of a transparent procedure that clearly specifies the sanctions in case of 
breach  of  sustainability  rules.  Identification  of  Member  States  with  vulnerabilities 
should be done on the basis of clear and undisputable quantitative indicators which 
should not be left to the sole discretion of the Commission. We have advocated that 
a specific scoreboard should be designed for euro area Member States which would 
trigger a quasi-automatic in-depth analysis and reinforced monitoring. A detailed and 
self-contained  scoreboard  offers  a  concrete  basis  for  assessment.  Furthermore,  it 
restricts the scope open to countries to arbitrage across indicators and monitoring 
dimensions. 
The procedure should be transparent in order to give the possibility to the general 
public and to market participants to appreciate the evolution of the process, from the 
stage at which macroeconomic imbalances are detected and assessed, to the stage 
at  which  recommendations  for  corrective  actions  are  issued.  Transparency  in  this 
case reinforces – rather than weakens – the teeth of the procedures. 
The  increase  in  the  quality  and  independence  of  the  economic  analysis  that 
underpins  the  surveillance  exercises.  It  is  important  that  the  Commission  is 
permitted  to  assess  not  only  national  budgets,  but  also  the  individual  budgetary 
measures taken by Member States and have the right – in liaison with the ECB – to 
carry  out  missions  to  Member  States  in  order  to  assess  the  budgetary  situation. 
Ancillary  to  this  last  point,  we  need  to  bring  the  reliability  of  statistical  data  to  the 
highest possible level.  
2. 
3. 
It  is  my  opinion  that  in  order  to  pursue  these  lines  of  reform  we  need  to  give  the 
Commissioner  himself  and 
the  Commission  services  charged  with  conducting 
macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance for the euro area the highest degree of independence 
possible  within  the  Commission,  ideally  supported  by  a  body  of  “wise  persons”  providing 
external assessments. 
Let me conclude with an example that demonstrates that in Europe policymakers can make 
bold steps when and where necessary. I am referring to the recent decisions of the European 
Council  and  the  European  Parliament  to  create  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  –  or 
ESRB – which I shall have the honour to chair.  
BIS Review 171/2010 
 5
This new European body will be part of the new European System of Financial Supervision 
and its function will be to provide macro-prudential oversight of the EU financial system. It will 
bring  together  the  governors  of  the  national  central  banks,  the  new  European  Supervisory 
Agencies, the Commission and the national supervisory authorities of all 27 member states.  
The establishment of the ESRB will be a landmark event in how Europe deals preventively 
with  systemic  risk.  It  will  complete  the  European  construction  in  the  direction  of  adding 
safeguards that will stabilise the financial system and make Europe’s economy more stable 
and  resilient  in  the  medium  terms.  Furthermore,  it  will  facilitate  multilateral  dialogue  and 
cooperation  in  the  field  of  macro  prudential  oversight  with  similar  institutions  in  other 
countries,  including  the  US  and  the  newly  created  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council 
(FSOC). 
Conclusion 
The  ECB  has,  I  trust,  been  living  up  to  its  responsibility  and  delivered  what  had  been 
promised  to  our  people:  a  stable  currency  that  has  promoted  economic  growth  and  job 
creation. This has not been an easy journey and we had to drive on rocky roads and absorb 
various  shocks,  including  food  and  oil  price  gyrations  as  well  as  the  consequences  of  the 
terrible terrorist attacks in the US. Over these years, the euro has always been a force for 
stability and it remains so also in what is now a more than three-year period of economic and 
financial instability. 
In  Europe,  as  in  all  other  major  advanced  economies,  we  are  now  called  to  react  to  the 
challenges  posed  by  the  crisis.  Changes  are  needed  in  the  euro  area  involving  both  our 
economic models and surveillance frameworks. Taking into account the lessons to be drawn 
from  the  global  crisis  in  terms  of  functioning  of  the  Economic  Union,  it  appears  of  the 
essence  to  pursue  greater  cooperation  and  greater  cohesion  through  a  economic 
governance  that  will  be  considerably  reinforced.  We  must  keep  our  sense  of  direction: 
towards more European unity and more responsible European unity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 171/2010
