William C Dudley: The outlook, policy choices and our mandate 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Society  of  American  Business  Editors  and  Writers  Fall 
Conference, New York City, 1 October 2010. 
 The deep recession that ended in June 2009 has been followed by a very tepid recovery. 
Economic activity has grown – but only slowly from levels far below the productive capacity 
of  the  economy.  With  demand  growth  barely  keeping  pace  with  firms’  ability  to  increase 
productivity,  job  creation  has  been  too  weak  to  significantly  reduce  unemployment,  which 
stands today at 9.6 percent. And, as is typical in such circumstances of considerable slack, 
the rate of inflation has declined.  
Viewed through the lens of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate – the pursuit of the highest 
level  of  employment  consistent  with  price  stability,  the  current  situation  is  wholly 
unsatisfactory. Given the outlook that the upturn appears likely to strengthen only gradually, 
it will likely be several years before employment and inflation return to levels consistent with 
the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 
Today,  I  will  discuss  why  the  recovery  has  been  disappointing  and  highlight  some  of  the 
issues facing the Federal Reserve and monetary policy, echoing some of the themes laid out 
by  Chairman  Bernanke  in  his  Jackson  Hole  speech  in  late  August.  As  always,  what  I  am 
going to say reflects my own views and does not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal 
Open Market Committee and the Federal Reserve System. 
In  recent  quarters  the  pace  of  growth  has  been  disappointing  even  relative  to  our  modest 
expectations at the start of the year. After rising at about a 3.25 percent annual rate during 
the second half of 2009, there has been a progressive slowing – to a 2.75 percent annual 
rate during the first half of the year and, very likely, to an even slower rate in the third quarter. 
The  factors  responsible  for  the  failure  of  the  recovery  to  pick  up  speed  include:  (1)  the 
gradual petering out of the contribution from the swing in inventories from rapid liquidation 
during  the  first  half  of  2009  to  a  modest  increase  in  the  second  quarter  of  2010;  2)  the 
sluggish  recovery  in  consumer  spending;  and  3)  the  continued  weakness  in  housing. 
Normally, at this stage of recovery, the handoff from growth led by inventory accumulation to 
growth led by private final demand would have been more fully accomplished. This handoff 
has  been  delayed  because  households  have  been  paying  down  their  debts  –  a  process 
known as deleveraging. In addition, many businesses have been reluctant to hire. This has 
limited income growth.  Slow income growth, and along with caution in the face of economic 
uncertainty, has also restrained spending. 
Although so-called “soft-patches” are quite common during the early stages of an economic 
expansion,  this  soft  patch  is  a  bit  different.  First,  it  looks  like  it  will  last  somewhat  longer 
because  the  deleveraging  process  is  not  yet  complete.  Second,  the  current  weakness  is 
somewhat  more  concerning  because  it  is  occurring  at  a  time  that  the  central  bank  has 
already cut interest rates to near zero. 
In fact, this failure of the recovery to “catch fire” has occurred despite aggressive monetary 
and  fiscal  policy  steps  to  stimulate  the  economy.  On  the  monetary  policy  side,  short-term 
interest rates have been nearly zero for a year and a half; the Fed purchased $1.7 trillion of 
long-term assets, and the proceeds from maturing securities are being reinvested to keep the 
balance sheet from shrinking unduly. On the fiscal side, a series of measures has provided 
support to a broad range of activities. 
The  sluggish  nature  of  the  recovery  in  the  face  of  very  substantial  stimulus  reflects  the 
dynamics  at  work  during  the  expansion  that  preceded  it.  Beginning  around  2003, 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 1
underwriting  standards  for  residential  mortgages  were  significantly  relaxed,  leading  to  a 
sharp  rise  in  household  borrowing  and  in  home  prices.  The  two  trends  were  inextricably 
linked. The rise in home prices helped to support additional demand for credit as households 
used  the  collateral  represented  by  their  homes  to  borrow  large  sums  of  money  via  home 
equity lines of credit and second mortgages. Chart 1 illustrates how the growing proportion of 
nonprime first mortgage loans helped fuel the sharp rise in home prices. 
As  home  prices  rose  and  the  stock  market  performed  strongly,  household  net  worth  rose 
sharply. Households responded by borrowing more and saving less. After all, why save when 
the rise in home prices was adding to your wealth and the housing equity created by the rise 
in home prices could be easily tapped for funds as needed? The use of home equity as a 
source for funds to support consumption is evident in the fact that the homeowners’ equity as 
a  share  of  home  values  was  essentially  flat  over  this  period  (Chart  2).  This  indicates  that 
homeowners  were  borrowing  against  their  accumulated  gains.  The  surge  in  home  prices 
pushed up the ratio of household net worth to disposable income to nearly 640 percent and 
the personal saving fell below 2 percent (Chart 3). 
The surge in home prices was fueled by products and practices in the financial sector that 
led to a rapid and unsustainable buildup of leverage and an underpricing of risk during this 
period.  These  dynamics  in  turn  provided  the  fuel  that  caused  house  prices  and  consumer 
spending to rise much faster than income. As shown in Chart 4, the share of GDP accounted 
for by consumption and residential investment climbed to a peak of 76 percent in 2005 from 
71 percent in the mid-1990s. 
The boom, of course, was unsustainable. The progressive easing of underwriting standards 
that  was  needed  to  support  housing  demand  could  only  persist  as  long  as  housing  prices 
were  rising  rapidly.  But  for  home  prices  to  rise  rapidly,  underwriting  standards  had  to  be 
progressively  relaxed  in  order  to  generate  more  buyers.  When  home  prices  began  to  slip 
beginning  in  2006,  the  dynamic  swung  into  reverse.  The  collateral  values  supporting 
borrowing and spending began to fall. 
As banks’ and other financial intermediaries’ credit losses began to mount, credit availability 
became  impaired  and  this  exacerbated  the  downward  pressure  on  home  prices  and  on 
borrowing and spending. Not only did households that had overextended themselves have to 
cut back; others also retrenched because they were also affected by declines in wealth and 
heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook and their job prospects. 
It is not surprising that the workout from the excesses of this type of boom would take a long 
time. Just as it took several years for the boom to begin and run its course, so it would take 
years, not months, for households and financial intermediaries to adjust their balance sheets 
and behavior to the new environment. Households had to raise their saving rates in order to 
rebuild their balance sheets. Financial intermediaries had to replenish their capital to replace 
losses  via  loan  charge-offs  and  other  credit  impairments.  Both  adjustments  would  need  to 
occur before the economy could grow rapidly. 
With this in mind, the key questions are: 1) Where are we in the adjustment process, and 
2) what,  if  anything,  can  monetary  policy  do  to  facilitate  a  smoother  adjustment  and  more 
rapid progress toward our dual mandate objectives? 
In  terms  of  the  adjustment  process,  starting  on  the  household  side,  most  signs  point  to 
significant progress. For example, the revisions to the national income and product accounts 
announced  in  July  revealed  substantial  upward  revisions  to  the  personal  saving  rate 
(Chart 5).  The  current  saving  rate  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  historical  relationship 
between personal saving and the household net worth-to-income ratio. Of course, part of this 
story depends on the stabilization of household net worth, which had earlier fallen sharply 
due  to  declines  in  both  home  and  equity  prices.  Although  household  net  worth  dropped 
significantly  again  in  the  second  quarter  according  to  the  Flow  of  Funds  accounts,  the 
subsequent rise in the U.S. equity market is likely to have reversed that decline. Meanwhile, 
housing price declines have moderated substantially, helped, in part, by the fact that the low 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2010
level  of  mortgage  rates  combined  with  the  sharp  drop  in  house  prices  has  resulted  in  a 
substantial improvement in affordability (Chart 6). 
Households have retrenched in terms of their borrowing and this has helped push down the 
household debt-to-income ratio sharply from its peak in 2007. Another factor behind the fall 
in the debt-to-income ratio has been credit losses and debt forgiveness. Since 2007, charge-
offs have reduced household debt outstanding by over $880 billion. 
Some  argue  that  the  decline  in  the  household  debt-to-income  ratio  must  go  much  further 
before  the  deleveraging  process  can  be  complete.  After  all,  the  household  debt-to-income 
ratio  is  still  far  above  the  level  reached  as  late  as  2002,  before  the  surge  in  household 
borrowing began. Some even argue that household debt-to-income ratios must fall back to 
the level of the 1980s. I think that this is an overly pessimistic view for a simple reason – both 
household debt and household financial assets have been rising faster than income growth 
on a secular basis since the 1950s. Focusing just on debt misses what is happening on the 
other side of the balance sheet (Chart 7). One reason why both household assets and debt 
have been rising faster than income is due to greater financial intermediation. For instance, 
tax  incentives  encourage  people  to  fund  their  401(K)  pension  plans  rather  than  pay  down 
mortgage debt as they get older. 
The  notion  that  the  household  adjustment  process  is  well  advanced  is  also  supported  by 
other data, as well. For example, the share of after-tax income devoted to servicing debts, as 
well as paying property taxes and homeowners insurance or rent, has declined sharply over 
the past two years and is now back to levels that prevailed in the late 1990s (Chart 8). In 
addition to the declining stock of debt, households have been able to refinance outstanding 
debt at lower interest rates. 
Moreover, mortgage delinquency rates, even in the most serious category, have started to 
fall, and data that tracks changes in the proportion of borrowers who are delinquent and then 
become current versus becoming even more delinquent is encouraging (Charts 9 and 10). 
Finally,  the  less  serious  delinquencies  for  credit  card,  auto  and  student  loans  have  been 
trending  lower,  though  not  the  more  serious  delinquencies  (Chart  11).  Of  course,  these 
recent  improvements  have  come  in  the  context  of  the  stabilization  in  unemployment  and 
house  prices.  To  ensure  that  the  more  favorable  trends  in  household  balance  sheets 
continue, the economic environment needs to become more supportive. 
We should recognize that there is still considerable uncertainty about the level of the saving 
rate and configuration of household balance sheets that will prevail in the coming years. It is 
possible that households now perceive the world to be a riskier place than they did before 
and  will  want  to  have  more  “rainy  day”  funds.  More  saving  may  also  be  needed  to  meet 
higher downpayment requirements for home purchases. Thus, while we may be far along in 
the adjustment process, it is difficult to judge just how much further we have to go. 
Turning now to the issue of credit availability, there is no question that credit conditions are 
still tight. There are a number of impediments: 1) Financial institutions – many of which still 
face balance sheet problems of their own – have tightened underwriting standards and, 2) a 
decline  in  property  prices  has  cut  collateral  values  and  made  the  refinancing  of  many 
residential and commercial mortgages difficult. 
On  the  banking  side,  there  is  considerable  differentiation  across  the  industry  in  terms  of 
health.  The  largest  banks  in  the  United  States  are  generally  in  much  improved  health 
following  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Process  (SCAP)  in  2008,  which  led  to 
substantial  additional  equity  raising.  For  smaller  banks,  the  situation  is  more  mixed. 
According to the FDIC, as of June 30, 2010, 829 of the nation’s 7,830 commercial banks and 
savings institutions remain on the FDIC’s problem institution list. 
But overall, the situation is one in which credit availability is slowly improving. According to 
the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officers Survey, the percentage of banks reporting that 
they were tightening credit standards across a wide range of lending categories peaked in 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 3
late 2008. The most recent data indicate that virtually no banks are tightening standards, and 
a number of banks have begun to relax credit terms (Chart 12). 
In  addition  to  households,  the  small-business  sector  is  another  area  that  has  seen  a 
contraction in credit. Focus groups and surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve System 
suggest this contraction is the result of three distinct factors – a decline in demand for credit, 
a tightening of lending standards, and a weakening of credit quality due to lower collateral 
values and cash flows.1 Which is the most important is difficult to discern. 
However, surveys of small-business owners indicate that much of the weakness in lending to 
this sector reflects lack of demand. The National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) 
Small Business Optimism Index, for instance, asks respondents to indicate their single most 
important problem from a standard list. For some time now, the response “poor sales” has 
been the most frequently cited problem. In contrast, relatively few respondents cite “financial 
and interest rates” as the most important problem (Chart 13). A caveat to this is that credit 
constraints  could  be  inhibiting  the  formation  of  new  small  businesses  –  something  that 
surveys of existing firms would not capture. 
Although credit availability has begun to improve, the decline in collateral values remains a 
significant  impediment.  For  example,  housing  prices  have  declined  so  far  that  nearly  one 
quarter  of  homes  are  now  worth  less  than  the  value  of  the  mortgages  that  finance  them. 
Lacking sufficient collateral value, such homeowners cannot take advantage of the fact that 
conforming mortgage rates are at their lowest level in history and refinance their mortgages. 
Overall,  the  desire  to  rebuild  wealth  through  savings  and  the  limits  on  credit  availability  to 
households has acted to restrain consumer spending, keeping the recovery tepid. 
To some degree, this adjustment is unavoidable, as the economy had reached unsustainable 
levels  of  consumption  and  housing  demand.  However,  the  fact  that  many  of  these 
adjustments are inevitable does not rule out a role for monetary policy to support economic 
activity. Very low interest rates can help smooth the adjustment process by supporting asset 
valuations,  including  making  housing  more  affordable  and  by  allowing  some  borrowers  to 
reduce debt interest payments. 
Beyond this direct role in smoothing the deleveraging process – to the extent that monetary 
policy can “cut off the tail” of the distribution of potential adverse economic outcomes, making 
a  truly  disastrous  outcome  less  likely  –  it  can  help  encourage  those  households  and 
businesses with money to spend to do so. 
Today’s low and falling rate of inflation – at a time when interest rates are near zero – is a 
problem  that  is  slowing  the  adjustment  process.  Currently,  by  most  measures,  inflation  is 
below  the  level  that  members  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  view  as 
consistent with price stability. Although the Federal Reserve has no formal numerical inflation 
target,  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  long-run  inflation  forecasts  of  the  FOMC  members  cluster 
around 1.75 percent to 2 percent for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. 
This compares with a 1.5 percent year-over-year rate for the PCE deflator and 1.4 percent 
rate for the core PCE deflator, which excludes food and energy prices. 
Low  and  falling  inflation  is  a  problem  for  several  reasons. First,  low and  declining  inflation 
makes it harder to accomplish needed balance sheet adjustments. That is because, all other 
things  being  equal,  lower  inflation  means  slower  nominal  income  growth.  Slower  nominal 
income  growth,  in  turn,  means  that  less  of  the  needed  adjustment  in  household  debt-to-
income  ratios  will  come  from  rising  incomes.  This  puts  more  of  the  adjustment  burden  on 
paying down debt. 
                                                 
1   Chairman  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  Addendum:  Addressing  the  Financing  Needs  of  Small  Businesses,  Monetary 
Policy Report to Congress, July 21, 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2010
Second, and even more importantly, low and falling inflation can cause inflation expectations 
to  decline.  This  is  important  because  inflation  expectations  are  an  important  factor  that 
influences actual future inflation. Moreover, when inflation expectations decline, the expected 
real cost of credit increases – a subject I will return to in a moment. 
So what could the Federal Reserve do? As I see it, there are two potentially complementary 
avenues.  First,  we  could  take  steps  to  make  our  current  highly  accommodative  stance  of 
monetary  policy  more  effective  in  stimulating  economic  activity  by  providing  additional 
guidance about what we are trying to achieve today and in the future. Second, we could find 
ways to increase the amount of stimulus we currently provide via our balance sheet. 
Turning  to  the  first  issue,  clear  communication  about  objectives  and  intent  is  an  important 
element  of  effective  monetary  policy.  For  example,  communicating  clearly  our  intention  to 
return  inflation  to  more  normal  levels  can  help  keep  inflation  expectations  well  anchored 
around levels consistent with our inflation goals. As the central bank, we and we alone can 
control inflation – if not precisely in the short run, then over the medium term. By clarifying 
our  intentions,  we  can  reduce  the  risk  of  further  disinflation  –  or  even  an  outright  debt-
deflation  spiral  that  would  make  it  still  more  difficult  to  accomplish  the necessary  balance-
sheet adjustments. 
Clear  communication  on  the  part  of  a  central  bank  is  important  at  all  times,  but  it  is  even 
more  critical  when  the  federal  funds  rate  is  at  or  near  its  effective  lower  bound.  In  this 
environment,  a  decline  in  inflation  expectations  that  drives  up  the  real  interest  rate  and 
thereby increases the real cost of credit cannot be offset by simply lowering the federal funds 
rate. Thus, in a very direct sense, a fall in inflation expectations when the target interest rate 
is  at  the  zero  bound  represents  a  de  facto  tightening  of  monetary  policy  and  of  financial 
conditions.  Such  a  tightening  would  clearly  be  highly  undesirable  at  a  moment  when 
unemployment is too high, inflation is too low and the economy has only moderate forward 
momentum. 
In this situation, the FOMC must be clear and resolute in its commitment to its price stability 
objective.  This  is  why  the  most  recent  FOMC  statement  clearly  stated  that  underlying 
inflation was running somewhat below levels consistent with the dual mandate. 
There are a range of options we could pursue if we judged it worthwhile to go even further in 
communicating our objectives and intent. We could be even more explicit with regard to the 
inflation  rate  that  the  Committee  views  as  compatible  with  price  stability,  for  instance,  by 
stating  an  explicit  inflation  objective  as  is  common  practice  in  other  advanced  economies. 
This  could  help  anchor  inflation  expectations  at  the  desired  rate.  It  would  also  clarify  the 
extent to which the current level of inflation falls short of that rate. 
If  we  were  to  go  down  this  path,  it  would  be  important  to  note  that  any  provision  of  more 
information on our inflation objective would not be a signal that the inflation element of the 
dual  mandate  had  become  more  important  than  the  full  employment  objective.  Instead,  it 
would  principally  reflect  the  fact  that  inflation  being  “too  low”  (just  like  inflation  being  “too 
high”) is an impediment to achieving the full employment objective of the dual mandate. 
If  we  judged  it  desirable,  we  could  go  still  further  and  provide  more  guidance  on  how 
monetary policy would react to deviations from any stated inflation objective. One possibility 
would be to keep track of inflation shortfalls when the federal funds rate is constrained by the 
zero  bound,  as  is  the  case  today. For  example,  if  inflation  in  2011  were  a  0.5  percentage 
point  below  the  Fed’s  inflation  objective,  the  Fed  might  aim  to  offset  this  miss  by  an 
additional 0.5 percentage point rise in the price level in future years. 
In the current environment, such an approach would have some advantages as well as some 
disadvantages. When there is a large amount of slack in the economy, the Federal Reserve 
might  not  easily  be  able  to  hit  an  inflation  objective  soon.  But,  the  central  bank  could 
plausibly promise to make up the difference later on. Indeed, the further the Fed fell behind 
its inflation objective in the near term, the more inflation would need to increase in order to 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 5
push the actual path of prices up to the path consistent with price stability over the long run. 
To  the  extent  this  policy  was  more  credible,  it  might  do  a  better  job  keeping  inflation 
expectations from falling. This might make monetary policy more stimulative and, thus, might 
help the FOMC achieve its objectives more quickly. 
However, such an approach would only work well if people understood how it would operate 
and  formed  their  expectations  of  future  inflation  accordingly.  And  there  could  also  be 
significant costs. For example, if people mistakenly concluded that the Fed was tinkering with 
its  long-run  inflation  objective,  this  could  lead  to  greater  uncertainty  about  future  inflation. 
This might lead to higher risk premia and higher nominal interest rates that would undermine 
the effectiveness of such a policy to stimulate the economy. 
In  addition  to  communication  strategies,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  a  second  set  of  tools, 
namely the ability to expand its balance sheet to stimulate activity and move inflation toward 
desired levels – either by purchasing medium and long-term Treasuries or agency mortgage-
backed securities. Such purchases of long-duration assets pull down the level of long-term 
interest rates by removing duration from private-sector hands, who respond by purchasing 
other long-dated assets. 
Two interesting questions pertain to balance sheet expansion: (1) How much would the Fed 
have  to  purchase  to  have  a  given  impact  on  the  level  of  long-term  interest  rates  and 
economic  activity,  and,  (2)  what  constraints  exist  in  terms  of  limits  to  balance-  sheet 
expansion,  and  what  are  the  costs  involved  that  could  impede  efforts  to  meet  the  dual 
mandate  now  or  in  the  future?  The  questions  demand  serious  consideration  prior  to  any 
decision to expand the balance sheet further. 
With  respect  to  the  first  question,  some  simple  calculations  based  on  recent  experience 
suggest that $500 billion of purchases would provide about as much stimulus as a reduction 
in  the  federal  funds  rate  of  between  half  a  point  and  three  quarters  of  a  point.  But  this 
estimate is sensitive to how long market participants expected the Fed to hold on to these 
assets. 
More broadly, the clearer and more credible the framework governing purchases, the greater 
the likelihood that market participants would act in a manner that helped the Fed achieve its 
objectives. In particular, the more confident market participants are in the Fed’s ability to exit 
when the time is right, the more effective its purchases will be in stimulating the economy. 
Suppose the Fed was indeed successful in reducing long-term interest rates further – what 
then? Some claim that lower rates would have no effect on economic activity – that the Fed 
would  be  “pushing  on  a  string.”  This  is  too  dark  a  view.  Although  the  responsiveness  of 
demand to reductions in interest rates is probably lower in a world in which balance sheet 
constraints are important, the responsiveness is not zero. I believe that it remains significant.  
Even  in  today’s  challenging  circumstances,  lower  long-term  rates  would  support  the 
economy through a number of channels. Lower long-term rates would support the value of 
assets, including houses and equities and household net worth. Lower long-term rates would 
make  housing  more  affordable  and  support  consumption  by  enabling  households  to 
refinance their mortgages at lower rates. This would increase the amount of income left over 
for other spending. Of  course, this channel can be made  more powerful to the extent that 
further progress can be made in efficient mortgage debt restructurings that allow households 
with  negative  equity  in  their  homes  to  take  advantage  of  the  drop  in  mortgage  rates.  In 
addition,  lower  long-term  rates  would  reduce  the  cost  of  capital  for  businesses,  thereby 
fostering higher levels of capital spending for any given economic outlook. 
In considering the limits to balance sheet expansion, there are two constraints – one major 
and one more minor. The first constraint is the risk that the balance sheet expansion might 
cause inflation expectations to become unanchored, leading to higher risk premia. This risk is 
presumably greater in a period in which budget deficits are high, as they are today. 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2010
If exit concerns were to rise as purchases increased, then a rise in inflation risk premia would 
offset at least some of the expected fall in interest rates. In contrast, the more credible the 
ultimate exit strategy, the less likely it is that inflation risk premia would go up and the more 
effective purchases would be in lowering long-term rates. Also, the more credible the ultimate 
exit plan, the more confident investors would be about the Fed’s willingness to do what is 
needed to accomplish its objectives. This is important because it would help stabilize longer-
run inflation expectations at levels consistent with the dual mandate. 
The FOMC should be able to assure investors that it has both the means and the will to exit 
when – but not before – the time is right. That is because the Federal Reserve has the tools 
to  control  financial  conditions  and  credit  creation  even  with  an  expanded  balance  sheet. 
Payment  of  interest  on  reserves  allows  us  to  control  short-term  rates  with  even  a  large 
amount of excess reserves outstanding. In addition, we can drain excess reserves in several 
ways.  We  have  developed  term  deposit  accounts  and  the  ability  to  conduct  reverse 
repurchase operations with a large number of counterparties that would allow us to drain a 
large volume of reserves. Also, when the time is right, the Fed can always sell assets. Such 
asset sales would lead to a rise in longer-term rates and this would have a contractionary 
effect on the demand for credit. 
I  am  very  mindful  of  concerns  here  and  abroad  that  balance  sheet  expansion  could  be 
interpreted  as  a  policy  of  monetizing  the  federal  debt.  However,  I  regard  this  view  to  be 
fundamentally  mistaken.  It  misses  the  point  of  what  would  be  motivating  the  Federal 
Reserve. The FOMC would only engage in large-scale asset purchases in order to push the 
economy more rapidly toward the dual mandate goals of full employment and price stability. 
Once  these  goals  were  accomplished,  there  would  be  no  basis  for  further  purchases 
regardless  of  the  government’s  fiscal  position  because  additional  purchases  would  not  be 
consistent with this mandate. 
The  second  constraint  is  that  further  balance  sheet  expansion  would  increase  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  interest  rate  risk  by  raising  the  maturity  mismatch  between  its  assets  and 
liabilities. Recall that the bulk of the Fed’s liabilities are overnight reserves and the bulk of its 
assets  are  longer-term  Treasuries,  agency  and  agency  MBS  securities.  The  bigger  the 
balance  sheet  becomes,  the  more  a  future  rise  in  interest  rates  will  squeeze  the  Federal 
Reserve’s net interest margin. 
Some  worry  that  this  exposure  to  higher  short-term  rates  could  conceivably  affect  the 
Federal Reserve’s monetary policy credibility in the future. Some market participants might 
worry that the Federal Reserve could become reluctant to raise short-term rates in a timely 
way because this would constrain the amount of revenue that it would earn and remit to the 
Treasury. I am confident there is nothing to worry about on this score. 
Even if the Federal Reserve was not obliged to act in keeping with its dual mandate – which 
it is – with its assets skewed toward longer-duration securities, the Federal Reserve would 
have every incentive to ensure price stability over the long term. 
It is true that the larger the size of the balance sheet, the more likely it is that the Fed would 
ultimately  sell  assets  back  into  the  market,  potentially  at  prices  that  could  result  in  losses. 
Although  some 
the  Federal  Reserve’s 
independence, there is no reason why this should be the case, providing we stick closely to 
our mandate at all times. 
To date, the Fed’s actions in responding to the crisis have resulted in abnormally large profits 
that might reasonably be set against any subsequent losses. But much more importantly, our 
dual  mandate  does  not  state  that  we  should  do  what  is  necessary  to  promote  full 
employment and price stability only at times when we are virtually certain that in doing so we 
will  make  a  profit.  It  directs  us  to  promote  full  employment  and  price  stability  at  all  times. 
Profits and losses in any given year are much less important than getting the U.S. economy 
back to the highest level of employment consistent with price stability. 
losses  could  compromise 
that  such 
fear 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 7
In making our assessments about next steps, we need to be a bit humble about our capacity 
to  forecast  how  market  participants  would  respond  to  our  actions.  We  do  not  control  their 
behavior nor have much historical experience that we can draw on to easily assess how they 
are likely to behave. Even viewpoints that turned out to be incorrect could persist for a long 
time and generate adverse consequences. It is not enough for us to be right in theory. We 
also  have  to  be  convincing  in  practice  and  in  explaining  why  concerns  we  think  are 
misplaced are indeed unwarranted. 
As  Chairman  Bernanke  indicated  at  Jackson  Hole,  the  FOMC’s  decision  with  respect  to 
providing additional accommodation will be made by weighing the costs against the benefits. 
This is a dynamic process, which depends on the evolution of the economic outlook and our 
own ability to learn how to become more effective in improving the cost/benefit trade-offs. 
And, at its last meeting in September, the FOMC said it is “prepared to provide  additional 
accommodation if needed to support the economic recovery and to return inflation, over time, 
to levels consistent with its mandate.” 
Currently, my assessment is that both the current levels of unemployment and inflation and 
the timeframe over which they are likely to return to levels consistent with our mandate are 
unacceptable.  In  addition,  the  longer  this  situation  prevails and  the  U.S.  economy  is  stuck 
with the current level of slack and disinflationary pressure, the greater the likelihood that a 
further  shock  could  push  us  still  further  from  our  dual  mandate  objectives  and  closer  to 
outright deflation. 
We  have  tools  that  can  provide  additional  stimulus  at  costs  that  do  not  appear  to  be 
prohibitive. Thus, I conclude that further action is likely to be warranted unless the economic 
outlook evolves in a way that makes me more confident that we will see better outcomes for 
both employment and inflation before too long. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
8 
 BIS Review 127/2010
 BIS Review 127/2010 
   9
   10 
 BIS Review 127/2010
    11
BIS Review 127/2010 
     12 
 BIS Review 127/2010
   13
BIS Review 127/2010 
     14 
 BIS Review 127/2010
  15
BIS Review 127/2010 
 Reference Charts 
    16 
 BIS Review 127/2010
