Zhou Xiaochuan: Macro-prudential policy – Asian perspective 
Opening remarks by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High-
Level Seminar on “Macro-prudential policy: Asian perspective”, Shanghai, 18 October 2010.  
 Distinguished Managing Director Kahn, 
Distinguished First Deputy Managing Director Lipsky, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good  Morning!  It  is  a  pleasure  to  meet  friends  old  and  new  in  Shanghai  in  this  beautiful 
autumn to discuss macro-prudential policy. On behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I want 
to  extend  the  warmest  welcome  to  representatives  from  international  organizations  and 
officials from central banks, ministries of finance and financial regulators. 
Reviewing  the  global  financial  crises  in  history,  we  know  that  a  crisis  will  prompt  fresh 
institutional  reforms  in  addition  to  causing  massive  damages.  Since  the  outbreak  of  this 
round of crisis, the international community has agreed on the need to strengthen efforts to 
implement macro prudential policy. In the past few decades, the many new developments in 
financial  sector  undergone,  as  reflected  in  positive  feedbacks  and  pro-cyclicality  in  the 
economic and financial system, worked together with various other factors and ingredients 
such as insufficient early warning, inappropriate management and contagion, and produced 
the worst crisis since the “Great Recession”. 
A key lesson from this crisis is that risk prevention should focus not only on single financial 
institution  or  single  sector,  but  also  on  systemic  risks.  Macro-prudential  policy  is  the  very 
solution that addresses systemic risks. 
After the outbreak of the crisis, the International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability 
Board  stated  clearly  that  implementing  macro-prudential  policy  should  be  central  banks’ 
responsibility.  Countries  have  since  then  also  enhanced  central  banks’  macro-prudential 
policy functions in their financial reform. At the request of G20 financial summit, the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  other 
standard-setting  bodies  are  working  to  develop  institutional  arrangements  and  tools  to 
strengthen  macro-prudential  policy,  establish  mechanism  to  mitigate  pro-cyclical  factors, 
raise regulatory standards on systemically important financial institutions, and improve risk 
disposal and settlement arrangements. 
The international practice of strengthening macro prudential policy will be a boost to China’s 
financial reform and development. The Chinese financial system has basically withstood the 
shocks  of  the  recent  crisis  because  of  the  following  reasons.  First,  continued  economic 
growth has created a benign environment. Second, after the Asian financial crisis, joint stock 
reform of state-owned commercial banks enhanced their overall strength and resilience and 
strengthened the foundation for financial stability. Third, the financial legislation system and 
supervision ability has improved. Fourth, the financial market, including delivery of services 
and product innovation, was not sophisticated, and this helped ward off crisis. 
Currently, China’s financial system faces the challenge of guarding against systemic risks. 
On one hand, to address deep-rooted problems in the economic structure and the uneven 
and  unbalanced  growth,  it  is  necessary  to  adopt  sustainable  and  sound  macro-economic 
policies; the expansion of domestic credit supplies remains strong and cross-border capital 
movement contains potential risks. Excessive liquidity, inflation, asset price bubbles, periodic 
non-performing  loans  and  other  risks  may  build  up  and  undermine  asset  quality  and 
resilience  of  China’s  financial  sector.  One  the  other  hand,  in  the  past  few  years,  many 
financial  institutions  are  offering  cross-sector  and  cross-market  products;  financial  share-
BIS Review 147/2010 
 1
holding companies have established complex internal structures and moved into diversified 
businesses;  new-type  of  financial  institutions  are  heavily  involved  in  the  financial  market 
activities. Given China’s domestic situation, the stability of the financial system and macro-
economic policies are directly related. Due to the large share of bank credit in total financing, 
there  is  a  close  relationship  between  fluctuation  of  credit  supply  and  economic  cyclical 
change on one hand and systemic financial risks on the other. Therefore, the establishment 
of  counter-cyclical  adjustment  mechanism  is  our  priority  in  strengthening  macro  prudential 
policy.  The  People’s  Bank  of  China,  with  a  mandate  in  China’s  macro-economic 
management and financial stability, needs to build a counter-cyclical adjustment mechanism 
to  increase  flexibilities  in  macro-economic  management.  Meanwhile,  it  is  necessary  to 
strengthen monitoring on systemically-important financial institutions to prevent and properly 
manage potential systemic risks. 
Macro-prudential policy is a relatively new concept in China. To avoid misunderstanding and 
simplification of it as just capital requirement, capital buffer, liquidity, leverage, etc, first of all, 
we need to clarify its essential meaning, framework and concrete content. In general, firstly 
macro-prudential  policy  is  counter-cyclical.  Secondly,  it  needs  to  deal  with  market  failure 
such as herding phenomena to enhance financial market soundness and prudence of market 
participants. Thirdly, along with globalization, rapid expansion of financial market, increasing 
complex  financial  instruments  and  trading,  it  is  necessary  to  formulate  and  implement 
broader international standards. 
Today, thanks to an IMF initiative, we gather to discuss macro prudential framework based 
on  lessons  learned  in  crisis,  to  analyze  macro  prudential  policy  tools  and  their  effects,  to 
reflect  the  changing  roles  of  central  banks  in  macro  prudential  management.  We  need  to 
reexamine the relationship between monetary policy, financial stability and macro prudential 
management,  and  its  policy  implications.  These  are  very  challenging  topics  and  deserve 
thorough discussion. 
I wish this seminar a great success! 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2010
