Charles Bean: The economic outlook for 2011 and beyond 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy at the Bank of England, 
at the Market News International Annual Seminar, London, 13 December 2010. 
 Good morning! Christmas is the traditional time for looking back over the events of the past 
year and contemplating what the new year might bring. Today I shall follow that tradition by 
taking  stock  of  economic  developments  over  the  past  year  and  looking  at  the  challenges 
ahead.  
Many  of  the  recent  activity  indicators  have  been  somewhat  comforting.  Global  growth  has 
recovered strongly on the back of a strong rebound in the emerging economies, with the IMF 
projecting  expansion  of  close  to  5%  this  year  and  more  than  4%  next  year.  Here  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  we  have  also  seen  a  nascent  recovery;  output  in  the  third  quarter  was, 
according  to  the  latest  ONS  estimates,  some  2.8%  higher  than  a  year  earlier.  That  is 
marginally stronger than our projection for the most-likely path of four-quarter growth made a 
year earlier in our August 2009 Inflation Report.  
Around  half  of  the  growth  over  the  past  year  was,  however,  down  to  the  contribution  of 
stockbuilding, as businesses reduced the rate of inventory decumulation and, in some cases, 
started  to  rebuild  stocks.  That  can  only  provide  a  temporary  boost  to  aggregate  demand 
growth.  And  the  contribution  of  public  spending  to  growth  is  also  set  to  fall  as  the 
Government’s planned fiscal consolidation gets underway. So economic prospects depend 
crucially on private final domestic demand and net exports picking up the baton; fortunately 
there have been signs that handover might be starting to take place in the latest quarterly 
data.  
Private final domestic demand fell sharply in the recession. Consumer spending decreased 
by  more  than  4%  over  the  five  quarters  from  2008Q2,  as  the  prospect  of  reduced  real 
incomes led households to cut their borrowing and build up precautionary savings balances. 
During this period, the household savings rate rose by almost six percentage points. Since 
then, we have seen a modest recovery in consumer spending, and measures such as the 
CBI Distributive Trades Survey suggest that recovery is likely to have continued into the final 
quarter of this year.  
The  prospects  for  household  spending  through  next  year  and  beyond  depend  crucially  on 
households’  expectations  of  their  future  incomes,  as  well  as  their  balance  sheet  positions. 
Consumer  confidence  measures  have  generally  weakened  through  this  year,  possibly 
reflecting concerns about the prospective fiscal consolidation. An open question is how far 
the  impact  of  that  consolidation  has  already  been  taken  on  board  by  households  in  their 
spending  decisions,  and  how  much  adjustment  is  yet  to  come.  The  annual  survey  of 
households’ financial positions carried out for the Bank by NMG Consulting1 included some 
special questions on this topic and found that, while the majority of households expected to 
be  affected  in  some  way,  less  than  half  had  so  far  responded  by  spending  less,  working 
longer  hours  or  looking  for  a  new  job.  That  suggests  there  may  be  further  adjustment  to 
come.  
Investment  fell  even  more  sharply  than  private  consumption  during  the  recession  –  down 
almost  20%  –  as  the  higher  cost  and  reduced  availability  of  finance,  coupled  with  sharply 
heightened  uncertainty  about  economic  prospects,  led  businesses  to  cancel  or  postpone 
                                                 
1   See “The financial position of British households: evidence from the 2010 NMG Consulting survey” by Mette 
Nielsen, Silvia Pezzini, Kate Reinold and Richard Williams, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter 2010. 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 1
investment  projects.  While  the  outlook  remains  highly  uncertain,  the  improvement  in  both 
financial markets and in the real economy since mid-2009 is likely to have contributed to the 
modest  recovery  seen  in  businesses’  capital  spending  over  the  past  year.  And  though 
continued tight credit conditions may restrain the investment spending of small and medium-
sized  enterprises,  the  bulk  of  capital  expenditure  is  carried  out  by  large  businesses.  They 
appear  to  be  less  credit-constrained  and  also  have  better  access  to  the  capital  markets. 
Moreover,  despite  the  downturn,  the  corporate  financial  position  appears  to  be  relatively 
healthy.  So  the  availability  of  finance  is  unlikely  to  be  a  major  brake.  Rather  investment 
spending  is  likely  to  be  restrained  by  the  juxtaposition  of  muted  product  demand  and  an 
overhang of spare capacity.  
For almost as long as I have been a member of the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, we 
have pointed to the need for a re-balancing of the composition of demand at some juncture, 
away  from  domestic  demand  and  towards  net  exports.  Accompanying  that  re-balancing 
would be a re-orientation of the structure of activity away from businesses that predominantly 
meet domestic needs towards those producing internationally tradable goods and services. 
The substantial depreciation of sterling – down around a quarter since August 2007 – should 
facilitate that re-balancing by making it more profitable to produce for export or to compete 
against imports. For example, relative unit labour costs in the United Kingdom are now more 
than 25% lower than before the crisis.  
The  contribution  of  net  exports  to  the  recovery  had  –  at  least  until  the  very  latest  GDP 
release  –  been  somewhat  disappointing.  Net  exports  reduced  growth  by  a  total  of 
0.7 percentage  points  over  the  past  four  quarters,  as  import  growth  outstripped  that  of 
exports.  As  world  output,  weighted  according  to  countries’  importance  to  UK  trade,  grew 
somewhat  faster  over  that  period  than  UK  activity,  the  weakness  in  the  UK’s  net  export 
performance cannot be attributed to a more rapid recovery here. Some of the weakness can 
perhaps  be  ascribed  to  strong  import  growth  associated  with  the  working  out  of  the  stock 
cycle, as inventories are relatively import intensive. But closer investigation suggests that the 
weakness has been especially concentrated in exports of financial services, no doubt in part 
reflecting the impact of the banking crisis. Foreigners’ demand for UK financial services may 
plausibly  continue  to  be  somewhat  lower  than  before  the  crisis,  so  this  weakness  may 
persist.  
In contrast, there are signs that the depreciation in sterling is having the expected effect on 
the  market  share  of  goods  exporters.  That  is  also  reflected  in  the  robust  growth  in 
manufacturing  output  and  in  business  surveys  which  report  buoyant  export  orders.  So  far, 
there is less sign that the lower level of sterling is leading to the substitution of imports by 
domestically produced goods and services. But it is likely that the producers of internationally 
tradable goods and services take time to respond to the improved opportunities associated 
with a lower real exchange rate, especially if investment in foreign distribution networks or 
the  repatriation  of  off-shored  activities  is  required.  So,  other  things  equal,  it  seems 
reasonable to expect the impact of the lower level of sterling on net exports to continue to 
build through next year.  
The  prospects  for  net  exports  obviously  depend  not  only  on  the  response  to  the  past 
depreciation of sterling, but also on demand in the UK’s main export markets. While global 
growth has been strong over the past year, much of that has been in emerging economies 
that presently account for a relatively small proportion of UK exports.  
Growth  has  been  patchier  in  the  developed  economies.  In  the  United  States,  following  a 
series of soft indicators through the late summer and early autumn, the US Federal Reserve 
announced additional purchases of US treasuries. And the Obama administration is seeking 
to inject a further fiscal stimulus, incorporating not only the widely expected extension of the 
Bush administration tax cuts, but also a temporary cut in payroll taxes. The extension of the 
Federal  Reserve’s  large-scale  asset  purchase  programme  has  proved  controversial,  with 
some  US  critics  asserting  that  it  is  inflationary  and  policymakers  in  some  of  the  emerging 
2 
 BIS Review 169/2010
economies claiming that it is both an attempt to engineer a beggar-my-neighbour devaluation 
and that it will boost capital inflows and foster asset-price bubbles.  
These criticisms seem to me mostly off the mark. Central banks undertake asset purchases 
financed by the issuance of central bank money in order to boost nominal spending. They do 
that  by  depressing  a  range  of  longer-term  real  yields  and  raising  asset  prices.  The  earlier 
phases  of  quantitative  easing  both  here  and  in  the  United  States  indeed  appear  to  have 
lowered  longer-term  nominal  and  real  yields  below  where  they  would  otherwise  have 
been.2 This time around, the transmission channel has been rather different, as after falling 
on  the  anticipation  of  further  asset  purchases,  longer-term  US  yields  rose.  But  the  policy 
should  only  prove  inflationary  in  the  medium  to  long  run  if  it  results  in  excessive  nominal 
spending  growth,  which  hardly  appears  likely  at  the  current  juncture.  Only  if  the  Federal 
Reserve fails to tighten policy promptly as the recovery takes hold is excessive inflation likely 
to be a problem. 
The  criticisms  from  outside  seem  to  me  almost  as  misplaced.  While  quantitative  easing  is 
likely  to  be  associated  with  exchange  rate  depreciation,  it  also  boosts  domestic  spending. 
Demand in other countries therefore rises as a result of the increased demand in the United 
States, as well as falling as a result of the appreciation of their currencies. These are just the 
normal mechanisms that operate when official interest rates are cut in one country. It is then 
an empirical matter which is the dominant channel. Quantitative easing is consequently very 
different  in  character  from  sterilised  exchange  rate  intervention,  which  merely  redistributes 
global demand.  
There  is,  though,  more  substance  to  the  concern  that  stimulatory  monetary  policies  in  the 
developed  economies  have  encouraged  a  search  for  yield  and  capital  inflows  into  the 
emerging economies. So there is some justification for the imposition of temporary restraints 
on those inflows. But where such asset price pressures are building, they seem more likely to 
be  related  to  overly  loose  monetary  and  financial  policies  in  those  countries  and  their 
unwillingness to allow exchange rates to bear more of the strain.  
It  is  the  euro  area,  however,  that  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  United  Kingdom.  In 
aggregate, the euro area looks to be undergoing a steady recovery, not dissimilar to ours. 
Output in the third quarter was 1.9% higher than a year earlier, roughly in line with the euro 
area’s historical average growth rate. But that masks markedly divergent performance and 
prospects within the euro area. Germany is growing rapidly, led in part by an expansion in 
exports  to  the  booming  Asian  economies.  The  countries  of  the  periphery  are,  however, 
struggling in the face of significant fiscal and structural challenges. While the countries of the 
euro-area periphery are each confronted by specific challenges, they all need to restore their 
competitiveness  without  the  option  of  devaluation.  Instead,  in  the  absence  of  effective 
structural  reform,  they  face  the  prospect  of  sustained  low  growth  in  order  to  drive  down 
wages and prices. That itself makes the task of stabilising public debt harder.  
Support to Greece and Ireland from the IMF and rest of the European Union has given those 
countries  a  breathing  space  in  which  to  undertake  the  necessary  adjustments.  Financial 
support  for  other  countries  may  or  may  not  prove  necessary  –  only  time  will  tell.  But  the 
important thing for us is whether an intensification of the difficulties in the euro-area periphery 
could also derail the recovery here.  
                                                 
2   Analysis  of  the  earlier  phases  of  quantitative  easing  both  here  and  in  the  United  States  suggest  that 
purchases of the order of 12–14% of GDP have lowered longer-term government and corporate bond yields 
by  around  70–100  basis  points  relative  to  where  they  would  otherwise  have  been.  See  Michael  Joyce, 
Ana Lasaosa,  Ibrahim  Stevens  and  Matthew  Tong,  “The  Financial  Market  Impact  of  Quantitative  Easing,” 
Bank of England Working Paper No.393, 2010, and Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and 
Brian Sack, “Large-scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, Staff Report No.441, 2010. 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 3
Sharp fiscal consolidation and very slow growth in the periphery countries would, of course, 
have some adverse impact on the demand for our exports. But the more significant links are 
potentially through the financial system. Fortunately, UK banks have done much to improve 
their resilience over the past couple of years and, even under a very adverse scenario, they 
should  be  able  to  absorb  the  likely  losses  on  their  direct  exposures  to  Greece,  Ireland, 
Portugal  and  Spain  without  too  much  difficulty.  There  is,  though,  the  possibility  of  further 
indirect  effects  arising  through  the  interconnectedness  and  cross-border  operations  of 
European  banks  which  could  amplify  the  impact.  So  some  adverse  effect  on  the  funding 
costs of UK banks and the supply of credit remains a possibility.  
Harder to gauge is the potential effect on household and, especially, business confidence. In 
the  aftermath  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  this  was  arguably  the  most  significant 
transmission channel to the real economy. An intensification of the sovereign debt problems 
in the euro area could therefore administer a blow to the recovery here. But given the very 
high degree of uncertainty, there is little that the MPC can do to deal with this risk ahead of 
crystallisation.  
While UK output growth has come in much in line with our expectations, the same cannot 
be said of our primary objective, inflation. Back in August of last year, our central projection 
was for CPI inflation to be around 1.5% now. But inflation has been markedly stronger than 
that – 3.2% on the latest reading. Why has inflation been so much higher, especially given 
that  our  expectations  for  growth  have  largely  been  fulfilled?  There  are  three  factors  that 
account for this.3  
First,  energy  and  non-oil  commodity  prices  are  substantially  higher  than  in  the  summer  of 
2009. By convention, we base our forecasts for these variables on futures prices, which were 
relatively flat at that time. The buoyancy of commodity prices since then reflects the rebound 
in  global  activity,  and  especially  the  strength  in  the  emerging  economies.  In  addition, 
temporary  supply  factors  have  boosted  the  prices  of  some  agricultural  commodities.  At 
present there appears to be a margin of spare capacity in the oil market, so that may permit 
global  growth  to  remain  strong  without  putting  further  upward  pressure  on  energy  prices 
immediately.  But  a  low  elasticity  of  supply  of  other  commodities  means  that  their  prices, 
relative to those of finished goods and services, may continue to drift upwards. That would 
constitute an additional headwind for the United Kingdom.  
A second factor behind the unexpectedly high inflation appears to have been greater than 
expected pass-through into final prices from the depreciation of sterling after August 2007. 
Evidence  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  other  countries  during  the  Great  Moderation 
suggested that pass-through had fallen, perhaps because inflation expectations were better 
anchored. We expected something similar on this occasion too. In the event, the strength of 
UK  goods  inflation,  relative  to  that  in  the  other  G7  economies,  suggests  that  the  pass-
through of the depreciation was in fact rather greater, and similar to that before the Great 
Moderation.  
The third potential ingredient behind higher inflation is a more moderate drag from the margin 
of spare capacity in the economy. Pay growth has been subdued during the recession, and 
that  has  helped  to  ensure  that  unemployment  has  risen  far  less  than many  commentators 
feared. Rather the puzzle is on the pricing side, as prices have been higher relative to costs 
than expected.  
That could indicate that the margin of spare capacity is not as large as the collapse in activity 
might suggest. On current estimates, output is presently about 10% below a continuation of 
its pre-crisis trend. But historical experience indicates that the output losses – relative to the 
pre-crisis trend – after banking crises tend to be highly persistent. That suggests that such 
                                                 
3   See pages 48–49 of our August 2010 Inflation Report for more on this. 
4 
 BIS Review 169/2010
crises  are  associated  with  an  impairment  of  supply  capacity  too.  Business  surveys  are 
consistent  with  this,  implying  that  the  margin  of  spare  capacity  in  firms  is  now  relatively 
limited  –  in fact  not  much  larger  than  after  the  bursting of  the  dotcom  bubble.  But  against 
that, it is difficult to find any direct evidence of supply impairment. For instance, liquidations 
have been running at less than 1% (compared to 3% in the 1990s recession). One resolution 
of the puzzle may be that producers have  mothballed capacity, which could, at a cost, be 
brought into use if demand conditions warranted.  
The MPC’s view is that the current elevated level of inflation is likely to persist in the near 
term  –  indeed  our  central  expectation  for  inflation  is  somewhat  higher  than  that  of  outside 
commentators. Ultimately, however, this period of elevated inflation should prove temporary. 
The  standard  rate  of  VAT  is  set  to  rise  again at  the  beginning  of  next  year,  but  once  that 
drops  out  of  the  annual  comparison  a  year  later,  so  the  inflation  rate  is  likely  to  fall  back 
sharply. The impact on prices of sterling’s past depreciation should be starting to wane. And 
the relatively moderate expansion that we expect over the next year or two should ensure 
that there is some, albeit uncertain, brake on inflation from spare capacity. We have seen 
muted underlying inflation pressures in both the euro area and the United States, reflecting 
the  spare  capacity  in  those  economies,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  United 
Kingdom will behave differently once the temporary influences subside.  
But  there  are  risks  to  this  scenario.  They  are  twofold.  First,  that  strong  global  growth 
continues  to  generate  upward  pressure  on  the  prices  of  commodities  and  tradable  goods 
more  generally.  And,  second,  that  the  period  of  elevated  inflation  causes  medium-term 
inflation expectations to drift up, leading to higher rates of increase of both wages and prices. 
Measures  of  near-term  household  inflations  have  moved  up  in  line  with  the  MPC’s  own 
assessment  of  near-term  inflation,  but  the  rise  in  longer-term  measures  has  been 
considerably  more  muted.  And  measures  derived  from  inflation  swaps  suggest  that  the 
expectations  of  financial  market  participants  five  years  ahead  have  remained  stable.  But 
given the unexpected strength of inflation in recent months, this risk has probably increased 
of late. So we shall be watching these indicators, and their impact on wages and prices, like 
proverbial hawks.  
What are the implications of all this for monetary policy? The recovery has so far turned out 
to be broadly in line with that expected a year ago, but the outlook for growth remains highly 
uncertain. Though inflation has been running well above target and is likely to continue to do 
so for a while yet, beyond the end of next year it should fall back to near the Committee’s 2% 
target. In the light of that outlook, I believe we have made appropriate use of the “constrained 
discretion” granted to us in the Chancellor’s remit, looking through the temporarily elevated 
inflation  to  the  medium  term  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  volatility  in  output.  Tightening 
policy sharply in order to deal with the currently elevated level of inflation would simply have 
put a brake on the recovery unnecessarily and would have made inflation more likely than 
not to fall below the target in the medium term.  
If all goes to plan, however, and private final demand continues to pick up the baton as the 
fiscal consolidation proceeds, then the margin of spare capacity will shrink and it will at some 
juncture  become  appropriate  to  begin  withdrawing  the  current  extraordinary  degree  of 
monetary stimulus. And, when that point comes, the MPC will aim to do so in a timely, but 
measured, fashion.  
As 2010 draws to a close, the good news, then, is that the recovery, here and more widely, 
has  remained  on  track,  following  the  sharpest  downturn  in  activity  since  the  Great 
Depression. Such an outcome was by no means guaranteed twelve months ago; for that we 
must  be  grateful.  But  there  remain  significant  challenges  for  the  year  ahead.  In  many 
developed countries, the after-effects of the financial crisis still linger, in the form of banks 
that are still overly reliant on official support, fragile household and business confidence, and 
bloated  public  sector  deficits  and  debt.  Moreover,  the  rapid  recovery  in  emerging  markets 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 5
has reawakened global inflationary pressures. And here in the United Kingdom, inflation has 
been running above the MPC’s 2% target for an uncomfortably long time.  
It may be some while yet before normality is restored. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 169/2010
