Andreas Dombret: Beyond the financial crisis – dealing with systemic 
risk 
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  workshop  “Beyond  the  financial  crisis:  systemic  risk,  spillovers  and 
regulation”,  organised  by  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Technische  Universität  Dresden, 
Dresden, 28 October 2010. 
 Strengthening resilience  
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I warmly welcome you to this dinner on the occasion of the workshop, jointly organised by 
the Technische Universität Dresden and the Deutsche Bundesbank. This has been a busy 
day full of research results and models. I would now like to complement this view with some 
remarks focusing on the policy dimension of systemic risk. 
Over  the  last  months,  the  international  community  has  already  decided  to  improve  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  the  international  financial  system  in  several  key 
points. The recent agreement on tighter capital standards (Basel III) represents a particularly 
decisive step forward in the envisaged re-form agenda. The new rules will probably be finally 
ratified  at  the  forthcoming  G20  Summit  of  heads  of  state  and  government  in  Seoul.  Bank 
capital  will  have  to  be  stronger  and  higher  in  future,  which  will  reduce  the  likelihood  of 
individual institutions failing.  
Larger risk buffers in the form of additional capital are not enough, however. More attention 
needs also to be paid to the “big picture”, the system as a whole. If the crisis has taught us 
one serious lesson, it is that the tightly networked international financial system can cause 
events which start out as isolated shocks to rapidly go global and unleash systemic effects.  
Such systemic risks can originate in any part of the financial system: channels of potential 
contagion  exist  both  within  financial  sectors  and  markets  and  across  sectors  and 
components. Feedback loops between the financial sector and the real economy can also 
give rise to systemic risk. The system as a whole can also encounter difficulties if, owing to 
interdependencies, the rational conduct of market participants at the individual level were to 
lead to market dislocations in the aggregate. 
I  draw  three  direct  conclusions  from  the  foregoing,  which  are  related  to  one  another  and 
should be main elements of the policy response to the crisis. First, we need to find a suitable 
way of dealing with systemically important institutions. Second, the traditional microprudential 
supervision needs to be supplemented with a macroprudential – or systemically oriented – 
component. Third, we must close existing information gaps by gathering information on areas 
of the financial system that have so far remained in the dark – and, in doing so, must pay 
particular attention to the so-called shadow banking system.  
I will now briefly discuss these three problem areas. 
Dealing with systemically important financial institutions 
2. 
How to deal properly with systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) is one of the key 
challenges  of  our  reform  agenda.  The  salient  feature  of  these  institutions  is  that  they  are 
especially  large  (too-big-to-fail),  or  especially  highly  networked  (too-connected-to-fail).  This 
category  can  also  include  intermediaries  that  perform  specific  functions  which  cannot  be 
readily assumed by other market participants.  
BIS Review 144/2010 
 1
If  one  such  institution  encounters  difficulties,  this  may  have  severe  ramifications,  snowball 
into  a  threat  to  the  entire  financial  system  and  impose  costs  not  only  on  other  market 
participants  but  on  society  at  large.  Therefore  the  insolvency  of  such  an  institution  is 
considered  to  be  unacceptable.  Consequently,  these  banks  enjoy  an  implicit  guarantee 
which  often  manifests  itself  as  a  competitive  advantage  in  the  form  of  more  favourable 
refinancing conditions. 
To solve this problem, we need a comprehensive approach which goes beyond the increase 
in risk buffers recently adopted by the Basel Committee. The G20 has given the Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) the assignment of finding solutions. For the upcoming G20 Summit in 
Seoul,  the  FSB  will  present  to  the  heads  of  state  and  government  recommendations  for 
dealing with SIFIs.  
I  think  it is obvious  that  global  SIFIs  should  be  subject  to more  intensive  supervision  than 
ordinary banks. Creating a more robust financial market infrastructure is also a must. One 
way of preventing the development of excessive risk concentration in the derivatives market, 
for  instance,  would  lie  in  maximum  standardisation  and  settlement  through  central 
counterparties.  To  be  effective,  this,  naturally,  would  of  course  require  a  regulatory 
framework which ensures that these central counterparties are well capitalised and well run 
and that they conduct prudent collateral policy.  
There is also a broad consensus that global SIFIs should have greater loss-absorbency than 
mandatory  under  Basel  III.  The  amount  of  this  additional  capital  requirement  should  be 
based on the potential damage that such a SIFI would cause to the system in an insolvency 
case; it should be based on that institution’s share of the risk to the financial system as a 
whole.  Such  a  capital  add-on  will  probably  be  applied  in  Pillar  2  of  the  Basel  Framework. 
Capital  add-ons  are  a  suitable  instrument  with  which  to  put  a  price  tag  on  the  implicit 
guarantee for global SIFIs. They raise capital costs and thus, to a certain extent, offset the 
competitive advantage resulting from their implicit guarantee. Alongside capital add-ons, the 
use of “contingent convertibles” is also among the ideas currently under discussion.  
However, some important details still have to be cleared up in the coming months regarding 
the  extent  of,  and  instruments  for,  ensuring  higher  loss-absorbing  capability  as  well  as 
regarding the overall international approach for dealing with global SIFIs. In all probability, it 
will  not  be  until  next  year  before  some  of  these  points  can  be  wrapped  up  for  good.  One 
great challenge surely lies in the question of how precisely to quantify systemic importance – 
apart from the 20 to 30 banks for which this is patently obvious – and translate it into action 
by regulators and supervisors. We also need to take precautions to ensure that SIFIs cannot 
circumvent the tightened requirements by reorganising the institutional group structure while 
leaving the risk profile unchanged. 
However,  we  will  never  be  able  to  fully  prevent  individual  institutions  from  encountering 
difficulties and going bankrupt. Therefore, it is incumbent on us to take measures to ensure 
that  a  large  SIFI  can  fail  without  dragging  down  the  overall  system  with  it.  It  is  therefore 
indispensable  that  the  financial  sector  has  in  place  its  own  restructuring  and  resolution 
mechanisms since general insolvency laws have often proven inadequate during the crisis. 
This  would  significantly  enlarge  government  agencies’  scope  for  action  in  times  of  crisis, 
while at the same time preserving the desired incentive function of giving institutions a door 
through  which  to  exit  from  the  market  –  in  an  orderly  fashion!  The  individual  national 
legislative frameworks should be internationally as compatible as possible, as this is the only 
way  to  ensure  that  a  SIFI  can  be  restructured  or  resolved  without  causing  major  market 
turmoil.  
Macroprudential oversight 
3. 
The  crisis  has  shown  us  compellingly  that  traditional  microprudential  supervision  is 
inadequate  to  the  task  of  sufficiently  addressing  systemic  risk.  This  type  of  supervision 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2010
primarily  aims  at  ensuring  the  stability  and  solvency  of  single  entities  but  often  fails  to 
adequately address the fact that the financial system as a whole is more complex than the 
sum  of  its  parts.  We  therefore  need  to  add  a  macroprudential  overlay  to  single-entity 
supervision – only by looking at the system as a whole will we be able to reliably identify at 
an  early  stage  the  risks  arising  from  the  interplay  of  financial  market  actors  and  potential 
contagion  effects  and  take  countermeasures.  This  holds  both  for  systemic  risk  caused  by 
interdependencies  within  the  financial  system  and  for  risk  concentrations  arising  from 
interplay between the financial system and the real economy. At the same time, the goal of 
macroprudential oversight is the early identification of the build-up of financial imbalances so 
that countermeasures can be taken.  
With  regard  to  giving  supervision  a  more  macroprudential  focus,  several  key  institutional 
decisions have already been taken at international and national level alike. Central banks are 
usually  key  players  in  macroprudential  oversight.  This  makes  perfect  sense  since  central 
banks house a greater concentration of the expertise needed for a systemic perspective than 
other institutions. They therefore have comparative advantages in terms of information and 
ability to take action, born, for instance, of central banks’ involvement in the responsibility for 
financial stability, their oversight of payment systems, their monetary policy operations, which 
bring  them  in  close  proximity  to  the  markets,  and  their  involvement  in  many  international 
bodies and committees.  
At  this juncture,  I  wish  to  confine  myself  to  three  examples  of  institutional  reforms already 
being  undertaken;  central  banks  are  key  players  in  all  of  these  cases.  As  an  example  of 
international efforts, the FSB and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have, since 2009, 
been conducting global Early Warning Exercises twice a year together with central banks. In 
these exercises, endogenous financial risks and macrofinancial systemic risks are analysed 
and  policymakers  are  given  confidential  warnings  and  recommendations  for  actions  to 
counteract identified weaknesses.  
In the EU, a decisive step with a similar objective has been taken in the form of the recent 
agreement on the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The ESRB 
and its support structure, based at the European Central Bank, will assume responsibility for 
macroprudential oversight in the EU beginning in the year 2011. Its objective is to ensure the 
early detection of stability risks and issue risk warnings or recommendations to the European 
Union, member states or European or national supervisory authorities.  
Finally, here in Germany, the so-called Risk Committee composed of high-ranking delegates 
from  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  has  been  established  at  the  end  of  2009.  It  serves  as  a 
coordination  committee 
integration  of  microprudential  supervision  and 
macroprudential  monitoring.  At  its  regular  meetings,  information  on  relevant  risk  areas  is 
exchanged,  enabling  cross-pollination  between  single-entity  supervision  and  systemic 
oversight.  The  committee’s  toolkit  also  includes  recommended  actions  to  be  taken  by  the 
supervisors concerned.  
for  better 
Closing existing information gaps 
4. 
Successful  macroprudential  oversight  is  predicated  on  the  responsible  public  authorities 
having  all  the  relevant  information  they  need  at  all  times.  This  requires,  in  turn,  that  all 
systemically  important  financial  institutions,  markets  and  instruments  be  subjected  to 
reporting requirements.  
In this context, the crisis has forcefully driven home the dangers arising from the fringes of 
the  financial  system.  Many  different  types  of  financial  activities  had  been  shifted  to  the 
shadow banking system and thus to an area that is not really regulated and about which only 
insufficient  information  is  available.  Put  simply,  the  agents  in  the  shadow  banking  system 
include  all  those  intermediaries  which,  like  banks,  conduct  maturity,  credit  and  liquidity 
transformation,  yet  do  not  have  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  or  public  sector  credit 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 3
guarantees.1 Among these are organisations such as structured investment vehicles (SIVs) 
or  conduits  which  have  acquired  a  somewhat  dubious  reputation  in  connection  with 
investments  in  securitised  subprime  mortgage  loans.  Many  market  participants  had 
previously been completely unaware of the existence of these vehicles and the extent of their 
activities. 
Other members of this grey zone of the financial system include US money market funds and 
leveraged investors, such as hedge funds. Although these actors were not at the forefront of 
the current crisis, they still represent a potential source of systemic risk, not least owing to 
their business relationships with large regulated banks. In individual, tight markets, they can 
also  trigger  and  significantly  amplify  market  reactions  or  act  as  a  catalyst  for  a  general 
reassessment of risks in the financial markets.  
This  example  serves  to  show  that  it  is  the  type  of  business  being  conducted  and  not  an 
agent’s formal status which should determine the type of regulatory treatment. We therefore 
also have to address and oversee those agents outside the classical banking system which 
perform  a  significant  measure  of  similar  intermediation  functions,  and  subject  them  to 
adequate registration and disclosure requirements. These reporting obligations will not least 
provide data input for further research on systemic risk and possible channels of contagion.  
An  internationally  coordinated  approach  is  necessary  for  any  possible  registration  and 
disclosure  requirements,  as  there  is  otherwise  the  danger  that  risky  activities  or  products 
could  flee  to  less  regulated  or  entirely  unregulated  areas of  the  financial  system  and,  in  a 
crisis, come back to affect regulated markets. In this connection, we have to bear in mind 
that  the  recent  tightening  of  banking  regulation  through  Basel  III  and  the  envisaged  rules 
governing SIFIs create new incentives to offshore business to the unregulated areas of the 
financial system. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To  sum  up:  the  recent  agreement  to  gradually  but  significantly  tighten  the  capital 
requirements  for  banks  represents  a  decisive  step  forwards  in  restoring  financial  stability. 
This is not enough, however. What we also have to do, in particular, is  
– 
– 
to curtail the systemic risk emanating from SIFIs as effectively as possible; 
to  embed  awareness  of  systemic  risk  in  the  entire  framework  of  oversight  and 
resolution,  and 
traditional  single-entity  supervision  with  a 
to  complement 
macroprudential component; and  
to widen supervisors’ focus through transparency requirements directed particularly 
at the shadow banking system.  
 Thank you for your attention! 
                                                
 
1  See Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No 458, Shadow Banking, July 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2010
