Vítor Constâncio: The establishment of the European Systemic Risk 
Board – challenges and opportunities 
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
at the Eurofi Financial Forum plenary session 14 on “Implementing the de Larosière Agenda”, 
Brussels, 29 September 2010. 
 The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will be established in January 2011 as the body 
responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the EU financial system. It is mandated to 
actively monitor the various sources of risk to financial stability in the EU – across Member 
States and financial sectors – with due consideration of also global developments. It should 
identify the risks and assess how they could impact the financial system so as to prioritise 
them.  In  this  context,  systemic  risk  is  defined  in  legislation  on  the  ESRB  as  “a  risk  of 
disruption in the financial system with the potential to have negative consequences for the 
internal  market  and  the  real  economy.”  The  ESRB  should  issue  warnings  on  significant 
systemic risks and issue recommendations for policy action to address such risks.  
The  creation  of  the  ESRB  is  a  response  to  one  of  the  key  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis 
regarding the need for an enhanced macro-prudential oversight of the financial system as a 
new policy function. The value added of a macro-prudential function to safeguard financial 
stability is its focus on detecting, assessing and addressing vulnerabilities that arise from the 
interconnections between financial institutions and markets, as well as from macroeconomic 
and  structural  developments,  including  financial  innovation.  It  will  thus  take  a  system-wide 
perspective,  which  will  complement  micro-prudential  supervision,  whose  purpose  is  to 
assess the soundness of individual financial institutions.  
The  design  of  a  framework  for  the  conduct  of  macro-prudential  oversight  as  new  policy 
function  involves  significant  challenges,  but  also  represents  a  unique  opportunity  for 
reinforcing the arrangements to safeguard financial stability. In particular, the following three 
main components should underpin a macro-prudential framework:  
 
first, the necessary conditions for an enhanced monitoring of the financial system as 
a whole, in order to identify potential threats to financial stability;  
second, the instruments for translating financial stability assessments into concrete 
policy action aimed at enhancing the resilience of the financial system; and 
third,  appropriate  governance  structures,  including  mechanisms  for  ensuring  an 
effective  interplay  between,  and  coordination  of,  macro  and  micro-prudential 
responsibilities. 
  As regards the first, one of the basic prerequisites for an effective macro-prudential function 
is the availability of a comprehensive set of information on the financial system that can be 
used for the detection and assessment of systemic risk. This implies the attribution of specific 
tasks  to  the  macro-prudential  authority  with  respect  to  accessing  and  collecting  such 
information, which may include macro-economic and macro-financial data and indicators, as 
well as market intelligence.  
In this regard, the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), the European System of Central 
Banks, the Commission, the national supervisors and the national statistical authorities have 
the  obligation  to  cooperate  closely  with  the  ESRB  and  to  provide  all  the  information 
necessary  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  tasks.  In  addition,  the  ESRB  may  request  the  ESAs  to 
supply information also on individual institutions on the basis of a reasoned request.  
The  ESRB  will  therefore  have  access  to  ample  sources  of  information  on  risks.  The 
development  of  the  appropriate  infrastructure  for  pooling  such  information  on  an  EU-wide 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 1
basis will be a major step forward in the assessment of financial stability in the single market, 
but  this  will  require  substantial  analytical  and  data-related  expertise,  as  well  as  market 
knowledge. Work is already under way to set up efficient procedures for regular information-
sharing between the ESRB and the ESAs. 
The second component relates to the instruments available to the ESRB, which should be 
geared  to  mitigating  systemic  risk  on  the  basis  of  the  outcome  of  the  monitoring  of  the 
financial system. As mentioned earlier, they include the issuance of risk warnings and policy 
recommendations, as well as the monitoring of the follow-up by the respective addressees 
on the basis of an “act or explain” mechanism.  
One  of  the  challenges  in  this  respect  is  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  the  ESRB’s 
instruments. From the very outset, this will require the development of analytical tools and 
models  that  underpin  the  macro-prudential  policy  process,  including  reliable  systemic  risk 
indicators  that  support  the  issuance  of  warnings  or  recommendations  on  the  calibration  of 
prudential measures. Such measures may include specific capital and liquidity requirements 
to  take  account  of  financial  cycles,  or  of  the  systemic  relevance  of  financial  institutions. 
Furthermore, the effectiveness will also depend on close cooperation between the members 
the ESRB and, in particular, the ESAs, which are expected to play an important role in the 
implementation of the ESRB’s recommendations. 
Macro-prudential  governance,  as  a  third  component,  is  decisive  for  the  functioning  of  the 
overall  financial  stability  architecture.  Central  banks  should  play  a  major  role,  given  their 
interest  in,  and  responsibility  for,  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  their 
analytical  expertise  and  the  information  they  have  on  the  real  economy,  financial  markets 
and market infrastructures.  
The participation of the governors of all EU central banks in the General Board of the ESRB, 
as well as the attribution of the Chair to the ECB’s President, shows that the importance of 
this role has been recognised. The ECB has also been requested to provide the Secretariat 
and  the  necessary  analytical,  statistical,  logistical  and  administrative  support.  For  this 
purpose,  the  ECB  will  optimise  its  existing  capabilities  and  infrastructure  in  the  areas  of 
financial  stability  monitoring,  macro-economic  analysis  and  the  collection  of  statistical 
information, to the benefit of the ESRB.  
Supervisory  authorities  should  be  involved  in,  and  contribute  to,  the  macro-prudential 
function  with  information,  analysis  and  regulatory  advice.  The  conduct  of  macro-prudential 
policies will to a large extent also depend on supervisory measures. Accordingly, the macro-
prudential  framework  should  provide  for  coordination  mechanisms  between  macro  and 
micro-prudential responsibilities, which should also avoid any potential overlaps or conflicts 
of interest. 
The legislation contains a number of provisions that provide the basis for a close institutional 
collaboration  between  the  ESRB  and  the  ESAs.  The  provisions  range  from  the  mutual 
participation  in  the  boards  of  the  ESRB  and  the  ESAs  –  including  the  chair  of  the  Joint 
Committee  of  the  ESAs  as  second  Vice-Chair  of  the  ESRB  –  to  cooperative  duties  in  the 
monitoring and assessment of systemic risk, the conduct of stress-tests and the sharing of 
information,  as  mentioned  earlier.  National  supervisors  will  also  participate  in  the  ESRB’s 
General Board and will, as is important, be members of the Advisory Technical Committee. 
This  committee  will  be  one  of  the  main  support  structures  of  the  ESRB,  together  with  the 
Advisory Scientific Committee of independent experts.  
In conclusion, the establishment of the ESRB will introduce a new policy function at the EU 
level,  which  has  a  great  potential  for  enhancing  the  ability  of  European  and  national 
authorities to safeguard the stability of the EU’s financial system as a whole. The challenges 
of  designing  and  implementing  this  new  EU-wide  macro-prudential  policy  function  are 
considerable.  However,  with  appropriate  preparations,  which  are  already  ongoing  in  close 
cooperation with all the parties involved, a smooth start of the ESRB may be envisaged in 
2011. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2010
