Jean-Pierre Landau: Rebalancing the world economy – a common 
challenge 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, 
at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Economic Forum, Beijing, 11 November 2010. 
 In preparing those remarks, I was very influenced by the works by Ricardo Caballero and Raghuram Rajan (see 
references) among others. All interpretations and errors are mine. 
Great changes are taking place in the world economy. The center of gravity is moving to Asia 
and the emerging world. This has been recognized in the landmark agreement on IMF reform 
reached at the last G20 Ministerial meeting. China has become the IMF’s third shareholder, 
India  has  moved  up  by  five  ranks  and  Brazil  is  now  on  par  with  Canada  (a  G7  country). 
Symmetrically, the European representation in the Board will be reduced by the equivalent of 
two chairs (out of nine currently held). 
At  the  same  time,  we  are  facing  great  challenges.  Output  is  growing  fast  in  emerging 
economies but this relative shift in production has not been fully matched by a rebalancing in 
demand. Overall, beyond the turbulences caused by “hot money”, net capital flows are going 
“uphill”  from  emerging  to  developed  economies.  That  means  that  some  of  the  poorest 
citizens of the world are lending money to some of the richest, allowing those to finance their 
consumption.  And  financial  bubbles  have  tended  to  proliferate  in  an  environment  of 
permanently low inflation and ample liquidity. 
I will argue that those phenomenons can all be ascribed to two common causes: a worldwide 
based shift in the primary distribution of income; and asymmetries in financial development 
among  countries.  Together,  they  combine  to  produce  (1)  excess  saving  in  emerging 
economies (2) strong capital inflows to the US (3) an increasing frequency in financial booms 
and busts and asset price bubbles in both advanced and emerging economies.  
Let’s look first at income distribution. In China, the share of wages in GDP has declined from 
55% in 1992 to 48% in 2008. In the US, the median real wage has been stagnant over the 
last fifteen years despite the fact that real GDP has grown annually by above 3% over the 
same  period.  These  are  deep  changes  mostly  driven  by  technology  and  demographics,  in 
proportions which are hotly debated, and partly unexplained. 
In contrast to wage developments, consumption trends have been widely divergent. In China, 
the share of consumption has gone down by more than 10 % of GDP over the last decade. In 
the US, consumption kept growing (both in absolute and in GDP share) fueling the demand 
for  imports.  Households  in  the  US  could  consume  more  and  save  less  because  they  felt 
richer. And they felt richer because the value of their houses and financial assets was rising 
at  a  quick  pace  and  that  trend  was  expected  to  persist.  Broadly  speaking,  the  worldwide 
equilibrium  between  demand  and  supply  of  goods  was  based  on  a  continuing  asset  price 
bubble in the United States. 
Considering now financial development, another kind of imbalance shows up. The global rise 
in  savings,  especially  in  the  emerging  world,  has  not  been  matched  by  an  equivalent 
increase  in  the  supply  of  safe  and  liquid  financial  assets.  This  “asset  shortage”  is  one 
fundamental reason why bubbles have erupted in many countries with increasing frequency, 
either in real estate or financial markets or both. It also had a strong impact on the direction 
of capital flows. Only the US economy has the ability to generate liquid and safe assets in 
significant  quantities.  US  capital  markets  act  naturally  as  a  magnet  for  world  savings, 
especially  for  foreign  exchange  reserves.  In  addition,  financial  engineering  allowed  US 
institutions to manufacture complex products which looked apparently safe, but proved very 
fragile. Admittedly, internal imbalances and huge deficiencies in supervision and regulation 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 1
to 
fiscal  consolidation.  Market  discipline  will  act  powerfully 
played a role in the run up to the crisis. But the process has been largely driven by capital 
inflows in the US looking for an improbable combination of liquidity, safety and high returns.  
Combining all these evolutions gives a good picture of the structural forces behind the crisis. 
Worldwide shifts in income distribution generated excess saving, which were compensated 
by wealth effects borne out of increases in asset prices. Since those transformations were 
asymmetrically distributed around the world, they were accompanied by growing imbalances 
and  capital  flows.  Obviously,  purely  domestic  factors,  especially  in  the  US  played  a  major 
role  in  amplifying  the  underlying  imbalances.  But,  ultimately,  the  crisis  was  borne  out  of 
structural changes in the world economy and our collective inability to adjust.  
Looking forward, many features of the precrisis environment will still be with us. Emerging 
economies  will  still  be saving  a  high  proportion  of  their  income.  A  significant  part  of  those 
savings will be invested in foreign exchange reserves. Downward pressures on wages will 
subsist.  There  are  signs  that  wage  dynamics  are  changing,  especially  in  China,  whose 
economy  is  deemed  by  many  analysts  to  have  reached  the  “Lewis  turning  point”  where 
demographic  pressures  are  offset  by  increased  demand  for  (at  least)  qualified  labor. 
Nevertheless,  the  process  will  likely  be  very  gradual.  As  for  advanced  economies,  biased 
technical  progress  and  pressures  from  the  emerging  world  as  well  as  unemployment  may 
work  to  constrain  wage  dynamics.  A  general  sense  of  economic  insecurity  will  lead  to 
increase in savings. In most countries and especially in Europe there is an urgent need for 
strong 
impose  strong 
consolidation of public finance over an extended period of time.  
Therefore, it is a valid question to ask: where will growth in world demand come from in the 
future ? 
This may sound paradoxical. In most of the emerging world, demand seems to be booming, 
and, for many analysts future economic growth will be primarily constrained by the scarcity of 
natural resources and environmental pressures. These are real and unprecedented and they 
call for a new technological revolution. I am optimistic. History has taught us that Malthus and 
its intellectual descendants have always been proven wrong. The whole process of economic 
growth  was  borne  out  of  the  ability  of  mankind  to  overcome  scarcity  through  human 
inventiveness and technical progress. It won’t be different this time.  
I  am  also  very  optimistic  in  the  long  run  on  the  fundamental  rebalancing  of  the  world 
economy.  Income  per  capita  levels  in  the  emerging  world  will  progressively  converge  to 
those  of  the  advanced  economies  and  this  will  present  gigantic  market  opportunities  for 
producers  in  those  countries.  At  the  same  time,  tensions  and  insecurity  created  by 
differences in income and productivity levels will abate and disappear.  
The  transition  process,  however,  may  be  bumpy.  Unavoidably,  advanced  economies, 
especially  in  Europe,  will  have  to  adjust  to  the  permanent  shift  in  world  comparative 
advantages. They will have to increase flexibility and, above all, develop and preserve their 
most  precious  resource  –  human  capital  –  through  education  and  excellence  in  research. 
Emerging economies will have to face the dual challenge of aging and reducing inequalities.  
During that transition period, which may last several decades, it is important that the whole 
process is not derailed by shocks and crisis borne out of imbalances in the world economy. 
This  is  where  the  twin  questions  –  (1)  of  the  level  and  distribution  of  global  demand  and 
(2) the level and allocation of world savings – may matter most.  
Inside the G20, there is broad agreement on the need to rebalance aggregate demand. That 
shared  objective  creates  cohesion  and  has  played  an  essential  role  in  2008  and  2009  in 
restoring confidence and setting the path for the recovery. 
The  debate  is  still  going  on,  however,  on  three  major  and  interrelated  issues  :  first,  the 
appropriate  pace  of  the  rebalancing,  with  advanced  countries  feeling  a  greater  sense  of 
urgency; second, on the most efficient strategies, in particular regarding exchange rates; and 
finally, and more broadly, on the best international financial and monetary architecture.  
2 
 BIS Review 170/2010
I would like to offer some tentative reflexions. These are purely personal thoughts, although I 
will try to put them in perspective with the incoming French Presidency of the G20.  
Rebalancing global demand will not be an easy task. 
Simple arithmetic and size effects show the amplitude of the challenge. At the word level, to 
compensate one for one for a decrease of 1% in US consumption, Chinese consumption has 
to go up by 7%. 
In addition, saving behaviours are deeply rooted in cultural and demographic structures of 
our  societies.  In  western  countries,  consumption  can  be  seen  as  the  ultimate  objective  of 
economic activity, as well as the fundamental measure of welfare. Other countries may have 
different preferences. In a speech one year ago, Governor Zhou pointed to the fact that “East 
Asia countries are influenced by Confucianism, which value thrift, self-discipline, … and anti-
extravagancy”. In a period of aging, thrift will be seen as a necessity as much as a virtue. 
Shifts in income distribution might not happen fast if strong structural forces push in the other 
direction. Public policies (fiscal, social safety nets) certainly have a role to play, but they take 
time to redeploy and implement. 
Finally,  consumption  patterns  differ  across  countries  and  are  strongly  influenced  by 
differences  in  taste  and  level  of  developments.  So,  global  rebalancing  in  consumption 
requires a change in production structures. That change will not – and should not – occur 
overnight.  Attempts  to  speed  up  the  process  would  only  result  in  major  disruptions  and 
increased  volatility.  Rebalancing  will  be  progressive  but  should  start  now.  It  cannot  be 
achieved without some adjustment in relative prices. In market economies, it is important that 
producers  face  the  right  price  environment  when  they  make  long  term  decisions  about 
investing in technology and productive capacity. Countries are free – and should remain free 
– to choose whatever exchange rate regime and policy suit them best, taking into account 
their specific national circumstances. Real exchange rate adjustment, however, is an integral 
part of a global and orderly rebalancing strategy. That wisdom is best embodied in one of 
Governor  Hu  Xiaolian’s  speeches, last  July,  where  she  demonstrated  how  domestic  factor 
price and exchange rate adjustments are both substitutes and complementary.  
Many interactions between our economies occur through capital rather than good markets; 
This  is  normal  in  a  “multipolar”  world  given  the  diversity  of  countries,  with  different 
preferences,  demographics  and  levels  of  development.  Some  of  us  save  more  than  we 
spend. Others need capital to finance their growth. Many are aging and want to secure their 
future  income  through  good  and  safe  returns  on  their  investments.  We  therefore  share  a 
common  interest  in  well  functioning  global  capital  markets.  Asymmetries  in  financial 
development prevent us from reaping all the benefits of our savings efforts.  
These asymmetries exist for good reasons. In many emerging economies, the memories of 
the 1997–98 crisis are still there. They lead to precautionary behaviors and a very cautious 
approach  to  capital  market  liberalization.  Obviously,  the  case  for  unrestricted  financial 
development and market liberalization has been somehow weakened by the crisis.  
Nevertheless,  we  might  be  paying  a  heavy  price  for  the  disorganized  state  of  our  global 
financial  and  monetary  system.  While  real  interest  rates  are  historically  low,  many 
investments with high returns are not undertaken. Poor and emerging economies growth is, 
in many cases, constrained by lack of infrastructure. We may face future shortages in many 
essential commodities because of insufficient investment in the current period. Differences in 
financial systems also exacerbate capital flows and exchange rate volatility, especially when, 
as is the case today, monetary policies are widely divergent across countries. Surely, we can 
do better in the future. 
Full  harmonization  and  total  convergence  in  financial  development  between  different 
countries is neither desirable nor feasible. But ensuring that our different financial systems 
interact harmoniously should be a priority. There are four possible avenues for progress.  
BIS Review 170/2010 
 3
First,  greater  convergence  in  financial  regulation  approaches  between  advanced  and 
emerging economies. Significant advances are being made. China, together with Brazil and 
India  has  been,  for  a  year,  a  full  member  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  and  as,  such, 
participates  in  steering  and  leading  the  effort  to  build  a  more  resilient  and  efficient  global 
financial system. 
Second, we may start thinking about ways of dealing with international capital flows volatility. 
For  one  given  country,  capital  controls  may  temporarily  reduce  the  pressure  on  its  capital 
account  or  even  permanently  limit  the  volatility  of  its  exchange  rate.  For  the  whole 
international system, however, they may simply displace the pressure to other countries or 
asset classes and exacerbate, rather than reduce, overall volatility. There might be ways to 
eliminate those negative effects by creating a predictable framework defining the circumstances, 
modalities  and  conditions  trough  which  temporary  or  permanent  controls  would  be 
implemented. 
Third, it is important that countries which decide to open their capital markets be adequately 
protected  against  external  financial  shocks.  Emerging  countries  have  constantly  sought  to 
expand their foreign exchange reserves from 4 percent of GDP in 1190 to over 20 percent on 
average  today.  Reserves  act  as  precaution  against  possible  abrupt  capital  outflows.  They 
also serve to provide liquidity to domestic financial institutions. They are used as a tool for 
internal – as well as external – financial stability.  
The need for national reserves could be reduced if credible mechanisms exist to provide for 
the supply of official liquidity on a multilateral basis. Hence the current search for financial 
safety nets which has taken first stage in the G20. Significant progress has been achieved in 
this direction during the recent period with the creation by the IMF of new facilities and a new 
SDR allocation, the biggest ever, for the equivalent of 250 bn USD. More needs to be done 
and work should be undertaken to find sources of international liquidity truly substitutable to 
reserves without creating undue and excessive moral hazard.  
And,  finally,  an  important  question  is  to  find,  in  the  future  ,reliable  international  stores  of 
value.  The  crisis  has  amplified  the  “asset  shortage”  as  some  instruments,  up  to  now 
considered  as  riskless,  have  proved  very  vulnerable  to  changing  financial  conditions.  The 
ability  of  the  private  sector  to  create  “safe”  assets  through financial innovation  has  proved 
largely illusory. So, in the period to come there may be both an increased demand worldwide 
for risk free assets and much less certainty on their future supply.  
The search for a reliable international store of value has been going on for many decades. 
When  discussions  were  held  to  build  the  Bretton  Wood  system,  Keynes  proposed  the 
creation of a new international currency, the “bancor” which could serve both as a source of 
liquidity and a store of value. Thirty years ago, there was extensive discussion in the IMF on 
the creation of a substitution account. Most recently, in 2009, Governor Zhou has reopened 
the debate and suggested, over the long run, the creation of a new “super reserve” currency, 
while, in the meantime, enhancing the role and status of the SDR.  
There  are  good  arguments  to  create  international  instruments  providing  a  reliable  store  of 
value. There are also conceptual and political difficulties. A choice would have to be made as 
to the true nature of the “super reserve currency”. Would it be a basket of existing monies 
such as the SDR today? Or would it be a new “fiat” currency? More fundamentally, a new 
reserve  currency  would,  in  fact,  grant  a  collective  guarantee  against  exchange  risk.  This 
guarantee would benefit surplus countries and would be given by deficit countries. When the 
substitution account was discussed more than 25 years ago, it became clear, at the time that 
it would have to be part of a package encompassing explicit, binding and symmetric rules on 
balance  of  payment  adjustments.  Most  likely,  the  same  questions  would  be  raised  again 
today  and  the  creation  of  a  new  reserve  currency  would  have  to  be  part  of  a  broader 
framework. That may take time, as our Chinese colleagues are fond of reminding us when 
we discuss those issues. 
4 
 BIS Review 170/2010
In the meantime, financial development in emerging economies can go a long way towards 
expanding the range of safe and liquid financial assets available to domestic and international 
investors.  Capital  markets  in  local  currencies  have  developed  significantly  over  the  last 
decade as fiscal positions in emerging countries have dramatically improved. There seems to 
be  considerable  scope for  regional  financial  and  monetary  arrangements  to  prosper  in  the 
future. Those huge pools of savings currently available can be intermediated locally instead 
of  going  through  financial  systems  located  in  advanced  economies.  Regional  financial 
markets would have to  complemented and underpinned by monetary arrangements. Asian 
countries are working on and implementing progressively such schemes through the Chiang 
Mai initiative. 
We, in Europe, monitor closely those evolutions as well as the progressive emergence of the 
RMB as an international currency. As you know, we have a long and successful history of 
economic, financial and monetary integration. We have learned a lot and, still recently, gone 
through many crises and difficulties. Nevertheless the Euro, which did not exist fifteen years 
ago, stands today as one of two major world currencies. We certainly don’t pretend our own 
experience should constitute a model or an example to be followed. I have, however, one 
certainty:  a  strong  and  permanently  renewed  spirit  of  cooperation  has  allowed  us  to 
overcome many obstacles and to reap many benefits in terms of prosperity and stability. In a 
world full of opportunities, but also increasingly complex, this may be an inspiration for all of 
us. 
I thank you for your attention. 
References 
Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  2006.  “The  Macroeconomics  of  Asset  Shortages.”  4th  ECB  Central 
Banking Conference, Frankfurt, November. 
Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  Emmanuel  Farhi  and  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas,  2008a.  “Financial 
Crash, Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
Fall, pp 1–55.  
Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  Emmanuel  Farhi  and  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas,  2008b.  “An 
Equilibrium  Model  of  “Global  Imbalances  and  Low  Interest  Rates.”  American  Economic 
Review, 98:1, p358–393.  
Caballero,  Ricardo  J.  and  Arvind  Krishnamurthy,  2009.  “Global  Imbalances  and  Financial 
Fragility,” American Economic Review, May. 
Lewis,  W.  Arthur  (1954).  “Economic  Development  with  Unlimited  Supplies  of  Labor,” 
Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, Vol. 22, pp. 139–91.  
Obstfeld,  Maurice,  Jay  C.  Shambaugh  et  Alan  M.  Taylor  (2010),  “Financial  Stability,  the 
Trilemma,  and  International  Reserves,”  American  Economic  Journal:  Macroeconomics, 
American Economic Association, vol. 2(2), pp 57–94.  
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (2010),  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World 
Economy, Princeton University Press. 
Wei,  Shang-Jin  and  Jiandong  Ju  (2010)  “Domestic  Institutions  and  the  Bypass  Effect  of 
Financial Globalization” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 5
