Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Japan’s economy and monetary policy – 
comprehensive monetary easing and strengthening of the foundations 
for economic growth 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Hiroshima, 20 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude for your cooperation in interviews and 
surveys  conducted  by  the  Hiroshima  branch  of the  Bank  of  Japan.  Information  from  these 
interviews and surveys is invaluable and utilized fully in our business operations.  
Before we exchange views, I will first explain economic developments at home and abroad. I 
will  then  speak  about  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  monetary  policy  by  focusing  on  recently-
introduced  “Comprehensive  Monetary  Easing”  and  the  “Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to 
Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth.” 
Overseas economic developments 
I. 
The  pace  of  growth  in  overseas  economies  has  been  slowing.  Here  I  will  explain  the 
developments  in  the  Unites  States  and  emerging  economies,  which  have  a  particularly 
significant impact on Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
In the United States, while a relatively strong recovery was forecasted around this spring due 
mainly to the policy effects, anxiety about the future increased as a series of weak economic 
indicators  such  as  GDP  and  employment  were  released  in  August.  Since  some  favorable 
data such as durable goods orders were released in September, I have been maintaining the 
view that the U.S. economy has been recovering moderately. However, compared with this 
spring, the possibility of prolonged low growth has increased.  
Economic  growth  in  the  United  States  has  been  restrained  partly  because  the  household 
sector  has  been  burdened  by  debt  such  as  mortgage  payments  and  thus  has  been 
constrained from consuming. The process of restoring the sound asset condition by repaying 
debt  is  called  “balance-sheet  adjustment,”  and  is  a  factor  in  lowering  spending  in  a 
continuous  manner  following  the  burst  of  “a  bubble.”  As  seen  in  the  case  of  Japan,  such 
adjustments  are  bound  to  take  time  and  thus  we  have  been  holding  the  view  that  the 
recovery in the U.S. economy, where the household sector faces significant balance-sheet 
adjustment  pressure,  will  remain  modest.  Yet,  if  there  is  an  increase  in  the  growth  of 
employee income or a rise in house prices, the debt repayment capacity of the household 
sector will increase and the adjustments will be completed in relatively a short period. Thus, 
the  U.S.  employment-  and  housing-related  indicators  are  particularly  drawing  attention.  A 
typical employment-related indicator is the unemployment rate. It surged to about 10 percent 
after the Lehman shock, slightly declined around this early spring, rose again thereafter and 
has remained at an elevated level. House sales picked up due to the effects of preferential 
tax  breaks  for  buyers  of  residential  houses,  but  plunged  immediately  after  the  tax  breaks 
expired at the end of April and have remained at a low level thereafter. Meanwhile, house 
prices have been more or less unchanged following the significant decline. As you can see, 
employment and housing conditions are weaker than expected, and thus it is becoming likely 
that “balance-sheet adjustments” might take more time than previously envisaged. 
Emerging economies are also slowing, although their adjustments are relatively light. From a 
longer-term  perspective,  there  is  a  strong  possibility  that  those  economies  will  maintain 
stable high growth as there is robust potential domestic demand toward spreading durable 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 1
goods and building social infrastructure. Some emerging economies have been shifting away 
from accommodative policies to prevent the economies from overheating, but there are still 
many economies whose measures to contain overheating are not considered to be sufficient, 
and thus there remains a risk of overheating that the pace of growth in emerging economies 
might  accelerate  amid  continued  capital  inflows.  At  the  same  time,  since  sizable  exports 
have  been  made  from  those  countries  to  the  United  States,  the  slowdown  in  the  U.S. 
economy might have no small effect on emerging economies and such downside risks also 
require vigilance. 
Developments in economic activity and prices in Japan 
II. 
Japan’s economy has been showing signs of recovery until recently. This summer, sales of 
air conditioners and beverages were buoyant due to the extremely hot weather, and a last-
minute increase in demand ahead of the expiration of the subsidies for purchasing energy 
efficient  cars  turned  out  to  be  extremely  large.  Both  factors  have  elevated  the  economy. 
However, amid increased uncertainty due mainly to fiscal problems in European peripheral 
countries and the outlook for the U.S. economy, global investors have become increasingly 
risk  averse,  which  increased  demand  for  the  yen  that  was  considered  as  a  relatively  safe 
currency  and  resulted  in  the  yen’s  appreciation.  In  addition,  overseas  economies  have 
slowed, and the pace of growth in exports has recently been rather moderating. Taking into 
account that exports, which have been leading economic activity, have been showing weak 
signs, it is appropriate to judge that Japan’s economy still shows signs of moderate recovery, 
but that the pace of recovery is slowing down.  
While  the  economic  outlook  is  to  be  examined  in  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and 
Prices  that  will  be  published  after  the  next  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on  October  28, 
compared with the outlook presented in the Bank’s July interim assessment, the economic 
growth rate is likely to be somewhat lower than expected. During this fiscal year, the slow 
recovery pace is likely to continue mainly due to the slowdown in overseas economies and 
the expected decline following the last-minute increase in demand ahead of the expiration of 
subsidies  for  energy  efficient  cars.  The  fact  that  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  yen  is 
deteriorating  business  sentiment  is  also  a  big  factor  in  putting  downward  pressure  on 
economic activity. In the recently-released September Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey 
of Enterprises in Japan), business conditions D.I. has substantially improved, compared with 
three  months  ago,  but  the  D.I.  is  forecasted  to  deteriorate  considerably  in  three  months 
ahead, suggesting that firms have come to be cautious due partly to the appreciation of the 
yen.  However,  when  looking  from  a  somewhat  longer  perspective,  Japan’s  economy  is 
expected to return to the moderate recovery path as emerging economies with high growth 
potential will complete the current mild adjustment phase.  
While  there  are  various  risks  associated  with  such  outlook,  we  need  to  keep  an  eye  on 
developments  in  overseas  economies,  mainly  the  U.S.  economy.  An  important  risk  factor 
unique to Japan would be developments in car sales in the future, and I think that there is 
considerable uncertainty associated with the sales. From August through early September, 
the last-minute increase in demand ahead of the expiration of the subsidies for purchases of 
energy efficient cars was extremely large, which might suggest that consumers have become 
sensitive to prices. While it is expected that car sales will plunge for some time following the 
expiration of the subsidies, what pace the sales will subsequently recover will be critical since 
that  would  gauge  the  strength  of  Japan’s  potential  demand.  Moreover,  the  automobile 
industry  has  a  wide  range  of  supporting  industries  and  its  developments  affect  business 
conditions  of  many  small-  and  medium-firms,  and  thus,  from  such  a  viewpoint,  the 
developments warrant close attention. 
As for prices, the year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) has been slowing. 
However,  the  possibility  that  weaker-than-expected  economic  activity  will  affect  price 
developments  requires  vigilance.  Moreover,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  yen’s  appreciation  will 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2010
lower  consumer  prices  not  only  through  worsening  economic  activity  but  also  through 
changes  in  import  prices.1  Given  those  circumstances,  it  has  become  more  likely  that  the 
return of Japan’s economy to the sustainable growth path with price stability will be delayed 
than previously envisaged. 
Comprehensive monetary easing 
III. 
Under the situation in which “it has become more likely that the return of Japan’s economy to 
the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability  will  be  delayed,”  it  is  necessary  to  further 
enhance monetary easing. On that basis, at the Monetary Policy Meeting on October 4 and 
5,  the  Bank  decided  to  carry  out  “Comprehensive  Monetary  Easing,”  or  “Comprehensive 
Easing” for short, composed of the following three measures. 
First, a change in the guideline for money market operations. The most fundamental policy of 
the Bank is to guide the overnight rate, that is, the interest rate applied in the market where 
banks borrow or lend money only overnight, to a pre-determined target rate. At the Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  on  October  4  and  5,  the  Policy  Board  changed  the  target  rate  for  the 
overnight rate from “at around 0.1 percent” to “at around 0 to 0.1 percent.” While the Bank 
said it has been maintaining the extremely low interest rate level of virtually zero percent, this 
time it changed the target interest rate to further clarify that it has been pursuing the virtually 
zero interest rate policy. If the Bank is to make further ample liquidity provision through, for 
example, a purchase of assets I will mention later, there might be strong downward pressure 
on  the  overnight  rate.  In  that  situation,  if  the  Bank  tries  to  maintain  the  overnight  rate  at 
around  0.1  percent,  some  flexibility  in  market  operations  might  be  lost.  That  is  another 
reason the Bank allowed the overnight rate to shift downward. 
Second, the clarification of a condition that the virtually zero interest rate will be maintained. 
The Bank, regarding the criterion for being consistent with price stability, indicates that on the 
basis of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, each Policy Board member’s judgment 
falls in a positive range of 2 percent or lower, and that the midpoints of most Policy Board 
members’ judgment are around 1 percent. The Bank calls this criterion the “understanding of 
medium- to long-term price stability” (the “understanding”). At the Monetary Policy Meeting 
on October 4 and 5, the Policy Board confirmed that the Bank will maintain the virtually zero 
interest rate policy until it judges that the price stability is in sight from a medium- to long-
term perspective. 
What  I  would  like  to  emphasize  here  is  that  the  Bank  employs  as  its  judgment  criterion, 
whether developments in the inflation rate expected in the future, not the rate at the moment, 
is  consistent  with  the  “understanding.”2  Given  that  it  takes  some  time  for  the  effects  of 
monetary policy to spread, in order to achieve price stability from a long-term perspective, it 
would be necessary to pay attention not only to the short-term inflation rate at the moment 
but  also  to  the  forecast  of  how  the  future  inflation  rate  will  develop  and  to  consider  its 
consistency with the “understanding.” Moreover, it is essential to learn from the experience 
that stability in economic activity and prices from a long-term perspective was undermined in 
the emergence and bursting of the recent global credit bubble, as a result of significant risks 
                                                 
1  While rather technical, as for the CPI, effects of a revision of the base year should also be noted. The change 
in the base year from 2005 to 2010 is scheduled to be made in the summer of 2011. In general, a year-on-
year change in the CPI tends to be overestimated as it goes farther from the base year, and such distortion 
tends to be corrected at the time of a base year revision. Namely, at the time of base year revision in 2011, it 
is likely that the year-on-year changes in the CPI will be revised downward. While it is difficult to estimate the 
degree of downward revision at this point, we should keep in mind a possibility that, looking back in the future, 
the degree of decline in the CPI could have been larger than previously recognized. 
2  This thinking is similar to that called “forecast targeting,” which uses whether a forecast will reach the target 
rate as a judgment criterion. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 3
including the accumulation of financial imbalances being overlooked. In other words, if one 
becomes  complacent  about  the  current  price  stability  and  overlooks  the  accumulation  of 
financial imbalances such as a “bubble,” there is a possibility that the economy will face a 
continued decline in prices after the burst of a “bubble.” The Bank stated that it will maintain 
the virtually zero interest rate policy on condition that examination of risk factors, including 
the accumulation of financial imbalances, does not reveal any problems. 
Third,  the  Bank  will  specifically  examine  a  program  to  purchase  financial  assets.  The 
program  aims  at  purchasing  various  financial  assets,  such  as  government  securities, 
commercial paper, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs). That deserves some detailed explanation.  
Taking a firm for an example, when it raises funds, it is conventional to pay higher interest 
rates than those of safe assets such as government bonds. That is because fund providers 
request adding interest rates worth the factors such as a firm’s default risk. The interest rates 
on safe assets are called risk-free interest rates and the additional interest rates are called 
risk premiums. The added interest rates depend on the probability of a firm’s default as well 
as to what extent fund providers’ want to avoid risk, namely, the degree of risk aversion. The 
stronger anxiety about the future and risk aversion are, the bigger the added interest rates 
become. 
Taking  into  account  that  there  is  little  room  for  short-term  interest  rates  to  decline,  the 
measure taken this time aims to encourage the decline in longer-term risk-free interest rates 
and risk premiums on risk assets, to pursue further enhancement of monetary easing.3 The 
Bank  has  been  encouraging  a  decline  in  slightly  longer-term  risk-free  interest  rates  by 
utilizing what we call the “fixed-rate operation,” through which the Bank provides funds with a 
maturity  of  three  or  six  months  at  a  low  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent.  This  time  the  Bank 
decided  to  encourage  the  decline  in  further  longer-term  interest  rates  by  purchasing  long-
term government bonds and corporate bonds with a remaining maturity of about one to two 
years. Moreover, to reduce risk premiums, the Bank will examine the purchases of ETFs and 
J-REITs. While such purchases are the first attempt for the Bank, its risk-taking through the 
purchases could have an effect of reducing risk premiums of stocks and real estate.4 
Such  purchases  of  assets  are  extraordinary  measures  for  a  central  bank,  especially  the 
purchases of financial assets to encourage a decline in risk premiums. Interest rates of risk-
free assets have already become rather low and there is little room, albeit some in longer-
term interest rates, for further reduction. Nevertheless, firms’ funding activity has not become 
active. Therefore, the Bank decided that it was appropriate to further support firms’ forward-
looking activity from a financial side by encouraging a reduction in risk premiums. 
The  asset  purchase  should  be  examined  deliberately  also  from  a  viewpoint  of  national 
burden.  If  prices  of  purchased  assets  decline,  the  consequent  losses  will  be  borne  by  the 
Bank.  Since  the  Bank  makes  payments  to  the  national  treasury  out  of  earnings  obtained 
through the issuance of the currency, if the Bank incurs losses, it will eventually become a 
public  burden  in  that  the  national  treasury  could  not  receive  payment  it  was  supposed  to 
                                                 
3  When there is strong anxiety about the future of the economy, namely, when there is the so-called Knightian 
uncertainty, there is a tendency that aversion against assets that are considered to be risky, such as stocks 
and real estate, becomes excessive and demand for those assets declines, leading to risk premiums of those 
assets  remaining  high  (Meanwhile,  it  could  happen  at  the  same  time  that  demand  concentrates  on  assets 
whose risks are considered to be small, thereby lowering risk premiums of those assets). In such a case, there 
is a possibility that the central bank’s purchase  of risk assets  will lead  the central  bank to play  a role as a 
“catalyst” to alleviate the tendency of excessive risk aversion. For reference, please see Nishimura, K.G., and 
H.  Ozaki,  “Irreversible  Investment  and  Knightian  Uncertainty,”  Journal  of  Economic  Theory,  136  (2007),  
668–694. 
4  For the purchases of ETFs and J-REITs, the Bank needs to seek approval from the government and it will do 
so in due course. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2010
receive.  The  reason  the  Bank  puts  emphasis  on  its  financial  soundness  and  is  cautious 
about carrying out a policy that takes such risk is that, it considers it natural for a central bank 
to  be  cautious  about  a  policy  that  could  risk  the  public  burden.  Nevertheless,  taking  into 
account the outlook for economic activity and prices as well as the situation in which there is 
little room for further reduction in short-term interest rates, the Bank judges it appropriate to 
take  certain  risks.  To  clarify  that  the  measure  is  an  extraordinary  and  temporary  one,  the 
Bank will newly establish a program on its balance sheet and manage separately from other 
assets held for different purposes. Meanwhile, since the fixed-rate operation, through which 
the Bank provides financial institutions with funds with a maturity of three or six months at a 
low interest rate of 0.1 percent, has the same purpose of encouraging a decline in longer-
term interest rates through the purchase of assets, the Bank judged it appropriate to manage 
the operation under this program. The Bank will examine the size of the program centering 
on about 35 trillion yen, which is the sum of assets to be newly purchased – about 5 trillion 
yen – and the size of the fixed-rate operation – about 30 trillion yen. 
IV. 
Fund-provisioning to support strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth 
The  “Comprehensive  Easing”  I  have  described  can  be  considered  as  a  policy,  when  a 
decline in future demand is worried but is expected to pick up after some time, to support 
such return of the demand or to underpin the demand by powerful monetary easing.  
The  challenges  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with  are  not  only  the  temporary  decline  in 
demand. It faces the medium- to long-term challenge of overcoming the trend decline in the 
growth rate that would still remain even after the temporary decline in demand is resolved. In 
other words, elevating the economy in a sustainable manner is considered to be an important 
challenge.  Taking  the  developments  after  the  Lehman  shock  as  an  example,  demand 
declined rapidly and temporarily due partly to inventory adjustments, but picked up as time 
passed. On the other hand, global demand for, for example, automobiles, which had been at 
a high level amid the “credit bubble” in the United States prior to the Lehman shock, will not 
pick  up  so  easily.  In  the  world  following  the  burst  of  the  credit  bubble,  to  return  to  the 
previous high level and to further grow, there is no choice but to increase the strength for 
growth  through  the  efforts  such  as  further  innovation  in  product  development  and  sales 
network  formulation.  On  the  basis  of  such  recognition,  the  Bank  introduced  the  “Fund-
Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth.”  In 
what  follows,  I  will  explain  my  views  about  the  background  against  which  the  Bank 
introduced the measure. 
Let me first overview the changes in the environment surrounding Japan’s economy. Japan 
has been faced with the low birth rate and the aging population for a long period. Meanwhile, 
emerging  economies,  especially  in  Asia,  have  been  growing  rapidly.  Therefore,  the  main 
demand has shifted from the youth and middle-aged to the aged people, and from advanced 
to emerging economies, and it has been required to establish a supply system of products 
and services that could meet such new demand. Looking at the history of hit products as an 
example  of  such  changes  in  demand,  the  main  purchasers  of  the  so-called  3Cs  –  color 
television  sets,  air  conditioners,  and  cars  –  were  young  couples  and  were  a  relatively 
homogeneous group. By contrast, recently, demand for low calorie foods preferred by elders 
and  services  that  deliver  purchased  products  to  elders  with  weak  mobility  have  been 
growing, and the purchasers have become heterogeneous.  
The  development  of  information  technology  has  also  brought  a  significant  environmental 
change. For example, even in a traditional industry like agriculture, it has become possible to 
directly  provide  information  to  customers  through  the  internet  and  deliver  products.  Firms 
now have to tap the new demand by utilizing such information technology and establishing a 
supply  system  that  promptly  responds  to  the  niche,  diversified  demand  of  high-mix,  low-
volume production. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 5
Amid  such  changing  environment,  while  Japanese  firms  have  been  trying  to  reform  their 
supply system to incorporate new types of demand, there seems to be much room remaining 
for further reform. So far as the new demand goes, the supply system is lagging far behind 
potential  demand.  Meanwhile,  because  the  transition  of  the  supply  system  has  not  been 
sufficiently progressing, there remains a substantial supply capacity for the old-type demand. 
Therefore,  the  output  gap  with  respect  to  the  old-type  demand  is  in  the  state  of  excess 
supply, and firms have no choice but to reduce the prices of their products and services. The 
fact  that  the  transition  to  a  supply  system  corresponding  to  the  new  demand  has  not 
sufficiently progressed seems to be a major factor behind the phenomenon called deflation 
Japan is plagued with. 
To  promote  the  transition  of  the  supply  system,  it  goes  without  saying  that  firms  play  a 
significant  role.  I  also  hope  that  financial  institutions  will  enhance  their  risk  management 
capacity and increase fund provisioning to firms that are promoting supply system transition. 
The policy authorities also need to play their respective roles in preparing an environment 
that encourages innovative activity of firms and financial institutions. If the authorities’ policy 
becomes a certain trigger to lead to an increase in fund provisions to firms that are trying to 
reform their supply system, a virtuous cycle can be generated in which financial institutions 
accumulate  the  know-how,  enhance  their  risk  management  capability,  and  provide  further 
funds. A related example is that, in the United States, venture capital has been playing an 
important  role  in  nurturing  firms,  and  what  triggered  an  increase  in  investments  by  the 
venture  capital  was  said  to  be  a  law  revision  to  relax  the  restrictions  on  investments  by 
corporate  pension  funds  in  venture  capital  funds.  The  accumulation  of  know-how  in  the 
process of managing the increased inflow of funds seemed to have enabled venture capital 
funds to increase their yields and generated a virtuous cycle of attracting further investment 
funds. 
In  my  view,  the  Bank’s  “Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the 
Foundations for Economic Growth” could be a trigger for the transition of the supply system. 
The  measure  is  not  only  different  from  the  conventional  monetary  policy  of  controlling  the 
policy  rate,  but  also  a  completely  new  and  unique  measure  even  among  the  so-called 
unconventional policy measures. Therefore, we have received many opinions mainly at the 
outset  of  the  introduction  that  “it  is  not  a  policy  measure  a  central  bank  should  take.” 
Nevertheless, I believe that if the transition of the supply system is to be promoted by the 
measure  and  firms  become  able  to  tap  the  new  demand,  it  will  contribute  to  overcoming 
deflation and thus will be consistent with the mission of monetary policy of “achieving price 
stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy”  as 
stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act. Moreover, financial institutions’ accumulation of know-
how to provide funds to new areas and the expansion of their business bases will not only 
contribute  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy  but  also  increase  financial 
institutions’  profitability  and  increase  their  capital  strength,  thereby  also  contributing  to 
“financial system stability,” which is the other objective of the Bank. 
In designing the “Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for 
Economic  Growth,”  the  Bank  has  aimed  at  supporting  as  broad  as  possible  the  various 
approaches  taken  by  financial  institutions  on  their  own  initiatives.  Therefore,  it  has  been 
designed  so  that  many  financial  institutions  can  participate  in,  and,  in  terms  of  areas  and 
plans,  due  attention  has  been  paid  to  make  an  extremely  flexible  framework  so  as  not  to 
inhibit financial institutions’ voluntary approach. Moreover, by striking a balance between the 
views  that  exploiting  innovative  areas  needs  time  and  that  the  time  limit  is  necessary  in 
letting financial institutions use the measure as soon as possible, the lending period was set 
for a maximum of four years. 
The 47 participating financial institutions at the first round of loan disbursement carried out on 
September 6 included various types of financial institutions such as the major banks, regional 
banks,  and  shinkin  banks  and  covered  a  wide  area  geographically.  The  areas  of  loan 
disbursement expanded to all the 18 areas illustrated by the Bank, centering on “environment 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2010
and energy business” and “medical, nursing care, and other health-related business,” and, 
besides,  there  was  a  range  of  plans  in  local  industries.  Moreover,  the  average  duration  of 
lending  or  investment  projects  was  8.2  years,  suggesting  financial  institutions’  stance  to 
support  over  time  the  firms’  efforts  to  exploit  innovative  areas.  Such  financial  institutions’ 
efforts have been showing depth and width in line with the intention of the measure, which I 
feel quite encouraging. 
Concluding remarks 
Today  I  have  focused  on  the  economic  situation  at  home  and  abroad  as  well  as 
“Comprehensive  Monetary  Easing”  the  introduction  of  which  was  decided  in  October  and 
“Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic 
Growth”  introduced  in  June.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  examine  the  outlook  for 
economic activity and prices, and take policy actions in an appropriate manner as a central 
Bank. 
As I have mentioned earlier, to meet the critical challenge of reforming the supply system, 
which is faced by Japan’s economy, the role of the policy authorities and, even more than 
that, of firms and financial institutions would be crucial. To meet the challenge, it is necessary 
to  respond  to  the  new  demand  created  in  accordance  with  the  changes  in  the  economic 
environment such as a rise in emerging economies as well as to nurture new businesses that 
tap potential demand. 
In  that  regard,  in  Hiroshima  Prefecture,  manufacturing  industry  including  automobile, 
machinery,  and  steel  has  been  actively  engaged  in  exporting  to  Asian  countries  and  has 
been  exerting  their  strength.  Moreover,  there  are  not  a  few  firms,  inclusive  of  non-
manufacturers, which were established here and developed to run nation-wide business, and 
thus this region seems to be equipped with a basis to nurture new businesses. This region 
already holds a variety of elements necessary for growth such as a geographical merit that it 
is close to other Asian countries, ample tourism resources with two world heritage sites and 
the  rich  natural  environment,  a  distinguished  reputation  as  an  international  city,  and  high 
education level with Japan’s fourth highest college advancement rate. That shows that the 
region has enormous potential. 
On  the  financial  front,  financial  institutions  in  Hiroshima  Prefecture  have  been  pursuing 
forward-looking  approaches  such  as  establishing  a  system  to  support  firms  that  are 
strengthening 
financial 
institutions  have  participated  in  the  Bank’s  “Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support 
Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth”  and  have  been  using  it  as  an 
opportunity to expand new lending methods that enable long-term lending.  
I sincerely wish you every success in your endeavor to achieve growth and I also hope that 
the economy of this region will further fulfill its potential. 
toward  Asian  countries.  Moreover,  several 
their  businesses 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 7
