Lars Nyberg: After the crisis – new thoughts on monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Nordea, 
Stockholm, 6 December 2010. 
 I would like to thank Mikael Apel and Erik Lenntorp for contributing to this speech. 
Crises lead to all sorts of problems. But they also cause us to rethink ingrained ideas and 
earlier  accepted  practices.  If  we  succeed  in  learning  the  right  lessons  from  a  crisis  and 
implementing wise changes, this may lead to a better development in the long run. 
But it is not always easy to see exactly what lessons we need to learn. For example, we are 
still not entirely agreed on all of the details regarding the crisis in the 1930s – why it arose 
and how it became so severe. In the same way, it will probably take time before there is a 
consensus  on  what  lessons  we  should  learn  from  the  financial  crisis  we  have  just 
experienced. 
Some of the lessons are fairly obvious, however. For instance, we can with hindsight note 
that there were clear inadequacies in the regulations and supervision intended to maintain 
financial stability. New regulatory frameworks are now taking shape both internationally and 
in individual countries, and there are discussions on how to make supervision more effective. 
One  example  of  the  work  done  so  far  is  the  agreement  in  September  on  the  Basel  III 
framework, which in brief entails raising the requirements regarding the capital and liquidity 
that the banks are required to hold. I will return to the subject of regulations and supervision 
later. 
The crisis has raised questions regarding the functioning of the economy 
But crises also raise more fundamental questions regarding the way the economy functions 
in  different  respects.  Are  the  economic  relationships  really  as  we  believed  them  to  be,  or 
have our theories and models missed something? Could there be a reason to begin thinking 
differently? These types of question are often much more difficult to answer. It usually takes 
years  of  practical  experience  and  theoretical  and  empirical  research  before  one  can  draw 
conclusions with any reasonable certainty. But it is quite clear that the crisis has brought to 
the fore a number of interesting questions. 
I intend to take up three areas, which I believe will be discussed in the coming period, both in 
the central bank world and in academic research. What these all have in common is that, in 
one way or another, they affect the monetary policy transmission mechanism, that is, the way 
the central bank’s policy rate decisions affect the economy. One can briefly say that the first 
area concerns monetary policy sometimes having unexpected effects, the second concerns it 
having  much  less  effect  than  normal  and  the  third  concerns  monetary  policy  receiving 
support  from,  but  sometimes  possibly  also  being  counteracted  by,  measures  that  are 
primarily aimed at maintaining financial stability. I will run through these areas one by one 
and explain in more detail what I mean. 
But first I would like to clarify something. The fact that I am raising these issues should not be 
interpreted as my trying to make a point about how the world looks with certainty. Although 
some  of  the  ideas  are  in  line  with  my  own  reasoning  in  the  monetary  policy  discussion, 
others are relevant from a more general perspective. These are simply issues I think are of 
current interest and which I believe will be discussed in the coming period. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
Can expansionary monetary policy increase risk taking in the economy? 
A  central  component  in  the  financial  crisis  was  what  has  sometimes  been  called  a  North 
Atlantic  property  bubble.1  In  the  United  States  and  a  number  of  other  countries,  such  as 
Ireland, Spain and the United Kingdom, property prices had increased substantially over a 
number  of  years,  accompanied  by  a  large  expansion  in  credit.  Property  prices  then  fell 
drastically in the crisis.  
There is no individual explanation for this development – it is due to a number of interacting 
factors.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  there  were  deficiencies  in  the  regulations  and 
supervision, but these perhaps mainly contributed to the failure to slow down a process that 
had already begun and was driven by other forces. One factor that some people consider 
played  a  role  in  this  is  the  expansionary  monetary  policy  with  very  low  interest  rates 
conducted by the US central bank, the Federal Reserve, and others during the years before 
the crisis.2 Although monetary policy was hardly the main reason for the crisis, it may have 
contributed to problems building up. 
A risk-taking channel… 
Recently,  there  has  been  increasing  interest  in  a  special  channel  through  which  monetary 
policy  may  have  influenced  events –  what  is  known  as  the  “risk-taking  channel”. The  idea 
that  there  is  a  special  risk-taking  channel  that  should  be  regarded  as  an  independent, 
previously-ignored  part  of  the  transmission  mechanism  is  fairly  new.3  The  idea  is  that  low 
policy rates can in various ways get the banks to take greater risks. When the central bank 
holds  the  policy  rate  low  because  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  the  economy  appears  to 
motivate  this,  the  policy  may  actually  have  the  undesired  and  unforeseen  effect  that  risks 
increase in the banks and in the financial system as a whole. In the long run, this can cause 
problems.  This  was  what  I  meant  earlier  when  I  said  that  monetary  policy  may  in  some 
circumstances have unexpected effects. Although the central bank is acting in an apparently 
natural  manner,  in  accordance  with  an  inflation  targeting  policy,  it  may  unintentionally 
contribute to a future crisis. The risk-taking channel can thus be said to form a link between 
monetary policy and financial stability. 
…that consists of different sub-channels 
The risk-taking channel actually consists of several sub-channels. One channel is that low 
interest rates can create incentives for investors to seek higher risk investments with a higher 
expected  rate  of  return  –  what  is  known  as  a  “search  for  yield”.  This  could  involve,  for 
instance, abandoning government bonds in favour of more risky, but higher-yield commercial 
paper during periods when the interest rate is particularly low. One reason may be the hope 
of attaining the same nominal yield as in earlier periods with higher interest rates.  
Another,  more  indirect  channel  is  linked  to  low  interest  rates  contributing  to  raising,  for 
instance, the value of assets and collateral, as well as income and profits. This can in turn 
affect the banks’ assessments of, and tolerance to, risk.4 Low interest rates could mean, for 
                                                 
1   Paul Krugman and Robin Wells, “The Slump Goes On: Why?” The New York Review of Books, September 
2010. 
2   See, for instance, John B. Taylor, “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical Analysis of 
What Went Wrong”, NBER Working Paper Series No. 14631, 2009. 
3   The concept of a “risk-taking channel” was introduced by Claudio Borio and Haibin Zhu in “Capital regulation, 
risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Papers No 268, 
2008. This paper also reviews the different mechanisms the risk-taking channel consists of. 
4   The banks’ assessment of risk can in turn affect the size of the leverage they allow. Variations in leverage also 
affect the price of the asset and are an important driving force in what are known as the “leverage cycle”; see 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
instance, that they  make a  more optimistic assessment of  the expected default frequency. 
This channel can be said to function as a form of multiplier in the sense that it reinforces the 
effects of interest rate changes on the economy. 
Finally, the central bank’s communication can also contribute to increasing risk taking. This 
may occur, for instance, if the participants in the economy perceive that the central bank is 
acting asymmetrically, to the extent that it reacts strongly once a crisis occurs, but remains 
passive during the period while the risks are building up. Such action may be interpreted as a 
form  of  insurance  that allows  agents  to  take  greater  risks  than  they  would  otherwise  have 
done, as they rely on the central bank always being prepared to intervene and resolve the 
situation if things go wrong. 
There is as yet rather limited empirical research on the risk-taking channel, but some papers 
on the subject have now begun to appear. The studies are based on data from the eurozone 
and the United States, as well as other countries. They appear on the whole to support the 
theory that low policy rates lead to the banks taking greater risks.5 
Well worth more research… 
My  personal  view  is  that  the  risk-taking  channel  is  definitely  an  interesting  line,  well  worth 
further research. Our knowledge of the monetary policy transmission mechanisms is far from 
complete  and  the  way  that  monetary  policy  affects  the  banks’  risk  taking  is  something  we 
need to learn more about.  
I  also  believe  it  would  be  useful  to  broaden  the  question  and  try  to  find  out  if  low  interest 
rates for a long period of time can lead to an increase in risk propensity in society as a whole 
–  among  households,  companies  and  other  participants  in  the  economy  –  and  not  just 
among banks. So far, research in this field has been even scarcer.6 As I see it, an increased 
risk propensity among households could be an equally strong driving force behind a rise in 
property prices as greater risk taking by the banks. 
…but not so easy to do in practice 
It  is  of  course  difficult  to  predict  today  what  the  conclusions  eventually  will  be  and  what 
implications  they  may  have  for  monetary  policy.  But  even  if  it  is  discovered  that  the  risk-
taking  channel  is  something  worth  taking  into  account,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  see  how  this 
should  be  done  in  practice.  I  cannot  see,  for  instance,  that  it  is  realistic  to  believe  that  a 
central bank would refrain from cutting its policy rate below a certain level on the grounds 
that  this  might  lead  to  greater  risk  taking  in  the  economy.  Should  developments  in  the 
economy as a whole warrant a low policy rate and there are no tangible signs of increased 
risk taking, it would be very difficult to justify such a policy. However, it is of course important 
                                                                                                                                                      
for  instance,  Geanakoplos,  J.,  “Solving  the  Present  Crisis  and  Managing  the  Leverage  Cycle”,  FRBNY 
Economic Policy Review, August 2010. 
5   See,  for  instance,  Gambacorta,  L.,  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Risk-Taking  Channel”,  BIS  Quarterly  Review, 
December  2009,  Ioannidou,  V.,  S.  Ongena  and  J.-L.  Peydró,  “Monetary  Policy,  Risk-Taking  and  Pricing: 
Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment”, European Banking Center Discussion Paper No 2009-04S, 2009, 
Jiménez,  G.,  S.  Ongena,  J.-L.  Peydró  and  J.  Saurina,  “Hazardous  Times  for  Monetary  Policy:  What  do 
Twenty-Three  Million  Bank  Loans  Say  About  the  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy  on  Credit  Risk?”  CEPR 
Discussion  Paper  No.  6514,  2009,  Altunbas,  Y.,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marques-Ibanez,  “Does  Monetary 
Policy Affect Bank Risk-Taking?” BIS Working Papers No 298, 2010, Delis, M. D. and G. Kouretas, “Interest 
Rates  and  Bank  Risk-Taking”,  Munich  Personal  RePEc  Archive,  MPRA  Paper  No.  20132,  2010  and 
Maddaloni,  A.  and  J.-L.  Peydró,  “Bank  Risk-Taking,  Securitization,  Supervision  and  Low  Interest  Rates: 
Evidence from the Euro Area and the U.S. Lending Standards”, ECB Working Paper Series No 1248, 2010. 
6   One paper that does not focus on banks is Bekaert, G., M. Hoerova and M. Lo Duca, “Risk, Uncertainty and 
Monetary Policy”, NBER Working Paper Series No 16397, 2010, which finds that low policy rates lower the 
risk aversion on the stock market after around five months. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 3
to  bear  this  mechanism  in  mind.  If  the  policy  rate  has  been  low  for  a  long  period  of  time, 
there  may  be  reason  for  particular  vigilance  regarding  signs  of  increased  risk  propensity. 
When there are such signs, it may be easier to act. Although not always easy to detect, it is 
not  impossible  to  identify  signs  of  increasing  risk.  For  example,  the  Riksbank  warned  in 
speeches and reports, a long time before the crisis broke out, that the compensation for risk 
on the financial markets was too low.7 
Weaker monetary policy effect when agents are consolidating their balance sheets? 
Something  that  has  characterised  the  recovery  from  the  recent  crisis  in  many  countries, 
although  not  in  Sweden,  is  that  it  has  been  very  slow.  One  hypothesis  is  that  several 
economies  are  currently  undergoing  what  is  known  as  a  “balance  sheet  recession”.  This 
concept was introduced a few years ago as an explanation for developments in Japan and its 
“lost decade”.8 
The concept of a balance sheet recession can be described as follows. Let us assume that 
we  have  experienced  a  large  price  rise  on  an  important  asset  market,  for  instance,  the 
property market, and that this rise has been largely financed through loans – that is, roughly 
what happened with the North Atlantic property bubble. If prices then fall drastically, many 
people will be stuck with assets that have declined substantially in value, while the value of 
the loan remains unchanged. In other words, their balance sheets look much worse than they 
had  anticipated.  This  can  create  uncertainty  regarding  the  outlook  for  the  future.  In  this 
situation the participants in the economy may set a target that overshadows all others – to 
get rid of enough of their debts. This means that their income will for some time to come be 
used for amortisation rather than consumption and investment. 
Interest rate cuts less effective when everyone wants to pay off their debts 
It is then of minor importance if interest rates are cut – the participants in the economy are 
still only interested in consolidating their balance sheets. Even if one steps on the monetary 
policy accelerator pedal, the engine does not give the usual response. This is what I meant 
earlier when I said that monetary policy has less effect than usual in certain situations. The 
actual consolidation of the balance sheets may go more quickly if the interest rate is cut, as 
this creates scope to increase the pace of the instalment payments. But in a balance sheet 
recession there is also a risk that the policy rate will reach its lower limit.9 
The consolidation of the balance sheets may take a fairly long time, in some cases perhaps 
several years, and during this period there is a risk of the economy as a whole weakening. It 
is only when the participants in the economy are satisfied with their balance sheets that they 
will begin consuming and investing again, and everything returns to normal. 
Developments in the United States similar to Japan 
In Japan the policy rate was close to zero in 1995, but the private sector continued paying off 
its  debts  and  it  was  not  until  around  ten  years  later  that  balance  sheets  had  been 
consolidated.  It  was  primarily  the  corporate  sector  that  paid  off  its  debts  and  held  back 
demand.  Many  analysts  are  now  saying  that  the  United  States  is  undergoing  a  similar 
                                                 
7   See, for instance, Financial Stability Report 2005:1. 
8   Koo, R. C., Balance Sheet Recession: Japan’s Struggle with Uncharted Economics and its Global Implications, 
Wiley, 2003. 
9   Normally, an expansionary fiscal policy  is considered the  best recipe in  a balance sheet recession, see for 
instance Eggertsson G. and P. Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo 
Approach”, unpublished paper, Princeton University, November 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2010
process,  but  there  it  is  mainly  the  households  that  are  struggling  with  balance  sheet 
problems.10 
Fortunately, not all recessions are balance sheet recessions – most of them are more normal 
recessions  without  any  debt  overhang  and  where  demand  recovers  fairly  quickly.  For 
example, households’ balance sheets in the United States have only shown prolonged and 
severe weakening during the most recent two of the past six recessions.11 The recovery in 
the economy as a whole has thus also been slower on these two occasions than following 
earlier recessions.  
Households and companies as important as the financial sector  
Balance sheet recessions have several important implications. One is, of course, that as they 
tend to be particularly long drawn out, one should try to avoid them. Another implication is 
that the banks and the financial system need not be the reason why the economy is slow to 
recover  from  a  financial  crisis.  The  reason  may  instead  be  that  households  or  companies 
need time to pay off their debts and put their balance sheets in order. 
Another  conclusion  I  draw  is  that  a  balance  sheet  recession,  or  in  any  case  a  very  weak 
economy resulting from balance sheet adjustments, may arise without there being problems 
in the banks that cause a threat to financial stability. For instance, one can imagine that a 
sharp  fall  in  house  prices  could  trigger  a  process  where  households  begin  to  save  and 
amortise their mortgages, without the banking sector experiencing any difficulties. One could 
thus say that, in this case, the reason one may want to prevent a balance sheet recession is 
because  of  monetary  policy  considerations  –  one  wants  to  stabilise  inflation  and  the 
economy  as  a  whole  –  rather  than  to  maintain  financial  stability.  Those  occasions  when  I 
have advocated a policy of “leaning against the wind”, that is, holding the policy rate a little 
higher because I perceive risks in a rapid increase in lending and house prices, this is the 
sort of problem I have had in mind.  
A further aspect of the problem is that in countries like Sweden most people buy a house or 
apartment  to  live  in,  not  to  rent  out.  Nor  do  we  have  the  possibility  that  exists  in  some 
countries  of  handing  the  property  over  to  the  bank  when  interest  payments  become  too 
much, and thus getting rid of the loan. When interest rates rise or one wants to pay off one’s 
debts, one simply cuts down on other expenditure. One could thus speculate as to whether 
the  risk  of  financial  instability  resulting  from  an  over-mortgaged  household  sector  is  less 
here, but on the other hand the effect on demand in the economy when households begin 
saving is greater. 
Interplay between monetary policy and macroprudential policy  
The two areas I have discussed so far have concerned monetary policy possibly contributing 
to a credit-driven bubble, and the fact that it may not be particularly effective when the bubble 
has burst. All in all, this gives a fairly unfavourable image of monetary policy and what it can 
achieve.  So  can’t  monetary  policy  play  a  more  positive  role,  for  instance,  by  preventing 
                                                 
10   See,  for  instance,  Koo,  R.  C.,  “How  to  Avoid  a  Third  Depression”,  Testimony  before  the  Committee  on 
Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  July  2010  and  Krugman,  P.  and  R.  Wells,  “The  Slump 
Goes On: Why?”, The New York Review of Books, September 2010. That household consumption plays a key 
role in the recovery from a financial crisis is a significant result in, for instance, Barrell, R., E. Philip Davies and 
O. Pomerantz, “Costs of Financial Instability, Household-Sector Balance Sheets and Consumption”, Journal of 
Financial Stability 2, 2006. Crises tend to be more severe the higher the degree of borrowing is, and there 
appear  to  be  effects  on  consumption  over  and  above  those  stemming  from  lower  disposable  incomes  and 
lower net wealth. 
11   Amaral,  P.,  “Households’  Balance  Sheets  and  the  Recovery”,  Economic  Trends,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Cleveland, September 2010. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 5
bubbles  and  exaggeratedly  highrisk  lending?  Yes,  I  believe  it  can,  if  one  acts  at  an  early 
stage. But at the same time, I believe that the main responsibility, or the first line of defence 
as one often says, for preventing credit-driven bubbles must be suitably-designed regulation 
and effective supervision. This is a stance that I believe I share with most people today. 
Coordinating the “interest rate lever” and the “regulation lever”  
I mentioned initially that monetary policy may receive support from, but can sometimes be 
counteracted by, measures primarily aimed at maintaining financial stability. Regulation and 
supervision can support monetary policy in two ways. For one thing, one can try to design a 
regulatory  framework  that  remains  the  same  over  time,  but  nevertheless  prevents  credit-
driven bubbles from arising. But one can also use regulation more actively so that there is 
not just an “interest rate lever” but also a “regulation lever” to pull on. 
Normally, one may imagine pulling on the two levers for different reasons – the interest rate 
lever for monetary policy reasons and the regulation lever to maintain financial stability. But 
the levers are nevertheless connected in different ways. When one pulls on one lever, the 
resulting effects are often similar to those one gets if one pulls on the other. For instance, a 
regulation  change,  such  as  a  higher  amortisation  requirement  on  mortgages,  will  lead  to 
higher  payments  for  households  in  the  same  way  as  an  interest  rate  increase  does. 
Regardless of which lever you pull, it is difficult to ensure the effects are only of a monetary 
policy nature, or only aimed at financial stability. One of the lessons of the financial crisis is 
that there are close links between these two policy areas, and that one therefore needs to 
coordinate how one pulls on the levers.12 
Having  said  this,  it  may  be  worth  adding  that  monetary  policy  and  a  policy  for  financial 
stability  usually  go  hand  in  hand,  more  or  less  automatically.  Moreover,  problems  with 
financial stability only arise under certain limited periods. On the other hand, one may claim 
that the crisis and its effects show that we actually should worry about it slightly more often 
than we have done.  
If we are successful in formulating and using regulations and supervision, the central bank 
can receive assistance with both of the monetary policy problems I mentioned earlier. The 
central bank can hold the policy rate low when the economic outlook calls for this, without 
being  afraid  of  risks  building  up  through  a  monetary  policy  risk-taking  channel.  And  if 
regulation and supervision can be used to prevent credit-driven bubbles arising, the central 
bank need not fear a balance sheet recession where monetary policy has little effect.  
Regulation with monetary policy motives 
With  regard  to  coordinating  the  interest  rate  lever  and  the  regulation  level,  I  would  like  to 
return to a question I raised when I talked about balance sheet recessions. As I noted then, a 
fall on the property market could lead to a weak performance in the economy if households 
become uncertain about the future and feel they must consolidate their balance sheets. I also 
noted that this does not mean that the banks will experience problems that could threaten 
financial  stability.  The  times  when  I  have  seen  risks  of  this  happening  and  therefore 
advocated a policy of “leaning against the wind” it was for monetary policy reasons. 
But it is not necessarily the interest rate lever that needs to be used to prevent this type of 
credit-driven bubble. The regulation lever is probably at least as effective in most cases. But 
what is worth noting in particular is that in this case one would use the regulation lever, not to 
maintain financial stability but for monetary policy reasons. This is a further example of the 
                                                 
12   See,  for  instance,  Mishkin,  F.  S.,  “Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Lessons  from  the  Crisis”,  paper  presented  at  
the  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference,  “Monetary  Policy  Revisited:  Lessons  from  the  Crisis”,  Frankfurt,  
18–19 November, 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 164/2010
close  links  between  the  two  policy  areas  and  their  tools,  and  also  of  how  regulation  can 
actively support monetary policy. 
Greater focus on systemic risks... 
Another lesson from the crisis is that as we now try to improve the regulatory framework and 
supervision, we should focus much more than before on the risks at the systemic level, for 
the financial system as a whole. The type of measure that is discussed in this context is often 
referred  to  as  macroprudential  policy.  The  actual  toolbox  for  macroprudential  policy  is 
gradually being developed. But in general one can say that it is not so much about inventing 
new tools, as it is about using traditional supervision tools in a new way – they will be more 
specifically  aimed  at  signs  of  exaggerated  credit  expansion  and  indebtedness  in  the 
economy at large, at the systemic level. 
What  are  these  tools  in  more  concrete  terms?  What  does  a  regulation  lever  consist  of?  I 
have  already  mentioned  the  possibility  to  vary  amortisation  requirements  for  mortgages. 
Another example is the countercyclical capital requirement for banks proposed in Basel III. 
The idea is that the capital requirement will increase if credit growth increases in relation to 
GDP. This entails a higher lending cost when credit growth is high, and also increases the 
banks’  resilience.  A  further  example  is  a  ceiling  on  loan-to-value  ratios  similar  to  the 
mortgage  ceiling  recently 
introduced  by  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial 
Supervisory  Authority).  This  kind  of  ceiling  creates  incentives  for  households  to  acquire  a 
buffer  that  reduces  the  risk  of  their  balance  sheets  being  weakened  if  property  prices  fall. 
Regulation of the loan-to-value ratio could also contribute to slowing down lending and house 
price increases and thus counteracting a housing bubble. 
…but traditional supervision is still important 
But while the discussion now mainly concerns macroprudential tools, it is important that we 
remember  to  keep  improving  the  more  micro-oriented,  traditional  bank  supervision.  Just 
because  it  proved  insufficient  to  prevent  the  financial  crisis  does  not  mean  that  it  is 
unimportant. 
There is a broad spectrum of regulations around the financial system; everything from rules 
on consumer protection to rules on how to act if an agent – a bank, company or household – 
becomes  insolvent.  If  these  micro-oriented  rules  are  not  properly  designed,  the  risk  of  a 
credit-financed bubble increases, and the consequences can be even greater. This means 
there is an even greater need to actively counteract this type of development by pulling on 
the more macrooriented regulation lever, and this may entail rather difficult considerations. 
One  could  say  that  well-designed  supervision  can  support  a  macroprudential  policy  in  a 
similar way to a well-designed macroprudential policy supporting monetary policy. 
Does macroprudential policy require support from monetary policy?  
So  will  improvements  in  regulation  and  supervision  be  able  to  solve  all  of  the  problems? 
Unfortunately, I don’t think so. Quite regardless of which solutions we use, I am quite sure 
that  we  will  not  be  totally  immune  to  financial  crises  in  the  future.  What  I  hope  we  can 
achieve is to ensure they are rarer and less severe.  
I also believe that there will always be situations where the regulation and supervision may 
need  support  from  a  monetary  policy  that  “leans  against  the  wind”.  One  reason  is  that 
experience shows that it is difficult to construct regulations that cannot be circumvented in 
one way or the other. The policy rate is certainly a blunt instrument, as it affects all lending in 
the economy. But at the same time, this may be a strength compared with the regulations, 
simply because it is difficult to “circumvent” an interest rate increase.  
BIS Review 164/2010 
 7
Another reason why monetary policy may in some cases be needed as a complement is that 
there will probably be quite considerable resistance to using regulation to prevent a credit-
driven bubble. Banks and other financial market participants may perceive regulation to be a 
larger intervention than an interest rate increase, and consider it to be aimed only at them. In 
addition,  things  often  look  very  good  just  as  a  bubble  is  inflating,  so  resistance  would 
probably  be  particularly  strong  when  measures  are  needed  the  most.  The  political  and 
psychological pressure on those pulling on the regulation lever could thus be substantial. 
Important with a good allocation of responsibility 
I thereby come to an issue that is just as important as how regulations should be designed; 
namely,  who  should  pull  on  the  regulation  lever  and  when.  Lessons  can  be  learned  from 
monetary policy when it comes to responsibility and mandate. If an authority has a sufficient 
degree  of  independence  it  can  more  easily  withstand  external  pressure.  And  if  it  also  has 
clear and specific objectives, it has greater opportunity to do a good job, while at the same 
time it is easier for society to evaluate it. 
The allocation of responsibility and mandate are of course important also because there are 
both an interest rate lever and a regulation lever to pull, and that these can in some cases 
have similar effects. It is not difficult to imagine situations where regulations and the interest 
rate counteract one another. For instance, one might have a situation where the prospects 
for inflation and the economy as a whole look bleak, but where there are nevertheless signs 
that  a  credit-driven  bubble  is  inflating.  There  may  then  be  reason  to  use  macroprudential 
measures to counteract the bubble. But these will reduce lending and thus further weaken 
the economy. 
Such counteracting effects need not be a problem, if one single authority is controlling both 
levers, or if they are controlled by different authorities that are essentially trying to achieve 
the same aims and make similar assessments. For instance, they may both agree that the 
economy is weak, but that there may be reason to take action to counteract a bubble. Then it 
is a question of coordinating and trying to find a suitable dosage, or mix, of interest rate and 
regulations.  It  is  clear  that  the  problems  can  be  aggravated  if  the  levers  are  controlled  by 
different  authorities  that  do  not  have  the  same  aims  and  make  completely  different 
assessments of the situation. 
It  is  thus  important  to  try  to  coordinate  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy.  Of 
course,  there  has  always  been  a  need  to  coordinate  monetary  policy  and  the  work  to 
promote financial stability. But following the crisis and the emergence of a macroprudential 
approach,  this  need  has  become  even  more  evident.  Important  issues  to  resolve  in  the 
coming  years  are  how  responsibility  should  be  allocated  between  different  authorities  to 
facilitate  this  coordination,  and  what  forms  the  cooperation  should  take.  It  is  of  central 
importance  that  the  mandate  is  clear  and  the  tools  are  well-defined,  particularly  to  enable 
evaluation and to ensure accountability. 
An unusually interesting time 
I have now been a monetary policy decision-maker for quite a long time – almost 12 years. A 
lot  has  happened  during  this  time,  both  in  the  Swedish  economy  and  internationally  – 
including  normal  upturns  and  downturns  in  economic  activity  and  a  number  of  crises  in 
various parts of the world. The way we conduct monetary policy has also changed quite a lot. 
But,  when  seen  in  a  broader  perspective,  the  changes  have  perhaps  mostly  concerned 
details – that we have further developed the inflation-targeting policy that has always been at 
the core of our work. 
There is of course no doubt that the recent crisis has been the most dramatic one during this 
period. But I also have the impression that it has affected thinking about monetary policy and 
the central banks’ activities in general, in a way that I have not experienced before. It is not 
8 
 BIS Review 164/2010
about us needing to throw away the old and find something completely new. The progress 
we have made in research and practical policy implementation still holds good, and we will 
continue to conduct a policy of flexible inflation targeting. But it is clear that we need to find a 
better  means  of  integrating  the  financial  sector  and  what  is  happening  there  into  our 
analyses. Both researchers and policymakers have a lot to think about in the coming period, 
and there is no doubt that the coming years will be interesting ones. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 9
