Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Regulatory framework for the exchange 
and use of credit information in Uganda 
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  
at  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  Executive  Breakfast  Briefing  on  “The  regulatory 
framework  for  credit  information  exchange  and  the  wider  economic  importance”,  Kampala, 
20 October 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It  is  my  pleasure  and  honour  to  address  this  distinguished  gathering  of  top  bankers.  My 
remarks  this  morning  are  on  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  exchange  and  use  of  credit 
information;  this  is  a  subject  which  is  of  great  relevance  for  both  the  development  of  the 
financial sector and customer protection. The interests of both the financial institutions and 
their customers must be properly balanced.  
The  nature  of  financial  transactions  means  that  financial  markets  are  information  sensitive 
markets.  Market  imperfections  in  financial  markets  mostly  emanate  from  some  sort  of 
informational problem. In extreme cases, lack of adequate information causes markets to fail 
completely;  a  phenomenon  which  has  been  analysed  extensively  by  economists  such  as 
Josepth Stiglitz and George Akerlof, who were awarded Nobel prizes for their work.  
Access to credit information on prospective borrowers enables lenders to better evaluate the 
creditworthiness of the borrowers. This reduces the information costs of lending and hence 
should  allow  more  credit  to  be  made  available  at  lower  interest  rates.  Better  credit 
information can reduce the extent of credit rationing which is a serious problem in financial 
markets.  
Because  credit  information  helps  credit  markets  to  function  more  smoothly,  thereby 
generating social benefits, such information has some of the characteristics of a public good. 
The  sharing  of  credit  information  among  all  lenders  yields  social  benefits  which cannot  be 
realized  if  each  lender  were  to  retain  the  information  which  itself  has  gathered  for  its  own 
private use. Evidence suggests that information sharing significantly increases the breadth of 
credit  markets,  especially  where  creditors’  rights  and  foreclosure  mechanisms  are  weak, 
partly compensating for the lack of effective law enforcement.  
The social benefits to be derived from the sharing of credit information provide the rationale 
for  a  centralized  agency  to  collect  data  on  borrowers  and  disseminate  this  data  to  its 
members. That is the reason why the Bank of Uganda has promoted the Credit Reference 
Bureau.  In  essence  the  CRB  is  a  tool  intended  to  facilitate  the  growth  of  credit  markets, 
improve access to credit and reduce its cost.  
The  sharing  of  information  on  prospective  borrowers,  however,  also  carries  risks.  Such 
information  can  be  misused  by  those  who  have  access  to  it,  to  the  detriment  of  bank 
customers. Moreover such misuse would severely damage the trust between banks and their 
customers, discouraging customers from using the banking system. Consequently, the Credit 
Reference Bureau must be governed by an enabling legal framework which guarantees the 
confidentiality and accuracy of the information passed to it and ensures that customers give 
their consent to any information about them being given to the CRB.  
The legal framework in Uganda for the Credit Reference Bureau is the MDI Act of 2003 and 
the Financial Institutions Act of 2004. The latter mandates the Bank of Uganda to establish a 
Credit Reference Bureau.  
BIS Review 139/2010 
 1
The Bank of Uganda has issued regulations and guidelines to govern the operations of the 
CRB.  These  regulations  allow  information  relating  to  the  performance  of  a  borrower  to  be 
submitted to the Credit Reference Bureau. The regulations stipulate that the written consent 
of the borrower must always be obtained in order to submit credit information to the CRB. 
Moreover, the onus of obtaining and keeping a record of the borrower’s consent rests with 
the lender, which must be able to demonstrate that it had obtained this consent in the event 
of any dispute.  
The Bank of Uganda has issued guidelines to the financial institutions that participate in the 
CRB to protect the rights of borrowers and to ensure that data are not misused. Financial 
institutions are required to put in place internal control procedures to ensure that access to 
the CRB is restricted. They must use this information only in connection with their lending 
operations and with the borrower’s consent. Guidelines have also been issued to enable the 
borrower  to  obtain  access  to  his  or  her  credit  report  held  by  the  CRB,  in  order  to  verify 
whether the data are accurate.  
The  regulatory  framework  for  the  CRB  is  not  yet  complete.  Within  the  next  year  or  so  we 
intend to establish a neutral ombudsman who can resolve disputes between customers and 
the CRB on the veracity of the credit information held by the CRB.  
Currently there is no law in Uganda that ensures the protection of personal data. In future, it 
would be desirable for Uganda to enact a law on credit data protection which would replace 
the  existing  CRB  guidelines.  Data  protection  legislation  could  also  allow  non  financial 
institutions, such as utility companies, to participate in the CRB.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  a  good  regulatory  framework  that  conforms  to 
international best practice, is essential for the efficient operation of the CRB and to ensure 
that the CRB commands the confidence of bank customers. The legal framework should deal 
with data protection, dispute resolution and the timely sharing of data between lenders. We 
have begun to put this framework in place, but the task is not yet complete.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2010
