Tadao Noda: Recent economic and financial developments and the 
conduct of monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Tadao Noda, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, 
at a meeting with business leaders, Shimonoseki, 15 September 2010. 
 Overseas economies  
I. 
I will begin by outlining the current situation of and outlook for the overseas economies.  
The world economy deteriorated significantly after the failure of Lehman Brothers, which filed 
for bankruptcy two years ago, but it has been recovering moderately since the second half of 
2009.  This  recovery  has  been  supported  by  the  effects  of  both  fiscal  stimulus  measures 
adopted around the world and inventory restocking in a bid to get them back to pre-slump 
levels. However, the pace of the global economic recovery has been slowing, as the effects 
of the stimulus measures and restocking have waned.  
A. 
The U.S. economy: burdened with balance-sheet adjustments and 
deceleration concerns  
The U.S. economy is recovering at a moderate pace, with the second preliminary estimate 
for the real GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter of 2010 marking 1.6 percent on an 
annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, but the rate has fallen from its peak of 5.0 percent for 
the October–December quarter of 2009. Given the gradual recovery in private consumption 
and business fixed investment, as well as the increase in exports, the main causes of the fall 
in  GDP  growth  appear  to  have  been  the  sharp  rise  in  imports1  and  the  slower  growth  in 
inventory investment.  
The  U.S.  economy  is  undergoing  balance-sheet  adjustments,  to  reduce  the  huge  debt 
resulting from excessive consumption that had accumulated up to the 2008 financial crisis. 
With  the  very  slow  improvements  in  employment  and  income,  recovery  –  particularly  in 
household spending – lacks momentum. Housing investment weakened again as the boost 
in demand ahead of the expiration of the home-buyer tax credit diminished, and it is likely to 
be some time before we see a self-sustained recovery.  
The pace of economic recovery is expected to slow temporarily by the 2010 year-end, due to 
decelerating exports following completion of the restocking of inventories worldwide, and the 
waning of effects of the government’s economic stimulus measures, which will push down 
the  growth  rate  temporarily.  The  economic  recovery  trend,  however,  is  likely  to  be 
maintained, since exports, particularly to emerging and commodity-exporting economies, are 
expected  to  continue  increasing,  while  private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment 
will probably remain on an upward trend amid an accommodative financial environment.  
The euro area economy: facing intraregional disparities and fiscal problems  
B. 
Turning to Europe, I will focus on the economic activity in the euro area. Economic activity in 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  been  recovering  moderately,  with  intraregional  disparities 
increasing. The real GDP growth rate in the April-June quarter marked a large increase of 
3.9  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  up  from  the  previous  quarter’s 
                                                 
1   When growth in imports exceeds that in exports, net exports (exports minus imports) decrease, pushing down 
GDP growth. The sharp increase in imports in the April-June quarter seems to have been only temporary. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 1
1.3 percent.  The  increase  mainly  reflects  a  steady  growth  in  exports  due  in  part  to  the 
depreciation of the euro.  
The economy, however, has been facing two challenges that have arisen from fiscal issues, 
and have intraregional disparities.  
The  first  issue  concerns  fiscal  consolidation.  Looking  at  the  April-June  quarter’s  real  GDP 
indicators by country, Germany marked the highest growth since the country’s reunification in 
1990 and was supported by strong exports. Meanwhile Greece, the first to adopt substantial 
fiscal tightening measures to combat its severe fiscal problems, saw declines for the seventh 
consecutive quarter. Although the extent of the area’s problems varies, fiscal consolidation 
must be carried out not only by the most seriously troubled countries such as Greece, but by 
all member states of the European Union.  
The  second  issue  concerns  stability  in  financial  markets.  Since  the  start  of  2010,  concern 
about  fiscal  problems  in  some  European  countries  has  caused  the  prices  of  government 
bonds  in  these  countries  to  fall,  leading  to  heightened  anxiety  about  the  soundness  of 
European financial institutions that hold large amounts of the bonds. After the July release of 
the  stress  test  exercise  results  for  these  institutions,  European  financial  markets  restored 
stability  for  a  while,  but  a  resurgence  of  fiscal  problems  in  Ireland  has  revived  market 
instability.  
It is anticipated that the two issues just mentioned will add downward pressure on the euro 
area economy, thereby moderating the pace of future economic recovery.  
The root of the two issues may lie in the use of a single currency, the euro, the structural 
factor  unique  to  the  area.  Its  introduction,  while  stimulating  an  increase  in  the  euro  area’s 
intraregional  trade,  expanded  the  fiscal  and  current  account  deficits  of  some  European 
countries  because  of  the  disparity  in  productivity  and  competitiveness.  Furthermore,  fiscal 
policy is the only tool available to the member states, given that monetary policy has been 
centralized and that foreign exchange rates can no longer be adjusted to control deficits in 
the area.  
The Asian economy: adjusting for a soft landing  
C. 
Asian  economies,  free  of  the  need  for  balance-sheet  adjustments,  have  been  the  driving 
force  of  the  world  economy  as  they  exhibit  high  growth  as  a  whole  led  by  recovery  in 
domestic demand. Private consumption is expected to increase steadily with robust demand 
for  durable  goods  reflecting  the  rising  level  of  income  and  increase  in  the  number  of 
households resulting from progress in urbanization. Capital inflows from abroad will support 
the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending, and so will help maintain 
strong  growth.  The  risk  of  overheating  has  caused  more  economies  to  conduct  tighter 
policies such as adjustments to accommodative monetary policy, but as a whole the financial 
environment remains lax.  
The  Chinese  economy,  the  most  powerful  engine  of  growth,  continued  to  grow  at  a  rapid 
pace  and  marked  a  double-digit  real  GDP  growth  rate  of  10.3  percent  on  an  annualized 
quarter-on-quarter  basis  for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2010,  decelerating  slightly  from 
11.9 percent  in  the  previous  quarter.  Concerned  about  the  hike  in  real  estate  prices,  the 
Chinese government this April introduced measures, including a higher down-payment ratio 
for housing purchases, to restrain the increase in real estate transactions. These measures 
are expected to place added downward pressure on economic activity to a certain extent by 
slowing the pace of growth in fixed asset investments. This would be achieved by restraining 
the  increase  in  real  estate  transactions  and,  at  the  same  time,  decelerating  production 
growth, particularly of steel and other construction-related materials. As a result, the balance 
between orders and inventories in the manufacturing sector is improving at a slower pace, 
and  the  pace  of  economic  expansion  is  expected  to  decelerate  for  a  while.  The  Chinese 
economy,  however,  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  rapid  pace  into  next  year,  as  private 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2010
consumption is expected to increase steadily, generated by higher income levels, while the 
government will be ready to intervene flexibly to help support the economy.  
Japan’s economy  
II. 
Next, I will outline the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy.  
A. 
The economy: recovering moderately, but with the self-sustaining momentum 
still weak  
Japan’s  economy  has  been  showing  signs  of  a  moderate  recovery  supported  by  the 
continued  improvement  in  overseas  economic  conditions  mentioned  earlier.  The  real  GDP 
growth  rate  for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2010  in  the  second  preliminary  estimate  was 
1.5 percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  showing  a  clear  deceleration  in 
growth  compared  to  the  previous  two  quarters.  However,  exports  have  been  increasing; 
private  consumption  has  been  picking  up,  due  to  the  government’s  economic  stimulus 
measures favoring energy-efficient products; and business fixed investment is showing signs 
of picking up, led by the increase in exports. Yet, the main economic indicators confirm that 
the level of economic activity remains lower than its recent peak. In this situation, there has 
been  a  persistent  sense  of  excesses  in  capital  stock  and  the  workforce,  and  thus  firms 
remain  cautious  about  spending  despite  a  notable  improvement  in  corporate  profits. 
Therefore,  prospects  for  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic  private  demand  remain 
uncertain.  
In terms of outlook, the economy is likely to recover at a moderate pace on the whole, with 
exports continuing to increase. However, the pace of increase in exports is likely to remain 
moderate for the time being, mainly due to the following: (1) the waning effects of inventory 
restocking  in  overseas  economies;  (2)  the  slowdown  in  the  high  growth  of  emerging 
economies,  primarily  reflecting  tighter  economic  policies;  and  (3)  the  yen’s  recent 
appreciating  trend.  A  decline  in  private  consumption  seems  inevitable  in  reaction  to  the 
waning  effects  of  the  government’s  economic  stimulus  measures  favoring  energy-efficient 
products.  Thus,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  Japan’s  economic  activity  is  likely  to  slow 
temporarily.  
Nevertheless, it is anticipated that Japan’s GDP growth rate for fiscal 2010 will exceed the 
potential  economic  growth  rate.  For  reference,  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’ 
forecasts  in  July  for  real  GDP  was  2.6  percent  for  fiscal  2010,  and  1.9  percent  for  fiscal 
2011.2  
Prices: weaker downward pressure from the negative output gap  
B. 
Although prices continue to decline due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, 
the pace of decline is slowing as a trend due to the gradual improvement in the aggregate 
supply and demand balance. Excluding the effects of the special subsidies for high school 
tuition introduced in April 2010, the year-on-year pace of decline in the consumer price index 
excluding  fresh  food,  or  the  core  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  is  gradually  slowing.  The 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in July for the core CPI was at around minus 
0.4 percent for fiscal 2010, and at around 0.1 percent for fiscal 2011.  
                                                 
2   Every April and October, the Bank releases its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report), 
and in the intervening January and July makes an interim assessment of the outlook laid out in the report. In 
October, the Policy Board will review its outlook by assessing the upcoming economic indicators and relevant 
information. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 3
Risk factors surrounding the outlook  
C. 
I  believe  the  outlook  just  outlined  for  Japan’s  economy  and  prices  is  the  most  probable 
scenario. Projections, however, are always subject to many uncertainties. Let me elaborate 
on major uncertainties that are also risk factors surrounding the outlook of the economy and 
prices in Japan.  
Since  Japan’s  economic  recovery  has  been  induced  by  improving  overseas  economic 
conditions, and a self-sustaining recovery in domestic demand remains uncertain, any delay 
in the recovery of overseas economies could derail Japan’s economy from a self-sustaining 
recovery path. Therefore, I consider that developments in overseas economies represent the 
greatest risk that Japan’s economy faces.  
Risks posed by the U.S. economy  
1. 
The quarter-on-quarter slowdown in the real GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter and 
declines  in  many  economic  indicators  released  since  July  have  sparked  serious  concern 
about the outlook for the U.S. economy. For example, forecasts by private-sector economists 
for  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  have  been  revised  downward  from  a  mean  of  around  3.0  to 
3.5 percent for 2010 and 2011, to a mean of just below 3.0 percent for both years. I believe 
that these revisions are only corrections to the overoptimistic forecasts that resulted from an 
incorrect  appraisal  of  the  substantial  pressure  exerted  on  economic  growth  by  the 
U.S. economy’s  balance-sheet  adjustments.  The  recent  developments  are  in  line  with  my 
forecasts: I had expected that the adjustment process would require a considerable amount 
of time and money, considering Japan’s long and harsh experience following the bursting of 
the economic bubble and the scale of excesses in the run-up to the recent financial crisis.3 In 
addition, it is possible that a negative chain reaction of downside risks will emerge: a slower-
than-expected  recovery  in  the  employment  situation  or  a  renewed  fall  in  housing  prices 
would further delay adjustment in household balance sheets. This would affect the corporate 
sector negatively by restraining private consumption.  
Risks posed by emerging and commodity-exporting economies  
2. 
In  addition  to  the  underlying  strength  of  self-sustaining  growth,  economic  activities  in 
emerging and commodity-exporting countries are in part being supported by capital inflows 
from  advanced  countries,  which  are  persisting  with  large-scale  monetary  easing.  Should 
capital  inflows  continue  and  economic  conditions  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  turn  out  to  be  stronger  than  expected,  the  greater  exports  thereby  generated 
could represent an upside risk for Japan’s economy. Nevertheless, if the aforementioned risk 
concerning the U.S. economy materializes and economic activities in advanced countries are 
weaker than expected, growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies might come 
under  downward  pressure,  generated  by  a  decline  in  trading  volume  and  an  outflow  of 
capital.  Furthermore,  although  a  growing  number  of  countries  are  making  adjustments  to 
accommodative  monetary  policies,4  a  delay  in  adjusting  policy  appropriately  could  lead  to 
economic  overheating  in  the  economies  that  fall  behind  the  curve  by  delaying  appropriate 
monetary policy adjustment. Should this be the case, in the short run Japan’s exports could 
rise even further, while at the same time the worsening in the terms of trade associated with 
                                                 
3   The  recently  released  annual  revision  of  GDP  data  showed  the  saving  rate  for  the  April-June  quarter 
increasing to 6.0 percent; the 3.9 percent in the pre-revision data rose to 6.2 percent in the post-revision data. 
This upward revision is notable as it reflects the magnitude of the pressure from balance-sheet adjustments. 
For reference, the average saving rate in the United States was about 2.8 percent from the beginning of 2000 
through summer 2008 – the period when overspending seemed to have continued. 
4   Asian countries that have raised their benchmark interest rates include Malaysia and India in March, Taiwan in 
June, and South Korea and Thailand in July. In addition to the Asian economies, Australia and Brazil have 
been raising their policy interest rates. 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2010
a rise in commodity prices could also pose a downside risk for private domestic demand in 
Japan. Moreover, in the medium to long term, if a sharp unwinding of excessive economic 
and financial activity takes place in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, the risk 
of deep adjustments in their economic activity would demand attention.  
Risks in global financial markets caused by the situation in Europe  
3. 
Global financial markets have been unstable since the beginning of this year, due partly to 
growing fiscal problems in some European countries and subsequent growing concern about 
the financial system. As mentioned earlier, a structural factor – the use of a single currency – 
may  lie  at  the  root  of  the  fiscal  problems,  and  thus  it  is  unlikely  that  there  will  be  a  quick 
resolution to the volatile situation in financial markets caused by the situation in Europe.  
Risks related to Japan’s corporate sector  
4. 
The  last  risk  posed  by  overseas  economies  relates  to  the  corporate  sector  in  Japan.  If 
expectations  are  rising  that  demand  in  Japan  will  be  lackluster,  while  expectations  for 
sustainable growth among emerging economies increase, there is a risk that investment in 
and lending to emerging economies will expand and Japanese firms’ spending on business 
fixed  investment  and  employment  will  be  placed  under  undue  restraint.  According  to  the 
Survey on Planned Capital Spending, released by the Development Bank of Japan, the ratio 
of  the  Japanese  manufacturing  sector’s  overseas  capital  investment  (capital  investment 
overseas  divided  by  capital  investment  in  Japan  multiplied  by  100)  for  fiscal  2010  was  a 
record  high  of  57.2  percent.5  Furthermore,  according  to  the  Annual  Survey  of  Corporate 
Behavior, conducted by the Cabinet Office, the ratio of overseas production has been on an 
upward  trend.  Recently,  an  argument  arose  linking  the  yen’s  appreciation  to  the  hollowing 
out of domestic industry. However, I believe it necessary to view this issue from a medium- to 
long-term perspective, linking it to the issue of productivity and the potential growth rate. I will 
expand on this topic later in more detail.  
III. 
Conduct of monetary policy  
Policy responses by the Bank of Japan  
A. 
Next,  I  will  outline  some  of  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  measures,  implemented  since  the 
Lehman shock in 2008. Policy measures become operative and effective through synergy, 
however, for the sake of explanation, I will categorize them into three types according to their 
objectives.  
1. 
Measures responding to cyclical economic changes: pursue powerful monetary easing 
Measures  taken  in  response  to  cyclical  economic  changes  were  designed  to  overcome 
deflation  and  return  to  a  path  of  sustainable  growth  for  Japan’s  economy,  which  had 
deteriorated  significantly  following  the  Lehman  shock.  The  Bank  undertook  interest  rate 
policy,  lowering  its  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  –  the  policy  rate  –  by 
0.2 percentage point both in October and December 2008, to 0.1 percent, or virtually zero 
percent.  Since  then,  the  policy  rate  has  remained  at  that  level.  The  Bank  has  also  been 
encouraging  longer-term  interest  rates  to  decline.  In  December  2009,  it  introduced  a 
fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral  (hereafter  the  fixed-rate 
                                                 
5   The survey was conducted in June this year with valid responses by 2,270 firms (1,357 firms were surveyed 
concerning  their  ratio  of  capital  investment  overseas).  The  ratio  of  capital  investment  overseas  in  the 
manufacturing  sector peaked  at 54.8 percent in fiscal 2005, but declined  gradually to 42.0 percent in fiscal 
2009,  after  which  it  rose  to  57.2  percent  in  fiscal  2010.  This  fluctuation  does  not  necessarily  represent  an 
upward deviation from the past trend, given the sharp decline from fiscal 2008 to fiscal 2009. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 5
operation)  to  provide  three-month  funds  to  financial  institutions  at  a  low  interest  rate  of 
0.1 percent,  the  same  as  the  policy  rate.  Moreover,  the  Bank  decided  to  start  providing 
additional  funds  with  a  six-month  term  in  August  2010.  The  total  amount  of  loans  to  be 
provided  through  the  fixed-rate  operation  will  increase  to  approximately  30  trillion  yen,  of 
which  some  20  trillion  yen  would  be  available  under  the  existing  three-month  term 
operations. In this way, the Bank is working to further enhance easy monetary conditions by 
providing ample and flexible funds to the money markets.  
Measures to stabilize financial markets: promote recovery from the “acute symptom”  
2. 
The stabilization of financial markets benefits the economy because the effects of monetary 
policy spread to the economy through financial markets. With the failure of Lehman Brothers, 
confidence in the overall financial market was suddenly undermined and the functioning of 
the market deteriorated substantially. In a bid to recover from the resulting situation, which 
has  been  described  as  an  “acute  symptom,”  the  Bank  adopted  a  number  of  measures, 
including the outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds in early 2009, in response to a 
fall  in  the  number  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  transactions;  and  special  funds-supplying 
operations,  collateralized  by  corporate  debt,  to  facilitate  corporate  financing  that  provided 
funds to financial institutions with funds at a low interest rate equivalent to the policy rate. 
These steps – completed by March 2010 after market functioning had been restored – were 
exceptional, in that the central bank had taken on individual private firms’ credit risks, which 
would appear on its balance sheet.  
3. 
Measures addressing structural issues of the economy: support strengthening the 
foundations for economic growth  
The third category of policy measures relates to Japan’s economy from a medium- to long-
term  perspective.  The  growth  rate  had  remained  high  until  the  start  of  the  1970s,  when  it 
started  declining  gradually,  before  dropping  sharply  following  the  bursting  of  the  economic 
bubble at the beginning of 1990s, after which the rate has been declining. Prices have been 
deflationary since the end of the 1990s in terms of the year-on-year change in the CPI. The 
fundamental cause of deflation is a lack of demand, caused by a protracted negative output 
gap. A decline in the growth rate seems to have been the cause of the sluggish demand as it 
dampened  the  public’s  expectations  for  future  economic  growth,  or  in  other  words, 
expectations  for  an  increase  in  wages.  From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  economic 
growth  comprises  growth  in  both  labor  productivity  and  the  number  of  employed.  With  the 
birth  rate  declining  and  the  number  of  those  employed  not  likely  to  rise,  labor  productivity 
must be raised if growth expectations are to increase and deflation is to be overcome. 
While the measures to address cyclical economic changes, involving more or less short-term 
economic  fluctuations,  would  solve  the  lack  of  demand,  they  alone  would  be  ineffective  in 
addressing the medium- to long-term issue of raising productivity.6  
Bearing this in mind, the Bank has searched for ways in which it could utilize its functions to 
raise the potential growth rate through higher productivity. Thus, in June 2010 it introduced a 
new  fund-provisioning  framework  to  support,  from  the  financial  side,  private  financial 
institutions’  efforts  of  their  own  accord  toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth.  
                                                 
6  
In March 2010, at a meeting with business leaders in Shiga Prefecture, I made the following statement in “My 
Answers  to  the  Frequently  Asked  Questions  regarding  Monetary  Policy,”  based  on  the  same  awareness  I 
have  now:  “Maintaining  the  extremely  accommodative  financial  environment  is  one  of  the  necessary 
conditions for overcoming deflation. Another is confronting the fundamental cause of deflation – that is, the 
lack of demand – and making steady efforts to unlock and capture potential demand, as well as to improve 
productivity.” 
6 
 BIS Review 154/2010
The  first  loan  disbursement  under  the  new  fund-provisioning  measure  was  executed  on 
September 6, involving a total of 462.5 billion yen, disbursed to 47 financial institutions, and 
covering 1,342 investments and lendings.  
The Bank hopes this fund provisioning will act as a catalyst for financial institutions in making 
efforts  on  their  own  initiative  toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth. 
Having had years of experience in the business of loans at a private financial institution, I 
strongly expect the measure will stimulate bankers in charge of loan disbursement and credit 
screening  to  foster  the  innovation  necessary  to  discover  and  nurture  newly  growing  firms, 
eventually leading to improvements in financial institutions’ screening abilities and capacity to 
produce information.  
Future monetary policy  
B. 
The  Bank  has  been  enhancing  easy  monetary  conditions  through  various  measures, 
including those I have just outlined, and by also making clear its commitment to maintaining 
an extremely accommodative financial environment. I am certain that the synergy resulting 
from  these  measures  has  supported  economic  activity  and  helped  clear  the  way  to 
overcoming deflation by improving the aggregate supply and demand balance.  
As  already  noted,  projections  are  always  subject  to  uncertainties.  Thus,  it  is  necessary  to 
examine  closely  the  forthcoming  economic  data  and  information,  so  that  necessary  policy 
measures can be taken swiftly and decisively should downside risks threaten before deflation 
has  been  overcome,  raising  the  possibility  that  the  economic  outlook  might  deteriorate 
significantly.  
Today, I have outlined some of the measures the Bank has implemented over the past two 
years since the collapse of Lehman Brothers. In addition, it implemented various pioneering 
measures  from  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  to  the  early  2000s  that  are  similar  to  those 
adopted by central banks in other major countries in response to recent financial crises.  
The  selection  of  appropriate  policy  measures  and  enhancing  of  policies  require  that  their 
possible effects on the economic outlook be taken into consideration, based on domestic and 
overseas expertise.  
The  selection  of  suitable  measures  requires  that  the  costs  which  may  arise  from  the 
implementation of measures, their efficacy, potential risks, and means to prevent such risks 
from materializing should be considered ahead of time. It is necessary, in addition, to keep 
up-to-date information regarding the effectiveness, probable costs, and side effects of policy 
measures, since they reflect changes in the economic and financial situation, as well as fiscal 
and institutional structures. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 7
