Patrick Honohan: Accountancy – certainty and ranges 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants in Ireland, Dublin, 27 October 2010.  
 Current  and  recent  discussion  on  Ireland’s  macroeconomic  and  financial  situation  has 
focused to a remarkable extent on accounting numbers and so it is timely that I should have 
this opportunity to deliver a lecture to the Certified Public Accountants in Ireland.  
As  accountants,  you  will  want  any  accounts  to  show  a  true  and  fair  view  of  the  economic 
entity for which the accounts are being drawn up. I would like to discuss some of the ways in 
which the normally used account have not helped us as much as they might in understanding 
and measuring the scale of our crisis in Ireland.  
Let me start with the government finances. After the dramatic budgetary correction of the late 
1980s, this was not expected to be a problem. Indeed, as shown in Chart 1, Ireland ran a 
balanced  budget  on  average  for  two  decades  before  the  collapse  of  2008.  It  satisfied  the 
deficit  criterion  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  of  the  European  Monetary  System 
before it was invented. And there was no drift: indeed the deficits became smaller and turned 
into surpluses in the early years of the new millennium. 
Chart 1 
 The Government debt to GDP ratio fell throughout this period reaching a low point of about 
25 per cent in 2006–7. Interestingly, in most years the total value of debt outstanding actually 
increased,  though  with  growth  in  GDP,  both  real  GDP  and  the  price  level  component,  the 
ratio to GDP fell steadily.  
So what happened in 2008? There was no really significant policy change – OK there had 
been some late-cycle relaxation in budgetary discipline in 2006–7. But mainly it was that the 
policies that had delivered steady surpluses suddenly stopped delivering. Obviously we know 
what happened, the property prices had stopped rising at the end of 2006, capital gains were 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 1
down, transactions had slowed dramatically, construction had contracted. But my point is that 
as an indicator of the sustainability into the future of the public finances, the SGP rules were 
not adequate. A country could run a surplus for years and yet the structure of its tax receipts 
and spending rules could leave it vulnerable to a sudden crippling turnaround in the deficit 
and  a  rapid  accumulation  of  debt.  The  SGP  points  to  what  may  be  necessary,  but  are 
certainly not sufficient, conditions for sustainable public finance policies.  
In Ireland’s case, the dependence on sources of tax revenue such as stamp duties, capital 
gains tax and corporation profits tax made total tax revenues dependent to an exceptional 
degree on profitable economic conditions, high transactions in the property market and asset 
price  appreciation  (Chart  2).  All  tax  systems  tend  to  do  better  in  such  conditions,  but  the 
elasticity of tax revenue response to a return to more normal conditions was exceptionally 
high in Ireland. Of course tax revenues have slumped, and expenditure has soared in all of 
the countries affected by the global downturn of 2008–9 and the slow recovery that is now in 
process. (The taxes and spending programmes that behave in this way are normally seen as 
stabilizing, and indeed are called the automatic stabilizers.) But the deterioration in Ireland’s 
fiscal position has been worse than almost any other country. Partly of course this reflects 
the fact that Ireland’s home-grown property bubble had risen further and so has fallen further 
than  most  (Chart  3).  But  it  also  reflects  the  heightened  elasticity  of  the  tax  receipts. 
Interestingly, when you plot tax and current expenditure as a percentage of GDP, you might 
miss this (Chart 4), masked as it is by the scale of the collapse in GDP – tax receipts fell 
even  faster  despite  big  increases  in  rates  and  base  especially  in  income  tax  as  the 
Government tried to make up for the shortfalls elsewhere. That is one of the main reasons 
why Ireland’s exposed fiscal position, with which the Government has been struggling for the 
past two and a half years and which will be the subject of intensified corrective action to be 
set  out  in  detail  in  the  promised  4  year  fiscal  programme  to  be  announced  shortly,  is  so 
exceptional.  
Chart 2 
2 
  BIS Review 143/2010
Chart 3 
Chart 4 
  3
BIS Review 143/2010 
 How could one use accounting numbers to improve the usefulness of the SGP for ensuring 
sustainable public finances? I have some ideas on this to which I will return after I speak a 
little about accounting and the Irish banks.  
A full account of the government finances is not complete in Ireland without considering the 
banks. Over the past year or more there has been intense interest in figuring out what will be 
the total cost of the losses incurred in the property bubble. Indeed this has been a focus of 
attention  worldwide,  with  for  example  the  IMF’s  World  Economic  Outlook  report  devoting 
attention  to  the  issue  in  each  of  its  five  semi-annual  reports  between  April  2008  and 
April 2010. Interestingly, the estimated losses for the global financial system from this source 
have  oscillated,  growing  from  the  first  estimate  of  US$1.2  trillion  to  reach  a  maximum  of 
$4.1 trillion before falling back to the latest estimate of $2.3 trillion (Chart 5). Clearly these 
estimates are not easy to pin down. This is not an exact science.  
Chart 5 
 Although it is not an exact science, estimating expected losses is an important ingredient in 
determining  what  additional  capital  banks  require  to  be  able  to  withstand  any  future 
unexpected  losses.  In  times  of  crisis,  incurred  losses  as  reported  in  accounts  tend  to  lag 
expected losses. Indeed, this is a matter on which the accounting profession really needs to 
reflect. Some of my colleagues feel that I should challenge the accounting profession for not 
having looked sufficiently far beyond the balance sheet date in providing their audit opinion; 
arguably, in a rapidly deteriorating environment accountants should at least have been more 
concerned  with  post-balance  sheet  events  concerns,  and  more  fundamentally  could  have 
done better in seeing the need for expected loss forecasts and the amplitude of the potential 
property price movements in assessing the going concern assumption.  
Whatever  about  that,  if  a  bank  is  to  retain  the  confidence  of  the  market  it  needs  to  have 
enough  accounting  capital  to  absorb  the  additional  expected  losses  and  still  remain  well 
capitalized. This was the main goal of the exercise which the Central Bank embarked upon 
about  a  year  ago  and  which  has  come  to  be  known  as  the  Prudential  Capital  Adequacy 
Review  (PCAR).  Much  of  the  losses  fall  out  of  the  NAMA  haircuts;  the  associated  loan 
purchases by NAMA crystallize those losses and trigger a formal recapitalization requirement 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2010
for the participating banks. Accordingly, estimates of non-NAMA loan losses for the two listed 
banks in NAMA were prepared by the Central Bank following extensive discussions with the 
banks and the resulting required capital amounts to be sought by the banks from the market 
were announced to coincide with the first NAMA haircut announcement. At that stage NAMA 
valuations were available only for the largest 10 exposures. The average haircut on this first 
tranche at 50% was much higher than had been expected earlier (a 30% indicative haircut 
had been mentioned in mid-September 2009), and these haircuts were read across to the 
rest of the NAMA portfolio in order to arrive at the minimum required capital. Nevertheless 
 –  as  was  always  possible  –  the  second  tranche  haircuts,  not  fully  announced  until  mid- 
August 2010, were even higher. At this point, it became clear that a long-drawn out drip-feed 
process  of  NAMA  tranche  announcements  based  on  each  successive  size-tranche  was  in 
prospect. In order to avoid this, NAMA agreed to conduct a sample review of the full range of 
tranches. The resulting estimated all-tranche NAMA haircut for each bank was the basis of 
the end-September announcement which led to an increase in the required capital of AIB, 
and to confirming the judgment that AIB would not be able to raise all of the needed capital 
from the market.  
The costs of Anglo depended even more heavily on its NAMA haircuts, given the relatively 
high fraction of its portfolio being transferred. On the other hand, not being in the market to 
raise  capital,  an  official  judgment  on  the  expected  losses  for  its  non-NAMA  book  was  not 
needed until the final decision was taken by Government on that bank’s future. Nevertheless, 
it was important to acknowledge that the surprisingly high first tranche haircut for Anglo, if 
read across to the rest of the NAMA-bound book, already at that point implied an astonishing 
figure of at least €22 billion for the net long-term fiscal cost to the State, given the relatively 
aggressive provisioning already made then by the new management on the non-NAMA book. 
As  is  well-known,  NAMA’s  estimated  all-tranche  haircut  has  somewhat  increased  this.  In 
addition, the management’s evolving estimates of the prospective loan losses embedded in 
the non-NAMA book have also been increasing, leading to our recently published estimate of 
the  additional  capital  required  to  capitalize  the  resolution  and  funding  entities  into  which 
Anglo  is  to  be  resolved.  (By  the  way,  as  accounting  specialists  you  will  recognize  that 
required capital is different to net cost: if the expected loss projections prove to be accurate, 
the net long-term fiscal cost will be lower than the required capital sum to the extent that the 
tender offer on subordinated debt is successful and to the extent that residual capital remains 
at an eventual wind-up.)  
To summarize, then, four main components have been key to arriving at a total cost figure for 
the losses created by the bubble, and exposed by its bursting: NAMA’s first tranche haircuts 
and  the  Central  Bank’s  non-NAMA  expected  loss  estimates  for  the  main  banks  (both 
published in March); NAMA’s estimated all-tranche haircuts and the Central Bank’s required 
capital  estimate  for  Anglo,  which  takes  account  of  the  management’s  revised  non-NAMA 
expected losses (both as of end-September).  
There are a few loose-ends of course:  
– 
For the smaller loans hitherto intended for NAMA but now staying with the banks, a 
provision  equal  to  the  average  all-tranche  NAMA  haircut  for  that  bank  has  been 
applied. This needs to be verified more thoroughly.  
The  final  NAMA  haircut,  following  the  rigorous  procedure  mandated  in  law  and 
required by the EU Commission, could deviate somewhat from the current estimate. 
These could go either way, but in any case are relatively small elements. The current figures 
are as precise as can reasonably be expected at this stage.  
For the future, the Central Bank will continue to conduct PCAR exercises on an annual basis. 
This will allow capital requirements to be kept consistent with evolving information on future 
economic and financial developments, including the performance of the residential mortgage 
portfolio.  Progressively,  these  exercises  will  also  look  forward  to  taking  account  of  the 
emerging Basel 3 capital rules.  
 BIS Review 143/2010 
 5
Much  has  been  learned  through  this  process.  Indeed,  the  reality  is  that  traditional  bank 
accounting practices were not really geared to deal with (i) assets that are so uncertain (and 
long-lived) (ii) an economy that has tanked so deep; (iii) future economic prospects that are 
so  uncertain.  But  as  the  banks  become  increasingly  adept  at  assembling  the  underlying 
information needed so the PCAR figures will become progressively more reliable. Already we 
see  differences  with  some  bank  managements  taking  a  more  aggressive  approach  to 
provisioning leaning more towards the expected loss idea than to the old-style interpretation 
of incurred loss. It may be no coincidence that new brooms have been to the fore here.  
Let  me  return  finally  to  the  question  of  the  Government  accounts.  I  do  not  want  to  speak 
today about the necessary adjustments or to qualify any of the percentages that have been 
publicly discussed in regard to the future budgetary profile.  
Anything  that  is  unsustainable  will  stop.  A  sequence  of  double  digit  government  deficits  is 
certainly  no  exception  to  this  rule.  Absent  a  managed  reprogramming  of  the  fiscal 
adjustment, market forces will take over and put a stop to the unsustainable increase in the 
debt ratio.  
What policy can – and I am hopeful will – achieve is that the adjustment will, not least by 
rolling  back  unaffordable  excesses,  be  accomplished  in  a  manner  that  is  much  less 
damaging to the economy and society. This means in particular ensuring that the adjustment 
helps as far as possible to restore lost cost competitiveness and enhance growth potential, 
while aiming at a fair distribution of the burden.  
While the direct effects of the bank recapitalization have caused a sharp jump in the debt 
ratio, the dynamic unsustainability does not arise mainly because of this, as can be seen in 
Chart 6. (Servicing of the bank-related debt amounts to about 1 per cent of GDP – a sizable 
block,  but  only  about  a  tenth  of  the  prospective  2011  deficit.)  That’s  why  a  sharp  fiscal 
adjustment would have been needed anyway – even if the Anglo and Nationwide had not lost 
quite so much money.  
Chart 6 
6 
  BIS Review 143/2010
There is a further link between bank accounting and government accounting which, I believe, 
deserves  more  attention  as  policymakers  in  Europe  continue  to  develop  new  governance 
arrangements  around  the  SGP.  A  leaf  should  be  drawn  out  of  the  agreed  international 
approach to bank capital and the distinction which I have alluded to between expected and 
unexpected losses. Thus, the fiscal position should not be considered merely in terms of the 
actual deficit (constrained to a 3 per cent target at present) but should also take account of 
the potential volatility of the deficit. A country which, like Ireland in the last decade, depends 
on  volatile  sources  of  receipt  would  be  required  to  aim  at  a  better  fiscal  performance  –  a 
lower deficit or even a surplus. A risk-adjusted deficit figure could be computed, just as bank 
regulators impose a risk-weighted capital adequacy requirement. Such a rule could insulate 
countries from the sudden emergence of a structural deficit. Even if such an idea might take 
time  to  command  agreement  at  EU  level,  despite  current  discussions  towards  an 
independent  fiscal  review  body,  it  should  certainly  be  factored  in  to  medium  term  fiscal 
planning at national level, to be brought into play when the budgetary accounts have been 
brought fully under control again in a few years time.  
BIS Review 143/2010 
 7
