Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur: New Primary Dealer System for Ghana 
Opening address by Mr Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the 
Stakeholders Workshop for New Primary Dealer System, organised by the Bank of Ghana 
and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MoFEP), Accra, 9 December 2010. 
 I am very happy to join you at this workshop which is the result of the collaborative effort of 
BoG and MoFEP to enhance further the financial market in Ghana. 
Efficient and effective financial intermediation is crucial in any country’s development and it is 
imperative that the necessary infrastructure is put in place. 
Beginning with this workshop, therefore, work on reforming the Primary Dealer System has 
started and you will be introduced to new guidelines that will control the system.  
Primary Dealers are financial intermediaries who promote investment in issued securities. In 
the developed securities market a Primary Dealer is licensed only after a long period as a 
demonstrated participant. However, the Ghanaian wholesale market was started on a different 
note.  In  addition  to  a  few  licensed  brokerage  firms,  all  the  Banks  and  Discount  Houses 
existing at the time were made automatic primary distributors. It was envisaged that with their 
wide coverage, the Banks could promote the retail distribution of Government Securities. 
In March 1996, in consultation with dealers in the market, the Bank of Ghana stopped the 
retail market of Treasury Bills. It was envisaged at the inception of the wholesale auction that 
the  primary  market  would  be  stimulated  and  broadened  through  increased  competition  for 
the evolution of a more efficient and dynamic secondary market. 
Despite  the  interventions,  the  market  is  yet  to  exhibit  the  dynamism  that  characterizes 
financial  markets  in  the  advanced  economies.  A  number  of  weaknesses  account  for  the 
inability of our Primary Dealer system to produce the desired objectives.  
The proper functioning of a deregulated financial system and the implementation of indirect 
monetary controls require a substantially liquid inter-bank market for Government securities. 
The reasons this has not happened include: 
– 
lack  of  commitment  of  the  Primary  Dealers  to  undertake  Government  securities 
transactions as a line of business 
the weak financial strength of licensed brokerage firms that do not have the required 
wide net work to reach the non-bank public 
over  80%  of  Government  securities  are  taken  up  and  held  by  Banks.  These  are 
seen more as investments rather than as trading stock, and have therefore tended 
to hold stocks of securities to maturity 
Government securities are seen by some Banks and other institutions as competing 
with their products that are offered by them to the same clients. 
   A  number  of  initiatives  have  been  introduced  in  the  market  infrastructure  to  facilitate 
securities trading among Primary Dealers. These include: 
– 
the Central Securities Depository which provides custodial services to investors in 
Government  Securities.  This  brought  to  an  end  the  issuing  of  certificates  for 
Government securities 
the  electronic  bidding  system  for  the  auction  of  Government  securities  on  the 
primary market which replaced the manual system for the submission of bids  
 BIS Review 169/2010 
 1
 the Ghana Inter-bank Settlement System (GIS) which has facilitated the settlement 
of Government securities. 
I wish to encourage you all to discuss the proposed Guidelines dispassionately and contribute 
positively to fashion out an efficient Primary Dealer system that a dynamic economy requires. 
Thank you for your coming and I wish you success in your discussions. 
2 
 BIS Review 169/2010
