Anna Maria Tarantola: Strengthening financial stability – the contribution 
of deposit insurance 
Speech  by  Ms  Anna  Maria  Tarantola,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
conference  on 
insurance,  Rome, 
30 September 2010. 
the  contribution  of  deposit 
financial  stability  and 
 Good morning. I would like to welcome all of you to the Bank of Italy. We are very pleased to 
be  able  to  host  this  year’s  conference  on  financial  stability  and  the  contribution  of  deposit 
insurance.  
The EU banking sector after the crisis 
1. 
Three  years  after  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  EU  banking  system  has  made 
important  strides.  These  have  been  a  long  and  difficult  three  years,  but  positive  signs  are 
evident. In the first half of 2010, profits rose at the major EU banks. In some cases income 
was significantly higher than in 2009; other banks reporting negative results last year have 
now  returned  to  profitability.  Loan  impairment  and  bank  provisions  were  reduced,  as  the 
recovery in the real economy gained momentum. The EU-coordinated stress tests published 
in July showed that banks have strengthened their capital base and are in a position to bear 
additional losses should the macroeconomic outlook deteriorate.  
However, despite these positive trends, considerable uncertainty still surrounds the banking 
sector.  Credit  risk  remains  high  and  if,  as  recent  signs  indicate,  the  international  recovery 
decelerates, credit risk could increase further. While moderate economic growth remains the 
most likely scenario for Europe, it remains vulnerable to a moderation in international trade. It 
is also not ensured that bank earnings will continue to be as sustained as in past months 
when they were supported by factors that may prove to be temporary: trading profits have 
been falling; and net interest income, though still strong, could be negatively impacted by a 
sudden flattening of the yield curve.  
Especially  worrisome  are  risks  stemming  from  the  interplay  between  sovereign  debt 
problems and fragility in the banking sector; these are particularly acute in EU countries with 
large fiscal imbalances. In past months, we saw budgetary pressures having dramatic spill-
over effects on bank funding in some countries; at the same time, signs of instability in the 
banking sector had negative repercussions on sovereign issuers.  
Bank refinancing is another major concern. EU banks will soon need to begin rollingover very 
large  amounts  of  debt.  Given  that  public-sector  requirements  will  also  be  rising,  access to 
market funding could become even more difficult. 
In fact, we are observing greater polarisation among banks. Stronger institutions can access 
the markets. Others are experiencing difficulty and remain dependent on government support 
and central bank financing.  
Today policy makers face a very demanding task. Dispelling market concerns over sovereign 
debt risk is imperative: progress in fiscal consolidation must remain a priority for EU member 
states.  Yet  equal  attention  must  be  devoted  to  supporting  growth  in  the  medium  term.  In 
evaluating longer-term sustainability, markets are paying increasing attention to a country’s 
ability 
the  greatest  degree  possible, 
consolidation measures should be growthfriendly and accompanied by structural reforms in 
the EU.  
to  generate  economic  growth.  Therefore, 
to 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 1
The  goals  for  regulators  and  supervisors  are  no  less  challenging.  We  must  safeguard  the 
stability  of  the  financial  sector,  and  rebuild  its  solidity,  while  ensuring  that  the  provision  of 
credit  and  financial  services  to  the  economy  is  not  impaired.  Weaknesses  and  distortions 
revealed in the crisis must be corrected, so that credit institutions can fully support economic 
growth in the future.  
It  is  essential  that  in  coming  years  we  have  fully  restored  the  banking  sector’s  ability  to 
perform  activities  essential  to  our  economies.  This  is  possible  when  there  is  a  solid  and 
stable system.  
The regulatory reform: priorities ahead 
2. 
A  fundamental  step  towards  achieving  these  objectives  has  been  made  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) with the agreement on the new bank capital and 
liquidity  standards.  The  standards  will  markedly  increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking 
system,  by  constraining  the  build-up  of  excessive  leverage  and  maturity  mismatches  that 
provided the fuel to this crisis. It is clear that the new rules will impose some costs – in terms 
of profitability – for the banking industry. However, these costs will be compensated by the 
fact that we will all (including bankers) live in a safer financial environment. Moreover, the 
transition  phase  to  the  new  rules  has  been  designed  so  that  costs  can  be  absorbed  in  a 
gradual manner and the recovery is not jeopardized.  
The Basel agreement, for all its importance, does not however exhaust the need of reform in 
the financial system. An urgent step is to solve the moral hazard problems associated with 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), also known as the “too-big-to-fail” (TBTF) 
problem.  
These problems have increased as a consequence of the extraordinary public interventions 
during the crisis and probably represent the most daunting legacy that regulators must now 
confront.  If  we  do  not  address  this  issue  with  determination,  SIFIs  will  continue  to  have 
incentives to engage in excessively risky activities; accurate monitoring by investors will be 
much weaker than desirable, with the result that future crises may be more likely.  
Finally,  we  must  be  aware  that  the  public  will  not  accept  a  repetition  of  the  widespread 
bailing-out  of  SIFIs  that  was  necessary  during  this  crisis.  A  clear  political  message  has 
emerged at international level (Pittsburgh G-20 meeting Sept.2009), strongly backed by the 
EU, that taxpayer money should not be used again to cover bank losses.  
Elaborating measures to effectively tackle “too big to fail” is now the priority of the Financial 
Stability Board (FSB), which will present its recommendations to the G20 in November. The 
FSB is assessing a broad range of policy options to reduce the probability and the impact of 
a crisis involving SIFIs. They include inter alia the introduction of prudential instruments, such 
as capital and liquidity surcharges above those agreed in Basel, the use of contingent capital 
(i.e. the possibility to convert debt into equity either by statutory resolution mechanisms or by 
private contractual arrangements) and the standardization and trading of OTC derivatives on 
electronic platforms with clearance by central counterparties to reduce the interconnectedness 
of financial institutions.  
But particularly important, especially to establish the right set of incentives for SIFIs, is the 
FSB’s program to set up effective resolution regimes, both at the domestic and cross-border 
level, to be able to manage in an orderly way the eventual failure of SIFIs.  
Only if we succeed to organise a mechanism through which SIFIs are allowed to fail, while 
limiting to the maximum extent the systemic risk involved, can we ensure that SIFIs behave 
in a correct manner and thus reduce the probability of future crises.  
The issue therefore merges into the broader question of establishing principles and tools for 
an  effective  crisis  management  system,  a  theme  that  involves  many  aspects  that  will  be 
addressed in the rest of this conference. Let me briefly touch upon some of them.  
2 
 BIS Review 127/2010
3. 
Strengthening the toolbox 
Role of authorities, preventive action and resolution regimes 
A first crucial issue involves the role and powers of authorities. The crisis has highlighted that 
the intensity and effectiveness of the supervision of SIFIs must be stepped up, particularly 
with regard to both preventive action and resolution powers. This will be possible, in some 
cases,  only  by  reinforcing  the  mandates,  independence  and  resources  of  national 
supervisors.  
With regard to preventive action, supervisory powers and resources must be reinforced so 
that  Authorities  can  quickly  detect  early  signs  of  deterioration  and  intervene  as  soon  as 
possible to reduce the probability and impact of a SIFI failure. National supervisors should 
have the powers to apply differentiated supervisory requirements for institutions based on the 
risk they pose to the financial system. They should have the power to intervene effectively at 
an early stage, to mandate changes within an institution, to prevent unsound practices and 
ensure appropriate countermeasures including capital and liability restructuring.  
With regard to resolution powers, an effective resolution regime must provide Authorities with 
the powers and tools to wind-down a firm quickly and safely, while ensuring the continued 
performance of essential financial functions and uninterrupted access of insured depositors 
to their funds in order to contain systemic risk.  
Authorities must possess all the tools that facilitate “gone concern” restructuring and wind-
down  measures,  including  the  establishment  of  a  temporary  bridge  bank  to  take  over  and 
continue operating critical functions.  
Cross border perspective 
A  second  crucial  aspect  for  an  effective  resolution  mechanism  regards  cross-border 
multinationals. In the past three years, cross border issues have added a layer of complexity 
in dealing with bank crises. The international dimension of financial institutions increases the 
scope  for  cross-border  contagion  and  thus  the  likelihood  of  a  systemic  crisis  across 
countries. Moreover, reaching rapid and clear agreements at cross border level proved to be, 
in  some  circumstances,  a  very  complicated  exercise.  Perhaps  this  should  come  as  no 
surprise. To some extent, it is a direct consequence of the inconsistency between, on one 
hand, the size, complexity and interconnectedness of large banking groups – operating far 
beyond  national  boundaries  –  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  enduring  fragmentation  of  the 
national legal and regulatory frameworks.  
The  Basel  Committee  recently  published  a  report  on  Cross  Border  Resolution,  which 
contains  a  set  of  recommendations  intended  to  strengthen  national  resolution  powers  and 
cross-border implementation. The report underlines, inter alia, the need to further converge 
on a common set of effective tools and improve information sharing in crisis management.  
The report addresses the issue of complex banking group structures and recommends using 
regulatory  incentives  when  complexity  could  create  an  obstacle  to  an  orderly  and  cost-
effective  resolution;  capital  or  other  prudential  requirements  should  be  designed  to 
encourage organizational structures that facilitate effective resolution.  
The  Financial  Stability  Board  is  also  working  to  remove  obstacles  that  can  obstruct  the 
effective  implementation  of  recovery  and  resolution  measures  in  complex  cross-border 
institutions. It has identified four technical areas that need to be addressed: i) complexities 
arising  when  trades  are  marketed,  booked,  funded  and  risk-managed  in  different  legal 
entities and jurisdictions; ii) difficulties in disentangling group structures when the parent or 
lead  bank  has  issued  guarantees  to  support  particular  transactions  by  affiliate  entities  in 
foreign jurisdictions; iii) the preservation of global payment operations; and iv) the adequacy 
of a firm’s ITC systems to provide firmwide and single legal entity information, especially to 
support recovery and resolution actions. 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 3
Moreover, on the prompting of the FSB, Cross-Border Crisis Management groups have been 
established worldwide for most of the largest global financial institutions. The focus of these 
groups is to establish firm-specific Recovery and Resolution Plans that will help authorities 
and firms handle emergency situations and enhance mutual trust among key home and host 
authorities.  Further  progress  on  the  recovery  and  resolution  plans  could  be  achieved  by 
reforming resolution regimes in different countries.  
At  EU  level,  it  appears  necessary  to  work  in  two  directions.  First,  cooperation  among 
authorities  must  be  improved  in  dealing  with  emergency  situations  involving  cross  border 
groups. The June 2008 Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation between the financial 
supervisory authorities, central banks and finance ministries of the European Union on cross-
border  financial  stability  needs  to  be  fully  applied  and  strengthened.  Second,  we  must 
proceed  quickly  to  better  harmonize  insolvency  laws  across  the  Union,  starting  with  those 
principles and procedures most directly connected with crisis management.  
A  building  block  of  any  crisis  management  system  is  the  effective  and  efficient  work  of 
colleges of supervisors. They are the natural body where possible and viable ways forward 
on  a  co-ordinated  approach  to  crisis  resolution  can  be  discussed  and  organised  (contact 
lists,  stock-taking  on  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks,  data  collection,  procedural  and 
organisational aspects of crisis management including possible scenarios of burden sharing). 
As a home supervisor, the Bank of Italy has put much effort in setting up these colleges and 
making  them  work,  coordinating  the  process for  all  cross-border  groups  it  supervises,  and 
convening meetings of the Cross-Border Stability Groups and Crisis Management Teams for 
Italian banking groups.  
The  new  European  Banking  Authority  will  certainly  play  a  crucial  role  in  developing  an 
effective system to deal with crisis situations in Europe. 
Funding the recovery or the orderly resolution. Who bears the cost? 
4. 
A  harmonised  approach  for  dealing  with  weak  or  ailing  institutions  necessarily  raises  the 
question, “Who shall bear the costs?”.  
Based on the principle that taxpayers should never again bear the burden of future financial 
crises,  priority  clearly  must  always  be  given 
to  private-sector  solutions  (including 
recapitalizations, ownership transfers, purchases & assumptions), ahead of any other source 
of support and certainly before taxpayer money is tapped.  
However, as these options may prove insufficient or unviable in particularly serious cases, 
we must also prepare valid alternatives. Various mechanisms are being discussed, including:  
Haircuts 
Haircuts on creditors or “bail in” instruments have been recently proposed as one of the most 
promising  tools  for  increasing  the  loss  absorbing  capacity  of  financial  firms,  beyond  the 
capital base. Statutory bail-in would allow authorities in a going concern situation to wipe-out 
creditors, before the collapse of the firm. However, it would entail harmonizing global rules on 
creditor  preferences  and  imposing  bail-in  conditions  on  pre-existing  contracts.  Contractual 
bail-in,  on  the  other  hand,  would  force  institutions  to  issue  a  portion  of  senior  debt,  to  be 
determined  by  regulation,  that  could  be  either  written  down  or  converted  into  equity  in  a 
public intervention procedure. There are also potential drawbacks in this option as it would 
introduce  a  distinction  between  “investors”  and  “customers”,  with  the  latter  being  less 
concerned about a careful monitoring of the bank. Nevertheless, it is clear that this is a route 
to be further explored.  
4 
 BIS Review 127/2010
Private resolution funds 
A  privately-financed  European  Recovery  Fund  has  also  been  proposed.  This  would  be 
designed to facilitate emergency  medium-term funding  when liquidity shocks, in distressed 
capital  markets,  threaten  banks  that  are  otherwise  solvent  and  profitable.  It  would  be 
financed by voluntary contribution of the top twenty European banks. Although private, the 
fund would only intervene when European authorities determine that a bank needs support, 
providing  guarantees  at  market  conditions.  This  could  be  an  important  resource  for 
overcoming difficulties in certain situations, but it is essential for authorities to consider the 
capacity of the banking system to finance both a resolution fund and an insurance scheme; 
an additional question is whether a private resolution fund would duplicate DGS that act as 
“beyond pay box” instruments.  
Ex-ante resolution funds 
In  addition,  the  EU  Commission  has  recently  proposed  establishing  a  system  of  EU-
harmonized  resolution  funds  (COM  2010/254),  aimed  to  facilitate  the  resolution  of  failing 
institutions.  The  funds  would  be  financed  by  imposing  levies  on  banks.  To  avoid  moral 
hazard,  these  funds  should  be  activated  only  as  instruments  of  last  resource,  after 
exhausting  all  private  sources  of  financing.  Within  a  clear  resolution  framework,  it  could 
provide  a  useful  instrument  to  help  authorities  liquidate  banks  in  an  orderly  manner,  by 
covering administrative costs, financing the total or partial transfer of assets and/or liabilities, 
or financing bridge banks.  
A number of countries have recently introduced (Sweden and Hungary) or announced plans 
to  introduce  (Germany,  France  and  the  UK)  bank  levies,  though  the  objectives  and 
implementation  schemes  differ  significantly.  Considering  the  current  conditions  of  the 
financial sector and the costs that banks will incur to conform with the new capital standards, 
in  my  opinion  the  timing  of  additional  expense  should  be  assessed  carefully.  However,  if 
such initiatives are pursued, it is important that they proceed in a coordinated manner and, in 
this sense, the Commission’s proposal appears to be a sensible way forward; a number of 
issues,  related  for  example  to  the  precise  scope,  financing  and  governance  of  resolution 
funds still need to be addressed.  
The role of DGS 
Deposit  Guarantee  Schemes  should  be  able  to  absorb  the  impact  of  medium  magnitude 
crises  or,  where  possible,  to  promptly  intervene  to  avoid  bank  failures  in  the  interest  of 
depositors. The more effective a DGS, the greater will be depositor confidence, reducing the 
risk of bank runs and limiting contagion from banks in distress.  
Much  work  is  underway  at  international  fora  to  strengthen  the  role  of  DGS.  The  effort  to 
harmonise and enhance their risk minimiser role is particularly welcomed. The contribution 
that DGS can bring to open market solutions, helping to preserve the continuity of important 
business activities and avoid the disruption of customer relationships, mainly in the interest of 
depositors, will be increasingly important.  
The important collaboration between the Basel Committee and the International Association 
of  Deposit  Insurers  (IADI),  who  joined  forces  to  address  a  range  of  issues  including 
coverage, funding and reimbursement, resulted in the “Core Principles” focusing on, among 
others, public awareness and cooperation with other safety-net participants, including central 
banks  and  supervisors.  The  principles  are  designed  to  be  adaptable  to  a  broad  range  of 
country circumstances, settings and structures.  
The  “Core  Principles”  form  a  non-compulsory  framework  for  deposit  insurance.  However, 
they are testimony of the will to establish best practices for national authorities committed to 
enhance or put in place effective deposit insurance schemes.  
BIS Review 127/2010 
 5
The EU Directive on DGS 
Steps taken in the EU to strengthen the regulation on DGS move in the right direction.  
The  Commission  proposal  of  July  2010  aims  to  enhance  depositor  protection  and 
convergence of EU DGS by harmonizing scope, coverage and funding mechanisms. It raises 
fixed  coverage  to  €100,000  per  depositor,  significantly  reduces  the  payout  delay,  and 
institutes a funding mechanism based mainly on ex-ante contributions.  
The  proposal  also  explicitly  provides  for  the  preventive  intervention  of  DGS  to  avoid  bank 
failure.  There  are  still  technical  issues  to  be  addressed,  since  the  current  proposal  lacks 
reference to the least cost criteria and authorisation processes. Nevertheless, the recognition 
of DGS as preventive actors in helping to avert worst crisis scenarios is welcomed. It could 
provide  the  necessary  impulse  for  implementing  this  feature  in  EU  countries  where  DGS 
currently lack such role.  
Pan-European Deposit Guarantee Scheme 
In the course of recent work to strengthen the European financial system, the question has 
been  raised  repeatedly  as  to  whether  a  single  pan-European  deposit  guarantee  scheme 
could  be  a  feasible  option.  It  would  certainly  allow  for  significant  savings  in  administrative 
costs (estimated at about € 40 million per year). Moreover, a pan-European scheme could 
ensure better management of bank failures because the impact of a bank failure on a large 
scheme  would  be  smaller  than  on  an  individual  Member  State  DGS.  Furthermore,  in  a 
crossborder  banking  crisis,  a  pan-European  scheme  could  provide  incentives  for  a  pooled 
solution  in  the  interest  of  all  depositors,  regardless  of  nationality.  However,  owing  to  the 
complex legal issues arising from differences in national legal frameworks and the absence, 
at  the  moment,  of  an  integrated  European  supervisory  and  crisis  management  framework, 
this idea is still a longer-term project.  
Conclusions 
5. 
Let me conclude my remarks by stressing two aspects that, in my opinion, are at the core of 
the issues addressed at this conference.  
First,  international  cooperation  and  rule  harmonization  must  be  significantly  stepped  up. 
Establishing an effective crisis management system, including a clear resolution framework, is 
the road we must undertake to reduce the likelihood of future crises and contain their damage 
should they nevertheless occur. In a context where financial institutions operate globally, we 
can succeed only by increasing cooperation, coordinating action and reaching a much higher 
degree of harmonization of our domestic systems. In Europe, this is of utmost importance if we 
wish to strengthen the single market and ensure a level playing field for all financial actors.  
Second, in the field of supervision, the harmonization of practices is at least as important as 
the  harmonization  of  rules.  The  introduction  of  a  common  set  of  rules,  powers  and  tools 
should  be  complemented  by 
the  development  of  common  methodologies,  among 
supervisors,  to  assess  the  ongoing  risks  faced  by  cross-border  banking  groups  and  to 
develop  common  assessment.  This  is  essential  to  achieve  shared  decisions  and  would 
greatly facilitate coordinated solutions in an emergency situation.  
Progress  must  be  made  rapidly,  now,  taking  advantage  of  the  momentum  in  international 
cooperation  that  has  gained  ground  with  the  crisis.  It  would  be  unforgivable  to  remain 
unprepared.  It  would  mean  confronting  future  emergencies  from  a  much  weaker  position 
than  we  had  when  this  crisis  first  emerged.  At  the  European  level,  there  are  encouraging 
signs that we are moving in the right direction. There is increasingly greater awareness of our 
interconnectedness and the response, though hesitant at first, has been more Europe, not 
less. I have no doubts that the new financial supervisory architecture and the authorities that 
will come into force next year will make great strides to provide the impulse and vigour to 
move forward and achieve the necessary goals of this process.  
6 
 BIS Review 127/2010
