Paul Tucker: The programme of reform 
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the Institute of International Bankers’ Annual Breakfast Regulatory Dialogue, Washington 
DC, 11 October 2010.  
 An  earlier  version  of  these  remarks  was  delivered  in  the  concluding  Panel  session,  chaired  by  Jacques  de 
Larosiere, at the Eurofi Financial Forum, 30 September 2010. 
Thank you very much to our hosts. 
I might start by saying that I believe that a material contributor to this crisis was the failure of 
the  official  regimes  for  overseeing  the  financial  system  –  the  intellectual  framework,  the 
machinery, and regulation and supervision – to keep up with the extraordinary evolution of 
our  capital  markets  over  the  past  two  decades  or  more.  The  programme  of  reform  is, 
accordingly, formidable. It will also be transformational. 
There is no doubt any more that the global financial system, regional financial systems and 
national financial systems are going to be transformed in the years ahead. And if there was 
any doubt in the market 18 months or so ago, I don’t think there can be doubt now that the 
energy behind reform hasn’t flagged. That is unsurprising given that unemployment remains 
intolerably high throughout the western world. 
Many  of  us  have  already  had  to  take  national  measures,  make  national  reforms.  But,  of 
course, it was a global crisis, and so it is essential that we also take measures at the global 
level, through the G20 and the Financial Stability Board. Whatever our national or regional 
approaches, we have to be part of that global agenda. 
Capital and liquidity 
We’ve got our first landmark: the new Basel Capital Accord. The UK, the Bank of England, 
would have liked it to be more rigorous in some respects, but we most certainly think that it is 
an Accord worth having. It is a significant stiffening of the regime which has prevailed up to 
now  –  perhaps  more  in  some  respects  than  commentators  immediately  appreciated.  It 
remedies problems not spotted in Basel I. 
Finding  remedies  for  some  of  the  problems  with  Basel  II  remains  work  in  progress.  The 
BCBS’s “fundamental review” of capital requirements for trading book positions will be one of 
the most important endeavours of 2011. Its main objective must be to tackle two things. The 
venal regulatory arbitrage that existed between the “banking book” and the “trading book”. 
And  requiring  capital  to  be  held  against  the  risks  of  violent  swings  in  liquidity  premia  for 
instruments  that  are  not  resiliently  liquid.  That  was  how  the  drying  up  of  liquidity  in  ABS 
markets undermined the (accounting) solvency of many trading books. 
Speaking in the USA, I should stress that it is tremendously important that the US, as well as 
Europe and Asia, do implement the Basel Accord faithfully and promptly. It is also important 
that  the  EU  Directive  implementing  Basel  leaves  flexibility  for  supervisors  to  apply 
supplementary requirements based on the condition of individual institutions and, separately, 
taking into account cyclical circumstances. 
The  other  big  step  in  this  space  will  be  a  Liquidity  Accord  from  Basel.  This  will  be  a  new 
Accord. It is a quarter of a century late, as the need for an agreed international approach to 
the regulation of liquidity was first discussed in the mid-1980s. There remains a great deal of 
work  to  be  done  on  this  front  but  no-one  should  underestimate  its  importance.  This  is  a 
package that is likely to change the shape of capital markets by effectively charging banks 
for the liquidity lines they provide to other parts of the financial system. For that reason there 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 1
will be what the Governors and Head of Supervision call an Observation Period. But some 
change will be acceptable, as it won’t do for parts of the financial system to subsist on the 
basis of liquidity lines from commercial banks against which the banking system itself does 
not  actually  hold  any  liquidity  buffer.  That  is  not  a  bad  definition  of  an  unsound  financial 
structure. 
Beyond that staple diet, I want to pick out four things – two of which are central to what has 
been  going  on  already  at  the  G20  Financial  Stability  Board  work  programme,  and  two  of 
which  lie  a  little  bit  ahead.  The  first  two  are  the  work  on  systemically  important  financial 
institutions (SIFIs) and on capital markets. 
Too Big to Fail: resolution regimes 
This wasn’t a crisis that revolved in every single degree around institutions that were Too Big 
Too Fail but, my goodness, they were at the heart of it. And it is intolerable for our societies, 
it is intolerable for capitalism, that we should continue to have institutions that are too big to 
fail. The Financial Stability Board will, therefore, be recommending to the G20 a package on 
this.  It  will  include  greater  loss  absorbency  for  the  largest  and  most  complex  firms  whose 
distress  would  inevitably  spillover  into  the  global  system  –  probably  in  a  way  that  can,  in 
degree,  be  implemented  in  different  ways  in  different  countries  and  contexts,  subject  to  a 
meaningful process of peer review to avoid free riding. 
But absolutely central to this is resolution regimes. Too many countries do not even have the 
most  elementary  resolution  regime  for  their  national  commercial  banking  institutions. 
Perhaps partly for that reason, many people, when they talk about resolution, slip after about 
15  seconds  into  talking  about  enhanced  supervision  and  early  intervention.  To  be  clear, 
resolution is about when everything else has failed. It is about when early intervention and 
higher capital requirements, better risk management and more resilient capital markets let us 
down, and we are in “the last chance saloon”. The distressed institution is no longer viable, 
and officials are presenting our political leaders with a ghastly choice between chaos from 
straight liquidation and, alternatively, taxpayer support to prevent the system imploding. That 
is a truly terrible choice and so the key thing is to find a new set of measures that can be 
deployed to give us a tolerable course. That set of measures is what constitutes a resolution 
regime. It is not about making things perfect. It is about coping. We can all learn from the 
US’s  special  resolution  regimes  in  this  respect,  including  the  extensions  in  scope  to 
bankholding companies and non-bank financial firms affected by the Dodd-Frank Act. 
But there are things being debated in Europe and in the international community that may 
even  supplement  the  toolbox  that  exists  already  in  the  United  States.  One  of  them  is  the 
potential ability for the resolution authority to haircut creditors and partially convert debt into 
equity in what is otherwise a firm with a viable underlying franchise and so potentially a going 
concern.  This  would  be  an  adaptation  of  Chapter  11  regime  in  the  US  rather  than  the 
standard special resolution toolkit for banks. 
This set of issues is, at its very core, a cross-border endeavour. We will not get far on this 
front  without  much  more  intimate  and  trusting  co-operation  between  home  country 
supervisors  and  resolution  authorities  and  host  country  authorities.  We  should  not 
exaggerate the extent to which this has worked well in the past. Supervisors even admit that 
behind closed doors. There seems to be a reluctance, perhaps just about understandable in 
some respects, to share information amongst home and host authorities and to co-operate 
when regulated firms are distressed, which of course is when it matters most that they should 
co-operate.  The  FSB  needs  to  ensure  that  we  confront  and  fix  this.  But  a  solution  cannot 
emerge  without  political  leaders  making  space  for  –  indeed,  without  them  positively 
encouraging – officials to cooperate properly. 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2010
Capital markets: the financial network 
The second key plank of the FSB’s existing programme has been to mitigate the complexity 
of the financial network. We do not just live within a world, a financial system of massive but 
independent  firms;  we  work  in  a  financial  system  where  everything  is  connected  to 
everything else. That has been the case for long as I can remember.  
Central counterparties 
The  use  of  central  counterparties  in  over-the-counter  derivative  (OTC)  markets  is  long 
overdue.  But  we  will  also  need  to  ensure  that  these  counterparties  are  robust.  If  ever  a 
central  counterparty  fails,  it  will  be  a  gigantic  mess.  Two  have  failed  significantly  over  the 
past 30 years: a relatively small one in Paris,  but the other was a significant one in Hong 
Kong during the 1987 market crash, which caused the Hong Kong equity and futures market 
to close. They were hard to reopen. And their securities markets and regulatory regime had 
to be completely overhauled as a result.1 There are lessons to be learnt from past crises as 
we build stronger central counterparties. The Basel Committee on Payment and Settlement 
Systems (CPSS) and IOSCO are working on this. 
But we need to go further than that. We need to think – and we are thinking carefully – about 
how to put more of the OTC market either on to exchanges or through trading platforms with 
greater  transparency.  In  this  particular  area  the  United  States  is  acting  ahead  of  Europe. 
That doesn’t matter. It is not a race and there is co-operation going on through IOSCO, with 
central bank support, that should reach fruition over the next few months in a report to the 
FSB. 
to  mitigate 
Large exposures 
Central  counterparties  are  one  way 
interconnectedness.  Another, 
complementary  route  would  be  regimes  that  are  more  attentive  to  the  network  of  large 
exposures that exists between our banks and dealers etc. The EU has been taking a step 
forward internationally in applying large exposure restrictions to interbank exposures for the 
first  time.  This  is  a  big  step;  one  that  is  welcome  to  the  Bank  of  England.  The  question  I 
would  like  to  pose  is  whether,  globally,  we  should  go  even  further  in  respect  of  large 
exposures amongst the largest institutions in the world. One of the greatest worries under 
stress is the size of the exposures amongst the biggest and most complex firms. BCBS are 
contemplating it. 
the 
Use of CRA ratings in regulatory regimes 
We  will  also  need  to  revise  the  extent  to  which  we  as  a  regulatory  community  use  rating 
agency ratings. The official sector can’t express concern – at times indignation – about the 
performance of rating agencies, valid concerns, and then at the same time continue to build 
rating agencies ratings umbilically into our regulatory regimes. Over the past few months, I 
have been chairing a working group of the FSB developing proposals on that, which will go to 
Ministers  and  Governors  shortly.  I  think  Ministers  in  Europe  are  attentive  to  it  as  well. 
Changes in this area will take time and will not be easy, but they are being planned. 
The underlying purpose of securities markets regulation 
Going beyond that, the final thing I would say in this area is that the conceptual framework 
for  securities  regulation,  especially  in  the  USA,  has  over  the  past  30  years  or  more 
                                                 
1   For  more  information,  see  the  report  of  the  Securities  Review  Committee  (1988),  “The  Operation  and 
Regulation of the Hong Kong Securities Industry”. 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 3
essentially made a distinction between public markets and private markets, public issuance 
and private issuance. That is basically because it has taken an investor protection approach 
to  securities  regulation. The  investor  protection objective  remains  valid  of  course. But  in  a 
systemic sense, private placements, private markets – what goes on beyond or behind the 
transparency of our public markets – that too can be threatening to stability; and so we need 
to  find  a  way  to  bring  daylight  into  those  markets  and  network  of  exposures  without 
interfering with the efficiency of some private transactions. I am not convinced that we have 
really  even  started  to  think  through  what  that  means  in  practice.  We  should  do  so.  This 
signals that the traditional financial stability authorities – including central banks – need to 
take a greater interest in some aspects of securities regulation than for a long time. 
So far I have covered the two broad areas where work has been actively underway. Now I 
shall say something briefly about two areas where, I hope, work lies ahead. 
Shadow banking 
First of all, shadow banking. I spoke about it at the beginning of the year,2 and I and others 
have  been  pushing  it  behind  the  scenes.  Mario  Draghi,  Chair  of  the  FSB,  flagged  it  in  an 
article in the FT a few weeks ago. 
As we restructure the banking system, directly and indirectly, we have to keep firmly in our 
minds the pervasive effect of regulatory arbitrage. The sponsors and the framers of the first 
Basel Capital Accord – Paul Volcker, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Bill Taylor, Brian Quinn, and 
their  generation  –  were  not  unaware  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  But  I  don’t  think  they 
appreciated,  or  could  reasonably  have  foreseen,  the  extent  to  which  it  would  become 
absolutely endemic. People around the world now will already have groups working on how 
to arb Basel III. This is part of freedom; it’s part of capitalism. But it means that the official 
community needs to be rather more nimble and savvy; knowledgeable about and alert to the 
byways  as  well  as  the  highways  of  our  capital  markets.  That  doesn’t  mean  regulating 
everything that moves, but it does mean having a capability to adapt our regimes when truly 
stability-threatening  activities  move  beyond  the  existing  regulatory  perimeter.  This  needs 
very careful thought. 
Macroprudential 
And that brings me to my last heading, which is macroprudential. This means many things. I 
want  to  suggest  that,  most  important,  it  means  taking  a  system-wide  perspective  to  micro 
regulation; the view that my Bank of England predecessors of 20–25 years ago would have 
taken. Today there are three elements to it. 
One,  as  I  just  implied,  is  equipping  ourselves  with  the  ability  to  move  the  perimeter  of 
microprudential regulation to keep up with the effects of regulatory arbitrage and innovation. 
The plans that the UK government have in this area would enable the planned new Financial 
Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England  to  make  recommendations  to  government  to 
change the perimeter of financial regulation. 
The second dimension of a macroprudential regime is maintaining a resilient infrastructure, in 
the widest possible sense, for our capital markets and banking system to be resilient. The 
debate about putting more activity through central counterparties is an example. Frankly, it 
could have taken place a decade ago, and it is a crying shame that it didn’t. The reason it 
didn’t was that no one came into work thinking that it was their job to think about that and that 
they had a responsibility for taking a system wide perspective and actually doing something. 
                                                 
2   See Tucker, P M W (2010), “Shadow Banking, Financing  Markets and Financial Stability” at BGC Partners 
Seminar, London, January 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2010
Institutions  are  now  being  created  around  the  world  –  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight 
Council in the US, the Systemic Risk Board in the EU, the Financial Policy Committee in the 
UK – which I earnestly hope will bring that kind of perspective to our work. 
And the final area is leaning against the credit cycle when it threatens stability. The zeitgeist 
embraced the seductive idea that either there wasn’t a bubble or if there was a bubble that 
there was nothing you could do about it. Which was dangerous nonsense, as events have 
proved. This is not about fine tuning the credit cycle. But we do need to be prepared to take 
the  punchbowl  away  before  the  party  gets  completely  out  of  control.  That  was  the  view 
50 years ago. Forward to the past. 
This will have a national dimension to it, a regional dimension in Europe through the EU’s 
new  Systemic  Risk  Board,  but  it  will  also  have  a  global  dimension  too.  The  extent  of 
co-operation between nations will have to intensify in this area. In the monetary policy area, it 
is important that we listen to each other and understand each other but in a world of floating 
exchange rates we can, on the whole, go back to our countries and make our own decisions. 
In the financial stability area, I won’t say we have to co-ordinate with a capital “C” but we are 
going to have to move from listening to each other towards co-operation. That will be healthy, 
but  not  easy.  And  it  might  entail  rethinking  the  division  of  labour  between  host  and  home 
prudential regulation. 
These  areas  of  shadow  banking  and  a  macroprudential  approach  to  supervision  and 
regulation lie ahead for the FSB agenda and for the G20 agenda. They will sustain important 
parts of the reform programme into next year and beyond. 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 5
