Jean-Claude Trichet: Conclusions of the G20 in Seoul – Interview in  
Le Progrès 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in Le Progrès, 
France, conducted by Mr Vincent Rocken and published on 13 November 2010. 
 Are you satisfied with the conclusions of the G20 in Seoul? 
Let me first of all say how delighted I am to be here in Lyon, breathing my native air and 
soaking up the beauty of the city and its way of life. 
With regard to the G20, I took note of the communiqué stating that risks remain for the global 
economy and that there is a need for extreme vigilance. I share this view entirely with the 
Heads of State and Government. Four further  conclusions are particularly important to my 
mind. First, a commitment to pursue macroeconomic policies aimed at ensuring sustainable 
growth, including rigorous fiscal measures in countries where these are necessary. Second, 
the need to implement ambitious structural reforms to foster growth and employment. Third, 
the  approval  of  the  banking  supervision  reforms  prepared  by  the  Basel  Committee.  And 
fourth, a commitment to enhance the flexibility of the exchange rates of certain currencies 
which are not sufficiently flexible. 
When  France  takes  over  the  presidency  of  the  G20  for  a  year,  what  guidelines  and 
actions should it focus on at the financial level? 
The  global  governance  of  the  G20  is  a  long-term  undertaking.  Nothing  is  settled,  and  the 
French presidency will need to deepen and strengthen the main avenues that are currently 
the subject of global consensus. This is already a huge task. But the greatest responsibility 
that I see for the future presidency is the correction of large external imbalances at the global 
level; such a correction is crucial if we are to avoid another major crisis in the future. And in 
Seoul the G20 explicitly asked the French presidency to work on criteria for measuring these 
external deficits and surpluses.  
The financial crisis is over, but its effects can now be felt in terms of the economy. Do 
you believe that all the necessary lessons have been learned in order to avoid a new 
global  crisis  when  one  sees  measures  here  and  there  that  are  perceived  as 
protectionist, in particular in the United States and China? 
We are in the midst of reflecting at the international level on the lessons to be learned from 
the  crisis.  This  is  a  considerable  task  and  it  is  being  undertaken  by  the  whole  of  the 
international community, including emerging market economies. It will take some time. For 
example,  in  order  to  make  the  global  financial  system  much  less  vulnerable,  much  more 
robust,  the  measures  proposed  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  adopted  by  the  G20  will 
necessarily  take  time  to  implement,  given  their  scale.  This  applies  in  particular  to  a  very 
considerable  increase  in  banks’  capital  requirements  at  the  global  level.  We  foresee  a 
transition period that will last until the end of 2018. 
Are  you  still  worried  about  the  capacity  of  certain  countries,  such  as  Ireland  and 
Greece, to reduce their public debt levels? 
What is certain is that it is very important for all countries, and not just Ireland and Greece, to 
take  measures  to  ensure  medium-term  fiscal  stability.  This  is  necessary  in  advanced 
economies, in the European Union in general and, of course, in the euro area in particular. A 
feature  that  is  shared  by  the  industrialised  countries  after  the  very  significant  recession 
triggered by the financial crisis is that they find themselves in a vulnerable fiscal position. The 
European Central Bank has always defended the Stability and Growth Pact, even when large 
countries such as France and Germany wanted to relax its rules.  
BIS Review 154/2010 
 1
The  Federal  Reserve  System  decided  last  week  to  inject  massive  amounts  of  dollar 
liquidity  into  the  economic  system,  a  decision  which  has  the  effect  of  reducing  the 
value of the US currency. Has the currency war started? 
That is, of course, a totally inappropriate expression to use. There are two main topics that 
need to be tackled seriously. On the one hand, there is the relationship between the major 
floating convertible currencies of the industrialised countries, such as the dollar, the euro, the 
yen and the pound sterling. These currencies – or, in the case of the euro, the currencies 
that preceded it – have been floating since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system at the 
beginning of the 1970s. The US Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal 
Reserve System say that a strong dollar vis-à-vis other major convertible currencies is in the 
interests of the United States. I share this view entirely. A dollar that is strong and credible 
among  the  major  currencies  of  the  industrialised  countries  is in  the  interests  of  the  United 
States,  it  is  in  the  interests  of  Europe  and  it  is  in  the  interests  of  the  entire  international 
community. On the other hand, the second topic is that of emerging market economies which 
have  considerable  current  account  surpluses  and  exchange  rates  that  are  not  sufficiently 
flexible.  On  this  issue,  commitments  have  been  made  by  the  G20.  A  move  towards  more 
flexible exchange rates, involving a gradual and orderly appreciation of their currencies vis-à-
vis  the  major  convertible  currencies,  is  also  in  the  interests  of  the  emerging  economies 
concerned and in the interests of the international community. 
Isn’t there a risk that the fiscal consolidation in the majority of European countries will 
slow down the economic recovery? 
No,  I  don’t  think  so.  A  consolidation  of  the  recovery  and  a  return  to  sustainable  growth 
crucially depend on confidence: the confidence of households, the confidence of firms and 
the confidence of savers. The pursuit of credible and reassuring fiscal adjustment measures 
will  contribute  to  the  consolidation  of  the  recovery  because  such  measures  inspire 
confidence in all those on whom economic prosperity depends. 
But has sufficient account been taken of the social risks involved? 
The main problem consists of the level of unemployment. As I said, a return to confidence, in 
particular fiscal confidence, is essential for the consolidation of the recovery and thus for the 
creation of lasting employment. 
The  confidence  to  which  you  refer  is  measured  in  particular  by  the  credit  rating 
agencies.  Isn’t  it  necessary  to  reassess  their  role?  Why  can’t  the  EU  have  its  own 
credit rating agency? 
This is one of the major areas that is being looked into at the global level. Past events have 
shown  how  risky  it  could  be  to  rely  blindly  on  the  analyses  of  the  credit  rating  agencies. 
Financial institutions and investors must assume overall responsibility for the decisions that 
they take.  
How can monetary policy and EU economic policy be better coordinated? 
We have a monetary federation, which has provided monetary stability on a continental scale 
for 330 million citizens. Necessarily, this must be accompanied by very close monitoring of 
fiscal policies and strict compliance by fiscal policies with the reference framework that we 
set ourselves. On behalf of the Governing Council, I have always asked for strict compliance 
with the Stability and Growth Pact and the introduction of closer monitoring of developments 
in  competitiveness  within  the  euro  area.  Today,  we  ask  the  European  Commission  and 
President Van Rompuy, who have been charged with this task, to put forward proposals that 
go as far as possible in this regard: we need to significantly enhance fiscal and economic 
governance in the euro area. 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2010
Does global governance simply mean the convergence or merging of the approaches 
followed by the main international bodies? 
A  lot  of  changes  are  happening  in  this  regard:  the  IMF  is  in  the  process  of  reforming  its 
internal  governance,  with  emerging  countries  being  granted  more  seats.  The  European 
countries have agreed to reduce their representation. With regard to the informal governance 
of  the  global  economy  and  finance,  the  G20  has  replaced  the  G7.  This  means  that 
henceforth all the emerging countries as well as the industrialised countries with a systemic 
influence at the global level bear full responsibility for the governance of the integrated global 
economy. 
How do you envisage this governance developing in the medium and long term? 
Governance today is still founded on the notion of sovereign states in a “Westphalian” world, 
which does not correspond to the new governance needs of an integrated global economy. 
The big challenge right now is to speed up the move to a system of global governance that 
fits  the  new  world  that  we  have  created  over  time,  in  particular  over  the  past  20  years 
following the collapse of the Soviet empire and the conversion of large emerging countries to 
the market economy.  
What is your view on the current economic situation in France? 
France, like all of the other European countries, is asked to subject itself to a very sizeable 
fiscal consolidation exercise. This will help to engender confidence and thus to consolidate 
the recovery and, in turn, create jobs. Like all euro area countries, France is encouraged to 
continue to actively implement reforms. The euro area as a whole can and must increase its 
potential for growth and job creation. The extensive reforms that have been undertaken in all 
countries, such as the pension reform in France, are needed. They are a step in the direction 
of  fiscal  responsibility  and  the  smoother  functioning  of  the  European  economy,  and  of  the 
French economy, and will lead to more growth and jobs. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 3
