Christian Noyer: No one should, nor can, manipulate their currency – 
interview in Le Figaro 
Interview with Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, in Le Figaro, Paris, conducted by Ms Isabelle 
Chaperon, Ms Bertille Bayart and Mr Jean-Pierre Robin on 9 November 2010 and published 
on 11 November 2010. 
 Interview – On the eve of the G20 in Seoul, the Governor of the Banque de France advocates an “orderly and 
calm” discussion on the international monetary system.  
Le  Figaro  –  Last  week,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  pumped  USD  600  billion  into  the 
economy. This decision has been harshly criticised. How do you view it? 
Christian  Noyer  –  We  raised  this  issue  last  weekend  at  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  in  Basel.  Fed  officials  explained  this  action  in  the  light  of  their  mandate,  their 
goal of reviving the US economy and the risk of deflation. They assured us that they had no 
deliberate intention to devalue the dollar. And I have no reason not to believe them. 
Le  Figaro  –  The  Fed  seems  much  more  accommodating  than  the  ECB  ...  Are  the 
economic situations so different? 
Christian Noyer  –  Saying  that  the  Fed  is  very  accommodating  and  the  ECB  very  stringent 
does  not  reflect  reality.  In  Europe,  our  monetary  policy  is  still  marked  by  the  non-standard 
measures tailored to the structure of our economy. In this respect, we do not think there is any 
risk of deflation in the euro area, or inflation for that matter. Furthermore, the United States may 
be substantially below its long-term growth potential, whereas the euro area is relatively close. 
Le Figaro – Nonetheless, the dollar is sliding and we seem to be moving away from the 
close cooperation seen between central banks during the crisis... 
Christian Noyer – First, everything does not come down to the dollar. For example, there 
are emerging countries that, by not being sufficiently flexible in their exchange rate policy, 
have  monetary  policies  that  are  inappropriate  and  create  risks  to  inflation  and  growth. 
Moreover, while each central bank is pursuing a policy appropriate to its country’s situation, 
nobody wants to move away from the goal of consistency. We are all committed to ensure a 
framework for balanced growth, and that commitment remains just as strong. As reiterated at 
the last meeting of G20 finance ministers and central bank Governors, no one should or can 
manipulate their currency. 
Le Figaro – Is the euro not the real victim of recent foreign exchange developments? 
Christian Noyer – The euro is not the only currency that floats against all other currencies. 
Let’s not be so self-centred! The idea that the euro is arguably the adjustment variable for the 
rest of the world seems strange to me. 
Le Figaro – Will the G20 be able to make headway on monetary policy issues given 
that the climate is, to say the least, tense? 
Christian Noyer – The main issue being discussed in the G20 – raised moreover by Nicolas 
Sarkozy  –  is  how  to  reduce  the  large  global  current  account  imbalances,  which  weigh  on 
world growth and generate dangerous capital flows. Monetary policy alone will not provide 
the solution. Each economic area should move towards a better balance between savings, 
consumption  and  investment.  And,  we  would  all  benefit  from  reforming  the  international 
monetary system, but in a structural, orderly and calm manner, and certainly not in a hurry. It 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 1
is a long process to move from a system in which only the currencies of major industrialised 
countries counted to the multipolar world in which we now live.  
Le  Figaro  –  This  G20  should  also  provide  the  opportunity  to  validate  the  new 
prudential framework (Basel III). Do you find it adequate? 
Christian Noyer – We have reached a balanced agreement. It is out of the question to be 
confronted  with  a  situation  where  States  fly  back  to  the  aid  of  banks.  That  is  why  we  are 
enhancing  both  the  quantity  and  quality  of  banks’  capital  requirements.  But  we  have  also 
provided  for  a  very  long  adjustment  period  to  avoid  an  artificial  reduction  in  funding.  This 
agreement is universal and is intended to extend to the United States and to all developing 
countries. This too is a balancing factor.  
Le Figaro – Has the project been completed? 
Christian Noyer – We have factored in a long observation period for some aspects. This will 
enable us to make possible further adjustments, for example regarding the liquidity rules that 
will apply as of 2015. The question of systemic risk is still outstanding and we will deal with it 
in 2011.  
Le  Figaro  –  Are  you  in  favour  of  more  stringent  requirements  for  larger  banks, 
considered to be systemic? 
Christian Noyer – This should be an option rather than automatic. Who would have thought 
that  Northern  Rock  or  Bear  Stearns  could  be  regarded  as  systemic?  I  think  that,  in  the 
context of each country, a wide variety of instruments is necessary to allow supervisors to 
ensure  that  banks  increase  their  loss-absorbing  capacity.  In  particular,  the  experience  of 
national supervisors should be taken into account. In France, for example, we adjusted, as 
permitted  by  Basel  II,  the  ratios  required  of  each  institution  based  on  its  risk  profile.  The 
experiment was conclusive. The amounts that each bank had to raise from the State during 
the crisis proved consistent with the requirements that we had determined. Other countries 
that have not had this experience are likely to implement automatic rules.  
Le Figaro – In the United States, some believe that European banks, and in particular 
French institutions, are undercapitalised relative to the size of their balance sheets...  
Christian Noyer – The idea that US banks all comply with Basel III and that efforts are only 
required  in  Europe  is  false.  Those  who  believe  this  are  victims  of  an  accounting  and 
prudential optical illusion. Put simply, a balance sheet produced under US GAAP is twice as 
small as its equivalent using international standards. And capital appears twice as high. This 
creates confusion.  
Le Figaro – Will the United States implement Basel III? 
Christian Noyer – We’ll be monitoring developments very closely. I have no doubts about 
the commitment of the US administration and the Fed. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2010
