Masaaki Shirakawa: Advanced and emerging economies – two-speed 
recovery 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Bauhinia 
Distinguished Talk hosted by the Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre, Hong Kong SAR, 
23 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good  evening.  Today,  I  am  indeed  honored  to  have  this  precious  opportunity  to  give  a 
speech  here  in  the  beautiful  and  dynamic  city  of  Hong  Kong.  I  would  like  to  begin  by 
expressing  my  heartfelt  thanks  to  the  Bauhinia  Foundation  Research  Centre  and  the 
Chairman, Mr. Anthony T. Y. Wu for kindly providing such an honorable occasion to speak in 
front of our distinguished audience. 
As  you  are  well  aware,  financial  business  is  the  biggest  industry  in  Hong  Kong.  Did  you 
know,  however,  that  the  financial  relationship  between  Hong  Kong  and  Japan  was  forged 
shortly  after  Hong  Kong  appeared  in  modern  history?  In  1871,  three  years  after  the 
foundation  of  the  Meiji  Government,  Japan  began  to  issue  its  first  modern  currency.  The 
government  of  the  time  acquired  its  minting  machinery  from  the  former  English  Minting 
Authority in Hong Kong, and invited the engineers to Japan, asking them to issue silver coins 
of  the  same  weight  and  quality  as  those  used  in  Hong  Kong.  While  there  are  a  variety  of 
stories claiming to account for the origin of the name of the Japanese currency, the yen, one 
of these stories tells us that in fact the yen derives its name from the silver Hong Kong one 
yuan coin (Slide 1). Financial institutions have also been active since the very early days in 
helping  build  close  associations  between  Hong  Kong  and  Japan.  The  Hong  Kong  and 
Shanghai  Banking  Corporation  Limited,  familiar  worldwide  as  HSBC,  was  established  in 
Hong Kong in 1865. In the following year, 1866, HSBC opened its branch in Yokohama, and 
this  contributed  greatly  to  the  development  of  trade  finance  in  Japan.  Among  Japanese 
banks, the former Yokohama Specie Bank Limited, which is said to have been modeled after 
HSBC, opened its local office in Hong Kong in 1896. 
The strong economic ties between Hong Kong and Japan are not limited to financial services 
but extend also to trade in goods and services. Hong Kong is currently Japan’s fifth largest 
export partner (Slide 2). It must also be pointed out that this trade in products is not confined 
merely  to  industrial  goods.  Believe  it  or  not,  despite  its  total  population  of  less  than  ten 
million, Hong Kong is the primary export destination for Japanese agricultural products, some 
of  which  may  be  re-exported  to  other  regions,  including  mainland  China.  Japanese  luxury 
fruits are very popular among Hong Kong’s gourmet residents. 
There is also a long-term relationship between Hong Kong and the Bank of Japan. The Bank 
of  Japan  opened  a  representative  office  in  Hong  Kong  in  1957,  aiming  to  ensure  close 
appreciation  of  economic  developments  in  the  Asian  region  (Slide  3).  Since  then,  our 
representatives  at  the  Hong  Kong  office  have  been  providing  extremely  valuable  and 
enlightening reports to the Tokyo Head Office on monetary and economic developments in 
Hong Kong  and East Asia, including those on the Asian currency crisis in 1997. We have 
been enjoying a very close and friendly relationship with the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
and  I  myself  have  solicited  advice  for  today’s  speech  from  my  very  close  friend, 
Mr. Norman T. L. Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
Let me now move on to the main subject. The title of my speech today is “Advanced and 
Emerging  Economies:  Two-speed  Recovery,”  and  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to 
express my views on the outlook for the global economy. I will also briefly touch upon several 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 1
challenges  for  Asia  and  Japan  from  the  perspective  of  ensuring  economic  developments 
between the two. 
Current state of the global economy 
II. 
I  will  start  with  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy.  The  global  economy  has  been 
recovering at a modest pace, following its rapid decline after the Lehman shock. The current 
state  can  most  accurately  be  described  by  what  has  already  become  a  rather  worn-out 
phrase, the “two-speed recovery.” According to the IMF World Economic Outlook released in 
October, the growth rate of the global economy was minus 0.6 percent in 2009, followed by a 
forecast  plus  4.8  percent  for  2010,  and  plus  4.2  percent  in  2011  (Slide  4).  Approximately 
70 percent  of  the  growth  is  contributed  by  emerging  and  resource-rich  economies.  Among 
those,  the  growth  of  Asian  emerging  economies  stands  out,  and  it  can  be  said  that  Asian 
emerging economies are currently the growth center for the global economy, and have been 
a great driving force for its recovery since the global financial crisis.1 
Meanwhile, Japan’s economy has also benefited significantly from the growth of the Asian 
emerging economies. Japan’s exports dropped sharply from the end of 2008 to the beginning 
of 2009, owing to the financial crisis. However, after the spring of 2009, exports showed a 
significant  increase,  mainly  to  China,  the  ASEAN,  and  other  major  Asian  economies 
(Slide 5). The Japanese economy has recovered at the fastest pace among the advanced 
economies, and one of the main reasons for this has been the significant increase in exports 
to Asia. 
Now, what projections can we make about future global economic developments? While the 
future of the global economy is fraught with uncertainty, I focus particularly on the following 
three points in making a projection. 
The  first  point  relates  to  the  advanced  economies,  especially  to  an  assessment  of  their 
balance sheet adjustments. The credit bubbles in the mid-2000s were on a very large scale, 
particularly in the U.S. and the U.K. economies, and for that reason, it may well take some 
time  for  them  to  recover.  Assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  macroeconomic  policies  in 
advanced  economies  is  also  an  important  element.  There  is  already  very  limited  room  for 
deployment  of monetary and fiscal policy in these economies. Given these circumstances, 
when can we expect the advanced economies to return to a full-fledged recovery path, and 
how robust will this return be? 
The second point I wish to raise relates to the growth prospects for the emerging economies. 
The growth potential of emerging economies may seem very large, but without the appropriate 
policy  taken,  the  risk  of  a  bubble  cannot  be  ruled  out.  In  addition,  although  this  is  not  a 
pressing concern, the smooth transition from a high-growth economy to a mature economy 
will become one of the important policy challenges for the emerging economies in the longer 
term. 
The third point, which interlinks with the above two points, is the issue of capital flows and 
exchange rates, or more simply, the currency conflict under the “two-speed recovery.” 
Perspectives from the experience of the Japanese economy 
III. 
Japan’s  experience  over  the  past  few  decades  offers  a  range  of  ideas  when  considering 
these three points. One of the most debated topics of economic policy over the past several 
months  has  been  the  large-scale  asset  purchase  program  implemented  by  the  Federal 
                                                 
1  
IMF “World Economic Outlook,” October 2010. Asian emerging economies are here defined as China, India, 
Korea, Taiwan POC, Hong Kong SAR, Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Vietnam. 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2010
Reserve. Meanwhile, many commentaries by economists and policy makers suggest that the 
program  was  intended  to  avoid  “Japanese-style  deflation”  or  “the  lost  decade  in  Japan.” 
Incidentally, if you search the keyword “Japanese-style deflation” on Google, the results have 
increased rapidly from about four hundred thousand entries during the first half of this year, 
to  about  a  million  during  the  period  from  July  to  mid-November.  However,  many  are 
interested not only in Japan’s experience of deflation or “the lost decade.” When I talk to my 
friends  in  China,  it  surprises  me  to  learn  that  in-depth  studies  are  carried  out  on  Japan’s 
experience during the high-growth period and after the Plaza Accord. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  express  my  views  on  the above  three  points, by  making  reference  to 
Japan’s experience. 
Balance sheet adjustments in advanced economies and their aggressive monetary 
easing 
Let me start with the issue of balance sheet adjustments or repair in advanced economies, 
particularly in the United States. Balance sheet adjustments were indeed an issue that Japan 
struggled to resolve after the burst of the bubble. Real GDP growth in Japan after the burst of 
the bubble decreased significantly to an annual average of 1.5 percent in the 1990s, down 
from 4.4 percent in the 1980s (Slide 6). After entering the 2000s, real GDP growth picked up 
somewhat to an average of 1.7 percent until 2007, but dipped again owing to the Lehman 
shock.  Average  real  GDP  growth  for  the  2000s  was  merely  plus  0.7  percent.  As  for  the 
inflation rate in Japan, the consumer price index has been on a mild downward trend since 
1998 (Slide 7). As such, Japan’s economic performance has not been impressive in recent 
years,  and  this  is  why  discussions  in  the  United  States  often  take  place  in  the  context  of 
“avoiding the Japanisation” of the U.S. economy. However, such framing of the discussions 
occasionally makes me feel that Japan’s experience and its lessons may be misread. 
My understanding of the main causes for the decline in Japan’s growth rate can be summed 
up in the following three points. 
The first cause can be attributed directly to the burst of the bubble. During the formation of 
the  bubble,  driven  by  excess  optimism  about  the  future,  firms  expanded  their  business 
capacity and employment, and increased their debt. After the eventual bursting of the bubble, 
the  so-called  “three  excesses”  remained,  namely  excesses 
in  business  capacity, 
employment,  and  debt.  The  economy  continues  to  suffer  downward  pressure  as  long  as 
“such excesses” remain. It was not before the resolution of these “three excesses” in 2003 
that Japan returned to a full-fledged recovery path (Slide 8). 
The  second  cause  is  the  failure  of  Japanese  firms  in  adapting  to  the  changes  in  overall 
trends that took place globally from the late 1980s through the 1990s, namely deregulation, 
globalization,  and  the  information  and  technology  revolution.  During  this  period,  global 
markets  were  further  integrated,  and  divisions  of  labor  in  production  processes  were 
extended  on  a  global  scale.  Foreign  firms  increased  their  value  added  by  optimally  re-
arranging  their  production  base  and  sales  channels,  and  reduced  costs  by  effectively 
expanding outsourcing. On the other hand, it was a significant challenge for Japanese firms 
to  adapt  to  such  circumstantial  changes,  since  their  business  models  were  based  on 
centralized  control  and  integrated  team  production.  The  industrial  model  in  Japan  was 
supported  by  a  highly  skilled  domestic  labor  force  under  the  lifetime  employment  system. 
However, since Japanese firms were trapped in the memory of their past successes, they 
were left behind in adapting themselves to the major trend changes in the global economy. 
The  third  cause  is  the  aging  and  declining  population  (Slide  9).  There  are  a  variety  of 
channels  through  which  demographic  changes  affect  the  economy.  However,  with  other 
conditions being equal, domestic demand will naturally decrease in line with a decrease in 
population. Likewise from the supply side, a decrease in labor supply will reduce the growth 
rate.  Owing  to  Japan’s  rapidly  aging  population,  the  growth  rate  of  productive  population 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 3
turned to be negative in 1995, and was minus 0.9 percent in 2009 on a year-on-year basis. 
The decline in population will also increase the fiscal burden on the working generation. 
How should we assess the risk of deflation, a question which relates to the debate on “the 
lost decade”? In fact, Japan has experienced a mild price decline of about 3 percent on a 
cumulative  basis  over  a  decade.  However,  the  country  has  not  experienced  a  deflationary 
spiral, where a decline in prices induces a decline in economic activity, thereby leading to a 
further decline in prices. This deflationary spiral is the strongest reason for fearing deflation. 
Instead,  in  terms  of  length,  Japan  experienced  its  longest  post-war  period  of  sustained 
recovery  from  2002  to  2007,  though  not  necessarily  spectacular.  Hong  Kong  has  also 
experienced an increase and decline in prices in recent years. For every jurisdiction, it is not 
appropriate to isolate the issue of deflation from economic structure, in particular from wage 
setting.  If  we  compare  consumer  price  inflation  between  Japan  and  other  advanced 
economies, the rate difference is mainly attributed to the development in the price of services 
(Slide 10). As the inflation rate declined, wages were set in a more flexible manner in Japan. 
This flexibility in wage setting was attained not only through a reduction in bonus payments 
and  an  increase  in  the  number  of  non-regular  workers,  but  also  through  the  downward 
revision  of  fixed  remuneration  for  regular  workers  in  a  flexible  manner.  Since  services  are 
more labor-intensive than the production of goods, the flexible adjustment of nominal wages 
resulted in a decline in the price of services, which became a cause of the deflation. Since 
the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  corporate  management  and  employees  in  Japan  have  given 
priority to ensuring employment, and a decline in wages has therefore been accepted by the 
workers. As a flipside to a decline in wages and mild deflation, Japan has experienced an 
increase  in  its  unemployment  rate  which  is  currently  at  5.0  percent,  but  this  increase  has 
been much smaller than in the U.S. and European economies. 
Let me summarize the above argument by highlighting the implications for the current U.S. 
economy. 
First, it takes a significant time after the burst of a large bubble for an economy to complete 
its balance sheet adjustments and return to the path of full-fledged recovery. In this regard, 
the  current  U.S.  economy  may  require  some  more  time  to  repair  its  balance  sheets. 
Aggressive monetary easing could reduce some of the pain arising from on-going balance 
sheet adjustments, but it will not extinguish the need for those adjustments. 
Second, even during the process of balance sheet adjustments, it is essential not to forget 
paying  attention  to  the  importance  of  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  Although 
accommodative  monetary  policy  is  important  so  as  to  avoid  sharp  declines  in  demand, 
prolonged low interest rates may hinder the growth of productivity by devitalizing economic 
regeneration. In the longer term, the trend in economic growth rates is determined by supply 
side factors, namely the growth of the labor force and productivity. On this point, the United 
States  seems  to  have  the  advantage  over  Japan  in  terms  of  its  more  flexible  economic 
structure  as  well  as  higher  population  growth  of  approximately  1  percent,  which  is  higher 
than  that  of  Japan  in  the  post-bubble  period.  However,  during  the  prolonged  economic 
downturn period after the burst of a bubble, policies that may harm long-term efficiency are 
often  introduced  in  the  climate  of  accumulated  social  frustrations.  Preventing  a  decline  in 
growth potential appears to be the key to avoiding “the lost decade” situation, although this is 
not an easy task for any economy. 
How long will the high growth of emerging economies be sustained? 
The above are my views on the balance sheet adjustments in advanced economies, which is 
the first point I wish to make in projecting the future developments of the global economy. My 
second point is on the sustainability of economic growth in emerging economies. Emerging 
economies  have  achieved  remarkable  growth  in  recent  years.  If  we  mathematically 
extrapolate from the average growth rates of the global economy and BRICs economies for 
the last ten years, the global share of the BRICs economies will reach more than 80 percent 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2010
in 2040, although this is considered to be unrealistic. Even these high-growing economies 
will mature at some stage. Let me now make a simple comparison of Japan’s high economic 
growth in the past and China’s economic growth in recent years. Roughly speaking, China’s 
population is ten times greater than that of Japan, China’s per capita nominal income is one-
tenth of that of Japan, and, accordingly, the nominal GDP for the two countries is about the 
same. Japan’s high economic growth era started in the mid-1950s, and ended in the early 
1970s. The average annual growth rate for this fifteen-year period reached about 10 percent 
(Slide  11). On  the  other  hand,  China’s  high  growth  era  began  in  the early  1990s,  and  the 
average annual growth rate for the first fifteen years was roughly the same as that of Japan 
during its high growth era. The difference between the two is that China is still continuing its 
high  growth  at  an  average  of  more  than  10  percent.  During  a  period  of  high  growth,  the 
supply of labor from rural agricultural areas is one of the key factors. If we compare the urban 
population  ratios  of  Japan  and  China  from  this  perspective,  the  current  ratio  for  China  is 
about  the  same  as  that  of  Japan  during  high  growth  era  of  the  1960s.2  The  automobile 
diffusion ratio for China has also reached about the same level as that of Japan in the 1960s, 
which indicates a consumption boom owing to improvements in income level. Based on such 
simple comparisons, China’s high economic growth is likely to continue for the time being. 
However,  one  of  the  important  prerequisites  for  maintaining  high  growth  is  to  avoid  the 
formation of a bubble. The authorities in China are well aware of this. I would then like to 
share  my  understanding  on  how  the  bubble  was  formed  in  Japan  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
1980s.  It  was  a  phenomenon  that  arose  from  the  complicated  interaction  of  the  following 
factors. 
The first factor was the overconfidence that became so pervasive throughout Japan. Japan’s 
growth  rate  gradually  declined  after  its  high  growth  era  ended  in  the  early  1970s,  and  yet 
growth  rates  remained  far  greater  than  those  of  other  advanced  economies  up  until  the 
1980s.  Inflation  rates  were  quite  subdued,  and therefore,  Japan  boasted  of  itself being  an 
honor student. It may sound like a joke, but there were even calculations in the late 1980s 
that the land value of the Tokyo metropolitan area alone was sufficient to purchase the whole 
United  States.  This  economic  background  fostered  overconfidence,  and  increased  the 
aggressive behavior of many economic entities. 
The  second  factor  was  the  lack  of  a  sufficiently  prudent  financial  supervision.  Financial 
institutions  considerably  increased  their  lending  to  the  real  estate,  construction,  and  non-
bank  sectors,  and  loosened  their  underwriting  standards  on  loans,  including  collateral 
evaluation.  As  a  result,  the  exposures  of  the  financial  institutions’  portfolios  became 
extremely vulnerable to fluctuations in land prices. 
The  third  factor  was  the  prolonged  accommodative  monetary  policy.  However,  it  is  not  so 
meaningful to simply state that monetary easing was one of the factors that contributed to the 
bubble.  We  need  to  examine  in  depth  the  social  and  economic  background  as  to  why 
monetary  easing  was  continued  for  such  a  prolonged  period.  One  of  the  reasons  is  the 
continuance  of  the  low inflation  rate.  Another  reason  is  that  Japan had  been  under  strong 
external  pressure  to  squeeze  its  current  account  surplus.  In  order  to  reduce  its  current 
account  surplus,  Japan  needed  to  expand  domestic  demand,  and  strong  arguments 
developed  around  implementing  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Even  after  the  economy 
had  improved,  concerns  were  often  expressed,  mainly  by  exporting  firms,  regarding  the 
appreciation  of  the  yen.  These  factors  stood  in  strong  opposition  to  withdrawing  the 
accommodative monetary policy. 
                                                 
2   For the comparison of development phases in Japan and China, for instance, see Muto, Matsunaga, Ueyama, 
and  Fukumoto  (2010),  “On  the  Recent  Rise  in  China’s  Real  Estate  Prices,”  Bank  of  Japan  Review  Series, 
No. 10-E-3. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 5
If there are lessons for high-growing emerging economies to learn from Japan’s experience, 
which  might  help  them  avoid  a  bubble,  these  can  be  summarized  in  the  following  three 
points. First, society, as a whole, needs to maintain a sense of discipline in order to avoid 
overconfidence,  particularly  in  times  of  high  growth.  Second,  I  put  an  emphasis  on  the 
importance of the financial regulation and supervision. Especially given that each bubble is 
different, it is absolutely essential to have a supervisory framework from the perspective of 
macro-prudence  to  accurately  grasp  the  overall  risk.  Third,  monetary  policy  has  to  aim  at 
domestic stability, which amounts to sustainable economic growth under price stability. We 
must  bear  in  mind  that  focusing  on  foreign  exchange  rates  and  current  accounts  can  be 
detrimental to the stability of the domestic economy. 
Financial and capital market developments under the “two-speed recovery” 
Let us now move on to my third point in making projections for the global economy. The third 
point  relates  to  issues  arising  in  financial  and  capital  markets  owing  to  the  “two-speed 
recovery.”  Currently,  advanced  economies,  including  Japan,  are  conducting  extremely 
accommodative  monetary  policies  to  ensure  their  economic  recovery.  On  the  other  hand, 
emerging economies are experiencing increasing capital inflows from advanced economies 
(Slide  12).  These  capital  inflows  mainly  reflect  the  high  growth  prospects  of  emerging 
economies, together  with  the  influence  of  interest  rate  differentials  between  advanced  and 
emerging  economies.  A  number  of  Asian  emerging  economies  have  observed  their  stock 
prices  reaching  new  historical  peaks  (Slide  13).  Real  estate  prices  have  increased  at  a 
substantial pace, and the rising trend in global commodity prices is also observed. In terms of 
the increase in asset prices, Hong Kong is no exception. 
Given these circumstances, emerging economies have been expressing concerns over the 
accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies, as it could lead to overheating in 
their domestic economies and the emergence of a bubble, and further to a possible reversal 
of  capital  flows  in  the  future.  Advanced  economies  are,  on  the  other  hand,  expressing 
concerns that the foreign exchange rates of emerging economies are less flexible, and this 
may  eventually  threaten  global  sustainable  growth  by  enlarging  global  imbalances.  For 
reference,  the  foreign  reserve  assets  of  Asian  emerging  economies  dropped  slightly 
immediately  after  the  Lehman  shock,  but  recovered  again  and  increased  dramatically 
(Slide 14). 
How should we address this currency issue? Textbooks provide clear-cut answers, but have 
never  sufficiently  covered  the  variety  of  dilemmas  that  we  have  actually  experienced  in 
recent  years,  including  carry  trades,  where  low  interest  rate  currencies  are  borrowed  as  a 
funding  currency  and  invested  in  the  financial  assets  of  high-yield  currencies.  Even  if  the 
textbooks  did  provide  us  with  clear-cut  answers,  these  would  not  instantaneously  help 
resolve  the  problems  we  face,  as  there  are  no  binding  powers  to  ensure  their  policy 
implementation  across  jurisdictions.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  a  deep 
understanding  of  the  textbook  principles  is  important,  but  at  the  same  time,  thinking  in  a 
textbook manner alone is not sufficient. 
Allow me now to confirm a very basic principle from the textbooks. Central banks in every 
jurisdiction bear the ultimate responsibility for the price stability and economic stability of their 
jurisdiction. Whether an advanced or an emerging economy, it is natural and legitimate for 
central  banks  to  take  accommodative  monetary  policy  to  be  strengthened  further  or 
otherwise  corrected,  depending  on  each  economic  situation.  In  relation  to  exchange  rate 
fluctuations,  under  the  free  movements  of  international  capital,  fixing  the  exchange  rate 
would inhibit autonomous monetary policy. Therefore, if the capital inflows to the emerging 
economies are causing overheating, the textbook answer for them would then be either to 
accept  the  appreciation  of  the  currency,  or  to  tighten  monetary  policy  in  response  to  the 
extent that it affects domestic prices and economic activity. 
6 
 BIS Review 157/2010
This  principle  is  indeed  important.  However,  the  textbooks  we  have  do  not  consider  the 
important economic reality at this moment, namely the zero interest rate bound and balance 
sheet adjustments. Given the zero interest rate bound, and given also that there are many 
economic  entities  exposed  to  balance  sheet  adjustments,  it  may  be  more  difficult  than  in 
other  circumstances  for  monetary  easing  policy  to  take  effect  through  domestic  economic 
entities.  Rather,  it  tends  to  take  effect  through  external  channels,  such  as  capital  outflows 
and  currency  depreciation.  The  reality  for  those  emerging  economies  receiving  capital 
inflows is that, although the growth of their financial and capital markets may indeed have 
been remarkable in recent years, their markets are still small and less liquid compared with 
those of advanced economies. Hence, when there are large uncovered capital flows into the 
local currency stock and bond markets of emerging economies, the exchange rate and the 
price of securities tend to rise simultaneously. This further accelerates the inflows in a self-
fulfilling  manner,  as  speculative  money  seeks  the  capital  gains  of  currency  as  well  as 
securities.  Such  superfluous  capital  inflows  force  down  domestic  bond  yields,  creating 
downward pressure on the lending rates of domestic banks, and may lead to a rise in asset 
prices. Allowing the currency to appreciate may help to deter capital inflows, but if inflationary 
pressures were suppressed by such currency appreciation, the low interest rate period may 
be extended owing to the apparent stable price conditions, resulting in the inability to prevent 
the  overheating  of  the  economy  and  the  creation  of  a  bubble.  This  would  suggest  that 
currency  appreciation  is  also  not  a  panacea.  In  either  case,  if  emerging  economies 
experience  the  formation  and  the  burst  of  a  bubble,  the  influence  will  also  rebound  to 
advanced economies. 
Several  years  ago,  when  Japan  was  implementing  its  quantitative  monetary  easing  policy, 
there were criticisms from Asian colleagues that such a policy was promoting carry trades. 
There  have  been  similar  arguments,  expressed  even  more  vigorously,  since  the  Federal 
Reserve  recently  implemented  its  large-scale  asset  purchase  program.  Although  it  is 
understandable for advanced and emerging economies to have their different views, what is 
essential  for  us  is  to  acknowledge  that  we  are  all  in  the  same  boat  when  it  comes  to  the 
globalized  economy.  There  is  as  yet  no  clear-cut  answer  to  these  difficult  issues,  but  I 
believe  it  is  important  that  each  jurisdiction  embraces  the  following  approach  when 
implementing monetary policy. 
First, advanced and emerging economies need to rethink the meaning of domestic stability of 
both  prices  and  economic  activity,  before  actually  implementing  monetary  policy.  Every 
central bank aims at ensuring domestic stability for its jurisdiction at any time. However, in 
order to attain this objective under circumstances of economic and financial globalization, it is 
becoming important for central banks to take into account the impact that their own monetary 
easing or lack of flexibility on foreign exchange  rates might have overseas, as well as the 
feedback effects on their jurisdictions. 
Second, it is also important to implement measures from a prudential policy perspective. In 
this regard, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) has sounded a warning since last 
year  about  the  rapid  increase  in  real  estate  prices,  implementing  a  variety  of  policy 
measures,  such  as  the  lowering  of  the  Loan-to-Value  (LTV)  ratio.  These  macro-prudential 
measures  are  particularly  essential  for  Hong  Kong,  where  a  fixed  foreign  exchange  rate 
regime has been adopted. An issue currently of global importance is how to design macro-
prudential  measures  appropriate  to  the  situation  of  each  domestic  economy  and  to  the 
degree of development in financial markets. 
Economic development in Japan and other Asian economies 
IV. 
So far, I have expressed my views on the outlook for the global economy. Next, in the little 
time  remaining,  I  would  like  to  change  the  topic  and  talk  briefly  about  economic 
developments  in  Japan,  with  particular  reference  to  the  economic  relationship  with  other 
Asian economies. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 7
The  Japanese  economy  is  facing  a  number  of  difficult  challenges,  as  indicated  by  the 
declining  trend  of  GDP  growth  rate.  We,  Japanese  people,  often  tend  to  be  rather  self-
reflective, which is also considered a virtue, but I feel that this tendency has been going too 
far recently. We should avoid being excessively either optimistic or pessimistic. 
Therefore,  I  will  start  by  emphasizing  the  strengths  of  Japan’s  economy.  First,  the  growth 
rate  of  real  GDP  per  worker  in  Japan,  namely  the  growth  rate  of  productivity,  still  bears 
comparison  with  that  of  the  United  States,  although  it  is  no  longer  what  it  once  was 
(Slide 15).  Second,  Japan’s  financial  system  is  sound.  Looking  back  at  the  time  of  the 
Lehman shock in the fall of 2008, Japan’s financial system was relatively more stable than 
those of the U.S. and European economies (Slide 16). Third, Japan has high technological 
competitiveness. For instance, Japan is at the global forefront of advances in environmental 
technology. Japan has also made advances, during the process of urbanization for example, 
in  areas  of  high  technology  associated  with  infrastructure,  including  water  supply,  roads, 
railways,  and  harbors.  Fourth,  Japan  has  strong  economic  and  historical  ties  with,  and  is 
geographically close to East Asian economies which together currently enjoy the most rapid 
growth in the world. Recent experience of the global economy suggests that, even in the age 
of globalization, the importance of geographic closeness still counts. 
After  highlighting  these  strengths  of  Japan’s  economy,  I  have  to  admit  that  it  nonetheless 
faces many challenges. The most pressing challenge is, I think, coping with its demographic 
changes. Japan’s working population has been declining since the latter half of the 1990s, 
and  the  number  of  workers  has  also  shown  a  declining  trend  since  1998.  Under  these 
circumstances,  I  believe,  the  particularly  important  issues  we  have  to  deal  with  are 
maintaining a sustainable fiscal balance, and increasing the rate of participation in the elderly 
and female workforce. 
Meanwhile, it is also vital that Japan continues to make efforts towards realizing the potential 
strengths  that  I  mentioned  earlier.  Strengthening  our  cooperation  with  Asian  economies  is 
likewise crucial for this issue. Looking at the weight of East Asian economies in exports from 
Japan,  it  has  increased  from  30  percent  in  1990  to  40  percent  in  2000,  and  further  up  to 
51 percent in 2009 (Slide 17). The weight of Asia in foreign direct investment from Japan has 
also been increasing steadily. As such, Japan’s relationship with Asian economies has been 
deepening further. Economic strategy in Asia is one of the important pillars in the Japanese 
government’s “New Growth Strategy” which was recently issued. As an example, I would like 
to  mention  again  environmental  technology.  Japan  was  once  plagued  by  low  energy 
efficiency,  which  resulted  in  large  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy  as  the  energy  price 
changed. This also caused serious environmental problems, including air and water pollution. 
In order to overcome these problems, mainly after the first oil shock, Japan made strenuous 
efforts  to  develop  energy-efficient  and  environmentally-friendly  technologies  by  bringing 
together both public and private sectors. As a consequence, energy unit efficiency in Japan 
has improved dramatically, and has become the most efficient in the world (Slide 18).3 This 
has reduced the impact of resource price changes on domestic prices and the real economy 
while  at  the  same  time  bringing  environmental  benefits,  as  there  are  now  far  fewer 
environmental disruption problems. The Asian emerging economies have much to improve in 
terms  of  environment,  and  I  think  there  are  many  areas  in  which  Japan  can  make  a 
contribution. 
In terms of cooperation with Asia, finance is an equally important area. In fact, one of the 
recent key strategies for major Japanese financial institutions has been the strengthening of 
their business activities in East Asian economies. Developing financial markets in the region 
is also an important policy issue. According to a BIS survey as of April 2010, global foreign 
                                                 
3   According  to  the  Agency  for  Natural  Resources  and  Energy  of  Japan,  the  efficiency  of  Japan’s  energy 
consumption has improved by 37 percent during the past thirty years, and as a consequence, its total primary 
energy input per GDP became the lowest in the world. 
8 
 BIS Review 157/2010
exchange  transactions  increased  by  20  percent  compared  with  that  of  three  years  ago. 
Among  them,  the  share  of  Asian  currencies  in  foreign  exchange  transactions  is  only  less 
than  4  percent  (Slide  19).  However,  given  the  significant  presence  of  Asian  economies  in 
trade  in  goods  and  services,  this  share  is  expected  to  increase  much  further.  As  such, 
developing  financial  markets  is  important  for  the  Asian  region.  For  instance,  there  are  still 
limits  on  the  number  of  Asian  currencies  that  can  be  settled  via  the  international  foreign 
exchange settlement system called Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS). It is also our task 
to  introduce  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  in  the  region  that  would  enable  central 
banks to supply local currency liquidity against collateral which are financial assets in other 
jurisdictions. In Asia, there are distinct international financial markets, including Hong Kong, 
Singapore, and Tokyo. What is expected of the market participants and monetary authorities 
in  those  financial  markets  is  to  support  the  overall  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  financial 
intermediary by being competitive and cooperative with each other. In this regard, I have the 
deepest  respect  for  one  of  the  HKMA’s  missions  to  promote  and  develop  Hong  Kong’s 
financial market into an international financial center, and for the innovative policy stance the 
HKMA has taken. 
Closing remarks 
V. 
As time is running out, I would like to conclude my speech. The future of the global economy 
is  currently  fraught  with  uncertainty,  and  we  are  facing  a  variety  of  challenges.  For  both 
Hong Kong and Japan, whether our economies will be able to take a desirable path depends 
significantly on global economic developments. From the perspective of the outlook for the 
global  economy,  I  have  raised  three  issues  today,  namely  balance  sheet  adjustments  in 
advanced  economies,  growth  potential  of  emerging  economies,  and  debates  on  currency 
conflict. The exact nature of these issues will change considerably, depending on the policy 
responses of each jurisdiction. It is therefore important for policy authorities around the world 
to promote better understanding and to cooperate closely with each other. 
Over the past decades, the world economy and financial markets have in fact been moving 
steadily towards globalization. However, at the same time, it is also true that we are still far 
away  from  perfect  globalization.  As  typically  observed  in  debates  on  currency  conflict,  the 
variety of challenges we are facing may reflect the complex reality of the global economy. 
Nevertheless,  we  need  to  make  efforts  to  resolve  these  challenges.  In  this  regard,  the 
growing number of voices calling for reform of the international currency system seems to me 
a  welcome  development.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it  is  unrealistic  to  expect  that  such 
difficult challenges can be resolved in a short period of time. What is most important at this 
moment is the sincere commitment of each jurisdiction to learn the lessons of what others 
have experienced. There is much to be learned from this experience, particularly on issues 
relating  to  the  formation  and  the  bursting  of  bubbles,  and  on  policy  responses  to  financial 
crises. 
Moreover,  it  is  important  for  us  to  exchange  frank  views  on  the  challenges  we  are  facing. 
While  listening  to  recent  debates  on  currency  conflict,  I  am  often  reminded  of  the  word 
“sympathy” as used by a great economist Adam Smith in his first but continuously revised 
book, “The Theory of Moral Sentiments.” What we need most fundamentally at this juncture 
is “sympathy” with each other, in Smith’s meaning of the term, bearing the situation of other 
economies in mind. I believe the current “two-speed recovery” presents a perfect example of 
the importance of such “sympathy.” We, the Bank of Japan, cooperating with other central 
banks and monetary authorities, should put all our efforts into ensuring sustainable economic 
growth under price stability, and the stability of the financial system. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 9
Slide 1 
Slide 2 
   10 
 BIS Review 157/2010
Slide 3 
Slide 4 
  11
BIS Review 157/2010 
 Slide 5 
Slide 6 
  BIS Review 157/2010
 12 
 Slide 7 
Slide 8 
  13
 BIS Review 157/2010 
 Slide 9 
 Slide 10 
 14 
  BIS Review 157/2010
Slide 11 
Slide 12 
  15
 BIS Review 157/2010 
 Slide 13 
Slide 14 
  16 
 BIS Review 157/2010
Slide 15 
Slide 16 
  17
BIS Review 157/2010 
 Slide 17 
 Slide 18 
18 
  BIS Review 157/2010
Slide 19 
 BIS Review 157/2010 
 19
