 Arnór Sighvatsson: Shedding the shackles of capital controls 
Speech  by  Mr  Arnór  Sighvatsson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
breakfast meeting of Icelandic Securities Ltd, Reykjavík, 7 October 2010. 
 Restrictions  on  movement  of  capital  to  and  from  Iceland  are  in  contravention  of  Iceland’s 
international obligations, including the European Economic Area Agreement. Such controls 
distort  economic  incentives,  lead  to  lost  business  opportunities,  discourage  foreign 
investment,  are  costly  and  inconvenient  for  the  public  and  private  sector  alike,  and  are  a 
breeding ground for illegal activity aimed at circumvention. There is also the risk that a capital 
controls regime will be progressively more difficult to enforce over time. Moreover, there is 
good  reason  to  believe  that,  in  the  long  run,  Iceland’s  pension  system  would  benefit  from 
diversifying risk by investing abroad. Indeed, this has become abundantly clear in the current 
financial crisis. In sum, there are a host of reasons not to impose capital controls, and to lift 
them as soon as possible if they do exist. 
In spite of these arguments to the contrary, capital controls were imposed after the Icelandic 
financial system collapsed, and removing them has taken longer than originally anticipated. It 
is useful to review the reasons for imposing  the controls, as those reasons are the key to 
understanding what conditions must be met before the controls can be lifted. 
Why capital controls? 
In  short,  restrictions  were  placed  on  movement  of  capital  because  confidence  in  Iceland’s 
banking  system,  currency,  and  Treasury  –  actually,  in  Iceland’s  entire  economy  and 
institutional framework – was in tatters after all of the country’s major banks failed in one of 
the largest financial collapses in history. It was clear that the collapse of the banking sector 
would deal the Treasury a heavy blow, although the exact scope of the shock was unknown. 
It was also clear that the Treasury would require substantial funding to address temporary 
deficit  operations.  The  collapse  cut  a  wide  swath  in  the  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  it 
proved necessary to use some reserves to stabilise the foreign exchange market while the 
reconstruction  of  the  banking  system  was  underway  and  solutions  to  private  sector  debt 
problems  were  being  sought.  Without  enhanced  reserves,  refinancing  of  Treasury  foreign 
debt  could  have  proven  elusive  or  even  unavailable  in  coming  years  if  efforts  to  restore 
confidence  in  the  global  markets  in  due  time  should  prove  unsuccessful.  There  were 
numerous indications that the global financial crisis could be protracted, as has proven to be 
the  case.  Thus  it  was  far  from  assured  that  the  global  financial  markets  would  become 
accessible to Iceland in time to refinance foreign loans maturing in 2011 and 2012. 
The  problem  was  exacerbated  by  the  large  króna  positions  accumulated  by  non-residents 
from 2005 onwards. It could be assumed that these investors would sell and, in some cases, 
would be forced to sell at distressed prices at the first opportunity. Had this happened, the 
króna would probably have plunged in the meantime and not recovered before prices and 
wages  had  adjusted.  But  the  problem  was  not  restricted  to  non-residents.  Residents, 
including  Iceland’s  pension  funds,  allocate  substantial  funds  that  must  be  invested  on  a 
continuous  basis.  With  the  economy  paralysed  and  the  Treasury’s  ability  to  fund  a  large 
deficit  over  the  next  few  years  uncertain,  domestic  institutional  investors  also  became 
reluctant to invest in domestic assets. Under these conditions, central government financing 
would  have  been  extremely  challenging,  which  would  have  undermined  exchange  rate 
stability still further.  
The  third  reason  for  the  capital  controls  was  the  shaky  balance  sheets  of  the  newly 
established  financial  institutions  and  the  other  financial  firms  that  survived  the  onslaught, 
however briefly. Their balance sheets were fraught with uncertainty and potentially unstable. 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 1
 A considerable share of their deposits could prove unstable as well. The balance sheets of 
households and businesses were likewise in a state of disarray. In the absence of exchange 
rate  stability,  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to  restructure  the  finances  of  Iceland’s 
households, corporations, and banks. 
Prerequisites for capital account liberalisation 
The foregoing discussion should make it clear that the capital controls will not be lifted in full 
until confidence has been restored to the extent that their removal will not cause prolonged 
instability.  Let  us  consider  the  prerequisites  for  capital  account  liberalisation  and  Iceland’s 
position on the path towards fulfilling them: 
The IMF Stand-by Arrangement has ensured sufficient foreign exchange reserves to roll over 
Treasury debt in coming years and address potential outflows associated with the first stages 
of liberalisation. When the loan facilities have been drawn in full, Iceland will probably be in a 
better position than many European countries in terms of refinancing risk. This will place the 
Icelandic Government in a comfortable position when it seeks foreign market funding once 
again. 
 
  A  central  government  budget  aimed  at  ensuring  a  primary  surplus  in  2011  has  now  been 
drafted  and,  according  to  the  medium-term  fiscal  programme,  the  Treasury  will  record  an 
overall surplus in 2013. According to these estimates, public sector debt will peak in 2010. 
Fiscal  consolidation 
Iceland’s 
creditworthiness and creating the conditions necessary for capital account liberalisation and 
sustainable exchange rate stability. Thus it is vital to adhere to these objectives. 
the  policy  aimed  at  reviving 
the  cornerstone  of 
is 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2010
   The  financial  system  is  now  in  a  better  position  than  it  was  only  a  few  months  ago  to 
withstand the volatility of short-term capital flows that could accompany the removal of capital 
controls. The most recent Supreme Court judgment eliminated a large source of risk that had 
made  it  extremely  difficult  to  estimate  the  banks’  liquidity.  According  to  the  Icelandic 
authorities’ Letter of Intent, the Financial Supervisory Authority will review the banks’ planned 
responses to the judgment by 15 November. The remaining risk is due primarily to foreign 
banks’ króna deposits and the old banks’ deposits. However, before  the controls on these 
deposits can be lifted in full, it is necessary to channel as much of this capital as possible into 
long-term investments and structure the winding-up of the old banks so as not to jeopardise 
exchange rate stability. 
Although  conditions  in  the  global  financial  markets  are  still  difficult,  they  are  better  overall 
than they were a year ago, not to mention two years ago. But the fiscal problems faced by 
Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain have contributed to investor flight to the relative safety 
of  low-yielding  markets.  The  Icelandic  Government  is  faced  with  the  intricate  task  of 
demonstrating  that  Iceland  is  a  better  target  for  investment  than  other  indebted  European 
countries. The progress made under the IMF programme is gradually laying the foundation 
for  enhanced  confidence,  but  the  programme  will  only  be  successful  if  we  adhere  to  its 
objectives. Funds lying in wait in the shelter of low-yielding markets will eventually seek more 
bountiful shores. When the flight to safety begins to subside and investors begin to seek out 
better returns, the Icelandic authorities must be ready to direct their attention to Iceland.  
BIS Review 138/2010 
 3
   The existence of capital controls and their proposed removal represents a problem for both 
the Monetary Policy Committee and those who trade in the bond market. While the capital 
controls are being removed, the risk-adjusted interest rate differential between Iceland and 
its  trading  partners  must  be  sufficient  to  make  ISK  assets  attractive  relative  to  foreign 
currency  alternatives.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  strong  arguments  for  a  considerable 
reduction in interest rates, provided that the capital controls keep the króna stable. Whether 
the interest rate at any given time is appropriate depends in part on the timing of the phased 
capital  account  liberalisation.  Both  the  market  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  face 
uncertainty about when, and in what stages, it will be possible to lift the controls. In line with 
transparent monetary policy implementation, the Monetary Policy Committee has explained 
how this uncertainty affects its decisions. To that end, the Committee has given an account 
of  various  factors  that  affect  the  prospects  of  continuing  the  phased  capital  account 
liberalisation that began in November 2009. Uncertainty about key Supreme Court decisions 
and the third IMF review increased the likelihood that the next stage of liberalisation could be 
delayed  quite  a  while.  The  bond  market  appeared  to  interpret  this  delay  to  be  more 
fundamental  in  nature  than  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  intended  to  convey  in  its 
statement, thus contributing to the decline in yields that had begun somewhat earlier. The 
uncertainty had abated by the time the Monetary Policy Committee met in September, and 
the  Committee  explained  this  in  its  statement.  Furthermore,  the  Committee  implied  that  it 
would inevitably consider this point in its next interest rate decisions. This shift represented 
not a change in policy but a response to changed circumstances. 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2010
     One  of  the  prerequisites  for  lifting  the  capital  controls  without  causing  exchange  rate 
instability  is  a  sufficiently  strong  external  balance  –  preferably  a  surplus.  That  prerequisite 
has  already  been  met  to  the  extent  that  the  Central  Bank  has  initiated  regular  foreign 
exchange  purchases  in  the  market.  Excluding  the  estates  of  the  failed  banks,  there  is  a 
sizeable trade surplus. When winding-up proceedings conclude, there will be a net debt to 
non-residents;  however,  it  will  probably  not  be  large  enough  to  eliminate  the  underlying 
surplus. The fundamental problem lies not with the current account balance but with capital 
movements.  Residents’  payments  on  foreign  loans  will  probably  exceed  inflows  of  new 
borrowed funds or other investments as long as Iceland’s access to foreign credit markets is 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 5
 constrained and economic recovery is delayed. However, Landsvirkjun’s recent bond issue 
indicates  that  foreign  credit  markets  are  not  entirely  closed,  although  few  firms  are  in  a 
position to obtain foreign credit and the terms are far from favourable.  
 
 It would arguably be wise to commence capital account liberalisation while the real exchange 
rate  is  relatively  low.  With  a  relatively  low  real  exchange  rate,  owners  of  ISK  assets  en 
masse are less likely to view the removal of capital controls as a selling opportunity, and it is 
more likely that foreign investors will view it as an opportunity to acquire krónur from those 
wishing to sell. The real exchange rate of the króna is somewhat below its likely long-term 
average, although it has risen in the past year. 
 
 6 
   BIS Review 138/2010
 As  economic  recovery  gains  pace,  the  outlook  for  capital  account  liberalisation  improves. 
Recovery tends to be accompanied by increased inflow of foreign capital in the form of credit 
or  direct  investment.  Significant  inward  foreign  direct  investment  could  set  the  stage  for 
removal of the controls. Although suggestions that recovery began late in 2009 or in the first 
half of 2010 have proven to be a mirage, a number of indicators imply that Iceland has hit 
bottom or is close to it, and that growth will resume in the latter half of this year. But the pace 
of  the  recovery  will  depend  greatly  on  our  success  in  attracting  foreign  capital  for  export-
generating investment. 
The main objective of the IMF programme is to build confidence in Iceland’s economy and 
economic policy. If that confidence existed now, it would be possible to lift the controls today. 
Considerable discussion has been devoted to the instability of foreign capital that could flee 
as  soon  as  the  controls  that  hold  it  in  place  are  reduced  or  eliminated.  Although  the 
magnitude  of  foreigners’  frozen  ISK  assets  is  broadly  known,  information  on  non-resident 
retail owners of ISK assets is largely hidden. The group referred to as impatient investors is 
probably not a fixed quantity; it may turn out to be quite variable, depending on expectations 
concerning Iceland’s economic policy, on the one hand, and on global market conditions, on 
the  other.  The  agreement  concluded  with  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg,  which 
transferred a significant amount of ISK assets to domestic long-term investors, facilitates the 
removal of capital controls. The agreement expands Iceland’s foreign reserves and transfers 
assets into the hands of parties that are less likely to sell at the first opportunity.  
 
 How to lift the controls? 
In August 2009, the Central Bank presented a capital account liberalisation strategy based 
on sequenced removal of the controls upon fulfilment of stated conditions rather than on a 
specified timetable. That strategy was prepared under conditions that differ from the current 
ones and must therefore be reviewed in its entirety. The first phase of the existing strategy, 
the removal of restrictions on capital inflows, was implemented in early November 2009. The 
original  intention  was  that,  in  Phase  2,  restrictions  on  capital  outflows  would  gradually  be 
lifted, beginning with long-term securities transactions. That step has not yet been taken, and 
its  implementation  must  be  considered  carefully  with  an  eye  to  stability  before  it  can  be 
taken. While the stages of the strategy were not scheduled in terms of a precise timetable, its 
implementation  has  definitely  been  delayed  with  respect  to  original  expectations,  in  part 
because of delays in the progress of the IMF programme and the uncertainty generated by 
recent Supreme Court judgments. The Letter of Intent connected with the second IMF review 
stated  that  the  next  stages  of  capital  account  liberalisation  would  be  taken  after  the  third 
review, at the earliest. The third review is now complete. When the associated loan facilities 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 7
 are disbursed over the next several months, and when the Financial Supervisory Authority 
has  completed  its  assessment  of  financial  institutions’  plans  in  view  of  the  last  Supreme 
Court  decision  on  FX  loans  (around  mid-November,  as  is  stated  in  the  Letter  of  Intent 
accompanying the third IMF review), it will be timely to consider further steps towards lifting 
the controls.  
Before those steps can be taken, however, we must engage in a great deal of preparatory 
work aimed at reducing the likelihood of exchange rate and bond market instability. In the 
next few months, the Central Bank will consult with the International Monetary Fund, other 
advisors,  and  the  Government  concerning  the  next  steps  and  will  thoroughly  review  the 
capital  account  liberalisation  strategy  of  August  2009.  Because  liberalisation  has  been 
delayed,  circumstances  differ  to  an  extent  from  those  expected  at  the  time  the  original 
strategy was prepared. For example, both inflation and interest rates are considerably lower. 
The outlook for fortification of the foreign exchange reserves is far less uncertain than before. 
As a result, there is good reason to re-think the sequencing in the liberalisation strategy with 
an  eye  to  changed  circumstances  and  market  developments,  as  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee indicated in its August statement. One possibility might be to change the order of 
events and adopt measures to release pressure from owners of frozen deposits and glacier 
bonds  before  lifting  controls  on  long-term  obligations.  The  August  2009  strategy  assumed 
that this particular step would not be taken until after restrictions on long-term obligations had 
been lifted, at least to some degree. The presence of unstable short-term capital creates a 
certain risk, however, when the first steps are taken. Another possibility is to hold auctions 
where non-residents with ISK holdings can exchange them for foreign-denominated bonds 
that can be traded without restrictions earlier in the timeline than was previously assumed. 
Still another possibility is the imposition of a gradually declining exit tax, either concurrently 
or later. One way of releasing frozen ISK assets is to direct them towards domestic long-term 
investments. 
Unfortunately, it is difficult at this stage to say with assurance whether, when, how, and in 
what order these solutions will be adopted. That will be determined in part by the results of 
the preparatory work currently underway. 
Foreign owners of frozen short-term assets are not the only parties that must be considered 
when the capital controls are lifted. Domestic institutional investors – particularly the pension 
funds  –  will  play  an  important  role  in  bringing  about  sustainable  stability.  As  of  the  end  of 
July, Iceland’s pension funds owned over 500 b.kr., or 3.3 billion euros, in foreign assets, but 
their  liabilities  are  entirely  in  Icelandic  krónur,  and  their  ability  to  hedge  against  foreign 
exchange  risk  is  limited.  As  such,  given  the  historically  low  real  exchange  rate,  it  is 
reasonable to expect that there might be an opportunity to reduce their exchange rate risk. 
Some  pension  fund  executives,  however,  have  stressed  that  the  dearth  of  domestic 
investment  opportunities  with  an  acceptable  risk-return  balance  makes  a  shift  to  domestic 
assets problematic. The Icelandic economy is still fettered by a debt crisis, and for a while 
Government-guaranteed  bond  yields  fell  below  levels  that  many  pension  funds  considered 
acceptable.  But  domestic  investment  opportunities  will  grow  in  number  as  corporate  debt 
problems are solved. It may also be the case that the pension funds’ required yield for the 
lowest-risk  domestic  bonds  is  simply  too  high.  Although  the  actuarial  assessment  of  their 
position is based on a given yield, it appears unrealistic to demand this yield on assets with 
the lowest-risk with respect to the pension funds’ liabilities. 
The capital controls – and more particularly, it seems, some parties’ expectations that they 
will remain in effect for a very long period of time – have played a role in generating relatively 
low  yields.  The  bond  market  instability  that  may  be  associated  with  market  expectations 
about when capital account liberalisation will begin highlights the role of the capital controls 
in price formation. Domestic investors are in the same position as foreign investors in that 
awareness of impatient investors with frozen ISK assets erodes their confidence in the króna. 
It is important to open up an exit route for the most impatient among the impatient investors 
8 
 BIS Review 138/2010
 and create a framework within which the others can divert their liquid króna assets into long-
term investment.  
Conclusion 
Is it possible to lift the capital controls without causing significant exchange rate instability? 
Yes, it is – if sufficient confidence has been built. At present, confidence is not present to a 
sufficient  degree  to  support  large  steps  in  this  direction.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  perfectly 
appropriate  to  begin  preparatory  work.  The  Icelandic  authorities  have  made  excellent 
progress in building confidence, although there is still much to be done. Investors’ concerns 
about the Treasury’s ability to fulfil its commitments should dissipate if the authorities adhere 
to the fiscal consolidation plans in the 2011 national budget and the estimates for the years 
to come. Soon it should emerge that Iceland is in many respects on a firmer footing than a 
number  of  other  developed  countries,  many  of  which  are  faced  with  sizeable  pension 
obligations  in  addition  to  large  fiscal  deficits  and  a  heavy  debt  burden.  Iceland  now  has 
access  to  enough  foreign  currency  reserves  to  pay  all  Treasury  debt  falling  due  from  now 
through 2013 – and through 2015, if it draws in full on the loan facilities associated with the 
IMF  Stand-By  Arrangement.  There  is  an  underlying  current  account  surplus.  The  real 
exchange  rate  is  still  at  a  low  level,  which  indicates  that  investments  in  krónur  should  be 
appealing  for  the  long  term.  If  efforts  to  attract  direct  investment  in  export  sectors  are 
successful over the medium term, the conditions for gradual removal of the capital controls 
will  improve.  The  Central  Bank  emphasises  lifting  the  controls  in  a  way  that  minimises 
exchange  rate  and  bond  market  instability  to  the  maximum  extent  possible.  Careful 
preparation will take place before the next steps are taken. However, the Bank cannot create 
greater certainty in the markets than it faces itself. 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 9
