Tiff Macklem: Managing risks in the new global economic landscape 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the National 
Insurance Conference of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 27 September 2011. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  speaking  here  in  Vancouver  at  the  annual  National  Insurance 
Conference  of  Canada.  Few  industries  know  more  about  the  personal,  economic  and 
financial impacts of disasters – or “extreme events” as insurance experts like to call them. 
And few know more about risk management. 
Today  I  want  to  talk  about  both  topics  –  an  extreme  event  and  private  and  public  risk 
management in its wake. 
This morning you discussed earthquake insurance. Earthquakes, like other natural disasters 
–  tsunamis,  hurricanes  and  ice  storms  come  to  mind  –  are  entirely  exogenous,  extreme 
events  –  acts  of  God,  if  you  will.  They  are  not  preventable,  although  their  impact  can  be 
reduced by building resilience and by timely and effective disaster response. Your industry, 
of  course,  plays  a  vital  role  in  helping  households  and  businesses  to  mitigate  the 
consequences of natural disasters. 
Other extreme events are endogenous – or manmade. The recent financial crisis falls into 
this category. The crisis that began in August 2007 and exploded in the autumn of 2008 was 
self-inflicted. The financial system was fragile and it failed. We are still paying. We will be 
paying for many years to come. 
The  global  recession  that  followed  the  financial  crisis  was  the  deepest  since  the  Great 
Depression. And today, we are two years into what is shaping up to be the weakest recovery 
since  the  Great  Depression.  This  is  the  new  economic  and  financial  landscape  we  find 
ourselves in. And while it may be less than we desire, it should not be terribly surprising. 
The  lesson  from  history  is  that  the  recessions  that  follow  financial  crises  are  bigger  than 
normal recessions. On average, the loss in output in a recession after a financial crisis is two 
to  three  times  the  loss  in  a  normal  recession.  Output  falls  further  in  a  recession  after  a 
financial crisis. Normally, the deeper the recession, the sharper the recovery. Not so with the 
recoveries  after  financial  crises.  Recoveries  after  a  financial  crisis  are  slower.  Typically,  it 
takes output twice as long to return to its pre-recession level after a financial crisis than in a 
normal  recovery,  and  output  is  permanently  lower  compared  with  its  pre-crisis  growth 
trajectory. 
The essential reason for this is that the legacy of a financial crisis is a lot of debt, and paying 
down that debt acts as a dragging anchor on the economy that takes many years to break 
free  from.  If  we  had  forgotten  this  lesson  from history,  recent  economic  and  financial  data 
have provided a reminder that in a world awash with debt, repairing the balance sheets of 
banks, households and governments will take years. 
In Canada, we weathered the crisis better than most advanced economies. Our recession, 
while sharp, was shallower and shorter than many, and we have few internal impediments to 
recovery.  Our  banks  are  among  the  strongest  in  the  world,  and  we  have  the  best  fiscal 
situation  among  the  G-7.  Nonetheless,  an  anemic  U.S.  recovery,  as  well  as  a  persistently 
strong Canadian dollar and elevated global risks, are all weighing on growth here. 
This new, more modest global economic landscape has implications for a number of issues. I 
will  develop  three  of  these  under  the  headings  sovereign  risk,  shifting  economic  centre  of 
gravity, and low for long. I will then say a few words about private risk management in this 
new  landscape,  as  well  as  the  public  policy  priorities  that  are  necessary  to  sustain  the 
recovery and support financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Sovereign risk 
Let  me  start  with  sovereign  risk.  The  immediate  issue  is  Europe:  I  don’t  need  to  tell  this 
audience that the fiscal and financial strains in Europe are acute. 
Widening  sovereign  spreads  on  an  expanding  group  of  euro-area  country  bonds  are 
challenging  fiscal  sustainability  in  these  countries.  The  leading-edge  consequence  is  the 
buildup  of  funding  pressures  on  European  banks.  Most  have  seen  their  funding  costs  rise 
sharply, their access to financial markets curtailed and their equities trading at historic lows 
relative to the value of their assets. These challenges are compounded by the impossibility of 
currency adjustments within a monetary union. Without the option of devaluation, prolonged 
deflationary adjustments are required in countries that must restore competitiveness. 
While the situation in Europe is immediate, the need for agreed measures to restore fiscal 
sustainability  in  the  United  States  and  Japan  is  no  less  important.  Increasing  uncertainty 
about  the  ability  of  the  political  process  to  deliver  the  needed  adjustments  is  reflected  in 
recent sovereign downgrades. 
These fiscal challenges are manageable with political will and sound execution, but as long 
as large debts need to be refinanced, sovereigns will remain vulnerable to changes in global 
growth  and  investor  sentiment.  This  presents  a  fundamentally  new  landscape  in  which 
government debt can no longer be considered a risk-free asset in many advanced countries. 
Given the central role of government liabilities in the financial system, prolonged concerns 
over  sovereign  risk  could  have  profound  implications  for  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system. In particular, the role of government bonds as the benchmark against which a broad 
array of financial assets are priced is likely to be eroded. 
Shifting economic centre of gravity 
A second consequence of a weak recovery in advanced countries is an acceleration in the 
shift in the economic centre of gravity to emerging markets. This is not a new trend, but it has 
been turbocharged. 
The  growth  differential  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies  has  widened  sharply. 
Emerging-market economies now account for close to 80 per cent of global growth – up from 
just one-third at the start of the millennium. 
Improved  economic  management  in  emerging  markets  has  both  increased  their  potential 
growth and reduced their riskiness. And with most portfolios underweight in emerging-market 
exposure, increasing the allocation to emerging  markets has the potential to boost returns 
without taking on excessive risk. Of course, emerging-market economies do not represent a 
homogeneous asset class. They offer a higher range of both volatility and opportunity that 
investors must take into account. 
Large capital inflows and sudden outflows can present challenges for emerging markets and 
investors alike. In particular, there is a risk that large inflows could fuel asset-price bubbles. A 
reallocation  of  only  5  per  cent  of  advanced-economy  portfolios  to  emerging  markets 
translates into a potential flow of $1.6 trillion, or eight times the portfolio equity flows to all 
emerging markets. This is a considerable shock. 
The  robust  growth  in  emerging  economies  is  a  welcome  source  of  strength  for  the  global 
economy. With strong growth, however, comes the risk of overheating, followed by an abrupt 
correction.  For  investors,  the  exits  could  be  crowded.  These  are  risks  that  both  private 
investors and public authorities need to manage. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Low for long 
The last feature of this new economic landscape I wanted to address is low for long. 
With weak recoveries in the United States and Europe and a tentative hand-off from public 
stimulus  to  private  demand,  policy  interest  rates  can  be  reasonably  expected  to  remain 
below normal for some time to come. While providing needed stimulus, prolonged periods of 
unusually low rates could contribute to excessive risk taking. They can cloud assessments of 
financial risks, induce a search for yield and delay balance-sheet adjustments. 
Low  for  long  is  a  special  concern  for  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  with 
guaranteed returns or benefits. You made promises that you need to keep. And by reducing 
yields  on  assets  and  raising  the  net  present  value  of  liabilities,  a  sustained  period  of  low 
interest rates makes guarantees harder to fulfill. 
To address potential shortfalls, investors may move funds into riskier assets to pick up yield. 
In  the  first  half  of  2011,  we  saw  a  significant  expansion  in  a  variety  of  risky  exposures 
offering higher returns – and volatility – including assets such as high-yield bonds, leveraged 
loans,  emerging-market  equity  and  debt,  and  commodities.  The  signs  of  growing  risk 
tolerance in  financial  markets  were  evident  in data  on  issuance,  pricing  and  flow  across  a 
range of markets, and financial instruments with a riskier and more complex structure were 
returning. 
With  the  dramatic  fall-off  in  risk  appetite  in  recent  weeks,  investors  have  shifted  from  a 
search for yield to a search for safety. This has sent the prices of risky assets sharply lower 
and  safe-haven  assets  to  record  highs.  Indeed,  in  a  world  of  high  sovereign  debt,  weak 
growth and a low-for-long-induced search for yield, the impact of new information will tend to 
be magnified. For investors, this means contending with more volatility. 
In short, the legacy of the crisis is a treacherous economic landscape that puts a premium on 
private  sector  risk  management  and  public  sector  risk  mitigation.  Let  me  say  a  few  words 
about both. 
Strengthening private sector risk management 
For the long-term investor, a fundamental shift is required, from thinking about a return target 
to  considering  appetite  for  risk  and  measuring  and  managing  risk  to  the  desired  risk 
tolerance.  The  experience  of  the  crisis  provides  some  clear  lessons  for  risk  measurement 
and  management,  and  points  to  the  need  for  better  tools  for  risk  assessment,  better 
information  systems  and  information  sharing,  improved  governance  and  compensation 
practices, and better communication. 
To assess the risk of an extreme event like a major earthquake, insurance experts do not 
rely on short spans of data because there would be very few, if any, major earthquakes in the 
sample. Yet, financial risk managers routinely use tools such as value-at-risk models that use 
relatively short windows of recent data to assess the likelihood of financial loss. To measure 
financial  risk  accurately,  we  need  better  tools  that  capture  tail  events  and  mitigate 
procyclicality.  In  particular,  there  is  a  need  to  draw  on  longer  spans  of  data  and  to 
complement  standard  tools  with  other  methods,  such  as  stress  tests,  that  allow  risk 
managers to explore the implications of extreme events. 
Better  information  systems  will  help  firms  to  measure  risk  and  identify  vulnerabilities.  The 
financial crisis exposed the need to perform due diligence with respect to new products and 
instruments.  A  crucial  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  to  avoid  embedded  leverage,  which  is 
extremely  difficult  to  measure.  We must  be  able  to  measure  and  quantify  risks,  and  these 
risks need to be understood and considered across business lines. This means developing 
limits and controls that absorb the amount of risk that a firm can take and putting in place 
reliable enforcement mechanisms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Sound  governance  is  fundamental  to  ensuring  appropriate  investment  in  risk  management 
and  application  of  its  principles.  Boards  must  be  involved  in  establishing  levels  of  risk 
tolerance  and  overseeing  risk  management.  Directors  need  to  question  growth  rates  in 
businesses  and  assess  whether  controls  are  keeping  up  with  risks  and  if  the  business  is 
resilient to shocks. This requires board members with expertise in banking, insurance and 
risk management. 
Boards  also  play  an  important  role  in  ensuring  that  compensation  systems  are  part  of  an 
integrated risk-management strategy. Tying bonuses to short-term profits without adequate 
consideration  of  long-term  risk  is  a  recipe  for excessive  risk  taking.  The  Financial  Stability 
Board  has  developed  principles  for  compensation  practices  that  align  compensation  with 
prudent  risk  taking.  Implementation  must  be  system-wide  so  that  professionals  and  firms 
have a level playing field. 
Finally, financial firms, credit-rating agencies and financial advisers need to do a better job of 
communicating  the  suitability  of  products,  and  their  inherent  risks,  to  their  clients.  This 
requires  better  plain  language  disclosure.  It  also  requires  improved  financial  literacy  and 
improvements  in  consumer  protection.  This  is  a  shared  responsibility  of  the  private  and 
public  sectors  –  and  we  both  have  much  to  learn  about  which  methods  are  the  most 
effective. 
Public policy priorities 
Sound risk management makes the best of the situation at hand; mitigating risk improves the 
situation. And there is much public policy can do. 
While  the  lesson  from  history  is  that  recoveries  after  financial  crises  are  disappointingly 
gradual and bumpy, the future is not preordained. Public policy has a critical role to play in 
securing the recovery and promoting financial stability. 
There is no doubt that the timely and concerted actions of the G-20 countries in 2008–09 to 
inject considerable monetary and fiscal stimulus averted a much worse disaster. But, today, 
uncertainty  about  the  willingness  of  policy-makers  to  respond  has  become  part  of  the 
problem. This needs to change. 
European authorities must move decisively to contain their sovereign debt crisis. This starts 
with  delivering  on  fiscal  austerity  in  key  countries  and  full  implementation  of  announced 
measures  to  make  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  more  flexible.  But  more  is 
required. The immediate priorities are to provide a funding backstop for vulnerable European 
sovereigns  that  is  sized  to  the  scale  of  the  problem  and  a  comprehensive  capital  plan  for 
European  banks.  In  our  opinion,  this  can  be  done  by  using  existing  European  resources 
more  efficiently.  These  steps  must  be  complemented  by  governance  reforms  and  credible 
fiscal arrangements within the European monetary union. 
In  other  advanced  countries,  the  priority  must  be  to  agree  on  credible,  concrete  and 
executable plans to restore fiscal sustainability consistent with the commitments made at last 
year’s G-20 Leaders Summit in Toronto. 
In many emerging-market economies, greater exchange rate flexibility is necessary to better 
manage  demand  pressures  and  inflationary  risks,  while  facilitating  a  global  rebalancing  of 
demand. Greater exchange rate flexibility between the United States and China is required to 
help the recovery in the former and control inflation in the latter. 
Finally,  advanced  and  emerging  countries  alike  must  implement  agreed  financial  sector 
regulatory reforms to build a more resilient financial system that better serves the needs of 
households and businesses. 
In the face of a difficult external environment, the Bank of Canada will continue to support 
Canada’s economic expansion by keeping inflation low, stable and predictable. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Since  the  crisis  erupted  four  years  ago,  the  Bank  has  demonstrated  its  nimbleness  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy. We reacted quickly and forcefully during the downturn. As the 
Canadian  recovery  has  progressed,  we  have  emphasized  that  we  would  be  prudent  with 
respect to the possible withdrawal of any degree of monetary stimulus. 
Conclusion 
I must conclude. Recoveries after financial crises feel more like a convalescence. For private 
sector investors, the fundamentals of sound portfolio management have not changed, but the 
economic  landscape  has.  Sovereign  debt  is  no  longer  a  risk-free  asset,  the  shift  in  the 
economic centre of gravity to emerging-market economies has accelerated, and low-for-long 
interest  rates  are  changing  behaviours  and  straining  some  business  models.  The  private 
sector bears much responsibility for the excesses at the heart of the 2008–09 financial crisis. 
Risk management can and should be strengthened, and adapted to new realities. 
Public  policy  has  a  critical  role  to  play  in  mitigating  systemic  macroeconomic  risks.  More 
action  is  needed  to  contain  sovereign  risks,  promote  a  rebalancing  of  global  demand  and 
implement financial regulatory reform. 
The  distant  horizon  of  the  new  landscape  is  bright.  Getting  there  will  take  some  time,  but 
moving steadfastly in the right direction will get us there safely. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
