Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Economic 
Society of Australia (Queensland) 2011 Business Luncheon, Brisbane, 15 June 2011.  
 Thank you for the invitation to visit Brisbane today and to join with the Economic Society here 
in Queensland to talk about our economic situation.  
It is barely five months since the flooding that inundated parts of Brisbane and had such a 
tragic impact only a couple of hours west of here in Toowoomba and the Lockyer Valley. It is 
only four months since Cyclone Yasi wrought havoc on some northern coastal communities 
and  flattened  key  crops.  The  people  of  Brisbane,  and  of  Queensland,  have  shown  their 
resilience and adaptability in the face of these disasters.  
The  economic  effects  of  those  events,  and  of  the  Western  Australian  cyclones  over  the 
summer,  have  been  seen  at  the  national  level.  Falls  in  coal  and  iron  ore  production  more 
than  fully  explained  the  decline  in  measured  economic  output  in  the  March  quarter,  which 
occurred  not  because  demand  slumped  but  because  the  economy’s  capacity  to  supply 
output was temporarily curtailed. There was also a sharp rise in some prices, which tends to 
happen when supply is suddenly disrupted. Bananas are the most celebrated manifestation 
of this. With 75 per cent of the crop more or less destroyed, and few sources of alternative 
supply available, prices to the consumer have quadrupled.  
The effects of these natural disasters are now gradually abating. Information on coal mining 
suggests that it is gradually recovering, though more slowly than had been expected initially 
owing  to  the  difficulties  of  getting  water  out  of  the  pits.  Iron  ore  production  has  fully 
recovered. The banana plants are re-generating. Most other crops are also getting back to 
normal  supply  levels.  As  this  occurs,  we  should  see  the  impact  of  these  events  on  prices 
start to reverse. For Queensland, the scars from last summer’s events remain – and always 
will. The destruction of capital stock is a loss of wealth, but capital can ultimately be rebuilt; 
lives lost cannot.  
But despite the tragedy, Queenslanders are getting on with things.  
The  broader  context  in  which  these  events  have  occurred  is  well  known.  The  proverbial 
pet-shop galah can by now recite the facts on Australia’s trade with China and our terms of 
trade, which are at a level not seen in over a century. It was already clear by about 2006 that 
something quite profound was happening in the continuing rapid growth of China, India and 
other emerging countries.1 This upward trajectory continued, and even accelerated in some 
cases, in the subsequent period. Then the crisis occurred, and the Chinese economy slowed 
abruptly.  But  the  authorities  responded  forcefully  and  China’s  economy  returned  to  very 
strong growth quite quickly. And so the trends in place up to the middle of 2008 had resumed 
within a year.  
The rapid growth in Chinese, Indian and other emerging world demand has been stimulating 
demand  in  the  global  economy,  despite  the  weakness in demand  from  the  “north  Atlantic” 
group of countries. This gives a boost to a country like Australia: our economy’s increased 
exposure to Asia – the part of the world where much of the growth is occurring – plus the 
high terms of trade make for an expansionary macroeconomic event. At present Australia’s 
                                                 
1  At that time, my predecessor noted that structural factors such as the industrialisation of China had led to “the 
largest  cumulative  increase  in  our  terms  of  trade  since  the  early  1970s”.  See  Macfarlane  IJ,  “Opening 
Statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public 
Administration”, Canberra, 17 February 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
terms  of  trade  are  about  85  per  cent  above  their  20th  century  average.  The  amount  of 
additional  income  accruing  to  production  in  Australia  from  that  is  15  per  cent  or  more  of 
annual GDP. Even allowing for the fact that a substantial fraction of this income accrues to 
foreign  investors  that  own  large  stakes  in  many  of  Australia’s  resources  companies,  this 
represents a very large boost to national income.  
These expansionary forces are at work on an Australian economy that was widely regarded 
as  very  fully  employed  by  early  2008,  and  that  experienced  only  a  fairly  mild  and  short 
downturn thereafter. As of today, measures of capacity utilisation are not as high as at the 
end  of  2007,  and  unemployment  is  not  as  low  as  it  was  then.  Nonetheless, the degree  of 
slack in the economy overall does not seem large in comparison with the apparent size of the 
expansion in resources sector income and investment now under way.  
With that general outlook, it follows that macroeconomic policies must be configured in the 
expectation that there will need to be some degree of restraint. Monetary policy has already 
been  exerting  some  restraint  for  a  while.  Looking  ahead,  our  most  recent  analysis  (as 
published in early May) concluded that the underlying rate of inflation is more likely to rise 
than  fall  over  the  next  couple  of  years.  This  central  expectation  –  subject  to  all  the  usual 
uncertainties  inherent  in  forecasting  –  suggests,  as  we  said  at  the  time,  that  “further 
tightening  of  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  be  required  at  some  point  for  inflation  to  remain 
consistent  with  the  2–3  per  cent  medium-term  target”.  It  remains,  though,  a  matter  for 
judgement  by  the  Board  as  to  whether  that  point  has  been  reached.  At  its  most  recent 
meeting,  the  Board’s  view  was  that  it  had  not  been.  New  information  will,  as  always,  be 
important in our monthly assessments of what monetary policy needs to do. As far as prices 
are concerned, we will get another comprehensive round of data in late July.  
Fiscal policy is also playing a significant role. The “fiscal impact”, calculated as the shift in the 
Federal budget position from one year to the next, is forecast to be minus 2 per cent of GDP 
in the 2011/12 fiscal year. A further, though slightly smaller, effect is forecast by the Treasury 
in the following year.  
There  remain,  of  course,  differences  in  economic  performance  around  the  country.  Given 
movements in commodity prices over the past year and the stated investment intentions of 
major  resources  companies,  these  differences  are  more  likely  to  increase  than  decrease 
over the coming period. More generally, while everyone understands that there is a “mining 
boom”,  many  people  would  say  that  they  themselves  cannot  directly  feel  the  effects.  We 
have  seen  widespread  re-emergence  of  talk  of  “two  speed”  or  “multi  speed”  economies. 
Within the state of Queensland itself there were differences in performance, even before the 
floods, let alone after them.  
How then do we make sense of these phenomena?  
It is a complex story, and I do not wish to make light of any of the legitimate concerns that 
people have about the differing economic conditions – actual and potential – across regions 
or industries. But there are three observations worth making.  
The  first  is  that  the  impact  of  the  resources  sector  expansion  does  get  spread  around,  in 
more  ways  than  might  immediately  be  apparent.  Obviously  mining  employs  only  a  small 
share  of  the  workforce  directly  –  less  than  2 per cent.  But  to  produce  a  dollar  of  revenue, 
companies spend about 40 cents on acquiring non labour intermediate inputs, primarily from 
the  domestic  sector.  Apart  from  the  direct  physical  inputs,  there  are  effects  on  utilities, 
transport,  business  services  such  as  engineering,  accounting,  legal,  exploration  and  other 
industries. It is noteworthy that a number of these areas are growing quickly at present.  
Once the costs of producing the output and other factors – such as taxes – are taken into 
account, the remaining revenue is distributed to shareholders or retained. While a significant 
proportion of the earnings distributed goes offshore, local shareholders also benefit. In fact, 
through  our  superannuation  
most  of  us  are  shareholders 
the  mining 
industry 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
schemes.2  We  don’t  get  this  income  directly  to  spend  now  –  it  is  in  our  superannuation. 
Nonetheless, it is genuine income and a genuine increase in wealth.  
A good proportion of the earnings retained by companies is used to fund a further build up of 
physical investment, which imparts demand to construction and manufacturing. Based on the 
industry liaison the Bank has done, around half – give or take – of the demand generated by 
these projects is typically filled locally, though, of course, this amount varies with the nature 
and details of any specific project.  
So there are effects that spill over, even though it is not always easy to spot them. In the end 
the  combination  of  the  resources  sector  strength  and  all  the  other  factors  at  work  in  the 
economy has, to date, produced a national rate of unemployment of around 5 per cent, and 
in  Queensland  only  a  bit  over  5  per  cent.  There  are  regional  variations  in  unemployment 
rates, but at this point these look comparable to what has been seen at most times in the 
past 10 years – a period that has seen both lower average unemployment rates and lower 
variation in unemployment rates than the preceding decade.  
Secondly, some of the undoubted differences in performance observable at present look like 
the inverse of earlier differences. Take housing prices and population growth, which are of 
course quite closely related. It surely is no coincidence that the two state capitals that have 
had the clearest evidence of declining house prices over the past couple of years – Brisbane 
and Perth – are the two that previously had the highest rate of population growth and that 
have  since  had  the  biggest  decline  in  population  growth.  Moreover,  it  is  hard  to  avoid  the 
conclusion that changes in relative housing costs between states, while certainly not the only 
factor  at  work,  have  played  an  important  role.  Relative  costs  are  affected  by  interstate 
population flows, but those costs then in turn have a feed-back effect on population flows. 
This is particularly so for Queensland.  
Historically, Queensland has had faster population growth than the southern states, as it has 
seen a slightly higher natural increase, a rate of net international migration on par with other 
states and a very substantial net positive flow of interstate migrants. Net interstate migration 
to Queensland peaked around 2003 – not long after Sydney dwelling prices had reached a 
new  high  relative  to  other  cities.  Interstate  migration  at  that  time  was  contributing  a  full 
percentage point a year to Queensland’s population growth. By 2008 this flow had slowed a 
bit, but international migration had picked up and Queensland’s population growth increased, 
peaking  at  nearly  3  per  cent.  Western  Australia’s  population  growth  was  even  higher, 
peaking at almost 3½ per cent.  
Meanwhile,  at  least  up  to  2007,  people  were  confident  and  finance  was  readily  available. 
Brisbane housing prices, which had been a bit over half of the average level of Sydney and 
Melbourne prices in 2002, had risen to be almost the same by 2008, which was unusually 
high.  
The rate of interstate migration to Queensland then slowed further, to be at its lowest in at 
least a decade. The effects of that on state population growth were compounded by a decline 
in  international  migration,  something  seen  in  all  states.  At the  same  time,  finance  became 
more  difficult  to  obtain  and  lenders  and  borrowers  alike  became  more  risk  averse.  This 
happened everywhere, but its effects in Queensland seem to have been more pronounced. 
Since  then,  Brisbane  housing  prices  have  been  declining  relative  to  those  in  the  southern 
capitals and the construction sector here has found it tough going.  
                                                 
2 
If  the  allocation  of  super  funds’  equity  assets  to  resources  companies  is  broadly  similar  to  that  of  the 
Australian share market, then around 10 per cent – or $130 billion – of Australians’ superannuation assets are 
invested in resources companies. And this 10 per cent has been providing a healthy return; over the past year 
alone, the average return on resources company stocks has been around 20 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
So  a  complex  interaction  of  forces  –  the  commodity  price  cycle,  the  financial  cycle, 
population flows, endogenous responses of housing prices that then feed back to population 
flows  and  so  on  –  has  been  occurring.  The  ebb  and  flow  of  these  forces  has  made  for 
differences in performance, first in one direction, then the other.  
Thirdly, the industry make-up of our economy is continually changing. While this is often a 
slow process – almost imperceptible in most years – these shifts have been significant over 
time. There is little doubt that trade-exposed manufacturing firms not linked to the resources 
sector are facing tough conditions at present. But many people might be surprised to learn 
that the peak in manufacturing’s share of Australia’s GDP was in the late 1950s – more than 
five decades ago. Its fastest rate of relative decline, so far, was probably in the second half of 
the 1970s. On the other hand “business services” – including things such as accountancy, 
legal  and  numerous  other  services  –  have  grown  fairly  steadily  and  now  are  credited  with 
more  than  twice  the  share  of  GDP  of  manufacturing.3  Several  of  these  sectors  are  being 
boosted by the flow-on effects of the resources boom at present.  
As  for  the  mining  sector  itself,  its  share  of  GDP  has  tended  to  rise  since  the  late  1960s, 
having been quite low in the mid 20th century. But in 2010, the mining sector’s share of GDP 
was still only about the same as it was in 1910. It will surely increase noticeably over the next 
five years, though will remain much smaller than it was in the gold rush era.  
Again,  none  of  this  is  to  deny  that  there  are  differences  in  performance  by  industry  and 
region. It is simply to give some perspective on what we see.  
The point about long term shifts reminds us to look beyond the immediate conjuncture, and 
to think about the magnitude of the event through which we are living. For a good part of the 
change in our terms of trade is a manifestation of a large and persistent  change in global 
relative prices. Let me be clear here: there is a cyclical dimension to the China story, and it is 
important  that  we  remember  that.  But  there  is  also  a  structural  dimension.  And  the 
associated change in relative prices constitutes a force for significant structural change in the 
economy. I think we have all only begun to grasp its implications relatively recently.  
For a long time, the world price of foodstuffs and raw materials tended to decline relative to 
the prices of manufactures, services and assets. But for some years now the prices of things 
that are grown, dug up or otherwise extracted have been rising relative to those other prices. 
This is mainly due to trends in global demand. At any point in time for a particular product we 
can appeal to supply-side issues – a drought, a flood or a mine or well closure, or some geo 
political event that is seen as pushing up prices. But stepping back, the main supply problem 
is really that there has simply been more demand than suppliers were prepared or able to 
meet at the old prices.  
We  do  not  have  to  look  far  for  the  cause:  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  in  the  emerging 
world have seen growth in their incomes and associated changes in their living standards, 
and they want to live much more like we have been living for decades. This means they are 
moving towards a more energy- and steel-intensive way of life and a more protein-rich diet. 
That fact is fundamentally changing the shape of the world economy. Even if China’s growth 
rate moderates this year, as it seems to be doing, these structural forces almost certainly will 
continue.  
It is worth noting in this connection that many commentators have for years been calling on 
policymakers in the emerging world to adopt growth strategies that rely more on domestic 
demand and less on exports to major countries. This is happening. It carries the implication 
                                                 
3  We define “business services” as those where the end user is more often a business than a household. The 
category  encompasses  the  following  sectors:  Information,  Media  and  Telecommunications;  Financial  and 
Insurance Services; Rental, Hiring and Real Estate Services; Professional, Scientific and Technical Services; 
and Administrative and Support Services. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
though that, first, more of the marginal global spending dollar is going to products that are 
steel-, energy- and protein-intensive for the emerging world’s consumers and less on other 
things like, say, luxury property in western countries.  
Secondly,  more  of  the  marginal  production  of  the  world  economy  has  to  be  in  those  raw 
material  intensive  products  –  and  in  the  raw  materials  themselves  –  and  less  in  the 
production of the other things. Ultimately there will be enough steel, energy, food and so on 
to meet demand – supply is responding. But considerable adjustment is needed to get there 
(and Australia is a very prominent part of that adjustment).  
The  average  consumer  in  an  advanced  economy  is  effectively  experiencing  a  decline  in 
purchasing  power  over  food,  energy,  and  raw  material-intensive  manufactures.  Australian 
consumers face this to some extent as well. Were Australia not a producer of raw materials, 
we  would  be  experiencing  a  good  deal  more  of  it.  In  such  a  world,  there  would  be  no 
resources sector build up. Our currency would be much lower. We would be paying much 
more  for  petrol  at  the  pump,  for  our  daily  coffee  and  for  a  wide  range  of  other  consumer 
products. We would not be holidaying overseas in our current numbers.  
We would have more of some other forms of economic activity that we currently have less of 
–  we  would,  perhaps,  be  less  of  a  “multi  speed”  economy.  But  it’s  unlikely  our  economy 
overall  would  be  stronger.  As  it  is,  the  rate  of  unemployment  has  seldom,  in  the  past  few 
decades, been much lower than it has been recently. Moreover, in that alternative world the 
real income of Australians in aggregate would be a good deal smaller.  
But Australia is a resource producer, so we have the advantage of being able to take part in 
the  additional  supply  of  things  that  are  in  strong  demand.  This  helps  our  incomes.  Mining 
companies are doing their best to capitalise on the increase in demand, and the effects of 
this  will  flow  through  the  economy,  but  other  producers  are  also  enjoying  a  boost  to  their 
income. Rises in the global prices of rural commodities over the past couple of years have 
been  sufficient  to  deliver  higher  prices  to  most  farmers  despite  the  appreciation  of  the 
Australian dollar.  
As consumers, the rise in our currency means that we take some of that higher income in the 
form of greater command over tradeable goods and services. The foreign exchange market 
being  what  it  is  –  namely  an  asset  market  –  it  has  looked  a  long  way  forward  into  the 
resources boom and pushed up the currency quite quickly. This is having significant effects. 
While consumers do seem to be continuing their more cautious mindset overall, many seem 
over  the  past  year  to  have  had  the  confidence  to  leave  the  country  to  experience  foreign 
travel at prices more attractive than any seen for a long time. Australia’s tourism sector is 
feeling the resultant loss of business, particularly in Queensland where the floods also had a 
separate  impact  on  confidence.  That  latter  effect  will  pass  –  Queensland’s  set  of  natural 
endowments  that  attract  tourists  remains  in  place.  But  the  need  to  adapt  to  the  high 
exchange rate may continue.  
For as well as conveying a rise in purchasing power to consumers, the high exchange rate is 
exerting a powerful force for structural change. I think we are seeing this in the retail sector. 
The  rapid  growth  of  internet  commerce  –  from  a  very  small  base  –  has  been  the  topic  of 
considerable  discussion.  This  was  bound  to  happen  anyway  with  technology.  But  with  the 
higher Australian dollar, the component of the retail “product” that is added in Australia – the 
local  distribution  and 
the  
retail “experience” – has become both much more visible, and much higher  relative to the 
production cost of the good itself. So the incentive for the consumer to avoid those overhead 
costs has increased quite noticeably. The retail sector is therefore under pressure to reduce 
those costs.  
These are just some of the structural adjustment forces at work. Of course it is easy to talk 
about structural change in the abstract. It is another thing to cope with it in practice. There 
are no magic-pill solutions, nor are there any real alternatives to adjustment. What solutions 
retailing  overheads 
to  provide 
that  are 
required 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
there  are,  though,  are  likely  to  involve  a  re-focusing  on  productivity  performance  after  a 
period in which, at least at a national level, our productivity growth has been disappointing.  
Yet, as I have said before, this is a much better problem to have than those we see in many 
advanced countries. The event to which we have to adjust is inherently income-increasing for 
Australia. Moreover, we do not carry the legacies of the past several years in our banks’ or 
public sector balance sheets that are such an impediment in other places.  
Conclusion 
Queenslanders  have  shown  their  resilience  and  adaptability  this  year  in  the  face  of 
extraordinary  events.  People  from  elsewhere  in  Australia  have  nothing  but  admiration  for 
you.  
Resilience and adaptability are among the characteristics we will all need in order to cope 
with a global environment that is growing more complex rather than less, and that presents 
both  economic  challenges  and  opportunities  greater  than  those  we  have  seen  for  many 
years.  
The  task  for  the  economics  profession  –  all  of  us  here  today  and  in  like  gatherings  and 
institutions around the country – is to do our part in trying to understand these challenges 
and opportunities, to explain them to our communities, and to articulate the responses that 
are most likely to see our country prosper.  
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
