William C Dudley: Regional economy and current trends in regional 
employment 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York, 
6 May 2011. 
 Good morning and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Quarterly Regional Economic 
Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our 
region – and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will discuss national 
and  regional  economic  conditions,  with  particular  attention  to  employment  trends  in  the 
Second  Federal  Reserve  District,  which  covers  New  York;  northern  New  Jersey;  Fairfield 
County,  Connecticut;  Puerto  Rico;  and  the  U.S.  Virgin  Islands.  I  will  not  comment  on  the 
outlook for monetary policy today but instead will focus on the economy itself. Following my 
remarks, my colleagues will provide more detail. As always, what I have to say reflects my 
own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the 
Federal Reserve System.  
National economic conditions 
I’ll  begin  by  commenting  on  national  economic  conditions.  Since  the  recession  ended  in 
2009, the economy has grown at a modest pace. When we met in February, the brisker pace 
of growth in the last quarter of 2010 appeared to be carrying over to the beginning of this 
year. 
Since  then  growth  has  been  somewhat  softer  than  anticipated,  with  real  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP)  increasing  at  only  a  1.8  percent  annual  rate  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011.  A 
number of factors contributed to the slowdown. Construction activity fell – likely reflecting the 
continued large supply of unsold homes – and government expenditures at the federal, state 
and local levels declined. 
In addition, real, or inflation-adjusted, consumption growth in the first quarter was slower than 
in the last quarter of 2010. This occurred, in part, because of the rise in gasoline and food 
prices  that  pushed  up  consumer  price  inflation  last  quarter  and  reduced  discretionary 
income. The rise in energy prices contributed to a fall in consumer confidence, which also 
may  have  had  a  negative  impact  on  consumer  spending.  However,  the  weakness  of  real 
GDP growth in the first quarter probably will prove temporary. In particular, production and 
business survey indicators, including the New York Fed’s own Empire State Manufacturing 
Survey, generally continue to signal strength. And financial conditions continue to improve. 
The  temporary  reduction  in  payroll  taxes  and  other  fiscal  measures  also  are  providing 
support  to  demand.  In  addition,  demand  abroad  –  particularly  in  Asia  –  remains  robust, 
supporting our exports. 
Most  importantly,  the  labor  market  has  shown  further  improvement,  as  demonstrated  by 
today’s employment report. Although payroll employment growth has been subdued during 
most of this recovery, the latest figures show the economy added 244,000 jobs in April – and 
an average of 233,000 over each of the past three months. While the unemployment rate – 
which is based on a different survey – ticked higher last month to 9 per cent it is nonetheless 
0.8  percentage  points  lower  than  it  was  in  November,  a  relatively  rapid  decline  by  historic 
standards.  Private-sector  job  growth  has  been  strong  enough  to  more  than  offset 
government layoffs, particularly at the state and local level. A particularly encouraging sign is 
the rapid growth of manufacturing jobs over the past year and the recent broadening strength 
in services employment. While the exact pace of a jobs market recovery is always hard to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
predict,  we  were  expecting  the  rate  of  job  growth  to  pick  up  over  the  first  half,  and  I  am 
hopeful that job growth will continue to strengthen in the coming months. We would welcome 
this. Even if the economy added 300,000 jobs per month from now on, we would likely still 
have considerable labor market slack at the end of 2012. 
Despite these clearly encouraging signs, there are still some downside risks to the growth 
outlook that bear watching. Let me list them for you: 
 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  high  oil  and  commodity  prices  have  cut  into  household 
purchasing power, a difficult situation for many families that could constrain overall 
spending more than I anticipate.  
The renewed decline in home prices could dampen consumer spending and housing 
activity more than I expect.  
Finally, aggressive near-term government spending cuts or tax increases could slow 
economic growth at least in the short- to medium-term – although a credible plan for 
medium-term fiscal consolidation is sorely required and would have many economic 
benefits. 
  That said, I want to emphasize that these are risks rather than likely outcomes. In regard to 
inflation,  on  a  year-over-year  basis,  the  headline  measures  have  increased  to  levels  near 
those  consistent  with  our  objectives  –  which  most  members  of  the  FOMC  consider  to  be 
2 percent  or  a  bit  less  on  the  personal  consumption  expenditures  measure.  Moreover,  the 
rise  in  commodity  prices  over  the  past  year  probably  will  push  up  headline  inflation  even 
further in coming months. It is noteworthy, however, that even with the sharp rise in oil and 
food prices, there has been little pass-through into broader measures of prices. In fact, most 
measures of underlying inflation trends – such as core inflation (which excludes volatile food 
and energy prices) – remain below levels consistent with our mandate. 
Going forward, futures markets do not signal that investors expect rapid ongoing increases in 
commodity  prices  from  current  levels.  Provided  these  prices  stabilize  (or  indeed  retreat),  I 
would  expect  headline  inflation  to  move  back  to  a  mandate-consistent  rate.  While  this 
process  plays  out,  however,  it  is  critical  that  we  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  do  not 
become unmoored. It is much harder to keep inflation in check if people begin to raise their 
expectations  of  inflation.  At  this  point,  measures  of  inflation  expectations  overall  remain 
stable.  Economists  at  the  New  York  Fed  have  examined  inflation  expectations  using  a 
unique  survey  that  we  sponsor.  As  reported  in  a  recent  post  on  our  new  Liberty  Street 
Economics blog, they find no evidence to suggest that a wage-price inflation spiral is getting 
underway. However, we will continue to monitor expectations for medium-term inflation very 
closely. 
To sum up, economic conditions have improved in the past year. Yet, the recovery remains 
moderate and we still have a considerable way to go to meet the Fed’s dual mandate of full 
employment and price stability.  
Regional economic conditions 
Now, how is our region doing? As attendees at previous press briefings may recall, the New 
York  Fed  produces  Indexes  of  Coincident  Economic  Indicators  to  help  monitor  the 
performance of the region. 
I  am  pleased  to  report  that  the  latest  months  of  data  no  longer  suggest  that  the  regional 
recovery has paused, as they indicated in February. Based on these measures: 
 
The recovery of activity in New York State and New York City continues at a steady 
and sustained pace.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 In New Jersey, activity also has begun to increase following a long period – roughly 
a year – where activity in the state was essentially flat. 
We monitor Puerto Rico using an index produced by the Government Development Bank of 
Puerto Rico. The index shows that the decline in activity on the island began in 2005 and 
continued through late 2010. However, there are some signs that the economy has stabilized 
in recent months.  
Regional employment trends 
Now,  let  me  turn  specifically  to  employment  trends  in  the  region,  the  focus  of  our  briefing 
today. In particular, we want to describe our region’s experience during the recession and 
recovery. 
Nationally,  the  Great  Recession,  which  began  in  December  2007,  has  been  the  deepest 
economic  downturn  since  World  War  II.  At  the  jobs  trough  in  February  2010  –  about 
7 months after the official end of the recession – the country had lost almost 6.5 percent of its 
jobs and the unemployment rate had more than doubled. Many people lost their jobs or saw 
their hours or income cut, and the duration of unemployment for jobless workers reached a 
historical high. For many families, this distress was compounded by losses of wealth from 
declining home prices and stock market losses. Since the  jobs trough, unemployment has 
retreated by a percentage point and jobs growth has resumed, albeit at a slow pace. Today, 
we will review questions about jobs in our region such as: How severe was the downturn? 
Where are jobs returning? And, what factors affect the employment outlook? 
As in other parts of the country, employment in our region declined substantially during the 
recession. But, New York and New Jersey and Puerto Rico had very different experiences. 
Employment  in  much  of  New  York  State,  including  New  York  City,  declined  less  severely 
than the nation. Both the state and city lost about 3.8 percent of their jobs. As we discussed 
at our briefing last October, part of reason for the more moderate decline in jobs in New York 
during  the  recession  was  a  less  pronounced  boom-bust  housing  cycle.  Indeed,  as  a 
percentage, the city and state lost fewer jobs during this recession than they did during either 
of the last two downturns. 
By  contrast,  the  downturn  in  employment  in  New  Jersey  in  the  current  cycle  was  more 
severe.  About  250,000  jobs  were  lost,  or  roughly  6.0  percent  of  total  state  employment  – 
about the same as in the country as a whole. This decline is comparable to the job losses 
during the most severe recent recession in the state, that of 1989–1992. 
Fairfield  County  in  Connecticut,  also  part  of  our  District,  saw  declines  comparable  to  the 
nation, while Puerto Rico experienced much deeper and longer job declines than the nation. 
In fact, employment in Puerto Rico began declining nearly two years before the onset of the 
recession on the mainland.  
Now, as in the nation, a labor market recovery has begun across much of the region. Over 
the  past  year,  the  tri-state  region  added  roughly  100,000  private-sector  jobs.  Within  the 
region,  however,  the  recovery  has  been  somewhat  uneven.  New  York  City,  upstate  New 
York and Fairfield County have been gaining jobs for more than a year now – at roughly the 
same pace as the nation. 
However, employment in New Jersey has only begun to expand during the past few months. 
In Puerto Rico, job growth has yet to be firmly established. The recession, which began in 
2005, has seen employment leveling off since last summer, but no clear reestablishment of 
growth. 
Businesses in a variety of services sectors have contributed to the recovery of jobs in the 
region, including professional and business services, education and health, and leisure and 
hospitality, as well as finance. The overall expansion of our private sector is being partially 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
offset by ongoing losses in manufacturing and construction, where firms in our region are not 
matching the modest growth seen in jobs at the national level. In addition, state and local 
government jobs in our district have declined sharply. After holding steady for much of the 
recession,  state  and  local  governments  in  New  York  and  New  Jersey  have  reduced  job 
counts by more than 40,000. These losses effectively offset about half of the private-sector 
jobs created over the period. The government job declines were particularly severe in New 
Jersey and Puerto Rico, and considerably steeper than in the United States overall. 
Looking  ahead,  the  continued  expansion  of  employment  at  the  national  level  should  have 
positive effects on many industries in our region. As elsewhere, state and local government 
will likely be a drag for some time. However, some new detailed job listing data point to an 
expansion of job openings in a number of key occupations in the region. 
the  region, 
Finally,  despite 
unemployment  rates  remain  very  high.  Although  down  from  their  year-ago  levels,  March’s 
unemployment rate of 8.0 percent in New York State and 9.3 percent in New Jersey remain 
unacceptably high. And there is disappointingly little evidence of any sustained improvement 
in Puerto Rico’s 16.1 percent unemployment rate.  
the  overall  recovery  of  employment  across  much  of 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the national economy experienced a soft patch in activity during the first quarter 
of  2011,  while  the  recovery  in  much  of  the  region  continued  at  a  good  pace.  New  York 
continued to expand and New Jersey has shown signs of turning the corner in the last two 
months. Puerto Rico may have bottomed out. 
During  the  Great  Recession,  most  of  New  York  sustained  less  severe  job  losses  than  the 
nation as whole. By contrast, New Jersey’s losses were comparable to the rest of the country 
and Puerto Rico’s job losses have been more severe. As the recovery takes shape, private 
services are the most likely source of job growth throughout the region. 
There are many reasons to believe conditions are in place for stronger growth in the coming 
months  in  the  nation  and  the  region.  Nevertheless,  both  nationally  and  regionally, 
unemployment remains stubbornly high and is likely to remain so for many months to come. 
Thank  you  for  your  kind  attention.  I  will  now  ask  James  Orr  to  provide  more  details  on 
regional economic conditions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
