Mark Carney: Canada’s new polymer bank notes – celebrating Canada’s 
achievements at the frontiers of innovation 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the presentation of new 
polymer bank notes, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 20 June 2011. 
 I am very proud to represent the Bank at this historic unveiling of a new generation of bank 
notes. 
Secure, durable and innovative, these new notes are at the frontier of bank note technology. 
They  will  set  a  benchmark  worldwide  and  will  help  maintain  the  confidence  Canadians 
already have in their currency. 
Designing and issuing bank notes that you can trust is an important element of the Bank’s 
mandate to promote the economic and financial welfare of our country. 
This  new  series  of  bank  notes  combines  innovative  technology  and  Canadian  ingenuity. 
They were developed by a team of physicists, chemists, engineers and other experts from 
the Bank of Canada and from across the bank note industry. 
This work was borne out of necessity. Beginning in 2001, counterfeiting in Canada increased 
dramatically, to levels that were very high by Canadian and international standards. By 2004, 
counterfeiting was at a historic peak of 470 counterfeit notes detected per one million notes 
in circulation. 
The  Bank  responded  with  an  aggressive  strategy  to  deter  counterfeiting,  which  included 
training  retailers  to  recognize  genuine  notes,  working  with  law  enforcement  to  catch  and 
prosecute criminals, and improving the quality of those notes in circulation. We succeeded. 
Today there are only 35 counterfeit notes detected per million notes – a more than ten-fold 
reduction. 
Of course, even one counterfeit note is one too many! That is why the Bank is continuing to 
work closely with our partners in law enforcement and that is why we are investing heavily in 
new technology to stay ahead of counterfeiting threats. 
And  we  are.  The  polymer  notes  we  are  introducing  today  are  unique.  There  is  simply  no 
other  currency  like  it.  These  new  notes  combine  transparency,  holography  and  other 
sophisticated security elements. 
These new bills are not only more secure; they are also more cost effective. 
In addition, we have independently verified that the environmental footprint of polymer notes 
will be smaller than that of currency made from cotton-based bank note paper. The new bills 
will  last  at  least  2.5  times  longer  than  cotton-based  bank  note  paper  bills,  and  after  being 
removed  from  circulation,  for  the  first  time  in  Canada,  they  will  be  recycled  into  other 
products. 
Safer, cheaper, and greener: these new bank notes are a 21st century achievement in which 
all Canadians can take pride and place their confidence. 
We have heard how these new bank notes will explore the frontiers of Canadian history and 
innovation, all while being at the frontier of bank note security. The product of leading-edge 
technology, these notes will be among the most secure in the world. 
These polymer bills will last at least two-and-a half times longer than the current cotton-paper 
bills  now  in  circulation,  thereby  costing  less  to  produce  and  leaving  a  smaller  ecological 
footprint: in every way, this is better money. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We  will  be  phasing  in  these  new  bills,  working  closely  with  financial  institutions  and 
manufacturers  of  bank  note  equipment  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition from  cotton-paper  to 
polymer. 
There are many important partners in this process. We will be working with law enforcement 
agencies, as well as retailers. 
Today, we unveil the new $100 and $50 notes so that Canadians can start to learn about the 
new features and appearances of each denomination. 
Starting  in  November  2011,  the  $100  bill  will  be  available  and  the  $50  notes  will  follow  in 
March 2012. 
The $20, $10, and $5 notes will be unveiled and issued by the end of 2013. 
So after telling you about the new money, the time has come to show it to you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
