Narayana Kocherlakota: Central bank independence and sovereign 
default 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  Sovereign  Debt  Seminar,  CME  Group-MSRI  Prize  in  Innovative 
Quantitative Applications, Chicago, Illinois, 26 September 2011. 
 These  remarks  are  highly  similar  to  those  I  gave  on  April  1,  2011,  in  Philadelphia.  I  thank  Marco  Bassetto, 
V. V. Chari, Ron Feldman, Futoshi Narita and Juan-Pablo Nicolini for their comments. The views I express here 
today are my own, and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the 
Federal Open Market Committee. 
Sargent and Wallace published their classic “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic” in the 
Minneapolis  Fed’s  Quarterly  Review  in  1981.  Since  that  date,  there  has  been  a  growing 
appreciation of the role of fiscal policy in the determination of the price level. The idea is a 
simple one. Consider a government that borrows only using non-indexed debt denominated 
in its own currency. There is an intertemporal government budget constraint that implies that 
the current real value of government liabilities – including the monetary base – must equal 
the  present  value  of  future  real  surpluses.  Because  the  liabilities  are  nominal  and  non-
indexed,  the  government  budget  constraint  provides  a  linkage  between  the  public’s 
assessment  of  future  real  tax  collections  and  government  spending  and  the  current  price 
level.  
I like John Cochrane’s analogy here.1 He thinks of money and government bonds as being 
like stock in a company. Just like a firm’s stock, money and bonds implicitly represent claims 
to the ownership of the government’s stream of surpluses. And just like with financial assets, 
the variations in their prices are fundamentally linked to variations in the present discounted 
value of government profits – that is, surpluses.2 
This  simple  insight  has  rather  profound  consequences  for  how  we  think  about  inflation. 
Inflation  is  no  longer  “always  and  everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon.”  Instead,  even 
apparently  independent  central  banks  may  not  have  control  of  the  price  level.  Thus,  if  the 
public begins to think that the fiscal authority is behaving irresponsibly, that belief will push 
upward on the price level.  
However, in the existing literature, the analysis of fiscal effects on the price level is typically 
based on the presumption that a fiscal authority will never default on liabilities denominated 
in its own currency. In my remarks today, I will relax this assumption. Once I do so, it will 
become clear that a sufficiently tough central bank does have the ability to control the price 
level, regardless of the behavior of the fiscal authority.3 I will argue that its ability to do so 
hinges  on  the  nature  of  its  response  to  the  possibility  of  default  on  the  part  of  the  fiscal 
authority.  I  will  talk  about  some  of  the  short-run  versus  long-run  tensions  involved  in  that 
response. Throughout, I will refer to the central bank as CB and the fiscal authority as FA. I 
will refer to the currency as being dollars, but that should not be viewed as suggesting that I 
am talking about the United States – or Australia.  
                                                 
1  See Cochrane (2005). 
2  The  present-discounted-value  formula  for  stock  price  evaluation  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  stock 
price does not have a bubble component. In the same way, the intertemporal government budget constraint 
relies on the assumption that the price of neither money nor bonds has a bubble component. This assumption 
is violated in a wide class of models of money. 
3  See Bassetto (2008) for a related analysis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let me start by describing a simple CB policy: a commodity price peg. Suppose the central 
bank holds X ounces of gold. It commits to being willing to buy and sell p dollars for each 
ounce of gold and has a monetary base of $pX. This policy successfully ties the price level to 
variations in the price of gold, regardless of the behavior of the FA.  
What  impact  does  this policy  have  on  the  FA?  Now,  when  the  FA  borrows  in  dollars,  it  is 
essentially borrowing in a real commodity: gold. All of the FA’s debt is essentially indexed to 
the  price  of  gold,  and  it  is  certainly  conceivable  that  various  shocks  could  lead  the  FA  to 
default on those obligations.4 
Of course, as I have argued elsewhere, this simple policy is generally viewed as suboptimal 
by  macroeconomists.5  In  contrast,  suppose  that  the  CB  follows  an  aggressive  Taylor  rule 
when determining the path of the short-term interest rate.6 That policy pins down an inflation 
path in the usual way, regardless of the FA’s fiscal plans.7 However, given that inflation path, 
the  FA’s  nominal  debt  is  now  actually  real.  This  means  that  if  the  FA  is  faced  with  an 
unexpected  decline  in  its  current  and  expected  future  real  surpluses,  it  will  be  forced  to 
default. 
Thus, once we allow for the possibility of default by the FA, a sufficiently tough CB can have 
considerable control over the price level. Of course, I’ve been arguing through examples. It 
would be more interesting to deliver a fuller characterization of the term “sufficiently tough”  
– but I’m not going to attempt to do so. Instead, in what follows, I’ll discuss some aspects of 
the CB’s response to a particularly critical situation. 
Suppose the FA owes $10 billion on a given Friday. It plans to repay that loan by auctioning 
new debt on the preceding Monday. However, when it auctions off the new debt, it finds that 
it can only raise $5 billion. The FA is now in danger of defaulting on its Friday obligation of 
$10 billion. 
It is at this stage that the level of commitment of the CB to its chosen inflation path will be 
severely tested. The FA will ask the CB to take some action that will allow the FA to raise an 
additional $5 billion on Wednesday. There are many possible actions. The FA might ask the 
CB to intervene by setting a floor on the price of debt in the Wednesday auction. But there 
are less overt approaches. For example, the CB can commit to a price peg for the FA’s debt 
in the secondary market for that debt.  
In any event, if the CB does intervene in some way to ensure the FA’s solvency, the CB no 
longer can be said to have independent control over the price level. If the CB’s intervention 
was largely unanticipated by markets, expected inflation will rise after the CB’s intervention. 
Then, incipient fiscal insolvency has triggered inflationary pressures. Of course, markets may 
well have already assigned a positive probability to the possibility that the CB might intervene 
in  this  kind  of  scenario.  If  so,  then  past  inflation  was  already  influenced  by  the  markets’ 
expectations of this fiscal policy scenario. 
                                                 
4  As modeled, for example, by Eaton and Gersovitz (1987). 
5  See Kocherlakota (2011). 
6  Here, I’m assuming that the CB is exchanging reserves and FA securities so as to control the path of a short-
term nominally risk-free interest rate. This nominally risk-free interest rate may not be the same as the interest 
rate on FA debt. 
7  Atkeson, Chari and Kehoe (2010) and Cochrane (2011) argue (convincingly to my mind) that an aggressive 
Taylor rule is not sufficient to determine inflation. The former authors suggest how price level determination 
can be achieved using a hybrid rule that augments an activist Taylor rule with a commodity price peg. Note 
though  that  their  implementations  implicitly  require  the  CB  to  have  the  ability  to  buy  back  money  from  the 
public. If the CB can only hold assets issued by the FA, then the FA’s actions will influence the value of the 
CB’s portfolio and thereby influence the CB’s ability to implement a given price level path. In this sense, the 
CB does not have independent control of the price level. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Should the CB be required to never intervene in this sort of insolvency scenario? I’ve argued 
that a ban on these interventions will give the CB more independence in its control over the 
price level. For those who think of CB independence as being the foundational element of 
macroeconomic policy, that pretty much settles the question.  
But I see a couple of reasons for caution here. It is certainly conceivable that FA insolvency 
can be triggered by shocks that are well outside the control of the FA itself. And, empirically, 
FA insolvency is associated with large short-term and even medium-term declines in output. 
Should  the  CB  be  prepared  to  drive  the  FA  into  insolvency  given  the  possible  adverse 
economic impact on the country? 
More subtly, regardless of the FA’s solvency, sovereign debt issues can fail simply through a 
coordination failure among investors. If I, as an investor, don’t anticipate that others will buy 
into the debt issue, I won’t either. In this sense, sovereign debt issues may be susceptible to 
suboptimal “runs.” The CB can eliminate this possibility by ensuring the nominal promises of 
the FA whenever the FA is threatened with default. 
Thus, I see trade-offs. On the one hand, if the CB is known to be willing to intervene to keep 
the FA solvent, then inflation is necessarily shaped by fiscal considerations and by the short-
run  incentives  of  elected  officials.  We  know  from  many  years  of  theoretical  and  empirical 
research that this effect is not a desirable one. On the other hand, if the CB is fully committed 
to allow the FA to default if necessary, then even optimal debt management by the FA may 
end up exposing the country to troubling risks, like sovereign debt runs.  
Let  me  wrap  up.  I’ve  argued  that  even  if  the  fiscal  authority  borrows  exclusively  in  its 
country’s own currency, the central bank can have a large amount of control over the price 
level. But the central bank can only achieve that control if it is willing to commit to letting the 
fiscal  authority  default.  Such  a  commitment  may  expose  the  country  to  risks  of  short-term 
and  medium-term  output  losses.  How  this  trade-off  should  best  be  resolved  awaits  future 
research.  But  it  may  turn  out  to  be  optimal  for  central  banks  to  guarantee  fiscal  authority 
debts  in  some  situations.  If  so,  we  again  have  to  think  of  price  level  determination  as 
something that is done jointly by the fiscal authority and the central bank – just as Sargent 
and Wallace taught us 30 years ago. 
References 
Atkeson, Andrew, V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2010. “Sophisticated Monetary Policies.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 47–89.  
Bassetto, Marco. 2008. “Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” in Lawrence Blume and Steven 
Durlauf (eds.), New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition. MacMillan: London.  
Cochrane, John H. 2005. “Money as Stock.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 501–28.  
Cochrane, John H. 2011. “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules.” Working paper. 
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business. 
Eaton,  Jonathan,  and  Mark  Gersovitz.  1987.  “Country  Risk  and  the  Organization  of 
International Capital Transfer.” NBER Working Paper 2204, April. 
Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2011. “It’s a Wonderful Fed.” Speech, St. Paul, Minn. 
Sargent,  Thomas,  and  Neil  Wallace.  1981.  “Some  Unpleasant  Monetarist  Arithmetic.” 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall, 1–17. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
