Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with El País 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
on 15 May and published on 16 May 2011. 
 Question: How would you describe the situation of the euro? 
Answer: We are in an economic and monetary union. From my point of view, Monetary Union 
has worked well: we have delivered price stability – fully in line with our definition of “below, 
but  close  to  2%  –  during  the  first  12  years  of  the  euro,  the  euro  is  a  solid  and  credible 
currency, and inflation expectations are solidly anchored over a horizon of five or ten years. 
The Economic Union, for its part, has shown its weaknesses during this global crisis and it 
has to improve very significantly. All pillars of the Economic Union have to be reinforced: first, 
we need a strengthened Stability and Growth Pact to ensure a rigorous surveillance of fiscal 
policies; second, we need a close surveillance of the competitiveness indicators and of the 
imbalances  in  the  euro  area,  something  that  we  have  been  calling  for  all  over  these  last 
years,  since  2005;  third,  we  need  to  accelerate  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms, 
which is an objective for the economic union (the “27”) as a whole, as well as in the euro 
area (the “17”), in order to elevate the growth potential of European economies. 
Q. What’s behind the dissatisfaction that seems to be affecting the euro? 
A.  I  think  there  is  criticism  of  the  behaviour  of  some  governments  regarding  their  own 
economic and fiscal policies, and also on others, because they did not exert appropriately the 
surveillance  on  their  peers.  .  But  I  don’t  think  the  criticism  concerns  the  single  currency, 
which  is  a  clear  success.  I  have  seen  many  surveys  in  different  countries  showing  that 
citizens are supporting the euro. That is the case in Spain. 
Q. Does rising debt indicate that the euro may be at risk? 
A. As I said, the euro is a solid and credible currency. The economy of the euro area as a 
whole is in a better fiscal position than the US or Japan, with a likely deficit of 4.6% this year 
compared  with  around  twice  that  figure  in  the  US  or  Japan.  Sovereign  debt  problems  are 
global,  not  just  a  European  problem.  The  paradox  is  that,  while  fiscal  performance  at  the 
consolidated  European  level  is  relatively  good,  we  have  in  the  euro  area  some  countries 
which are clearly in a difficult situation, and that require a major adjustment. 
Q.  Despite  your  rejection  of  a  possible  restructuring  of  Greek  debt,  markets  are 
insisting that that is the only way out. 
A. The ECB’s position has been clear from the beginning. We have an adjustment plan set 
by the IMF and the Commission. What we are asking for is that the plan be implemented as 
strictly as possible, as it was negotiated, with rigorous efforts being made by Greece. The 
adjustment, engaged by this country is essential for its sustainable, medium term growth, job 
creation  and  the  stability  in  the  euro  area.  And  there  is  no  other  way  than  the  strict 
application of this adjustment plan.  
Q. What can we expect from the summit in Brussels on Monday? 
A.  The  Ecofin  and  the  Eurogroup  will  have  to  examine  a  number  of  issues,  including  the 
programme  for  Portugal,  which  has  been  negotiated  by  the  IMF  and  the  Commission,  in 
liaison with the ECB. The ECB attaches a great importance to the fact that this programme 
has been approved by various political sensitivities in Portugal. 
Q. Has it been ruled out that a country could leave the euro? 
A. I already said that I consider this an absurd hypothesis. But let me come back to the euro. 
If, in 1998, we had been told that for the 12 first years of the euro, we would have a single 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
currency  that  keeps  remarkably  its  value,  with  average  inflation  below  2%,  a  better  result 
than in any Member State in the past 50 years, many people would probably have said that it 
was too good to be true. Today it’s a reality and these achievements are documented. 
Q. Is the standing of the ECB at risk because of the rating cuts for the countries from 
which you have collateral? 
A.  We  are  applying  our  own  rules  on  the  matter  and  are  paying  close  attention  to  risk 
management. It is also useful to bear in mind that we are talking about three economies that 
account  for  around  6%  of  the  GDP.  The  other  94%  of  the  GDP  of  the  EU  are  in  a  very 
different position. 
Q. The ECB has embarked on debt purchasing but is doing it intermittently. 
A.  I’ve  always  said  we  are  transparent  in  the  management  of  this  issue.  I  have  no  other 
comment. 
Q. But that is a function that is not supposed to be performed by the ECB, it is not part 
of the mandate. Should another institution take on that task? 
A. All these non-standard measures have been decided by the Governing Council to better 
transmit our monetary policy decisions, in times of financial crisis. It is fully in line with our 
mandate. These measures, including the full allotment of liquidity at fixed rate, are transitory 
by nature, as I say regularly in the name of the Governing Council. 
Q. Three years after the start of the crisis, where are we now? 
A.  Since  the  recovery  started  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009,  Europe’s  economy  has 
experienced  often  upward  revisions  to  previous  projections  of  real  growth.  Quarter  after 
quarter, the data has frequently exceeded expectations. This has been particularly evident in 
the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  with  an  increase  of  0.8%  more  than  projected,  and  several 
economies in the euro area with better results, even significantly better than expected. That 
includes  Spain,  which  is  growing  a  little  bit  better  than  anticipated.  It  is  no  time  for 
complacency, we have to be very cautious and we do not declare victory, but I think that’s 
encouraging.  As  for  the  role  of  the  ECB,  we  are  responsible  for  issuing  the  currency  for 
17 countries  and  331  million  citizens.  That  is  a  huge  responsibility  and  it  is  normal  that 
sometimes there are countries that go faster and others that go slower. What matters is that 
it’s not always the same ones who go rapidly or slowly because that would be unsustainable. 
There  was  a  time  when  Greece  and  Ireland  were  growing  very  rapidly  and  then  it  was 
Germany  that  was  lagging.  So  it’s  good  that  there  are  now  countries,  including  Germany, 
which are growing again fast and quickly recovering the ground they lost, while others need 
to undertake indispensable major adjustments. Again, what counts is that in the euro area as 
a whole the recovery is confirmed. But let us not be complacent, we have hard work ahead of 
us. 
Q. Oil prices have fallen by more than USD 10 since the ECB decided to raise rates. 
How do you see price stability at the moment, with raw material prices so volatile? 
A.  The  decline  in  oil  prices  is  good  news:  it  reduces  both  the  inflationary  impact  and  the 
depressive  effect  of  high  oil  prices  on  the  economy.  That  said,  there  is  a  high  degree  of 
volatility.  The  present  price  level  is  high;  2.8%  in  the  euro  area.  We  cannot  do  anything 
immediately to reduce the price of oil and raw material. We have to ensure that price setters 
and social partners fully understand that we are there to deliver price stability in the medium 
term at less than 2%, close to 2%. It would be for them a big mistake to think that the present 
hump in the CPI inflation signals the level of inflation in the medium term. Because we are 
there  to  take  decisions  that  will  prevent  this.  That’s  why  there  is  an  independent  central 
bank – to ensure price stability over the medium term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Q. Are you seeing excessive wage increases? 
A. Let me say something to the people of Spain: we are providing price stability in line with 
our definition, an average of 1.97% in the first 12 years, we are credible for the future five to 
ten  years,  and  that  has  to  be  accounted  for  in  all  decision-making  within  the  euro  area.  If 
prices and costs in a particular economy are permanently above that level, with spiralling of 
nominal  inflation  and  nominal  wages,  in  particular  there  will  be  unavoidable  losses  in 
competitiveness and less growth and less job creation.  
Q. Does that apply to Spain in particular? 
A. To all countries, without exception, and of course to Spain also. This is a very important 
message. 
Q. So those involved in wage negotiations should forget about national price data. 
A.  All  price-setters,  in  particular  the  social  partners,  must  be  conscious  that  there  is  a 
benchmark for the euro area inflation as a whole, which is less than 2%, close to 2%. If the 
unit labour costs in particular are not in line with the evolution of the euro area as a whole, a 
loss of competitiveness of the economy will be unavoidable, with its consequences in terms 
of  growth  and  jobs  creation.  Again,  the  worst  that  could  happen  in  terms  of  growth,  is  a 
cost/price signalling over and above the average of the euro area. 
Q. That is the conclusion that many people are drawing about the situation in Spain, 
do you share it? 
A. Some of these phenomena happened in the past undoubtedly. It seems to me now that 
everybody  understands  that  competitiveness  of  the  productive  sector  is  essential  for  the 
economy. 
Q.  It  is  doubtful  that  the  citizens  of  southern  Europe  understand  the  rise  in  rates 
resulting from the threat of inflation. 
A.  I  think  they  understand.  Because  if  we  were  to  lose  credibility  in  price  stability,  then 
inflation expectations would not be anchored and all medium- and long-term market interest 
rates in Europe, would rise, driven by those higher inflation expectations. Then we would all, 
I insist, all without exceptions, be suffering the consequences of a less favourable financial 
environment and its impact on growth and job creation. 
Q. This is very reminiscent of the situation in July 2008. Are you still defending that 
rise in interest rates? 
A.  Of  course  it  was  an  appropriate  decision.  The  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  came  later 
and we took the right measures to cope with the dramatic crisis. We decided to raise rates to 
counter an unwelcome increase in inflation expectations. By taking that step we confirmed 
that we are extremely determined to anchor inflation expectations. It helped us considerably 
during the crisis in preserving us both from the materialisation of the risk of inflation as well 
as  the  materialisation  of  the  risk  of  deflation  –  which  was  a  very  important  element  to 
surmount the crisis. 
Q. Jürgen Stark has said that the debt crisis is our own Lehman Brothers. 
A. We are experiencing at the global level a second episode of the crisis. After the private-
sector crisis we are now seeing tensions in the public sector and amongst sovereign risks. 
This  is  a  global  phenomenon,  observed  in  advanced  economies.  It’s  crucial  to  deal  with 
these tensions correctly, especially in Europe. 
Q.  Let’s  turn  to  Spain.  Don’t  the  markets  understand  the  reforms  that  have  been 
made? 
A. From our point of view, there are three key issues: fiscal policy, the financial sector and 
structural reforms. Spain is moving in these three areas, it has made  decisions; it has set 
goals and has done a lot, and has still work ahead of it. I’d say that this is appreciated by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
external observers, who believe that the country is going in the right direction. But this is no 
time for complacency. On the fiscal side, the government has been convincing. That being 
said, measures have to be followed up and the deficit target of 3% in 2013 is essential for 
credibility. Regarding the financial sector, there is a huge difference in perception compared 
with a few months ago, but work has not been finished there yet. As for structural reforms, 
they  are  absolutely  essential  because  it  is  through  them  that  growth  potential  increases. 
There are reforms that need to be tackled, especially labour market reform, which is being 
discussed by the social partners. All this is true for Spain, but also for Europe, which has to 
push forward bolder structural reforms. 
Q. Isn’t fiscal orthodoxy, the surge of austerity, condemning Europe to slow growth 
for a long time? 
A. On the contrary, fiscal soundness is essential for confidence, and confidence is the most 
important ingredient for sustainable growth. Financial soundness and structural reforms are 
also of essence. But speaking for the past, let me give you two or three figures. In the past 
12 years, GDP per capita has grown in Europe at the same pace as in the US, around 1%. In 
the labour market, despite the years of crisis, the euro area has created around 14 million 
jobs since the birth of the euro: about 6 million more than in the US. This is again no time for 
complacency. And nobody can say that we are satisfied when unemployment is still so high.  
Q. Is Spain the red line in the EU? 
A. Spain in the past has shown a remarkable capacity for innovation, for creativity, growth 
and  job  creation.  It  is  a  very  dynamic  country.  That  makes  me  optimistic,  provided  Spain 
continues to implement very actively and convincingly its programme in three areas already 
mentioned: fiscal soundness, banks’ reshaping, and structural reforms.  
Q. And the savings banks are the red line in Spain? 
A. In this sense, Spain has three main challenges. As regards the savings banks challenge, 
a lot of hard work has already been done and should continue to be very actively performed. 
Q.  Especially  after  the  leaks  in  Germany,  do  you  think  all  the  European  partners, 
especially the political leaders, are aware of the danger of the current fiscal situation? 
A. I appeal to all governments to show a high sense of responsibility, both individually and 
collectively, and to keep a strong sense of direction. 
Q. At first you didn’t seem very happy about the IMF involvement in the bailouts. Some 
were even calling for a European Monetary Fund. Why did you change your point of 
view? 
A.  The  worst  thing  would  have  been  benign  neglect  by  the  Europeans,  which  was  a  big 
danger at the beginning. Having overcome this temptation, the rescue brought together the 
conditionality and the financial support from the IMF and the European partners, which was 
necessary. 
Q. On the subject of eurobonds, Europe has no treasury, unlike the United States. Do 
you think that a step could be taken in that direction? 
A. At the present stage of European integration, with the current institutional framework, we 
consider that a major improvement in governance, particularly in fiscal policy, is absolutely 
decisive. At this stage we are not in favour of euro bonds. 
Q. What is your opinion of Zapatero? 
A. It is not for the President of the ECB to judge or give good marks or bad marks to the 
prime  ministers!  We  are  fiercely  independent  from  the  executive  branches  and  we  are 
issuing the currency for all the people, all the 17 nations, and political sensitivities.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Q. What about Draghi? 
A. The appointment of the President of the ECB is the responsibility of the Heads of State 
and Government, after having had the advice of the Parliament and the Governing Council of 
the ECB. 
Q. Does he have the right profile? 
A. We have a great Governing Council, with very wise and experienced colleagues. And I 
have to say that Miguel [Fernández Ordóñez], Mario [Draghi] and all others have the right 
team spirit. And it is this very good team spirit which counts. 
Q. What will you do after 31 October? 
A. We’ll see. I have a very hard job ahead of me. There’s no time for complacency in many 
ways. I still have five and a half month! I will be completely absorbed by my work until the 
end of October. 
Q. In these eight years, what has been the worst moment? May 2010? 
A.  We  have  had  major  challenges  from  the  start.  Immediately  after  my  arrival  the  largest 
countries in the euro area, Germany, France and Italy, were asking for an easing and even a 
dismantling of the Stability and Growth Pact. We had to fight that. And there were other big 
challenges afterwards; the crisis has certainly been one. This is the greatest crisis since the 
Second World War. It could have been even worse – the worst crisis since First World War – 
if we had not made the decisions we made. They were times that required a great deal of 
effort. It has been very rewarding to see the team spirit of the Governing Council and of the 
staff of the ECB and of the other central banks of the Eurosystem. There have been some 
intensely  challenging  moments,  during  which  my  greatest  satisfaction  has  been  to  see  a 
formidable dedication to the euro and to Europe, in serving our 331 million fellow citizens.. 
Q. What is your legacy? 
A. It’s not up to me to talk about that. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
