Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Pressing tasks needed to improve Spain’s 
economy 
Address  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  “XXVII 
Reunión del Círculo de Economía”, Sitges, 3 June 2011. 
 Good morning. 
Let me first thank the Círculo de Economía for kindly inviting me to participate in this forum.  
Had you invited me in March last year to talk about the foundations for a new economy in the 
21st century, I would surely have focused on what I see as the main challenges facing us this 
century. Firstly, population ageing, which will affect not only the developed countries but also 
other emerging nations such as China. Secondly, the growing inequality that has appeared in 
some countries along with the positive effects of globalisation. Thirdly, the pressing need to 
use natural resources – and energy resources in particular – rationally. And finally, I would 
have  taken  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  changes  under  way  worldwide  in  financial 
regulation to avoid a repetition of the crisis we have experienced.  
But I’m not going to talk about this, as in April last year the Greek sovereign debt crisis broke 
and, since then, the euro area has been immersed in a crisis still to be resolved and which 
might have very serious consequences not only for its members but for all Europeans and for 
the world economy as a whole. If this crisis is not suitably resolved, the effects on the global 
economy  and  financial  markets  might  be  most  significant  not  only  due  to  the  strong  links 
connecting the main economies, but also because the doubts over the sustainability of public 
finances might ultimately pass through to other major developed economies.  
The euro area is the epicentre of a crisis whose resolution is key to what may happen in the 
European and global economies in the opening decades of the 21st century, and it is on this 
that  I  shall  focus  today.  European  integration  can  only  move  forward  if  the  euro  area 
economy  operates  once  again  without  upheavals.  And  since  European  integration  is 
fundamental to the well-being of all Europeans and, naturally, of Spaniards, Spain must, like 
the other countries and the European institutions, make every effort to resolve the crisis.  
The truth is, as the Governor of the Bank of France said last week, if we don’t resolve this 
crisis properly, a “horror scenario” might ensue. But I’ll resist the temptation of detailing all 
the  adverse  consequences  that  failure  to  overcome  this  crisis  would  have  for  European 
citizens.  To  quote  Fernando  Pessoa,  “to  be  a  pessimist  is  to  see  everything  tragically,  an 
attitude that’s both excessive and uncomfortable”. Therefore I’m going to take a realistic but 
optimistic  approach,  stressing  the  steps  forward  we  have  taken  to  date  and  presaging  a 
happy ending for this crisis if the necessary measures are adopted.  
All the EU Member States have a responsibility to resolve the crisis. On one hand are the 
governments of the countries that show the biggest divergences, and whose conduct is key 
to exiting the crisis. And on the other are the governments of the countries which, given their 
importance in the area, are central to euro area and EU decision-making, since overcoming 
the crisis will only be possible if the European institutions’ complex decision-making process 
works well.  
But we will better understand what each of these players must do to emerge from the crisis if 
we reflect firstly on the mistakes they have made over the 11 years that a monetary union 
has been in place without a political union.  
Let’s begin on that point. You will all recall that when the euro was created, many academics, 
especially  from  Anglo-Saxon  circles,  warned  that  the  monetary  union  was  doomed  to  fail, 
since it did not meet the essential conditions of what is known as an “optimal currency area”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Among other aspects, it was stated that a monetary union could hardly be successful if there 
were no fiscal transfer mechanism allowing asymmetrical shocks affecting a specific part of 
the  monetary  union  to  be  accommodated.  In  this  connection,  critics  of  the  euro  project  
said – and still say – that a monetary union should not be maintained if there is no political 
union.  They  argued  that  the  potential  divergences  between  different  areas  could  only  be 
offset  or  resolved  if  there  were  a  single  budget  for  the  entire  area.  Otherwise,  a  durable 
single currency would not be feasible. 
Yet given that political union in Europe over the short term is inconceivable, will a monetary 
union not be able to survive without political union? In my view, the most important lesson 
we’ve  learned  in  this  crisis  is  that  it  is  possible  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  single  currency 
without  political  union,  but  only  if  strong  divergences  between  the  member  countries  are 
avoided.  
This has been understood by the European Union and is what has prompted the changes to 
the Stability and Growth Pact and to economic governance, which are intended precisely to 
correct  divergences  before  they  become  so  great  that  they  are  difficult  to  redress.  And  it 
must be acknowledged that here a good deal of progress has been made over the past year.  
The unfolding of the crisis has shown that the governance model in place to date in the EU 
has been of no use in ensuring economic policy consistency or in managing crisis episodes 
flexibly and effectively. It’s now clear that public finances were not sufficiently restructured in 
the  upturn,  that  macroeconomic  divergences  were  excessive  and  that  we  need  a 
well-designed financial aid mechanism to assist ailing countries swiftly and effectively. 
Mindful  of  this,  European  governments  and  institutions  have  taken  major  steps  towards 
correcting  deficiencies  in  three  fundamental  areas:  the  strengthening  of  fiscal  discipline, 
closer  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  maladjustments  and  the  creation  of  a  permanent 
crisis-management framework.  
Starting with fiscal discipline, public debt levels will be more closely monitored and countries 
will  have  better  incentives  to  comply  with  their  commitments,  through  the  introduction  of 
broader  and  transparent  sanctioning  arrangements,  which  will  moreover  be  applied  at  an 
earlier  stage  and,  as  far  as  possible,  automatically.  Further,  the  reform  of  national  fiscal 
frameworks is being promoted, so that budgetary policy rules and surveillance systems will 
be adopted that help curtail spending.  
Moreover, a new framework for the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances 
is being established. The aim of this mechanism is the early identification of the emergence 
of  potentially  “excessive  imbalances”.  When  imbalances  are  considered  to  be  too  big,  an 
excessive imbalance procedure will be initiated which will include recommendations for the 
adoption of corrective measures.  
The  third  key  element  of  EU  economic  governance  reform  is  the  creation  of  a  permanent 
crisis-management instrument, the so-called European Stability Mechanism, which will come 
into force in mid-2013. Geared to lend up to €500 billion, this mechanism will provide funds to 
countries with liquidity problems under strict conditionality.  
Finally, a mention for the Euro Plus Pact, approved in March by the euro area Heads of State 
and of Government. This pact involves a commitment at the highest political level to adopt 
the  measures  needed  to  attain  competitiveness  and  employment-promoting  objectives,  to 
contribute to the sustainability of public finances and to reinforce financial stability.  
There’s always room for improvement and, at the ECB, we have called on Heads of State to 
strengthen governance procedures further, for instance by making sanctions more automatic 
in cases of non-compliance so as to prevent governments succumbing to the temptation of 
being excessively lax. This was seen in 2005 when the core countries failed to meet their 
deficit commitments and the Commission and the European Council agreed to change the 
rules so as not to sanction these countries. But the lesson whereby maintaining a monetary 
union is only possible if divergences remain within a moderate range must also be taken into 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
account  by  the  national  governments  of  each  of  the  euro  Member  States,  because  the 
policies that may prevent the emergence of these imbalances or help to correct them are, for 
the most part, the responsibility of national governments.  
Many tasks lie ahead for all the euro area countries in contributing to reducing divergences. 
But it is our duty to pay more attention to what Spain should do. Our country reacted a year 
back when the sovereign debt crisis broke, and it showed resolve in adopting far-reaching 
measures  to  correct  our  economy’s  imbalances  without  resorting  to  aid  from  its  fellow 
members. It was able to do so, firstly, because its divergences were not overall as great as 
those of the countries that have had to apply for external financial assistance. And secondly, 
because the Spanish parliament was prepared to approve some of the harshest and most 
difficult measures adopted in Europe to rapidly reduce the budget deficit.  
But  the  task  is  by  no  means  complete  and,  therefore,  the  responsibility  of  Spain’s 
parliamentary  forces  remains  of  paramount  importance.  True,  the  countries  that  required 
financial  assistance  have  more  problems  to  resolve,  but  in  their  favour  they  have  precise 
programmes  of  measures  agreed  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  European 
Union with which they must unfailingly comply. If they fail to do so, they will be withdrawn. 
They know perfectly well what they have to do and when they have to do it. In our case the 
responsibility is greater, since we ourselves must decide on the content and timeframe of the 
reforms and that means we must be capable of adopting the right measures for exactly as 
long and as intensely as required, and over a sufficiently short timescale so as to convey to 
all the firmness of our resolve to overcome the crisis. 
Let us turn to the most important and pressing tasks facing us: to bring about far-reaching 
change  in  the  legal  and  institutional  framework  for  employment,  to  comply  with  the 
deficit-cutting plan and to complete the restructuring of the financial system and the overhaul 
of savings banks.  
Nothing is more necessary for improving the well-being of workers and of all Spanish citizens 
than reducing the unemployment rate and raising productivity so that wages may grow at a 
higher rate. But this task has also become a pressing one since, as euro area membership 
precludes using the devaluation tool, reform of the employment institutional framework is vital 
for  increasing  productivity,  and  thus  for  restoring  competitiveness  and  raising  our  growth 
rate.  
Lately, those convinced of the importance of this reform have grown in number. But among 
those  showing  reluctance,  a  new  argument  has  now  arisen  which  seeks  to  play  down  the 
need 
two 
counter-arguments here. First, Spain has moved so far away from the various employment 
institutional framework models in the developed countries that a rapid approximation to them 
could have more immediate effects than in other countries. Admittedly, a reform of this type 
would not swiftly lower our unemployment rate to the average European level, which is below 
10%; but a reduction in the unemployment rate, no matter how modest at first, would have 
most  favourable  consequences  for  domestic  and  external  confidence  in  the  Spanish 
economy. What’s more, even if it is thought that results will only emerge gradually, slowness 
in  taking  effect  is  no  argument  for  delaying  this  reform  a  minute  longer;  rather,  it  is  an 
excellent  reason  to  adopt  it  immediately  so  as  to  be  able  to  enjoy  its  effects  as  soon  as 
possible.  
Regarding fiscal consolidation, there is little to say and much to do. Little to say because the 
government-approved  Stability  Programme,  which  envisages  quickly  attaining  a  significant 
deficit  cut,  has  been  favourably  assessed  by  the  EU  and  strictly  met  in  its  first  year.  The 
now-difficult  task  is  for  all  levels  of  government  to  rigorously  meet  their  adjustment 
commitments this year and to enable the 6% overall general government deficit target to be 
attained. Henceforth, we should expect local and regional authorities not to put off any longer 
the vigorous expenditure-cutting decisions that are needed to meet this overall target.  
for  reform  because, 
they  say, 
to  bear 
I  have 
it  will 
fruit. 
time 
take 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Finally, concerning the restructuring of savings banks, the final part of what was legislated by 
Parliament in the recapitalisation Decree-Law approved in February remains to be done, but 
so far the Decree-Law has been implemented under the conditions and within the timeframe 
set.  
On 11 March the Banco de España published the core capital requirements of all Spanish 
credit institutions. Among them, 12 (4 banks and 8 savings banks) were identified as having 
a  core  capital  deficit  for  a  maximum  amount  of  €15.15  billion.  Later,  when  one  of  the 
integration projects came unstuck, the number of institutions needing additional capital rose 
to 13.  
On  14  April,  the  Banco  de  España  approved  the  strategies  and  timetables  submitted  by 
these  13  institutions  or  groups.  Two  were  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks,  which  have  been 
recapitalised by their respective parents; the two Spanish banks have reinforced their capital 
by  resorting  to  the  markets;  four  savings  bank  groups  have  considered  an  initial  public 
offering  or  the  raising  of  capital  from  investors  as  a  priority  option,  with  a  subsidiary 
alternative  of  resorting  to  the  FROB  (Fund  for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the  Banking 
Sector) if their initial approach did not work out as planned; another savings bank has stated 
its  preference  to  participate  in  an  integration  process  with  another  more  capitalised 
institution; and, lastly, the remaining four savings banks have expressed their preference to 
reach  the  required  level  of  capitalisation  by  means  of  the  FROB  taking  a  stake  in  their 
capital.  
Before 28 April, those institutions that had considered going to the FROB as a priority source 
submitted their specific recapitalisation plans to the Banco de España. In the meantime, the 
FROB has formally undertaken, with all institutions that have submitted strategies envisaging 
the possibility of resorting to it, to provide the necessary funds so that all institutions in the 
Spanish banking system may comply with the new core capital ratio.  
At present, the recapitalisation plans submitted by the institutions are being analysed, as a 
further step in the timetable. By 30 September 2011, these institutions must have completed 
what was stipulated in their strategies. This deadline may, as provided for in the Decree-Law, 
be extended by three months by the Banco de España if considered necessary for justifiable 
operational reasons, and by up to six months if an initial public offering is involved.  
A  conclusive  step  will  thus  have  been  taken  in  the  savings  banks  sector  restructuring 
strategy,  which  has  entailed  unprecedented  change  on  many  levels:  balance-sheet 
write-downs at institutions; integration projects among savings banks to achieve bigger and 
more efficient institutions; a change in corporate model to smooth access to capital and to 
encourage enhanced governance, and, lastly, the recapitalisation of the sector. If these three 
reforms are resolutely seen through, there will be a favourable change on the markets similar 
to that seen in the first half of this year when the pensions reform and the recapitalisation of 
credit institutions were approved. Spain might feature next year as a euro area country that 
still has a high deficit – 6% at end-2011 – but comparable to that of other major euro area 
countries and with the lowest debt level among the biggest economies in the area. Moreover, 
once the restructuring and recapitalisation of the banking system has been completed, it will 
be more apparent that all credit institutions have a high degree of capitalisation and that only 
a  small  portion  of  the  sector  has  required  public  aid.  Finally,  if  a  sufficiently  far-reaching 
reform  of  the  employment  institutional  framework  is  undertaken  as  to  turn  employment 
around, confidence will be restored in the capacity of our country to generate robust growth 
once again.  
The  favourable  assessment  of  these  reforms  along  with  the  progressive  improvement  in 
economic figures as a result of headway in the adjustment of the imbalances (the reduction 
in  net  borrowing,  the  resumption  of  moderate  inflation,  the  adjustment  of  the  real  estate 
sector, the lessening of the negative contribution of the construction sector to GDP growth, 
etc.) will prompt a positive change in the perception of the Spanish economy and in domestic 
and  foreign  investors’  confidence.  That  would  lower  the  risk  premium  of  the  Kingdom  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Spain, providing for better financing conditions for our companies and for the public sector, 
and giving an additional boost to growth which has in fact ceased in the first quarter of this 
year to bring up the rear among the major euro area countries. 
To  conclude,  I  have  focused  today  on  discussing  the  most  important  and  pressing  tasks 
needed to improve our economy. Evidently, though, there are many more that will take time, 
not least of which is doing everything possible to raise the level of educational attainment of 
our labour force. What I am certain of is that it would suffice to comply satisfactorily with the 
three tasks I have set out in order to bring about a change in perception by the domestic and 
foreign agents that fund us, and that this would be the best contribution Spain can make to 
resolving the euro crisis. Experience has shown that Europe has learned and even emerged 
stronger  from  crises.  If  the  other  countries  and  European  institutions  fulfill  their  tasks,  this 
crisis will have ceased to be a determining factor of the course of the European and world 
economy in the 21st century. And we may then move on to talking more calmly about ageing, 
inequality and the rational use of national resources, matters which I view as essential for 
understanding what is going to happen in the world economy this century.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
