Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Banks in Nigeria and national economic 
development – a critical review 
Keynote address by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at 
the seminar on “Becoming an economic driver while applying banking regulations”, organised 
by  the  Canadian  High  Commission  in  joint  collaboration  with  the  Chartered  Institute  of 
Bankers of Nigeria (CIBN) and the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC), Lagos, 7 March 2011. 
 is 
theme  of 
focusing  on 
the  banking  sector  in  Nigeria.  The 
Protocol 
1.  
I  am  very  delighted  to  be  invited  to  present  a  key-note  address  at  this  important 
forum.  I  wish  to  commend  the  organizers,  the  Canadian  High  Commission,  the  Chartered 
Institute of Bankers of Nigeria and the Royal Bank of Canada for gathering top policy makers 
and operators in the banking and finance industry here today for this all important seminar 
which 
this  seminar 
“Transformational Banking for Economic Development” is indeed topical, and couldn’t have 
come  at  a  better  time,  considering that  the  banking  sector in  Nigeria  is  passing  through  a 
critical and decisive path in reforms to reposition it to effectively impact on other sectors of 
the economy, especially the real sector.  
2.  
Economic development is about enhancing the productive capacity of an economy 
by  using  available  resources  to  reduce  risks,  remove  impediments  which  otherwise  could 
lower costs and hinder investment. The banking system plays the important role of promoting 
economic  growth  and  development  through  the  process  of  financial  intermediation.  Many 
economists  have  acknowledged  that  the  financial  system,  with  banks  as  its  major 
component,  provide  linkages  for  the  different  sectors  of  the  economy  and  encourage  high 
level  of  specialization, expertise,  economies  of  scale  and a  conducive  environment  for  the 
implementation  of  various  economic  policies  of  government 
to  achieve 
non-inflationary  growth,  exchange  rate  stability,  balance  of  payments  equilibrium  and  high 
levels of employment.  
3.  
The  role  of  finance  in  economic  development  is  widely  acknowledged  in  the 
literature.  In  particular,  Schumpeter  (1911)  put  the  role  of  financial  intermediation  at  the 
center  of  economic  development.  He  argued  that  financial  intermediation  through  the 
banking system played a pivotal role in economic development by affecting the allocation of 
savings, thereby improving productivity, technical change and the rate of economic growth. 
He  believed  that  efficient  allocation  of  savings  through  identification  and  funding  of 
entrepreneurs with the best chances of successfully implementing innovative products and 
production processes are tools to achieve this objective. 
4.  
The  endogenous  growth  literature  also  supports  the  argument  that  financial 
development has a positive impact on growth. Well functioning financial systems are able to 
mobilize  household  savings,  allocate  resources  efficiently,  diversify  risk,  and  enhance  the 
flow  of  liquidity,  reduce  information  asymmetry  and  transaction  cost  and  provide  an 
alternative to raising funds through individual savings and retained earnings. These functions 
suggest that financial development has a positive impact on growth.  
5.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  for  many  of  you  here,  I  may  be  stating  the  obvious,  by 
highlighting  the  central  role  that  banks  play  in  the  development  of  every  economy  by 
mobilizing resources for productive investments and being the conduit for the implementation 
of monetary policy. Yet, I have given this the emphasis it requires. Due to the critical nature 
of  these  roles,  and  the  fact  that  the  ability  of  banks  to  effectively  impact  on  economic 
development hinges largely on their soundness and efficiency, governments across the world 
continue to take variety of measures to safeguard the banking sector through reforms. Such 
reforms  often  focus  on  increased  risk  management  procedures  and  enhanced  corporate 
intended 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
framework 
governance in order to strengthen and reposition the banking industry to enable it contribute 
effectively  to  the  development  of  the  real  sector  through  its  intermediation  process.  In 
addition, such reforms may involve a comprehensive process of substantially improving the 
regulatory and surveillance framework; fostering healthy competition in banking operations, 
ensuring  an  efficient 
for  monetary  management,  expansion  of  savings 
mobilization  base,  enforcement  of  capital  adequacy,  and  the  promotion  of  investment  and 
growth through market-based interest rates. The need for reforms on an on-going basis has 
become more imperative with the increasing sophistication of the global financial products. 
The  recent  experience  from  the  global  financial  crisis  has  further  underscored  the 
imperatives for countries to embark on banking reforms on a regular basis.  
6.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the process of reforming a financial sector usually involves 
the movement from an initial situation of controlled interest rates, poorly developed money 
and securities market and under-developed banking system, towards a situation of flexible 
interest rates, an expanded role for market forces in resource allocation, increased autonomy 
for the central bank and a deepening of the money and capital markets. It would indeed be 
difficult  to  define  the  components  of  “good”  banking  sector  reform  in  absolute  terms. 
Generally  speaking,  good  reforms  would  engender  clear  market  entry  and  exit  conditions; 
ensure  the  ability  of  banks  to  function  according  to  market  principles  without  state 
intervention  in  their  decision-making;  guarantee  central  bank  independence  and  establish 
independent banking oversight. This means that reform in the domestic financial system will 
comprise  of  three  key  policy  actions.  The  first  is  removal  of  price  restrictions;  that  is,  the 
removal of  ceilings on deposit interest rates and restrictions on lending interest rates. The 
second  component  is  removal  of  quantity  restrictions;  that  is,  the  removal  of  direct  credit 
allocation  mechanisms,  relaxation  of  reserve  requirements,  and  removal  of  restrictions  on 
foreign currency deposits. The third policy action consists of removal of entry barriers in the 
financial  system.  In  countries  with  a  heavy  government  presence  in  the  financial  sector, 
reform  would  usually  involve  privatization  of  public  financial  institutions  and  relaxation  of 
restrictions on the creation of private financial institutions. Liberalization would also include 
opening  up  of  the  financial  system  to  foreign  players.  All  these  actions  aim  at  promoting 
strong  competition  in  the  financial  system,  which  improves  the  efficiency  of  intermediation 
through the dismantling of monopolies in the financial system.  
7.  
Thus,  a  well  repositioned  bank  is  therefore  expected  to  perform  its  role  more 
efficiently  and  contribute  to  the  development  and  growth  of  the  economy.  Banking  sector 
reform  leads  to  improved  financial  services  which  lead  to  cost  reduction  by  the  industrial 
concerns.  More  people  will  have  access  to  funds  from  the  banking  system  and  this  will 
increase  aggregate  demand  for  goods  and  services.  Increased  aggregate  demand  will 
impact  positively  on  output  and  employment  generation  thereby  reducing  poverty  –  the 
ultimate goal of economic management. 
In the final analysis, bank reforms aim at ensuring financial deepening which implies 
8.  
the ability of financial institutions to effectively mobilize savings for investment purposes. The 
growth of domestic savings provides the real structure for the creation of diversified financial 
claims. It also presupposes active participation of financial institutions in financial markets, 
which in turn entail the supply of quality (financial) instruments and financial services.  
9.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  do  not  wish  to  bore  you  with  a  chronicle  of  distress  and 
reforms  that  have  taken  place  in  Nigeria  since  the  1950s.  I  have  done  so  in  many  fora. 
Suffices it to say that many crises had happened and many reforms had been initiated and 
implemented  in  the  banking  sector.  At  the  inception  of  the  reforms  in  2004,  the  thrust  of 
policy was to grow the banks and position them to play pivotal roles in driving development in 
other  sectors  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  induce  improvements  in  their  own  operational 
efficiency.  As  a  result,  banks  were  consolidated  through  mergers  and  acquisitions,  raising 
the capital base from N2 billion to a minimum of N25 billion, which reduced the number of 
banks to 25 from 89 in 2005 and later to 24. Beyond the need to recapitalize the banks, the 
reforms focused on ensuring minimal reliance on public sector for funds, but rather relying on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  private  sector.  The  adoption  of  risk  focused  and  rule-based  regulatory  framework; 
adoption  of  zero  tolerance  in  regulatory  framework  in  data/information,  rendition/reporting 
and infractions; strict enforcement of corporate governance principles in banking; expeditious 
process  for  rendition  of  returns  by  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  through  e-FASS; 
revision  and  updating  of  relevant  laws  for  effective  corporate  governance;  and  ensuring 
greater  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  implementation  of  banking  laws  and 
regulation.  
10.  
The implications were that the resources base of such banks was weak and volatile, 
rendering their operations highly vulnerable to swings in government revenue, arising from 
the  uncertainties  of  the  international  oil  market.  It  was  also  observed  that  many  banks 
appeared  to  have  abandoned  their  essential  intermediation  role  of  mobilizing  savings  and 
inculcating banking habits at the household and micro enterprise levels. The apathy of banks 
towards  small  savers,  particularly  at  the  grass  root  level,  had  not  only  compounded  the 
problems  of  low  domestic  savings  and  high  bank  lending  rates  in  the  country,  it  reduced 
access to relatively cheap and stable funds that could provide a reliable source of credit to 
the productive sectors at affordable rates of interest. 
11.  
Another aspect of the reforms which is seldom mentioned relate to the changes in 
policy  approach  at  the  CBN.  Beginning  from  December  2006,  the  Bank  introduced  a  low 
interest rate based framework and made the monetary policy rate the operating target. The 
new  framework  has  enabled  the  bank  to  be  more  proactive  in  countering  inflationary 
pressures. Also, in the use of the framework, upper and lower limits to the monetary policy 
rate were set, coinciding with the rate for the standing lending facility and standing deposit 
facility,  respectively.  The  corridor  regime  has  helped  to  check  wide  fluctuations  in  the 
interbank rates and also engendered orderly development of the money market segment. 
12.  
There are, no doubt, some positive outcomes of the reforms. First, banks by their 
size were enabled to undertake funding of large ticket projects, especially in infrastructure, 
and oil and gas sectors, through the new window in the enlarged single obligor limits. The 
larger size of banks also engendered improved customer confidence. The number of bank 
branches has increased from 3,247 in 2003 to over 5,837 in 2010 and employment in the 
sector rose from 50,586 in 2005 to 71,876 in 2010. Also, the capital market received a boost 
as several banks recorded successes in their initial public offers (IPOs). The consolidation 
exercise  also  impacted  on  the  payment  system  positively  as  the  fewer  number  of  banks 
made it easier to deploy the new automated clearing systems and also reduced the length of 
time  spent  on  the  clearing  floor.  Concerning  supervision,  the  relative  ease  of  having  to 
oversee 24 banks as against 89 deserves mention. 
13.  
In  spite  of  these  positive  developments,  a  new  set  of  problems  emerged  and 
threatened  the  financial  system  from  2008,  coinciding  with  the  global  financial  crisis.  The 
surge in capital put pressure on the availability of human capacity in the sector and coupled 
with  poor  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  frameworks  this  led  to  our  recent 
experience  with  margin  loans  and  other  high  risk  investments.  Consequently,  when  the 
capital market bubble burst, the balance sheet of banks became eroded to the extent that 
some of them remained for some time on “life support” from the CBN. Inter-bank rates spiked 
as  banks  tried  to  borrow  at  any  rate  in  order  to  remain  afloat,  the  size  of  non-performing 
loans significantly increased, customer panic re-emerged and several instances of unethical 
conduct among the managements of banks were revealed. In addition, the critical question 
“Are our banks playing the pivotal role of driving development” could not be answered in the 
affirmative. It was this scenario that set the stage for the most recent set of reforms.  
14.  
The reforms could be broadly divided into two. The first part of the reform focused 
on ensuring that the nine banks, which the CBN/NDIC special examination revealed were in 
a dire state, were rescued. Some of the actions included the reduction of cash and liquidity 
ratios, expanded discount window operations, which enabled the banks to borrow for up to 
360 days from the CBN. It also admitted non-traditional instruments, like commercial papers, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
promissory notes and bankers’ acceptances in the discount window. Interbank lending was 
also  guaranteed  to  encourage  banks  to  lend  among  themselves.  The  sum  of  N620  billion 
was injected into eight banks as a direct rescue package, while corporate governance was 
enhanced with the appointment of new management teams. Over all, we can now say that 
the system has been restored to the path of stability. 
15.  
The  second  aspect  of  the  reforms  is  couched  in  terms  of  medium  to  long  term 
objectives. Under this, financial sector stability is emphasized alongside the need to position 
the banks to provide funding for the development of the real sector of the economy. The four 
cardinal  pillars  of  the  reform  are:  enhancing  the  quality  of  banks,  establishing  financial 
stability,  enabling  healthy  financial  sector  evolution,  and  ensuring  that  the  financial  sector 
contributes to the real economy, which is very critical to the type of growth that translates to 
improved welfare. 
16.  
Enhancing  the  quality  of  banks  entails  the  initiation  by  the  CBN  of  a  five  part 
programme  to  enhance  the  operations  and  quality  of  banks  in  Nigeria.  This  programme 
consists of the following: industry remedial programmes to fix the key causes of the crisis; 
risk-based supervision; reforming the regulatory framework; enhanced customer protection; 
and internal transformation of the CBN. Issues such as effective corporate governance, data 
quality, and financial crime have seen increased attention. More so, consumer confidence is 
also being tackled in the reform programme as complaint desks have been opened to ensure 
that financial services are delivered to customers as transparently and fairly as possible. 
17.  
Establishing  financial  stability  entails  conscious  actions  by  the  CBN,  and  other 
regulatory agencies to stem wide fluctuations in the key macroeconomic indicators. The high 
points of this pillar include, strengthening the Financial Stability Committee within the CBN, 
establishment  of  macro-prudential  rules,  development  of  directional  economic  policy  and 
counter-cyclical fiscal policies by the government and further development of capital markets 
as alternative to bank funding. It is hoped that the new macro-prudential rules would leverage 
on the following: 
 
 
Limiting capital market lending to a set proportion of bank’s balance sheet; 
Prohibiting banks from using depositors’ funds for proprietary trading, private equity 
or venture capital investment; and 
Adjusting  capital  adequacy  and  forward  looking  capital  requirements  driven  by 
stress tests by the CBN. 
Enabling  healthy  financial  sector  evolution  entails  the  CBN  reviewing  the  basic 
18.  
one-size-fits-all  model  of  banking.  This  has  made  possible  the  emergence  of  international, 
national,  regional,  mono-line  and  specialized  banks  such  as  non-interest  banks,  etc,  with 
different capital requirements commensurate to the depth of their operations. 
19.  
The  fourth  pillar  of  the  reform  has  direct  bearing  on  the  development  of  the  real 
sector  as  it  seeks  to  position  the  banking  system  to  contribute  to  the  growth  and 
development of the various sectors of the economy. The spirit of this pillar is anchored on the 
fact  that  real  economic  growth  must  be  supported  by  actual  rise  in  physical  goods  and 
services.  This  segment  of  the  reform  has  sought  to  break  from  the  classical  orthodoxy  of 
leaving  the  allocation  of  financial  resources  to  the  market  forces.  Rather,  the  reform  has 
identified priority sectors and developed tailored interventions to support and promote growth 
in  these  sectors.  Some  of  the  key  interventions  in  the  real  sector  under  this  reform  pillar 
include: the N200 Billion Commercial Agricultural Credit Scheme (CACS); the N300 Billion 
Power  and  Aviation  Intervention  Fund;  the  N200  Billion  Restructuring/Refinancing  to  the 
Manufacturing Sector/SME; the N200 Billion Small and Medium Scale Enterprises Guarantee 
Scheme (SMECGS).  
20.  
The CACS was established by the CBN in collaboration with the Federal Ministry of 
Agriculture. It is being funded through the issuance of FGN Bond worth N200 billion, by the 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  economy, 
real  sector  of 
the  CBN  made  available  N200  billion 
Debt Management Office (DMO) in two tranches. The first tranche of N100 billion had been 
raised and passed on to participating banks for on-lending to farmers. Loans made under this 
scheme are at single digit interest rate subject to a maximum of 9.0 per cent, while the CBN 
bears  the  interest  subsidy  at  maturity.  The  scheme  was  initially  to  promote  commercial 
agricultural enterprises but was later expanded to accommodate small scale farmers through 
the  on-lending  scheme  of  the  state  governments.  The  sum  of  N96.81  billion  has  been 
disbursed to 104 projects through 11 banks and 18 State governments including the Federal 
Capital Territory, as at end of December 2010. 
21.  
Under the Power and Aviation Intervention Fund, the CBN made available the sum 
of  N300  billion  to  stimulate  credit  to  the  domestic  power  sector  and  the  troubled  airline 
industry. The amount was part of the initial N500 billion intervention fund sourced to catalyze 
financing of the real sector of the Nigerian economy. The main objective of the initiative was 
to  help  finance  badly  needed  power  projects  and  to  allow  banks  to  refinance  loans  to  the 
heavily-indebted airline industry. The programme operates in such a way that borrowers will 
be  able  to  access  the  fund  at  an  interest  rate  of  7  percent  payable  on  a  quarterly  basis 
including  all  charges  in  order  to  refinance  existing  loans  and  leases  and  provide  working 
capital  for  the  two  sectors.  The  fund  is  managed  by  the  Bank  of  Industry  (BOI)  while  the 
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) serves as the technical adviser to the fund. 
22.  
As part of efforts towards unlocking the credit market and to ensure that credit flows to 
the 
for 
re-financing/re-structuring  of  banks’  existing  loan  portfolios  to  the  manufacturing  sector  and 
SMEs. The main objective of the fund is to fast-track the development of the manufacturing 
sector  by  improving  access  to  credit  by  manufacturers  as  well  as  improving  the  financial 
position  of  the  DMBs.  The  types  of  facilities  under  the  fund  include  long  term  loans  for 
acquisition  of  plant  and  machinery,  refinancing  of  existing  loans,  resuscitation  of  ailing 
industries,  working  capital  and  refinancing  of  existing  leases.  The  loan  amount  for  a  single 
obligor is a maximum of N1 billion in respect of re-financing/re-structuring with an interest rate 
of  7  per  cent  payable  on  quarterly  basis.  All  commercial  banks  and  Development  Finance 
Institutions (excluding BOI) had all been enlisted to participate in the scheme. As at the end of 
December 2010, N199.6 billion had been disbursed to 539 beneficiaries across twelve different 
sectors of the economy. 
23.  
The  N200  billion  Small  and  Medium  Scale  Enterprises  guarantee  Scheme 
established by the CBN in 2010 aims at promoting access to credit by SMEs in Nigeria. The 
scheme provides guarantees on loans by banks to the sector in order to absorb some of the 
risk elements that inhibit banks from lending to the real sector. The activities covered under 
the  scheme  include  manufacturing  and  agricultural  value  chains;  SMEs,  processing, 
packaging  and  distribution  of  primary  products.  The  maximum  amount  that  can  be 
guaranteed is N100 million and is in the form of working capital, term loan for refurbishment, 
equipment  upgrade,  expansion  and  overdraft.  The  guarantee  covers  80  per  cent  of  the 
amount  borrowed  and  is  valid  up  to  the  maturity  date  of  the  loan,  with  maximum  tenor  of 
5 years. 
24. 
A  new  financing  framework  for  agriculture,  the  Nigerian  Incentive–Based  Risk 
Sharing  System  for  Agricultural  lending  (NIRSAL)  is  being  introduced.  This  model  of 
financing agriculture is different in many ways from the current model which has not yielded 
the desired impact of making adequate credit available in the sector. NIRSAL is a demand 
driven  credit  facility  rather  than  the  current  supply  driven  funding.  It  would  adopt  a  value 
chain approach to lending and banks would be free to choose which part of the chain they 
would  be  interested  in  lending.  It  would  build  the  capacity  of  banks  to  engage  and  deliver 
loans  by  providing  technical  assistance,  reduce  counterpart  risks  facing  banks  through 
innovative crop insurance products, reward performance in agricultural lending and would be 
managed with performance based incentives. NIRSAL would pool the current resources in 
CBN’s  agricultural  financing  schemes  and  other  investor  funds  and  transfer  these  into  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that 
Available  data  shows 
the  macroeconomic  environment  has 
different  components  of  the  programme.  In  other  words,  our  existing  agricultural  financing 
and insurance scheme would be assessed, modified and integrated into NIRSAL. 
25.  
All  of  our  development  initiatives  at  the  CBN  have  been  underpinned  by  a  new 
engagement with the Banking industry through the Bankers’ Committee by adopting a more 
collaborative  approach  for  financial  services  led  national  economic  development  and 
transformation. The Bankers’ Committee has identified 3 key sectors: Power, Transportation 
and Agriculture, as most critical to development of the real economy, as well as the change 
that will drive other sectors and contribute to economic development of Nigeria. We work by 
identifying  initiatives  in  each  of  the  focus  sectors  that  the  financial  system  will  support, 
determine  requirements  for  success  including  funding  and  engage  in  advocacy  to  effect 
government policy changes. The Bankers’ Committee also supports industry-wide capacity-
building  and  work  on  the  development  of  regulation  and  legislation  to  support  lending  to 
these three key sectors.  
26.  
improved 
considerably. Inflation rate has moderated at a low double digit while the prime lending rate 
has gone down significantly. The exchange rate has been relatively stable. All these have 
impacted on the growth of the real economy. 
27.  
From the recent experience it is discovered that the preponderance of toxic assets 
in bank portfolios have largely contributed to liquidity challenge facing some banks. However, 
the operation of AMCON has started to strengthen the balance sheets of the deposit money 
banks. It is important that the banking system should learn to strictly to comply with the Basel 
requirements  in  their  operations  in  order  to  safeguard  their  stability.  Therefore,  bank 
managers must be guided by professionalism and good corporate governance principles in 
their day to day activities so that our banks can remain safe, sound and competitive in the 
global market. 
28.  
Maintaining  a  safe  and  sound  banking  sector  is  essential,  given  the  key  role  that 
banks play in facilitating economic growth and financing developmental projects, particularly 
key  infrastructure,  agriculture  and  industry.  Most  emerging  market  economies  have  been 
known to use the domestic financial institutions to execute real sector big ticket projects and 
financial  institutions  in  Nigeria  should  not  be  an  exception  if  we  hope  to  achieve  our 
developmental  objectives.  Therefore,  for  our  banks  to  be  globally  competitive,  the  current 
reforms in the banking will be sustained and strengthened. 
29.  
Finally,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  some  schools  of  thought  have  questioned  the 
rationale for any central bank to pursue the so called multiple objectives. Let me emphasize 
the  fact  that  in  a  developing  economy  such  as  ours  in  need  of  strong  growth,  typically  a 
central bank’s objectives should include developmental role in addition to its core mandate of 
ensuring  price  stability.  Indeed,  during  the  global  financial  crisis,  most  central  banks 
subordinated the price stability objective to achieving financial stability and initiating growth.  
30.  
Despite  the  unusual  monetary  policy  environment,  the  CBN  has  recently  pursued 
the  objectives  of  financial  stability  and  initiating  growth,  but  with  a  critical  eye  on  price 
developments.  The  point  here  is  that  a  focus  on  price  stability  is  not  inconsistent  with 
financial  stability  and  economic  growth  objectives  as  you  cannot  have  economic  growth 
without price stability. Thus, it is our expectation that effective implementation of the recent 
initiatives  would  help  to  promote  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises,  bring  the  necessary 
improvements  to  the  power  sector,  increase  agriculture  output,  create  employment  and 
reduce poverty as well as put Nigeria on the path to meeting the targets of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
