Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Bild 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Bild, 
Germany, conducted by Mr Oliver Santen and published on 15 January 2011. 
 Mr Trichet, in one word, how would you describe the state of the euro today? 
If you allow me two words: credible and stable. 
Will the euro crisis get worse this year? 
Let me be very clear: this is not a crisis of the euro. Rather, what we have is a crisis related 
to the public finances of a number of euro area countries. All governments have to put their 
finances  in  order,  and  above  all  those  governments  and  countries  which  have  lived  well 
beyond their means in the past.  
How are the euro area countries ever to reduce the debt, now totalling €7 trillion? 
This year, the budget deficit in the euro area will be half as high as that in the United States 
or Japan. Virtually all advanced economies face acute fiscal problems. This is something that 
is often forgotten. That being said, this is no time for any complacency. Let me repeat: the 
ECB expects the governments in the euro area to make enormous efforts to bring down their 
debt. Some countries have to get their debt under control again. 
Can you understand that many Germans are afraid of inflation? 
The Germans are right to be fiercely against inflation. Inflation hurts in particular the poorest. 
Price stability is a precondition for growth. But the Germans and the European citizens do not 
need to be afraid: We have delivered and we will deliver price stability. 
Inflation in Europe rose to 2.2% in December, the highest rate for two years. 
We are always concerned if inflation rises and are following developments very closely. But 
the figures for December can be accounted for, above all, by rising energy prices. 
Let me say something about the longer-term figures. In the last 12 years the average rate of 
inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  been  1.97 %,  and  in  Germany  only  1.5 %.  Those  are  better 
figures than at any time in the 50 years before the euro was introduced. In Germany, inflation 
was  2.2 %  in  the  1990s,  2.8%  in  the  1980s  and  even  higher  in  the  1970s.  These  figures 
speak for themselves.  
But why does nearly everybody have the impression that the euro has made life more 
expensive? 
That may have been the case ten years ago. I do not believe that this perception is shared 
today  by  a  significant  number  of  fellow  citizens.  The  ECB  has  ensured  that  the  euro  is  a 
credible and stable store of value. 
Why then do you think that one in two Germans wants the Deutsche Mark back? 
Once again: The euro has ensured stable prices. In the last 12 years the price level has been 
more stable in the Federal Republic than over the previous 50 years. The Germans, too, are 
aware of how valuable it is. 
Why are you in favour of an enhancement of the rescue umbrella?  
Governments need an effective mechanism, which is supportive to ensure financial stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Germany  is  the  biggest  contributor  to  the  rescue  of  the  euro.  Are  we  Europe’s 
paymaster? 
Germany is a very important country in Europe. The measures to combat the debt crisis are 
borne jointly by the Member States. Germany is an important anchor for Europe, not only on 
account of its economic size, but also and above all owing to its own  creditworthiness, its 
sound fiscal policy and its competitiveness. 
Why does Europe not just let default countries go bankrupt? 
First,  I  would  say:  debts  should  be  repaid.  It  is  the  rule  of  law.  Now,  the  International 
Monetary Fund has been around for many years to help marshalling adjustments in countries 
with  difficulties,  in  order  for  them  to  recover  their  creditworthiness  and  honour  their 
commitments. Europe is in line with this approach, for the sake of the financial stability of the 
euro area as a whole.  
Many experts believe that Greece’s bankruptcy is unavoidable. 
The Greek government has taken measures within a strong programme negotiated with the 
European  Commission  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  We  expect  Greece  to 
implement  these  measures  to  the  letter.  Compliance  with  the  announced  adjustment 
programme is checked every three months. 
After Ireland, will other countries be taken under the EU rescue umbrella? 
We are asking all countries to bring their fiscal house in order. This is the best way for them 
to win back their creditworthiness. 
Have the right lessons been learned from the financial crisis? 
We  are  on  the  road  to  far-reaching changes  in the  international  financial  system,  and  it  is 
important that these changes are made. Together with the international community we are 
working hard to ensure that banking rules are changed. Much has already been done, but a 
great deal also remains to be done. 
Will the euro still exist in 20 years’ time? 
Of course, there is no doubt about that. 
Will more than the current 17 countries then have the currency? 
Today, 331 million people in 17 countries use the euro. The rules for joining the euro area 
must be applied strictly. That is the main thing: provided strict application of the rules, the 
euro area is open, as the entry of Estonia demonstrates. 
Mr Trichet, your term of office ends in October. Do you already have your eye on a 
suitable successor? 
That is not up to me. Rather, it is the responsibility of the Heads of State or Government. 
A German at the head of the ECB would surely not be a bad thing for the euro. 
This decision is a very important responsibility of the Heads of State and Government! 
What are you particularly proud of in the seven years you have been in office so far? 
The ECB has a clear primary mandate, which is to ensure price stability in the euro area. We 
have delivered and we will continue to deliver. And all members of the Executive Board of 
the ECB, all colleagues of the Governing Council of the ECB can be very proud of that. Let 
me add: peace and friendship between the European nations are essential for the stability 
and prosperity of our continent. I have devoted my life to bring the friendship between France 
and Germany to the benefit of Europe as a whole.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
