Glenn Stevens: Overview of the Australian economy and challenges 
ahead 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 11 February 2011. 
 In the relatively short period since we last met, the global economy has continued to expand 
and, if anything, looks a little stronger than it did. China and India have sustained a strong 
pace of expansion and the United States seems to be gaining a bit more momentum lately 
though it still faces considerable problems. Conditions in Europe remain quite mixed and the 
interplay  of  sovereign  and  bank  creditworthiness  continues  to  be  a  source  of  great 
uncertainty.  
Observers have been revising up both their estimates of global growth outcomes for 2010 
and their forecasts of growth in 2011. The IMF is now saying world GDP growth was about 
5 per cent in 2010, which is well above the 30-year average. For 2011 the IMF has lifted its 
forecast to 4.4 per cent, which is still noticeably above average.  
Global  commodity  prices  have  risen  further  in  recent  months.  This  has  been  quite 
widespread – from metals, to minerals, to energy and foodstuffs. In a number of countries, 
measures of consumer price inflation have reflected this rise in commodity prices, particularly 
in the case of food. China, India, indeed most of Asia, and Latin America are all facing these 
issues. Managing these pressures is shaping up as one of the major international economic 
policy challenges of 2011.  
The  commodity  prices  most  important  for  Australia  are  at  very  high  levels.  In  the  case  of 
coal,  this  reflects  in  part  the  supply  tightness  resulting  from  the  Queensland  floods,  which 
have reduced national production by something like 15 per cent and had a material effect on 
the global supply of traded coal. But supply of iron ore has not been much affected by the 
weather and its price has risen above the highs of 2008, driven by strong demand.  
As a result, Australia’s terms of trade are higher than assumed three months ago and look 
like  they  will  peak  higher  and  later  than  we  had  previously  assumed.  A  large  build-up  of 
capacity  in  iron  ore,  natural  gas  and  coal  is  planned.  Over  the  summer,  there  have  been 
further  announcements  of  projects  that  had  been  proposed  being  given  the  “go-ahead”, 
principally in the gas sector.  
In  broad  terms,  therefore,  the  main  medium-term  story  the  Bank  has  been  pointing  to  for 
some time still seems to be in place: we are experiencing a terms of trade event of very large 
size, of the type that happens only once or twice in a century. Our job is to try to manage this 
so as to avoid, as far as possible, the instability that has accompanied most previous such 
episodes.  
To date, something that is probably a bit unusual in the face of such developments is the 
relatively  cautious  attitude  of  households  towards  their  finances.  This  has  been  much 
remarked on over the recent period, but in fact looking back it seems that the rate of saving 
from current income has been rising for several years now. With the caveat that saving is not 
very accurately measured, it looks like the propensity to save out of new income has been 
quite  high,  and  that  people  are  working  to  reduce  debt  more  quickly,  and  are  more 
demanding of value in their purchases than they had been for some time.  
This  is  quite  a  difficult  environment  for  retailers.  But  from  a  macroeconomic  point  of  view, 
perhaps  it  is,  on  balance,  not  entirely  unwelcome  in  the  current  circumstances.  If 
consumption  were  to  boom  at  the  same  time  as  we  try  to  expand  the  resources  sector, 
upgrade  urban  infrastructure  and  increase  our  pace  of  housing  construction  to  house  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
how large are the effects on output and prices that we should expect to see? 
are they due to demand or supply disturbances? and 
how long they will last – do they change the medium-term outlook? 
growing population, it would be harder to avoid the economy overheating. The more cautious 
behaviour  is  also  building  resilience  into  household  balance  sheets,  which  will  be  a  good 
thing to have in the future should developments turn in an unfavourable direction. The ratio of 
household  debt  to  income  seems  to  have  stabilised,  having  risen  continually  for  two 
decades. I might add that this is happening in many countries, not just in Australia. But we 
have the good fortune to be seeing this financial consolidation happening at a time when our 
incomes are being increased by other factors.  
Locally, attention has been focused on the devastation caused by extreme weather across 
several  states,  most  particularly  Queensland.  The  human  cost  cannot  be  quantified  in 
dollars. The people affected are still absorbing that cost, and some will do so long after the 
economic effects have passed. Those of us not directly affected have admired their courage 
and resilience.  
The  Reserve  Bank,  for  its  part,  has  an  obligation  to  consider  the  potential  impact  on  the 
national economy. We have to ask at least three questions:  
 
 
 
We have set out some estimates in our Statement on Monetary Policy. This was finalised after 
the Queensland and Victorian flooding had been observed, but before the impact of Cyclone 
Yasi could be assessed. I should emphasise that these estimates are preliminary and that a 
good deal of uncertainty inevitably surrounds them.  
With  those  caveats,  we  expect  real  GDP  will  be  noticeably  lower  than  it  would  otherwise 
have been in the December and March quarters. By the March quarter, it could be about a 
percentage point lower than the pre-flood forecast.  
As to the reason for this effect, it is not primarily because demand for goods and services 
has suddenly slumped, but because the economy’s capacity to supply goods and services, 
and especially some key commodities, has been disrupted. It will most likely recover the bulk 
of those supply losses in the June quarter as production, particularly coal mining, resumes. 
Nonetheless, for many businesses there has been a period of lost income, as indicated by 
the reduction in the level of GDP for the 2010/11 financial year of about half a percentage 
point compared with earlier forecasts.  
After  the  initial  recovery  in  production  over  the  next  few  months,  the process of  rebuilding 
damaged structures, accommodated in part by deferral of some other spending, will see a 
modest increment to demand over the coming year or two compared with what we expected 
three months ago.  
Since  these  estimates  were  put  together,  Cyclone  Yasi  has  done  major  damage  to  some 
crops.  Some  very  early  intelligence  we  have  received  suggests  that  the  damage  to  crops 
may not be quite as great as occurred with Cyclone Larry five years ago and that recovery of 
some crops might be a bit faster than in that episode. Nonetheless, there has clearly been a 
very substantial impact and a big rise in the prices of some fruits is already occurring, on top 
of the increases in prices for some foodstuffs as a result of the earlier flooding. The result of 
this is likely to be a temporary rise in the CPI inflation rate, to around 3 per cent in the June 
quarter. This is higher than the figure in the Statement because the impact of Cyclone Yasi 
could not be included in that forecast. The combined contributions to this outcome of all the 
summer flooding and the cyclone add up to about half a percentage point or a little more. 
These effects should begin to reverse in the second half of the year and should have largely 
dissipated by the end of 2011.  
We do not think the effects on activity of these events will derail the expansion. Nor should 
the  price  effects  pose  a  serious  threat  to  the  achievement  of  the  medium-term  goal  for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation, provided the community can understand their temporary nature and expectations of 
ongoing inflation remain well-anchored.  
Accordingly,  the  view  of  the  Board  at  the  recent  meeting  was  that  while  the  impact  of  the 
floods on the short-term path of output and prices would be quite substantial, monetary policy 
should not respond to those effects. Likewise, while the recovery efforts may add a little to 
aggregate  demand  over  the  latter  part  of  2011  and  2012,  those  effects  should  be 
manageable. While we could not assess the impact of Cyclone Yasi at the Board meeting, 
our assessment of the medium-term outlook is not very different now.  
The outcomes for inflation in the latter part of 2010 were quite moderate and a little lower 
than  we  had  thought  they  would  be  at  the  time  of  the  last  hearing.  To  what  extent  this 
represents a genuinely lower trend, as opposed to noise, is, as always, difficult to say. There 
would  appear  to  be  some  association  between  consumer  caution,  reports  of  widespread 
discounting  in  the  retail  sector  and  the  very  high  exchange  rate.  If  that  connection  is  in 
operation then the question arises as to how long such cautious behaviour might continue – 
and this is one of the uncertainties to which we point in the section on “risks” in the Outlook 
chapter of the Statement. There are of course other uncertainties as well. But stepping back, 
underlying  inflation  has  fallen  by  a  substantial  amount  from  the  peak  in  2008.  It  is  worth 
recording that a combination, on the latest figures, of a 5 per cent unemployment rate and an 
inflation  rate  clearly  “in  the  2’s”  is  a  pretty  favourable  one  by  the  standards  of  recent 
decades.  
Turning finally to monetary policy itself, as a result of the adjustment to the cash rate made in 
November, and the changes made by financial institutions to lending rates, interest rates being 
paid by borrowers are a bit above average compared with the past 15 years. Household credit 
growth is quite modest and business credit is still declining, as firms continue to consolidate 
balance  sheets  and,  in  the  case  of  larger  companies,  to  access  capital  markets  directly. 
Reports suggest that there is some easing of lending conditions in some areas but my sense is 
that,  generally,  lenders  remain  quite  cautious.  The  exchange  rate  is  at  peak  levels  for  the 
floating  rate  era.  This  is  not  especially  surprising  given  the  level  of  the  terms  of  trade,  but 
nonetheless it is exerting dampening pressure on the traded sector outside of the resources 
sector.  
So,  overall,  financial  conditions  are  on  the  firm  side.  In  view  of  the  general  outlook  that  I 
sketched at the beginning, that seems to us to be appropriate. Having reached that position 
in a fairly timely fashion, the Board has judged it to be sensible of late to leave the cash rate 
steady.  
My colleagues and I look forward to your questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
