Eric S Rosengren: The role of “financial myths” in financial crises 
Remarks  by  Mr  Eric  S  Rosengren,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  at  the  Boston  University  conference  on  “The  State  of  Financial 
Reform”  (panel  on  Lessons  Learned  from  the  Global  Financial  Meltdown),  Boston, 
Massachusetts, 28 February 2011. 
 Good  morning.  I’d  like  to  thank  Boston  University  and  all  the  conference  organizers, 
particularly Larry Kotlikoff, for the opportunity to be here to discuss lessons learned from the 
global financial meltdown.1  
Everyone knows that the past three years have been a particularly difficult period for global 
financial market stability and for the global economy. The financial crisis clearly showed the 
dramatic impact that financial problems can have on the real economy. And in spite of a fair 
amount of focus on financial stability prior to the crisis, events highlighted that the private and 
public sectors both here and abroad were not fully prepared for the kinds of financial shocks 
we experienced. 
Today I’d like to discuss the role of what I call “financial myths” in creating financial crises. By 
financial myths I mean the beliefs, held by most market participants and by regulators, that 
certain outcomes are so unlikely to occur that they can basically be ignored – essentially that 
low probability events, based on historical experience, can be reclassified as zero probability 
events. When these sorts of widespread assumptions – these financial myths – turn out to be 
wrong, most financial-market participants find themselves poorly positioned for the resulting 
shocks. The result is insolvency of groups of firms and substantial uncertainty – uncertainty 
about  the  exposure  of  many  firms  to  direct  losses,  or  to  indirect  losses  created  by  their 
counterparty exposure to other firms that suffer direct losses. 
These so-called financial myths are not unique to this time period, or to this country. I would 
like  to  briefly  mention  two  among  the  numerous  examples  from  recent  history  –  examples 
where financial myths were important in helping to create a potential crisis. The first example 
involves  the  assumption  of  many  in  Japan  that  real  estate  prices  could  not  fall  in  the  late 
1980s.  The  second  involves  the  assumption,  in  the  late  1990s,  that  the  Internet  had 
completely changed how we should think about company valuation. 
I will then briefly mention four financial myths that played critical roles in the recent financial 
crisis. These include the following assumptions:  
 
 
that a diversified portfolio of US real estate had little risk of falling in value;  
that  Triple-A  rated  securities  based  on  mortgages  were  so  well  protected  by  the 
structure of the securitization that they posed little risk even if real estate prices did 
fall;  
that the evolution of many financial institutions to an “originate to distribute” model of 
lending  and  securitization  meant  there  was  little  risk  exposure  to  declining  real 
estate prices; and,  
that there was little risk of a “run” on organizations like investment banks that relied 
on short-term, collateralized borrowing.  
                                                   
1   Of course, the views I express today  are  my own,  not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of 
Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Then  to  conclude  I’d  like  to  briefly  mention  what  we  can  and  must  do  to  reduce  the  risks 
resulting from these sorts of financial myths, going forward. I believe that financial stability 
will, in the future, be better served as we implement some of the protections afforded by the 
Dodd-Frank Act; but I also suspect that doing better at protecting against various financial 
myths ultimately requires a cultural change. As a discipline, risk management has been too 
willing to accept that historical statistical relationships will be stable. Ideally, risk management 
practices  would  lead  us  to  ask  things  like  “What  will  happen  if  the  historical  relationship 
breaks down?” and “What assumptions would need to change for them to break down?”  
Also,  I  will  touch  on  the  fact  that  challenging  assumptions  and  understanding  the  risk 
inherent in relying solely on historical experience should not be the responsibility of the risk 
manager alone. These things also need to be better ingrained in CEOs, members of boards 
of  directors,  and  regulators.  I  believe  we  need  to  do  a  much  better  job  of  using  so-called 
stress tests to challenge commonly held views, so that boards of directors and regulators of 
firms better understand the fundamental drivers of risks in organizations and in the financial 
system. 
Financial myths in recent history 
Let me look back to the time period before the most recent crisis and share two examples of 
financial myths – and, unfortunately, their messy demise. And I would emphasize that these 
are just two of many examples of the phenomenon. 
First,  I’ll  note  that  during  the  late  1980s,  New  England  began  to  experience  substantial 
declines  in  residential  and  commercial  real  estate  prices.  My  research  at  that  time  at  the 
Boston  Fed  was  focused  on  how  problems  at  financial  institutions  could  disrupt  credit 
availability.  Interestingly,  in  1989  I  was  visited  by  a  variety  of  Japanese  academics  and 
government  officials.  They  wanted  to  understand  how  we  had  missed  the  signs  of  an 
overheating real estate market.  
As Figure 1 indicates, it was shall we say an interesting time for researchers from Japan to 
ask such a question. However, when I inquired about the rapid increase in real estate prices 
in  their  country,  I  always  received  the  same  answer  –  Japan  is  an  island  nation  and  had 
limited  buildable  lots,  and  that  prevented  real  estate  prices  from  declining.  This  view  was 
very widely held. However, as you can see in Figure 2, that widely held financial myth was 
soon shattered. Unfortunately, the result of this belief was eventually the crippling of some of 
the world’s largest financial institutions, a long period of subpar economic growth in Japan, 
and eventually a problematic deflation that Japan struggles with to this day. 
A second example is provided by the growth of the Internet, and in particular the growth in 
“dot-com”  stock  valuations,  in  the  late  1990s.  As Figure 3  shows,  there  was  a substantial 
run-up in stock valuations during this period. At the time I had conversations with a variety of 
financial professionals in Boston who made the argument that traditional valuation measures 
no longer applied. The view assumed by many was that valuation of firms should be based 
on clicks of a computer mouse rather than earnings, either current or expected in the future.  
As Figure 4 shows, such enthusiasm for a new way of valuing companies was short-lived. 
But  importantly,  the  substantial  decline  in  Internet-related  stocks  did  not  create  a  financial 
crisis.  Many  of  the  positions  were  equity  financed  –  so,  while  significant  wealth  was  lost, 
financial institutions and financial markets did not suffer severe repercussions. That loss in 
wealth helped ignite the 2001 recession, but it was a much more mild downturn than the one 
we have experienced of late. With the financial infrastructure not significantly damaged, the 
impact  was  much  less  severe  than  if  individuals  and  firms  had  taken  highly  leveraged 
positions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Financial myths in the recent crisis 
Now  I’d  like  to  describe,  and  present  some  charts  that  illustrate,  four  financial  myths  that 
played a role in the recent crisis. 
Myth 1 – Diversification eliminated the risk of declines in residential real estate 
holdings 
Despite the experience of Japan’s real estate in the 1990s, and substantial declines in real 
estate prices in many regions of the United States throughout history, many commentators 
argued that a significant, widespread housing-price decline in a country as large and varied 
as the United States had not happened historically and was very unlikely to occur.  
That  logic  was  based  on  what  you  see  in  Figure  5,  which  highlights  that  there  had  been 
significant declines in some regions of the country – but the declines were coincident with 
increases elsewhere. As Figure 6 shows, there had not been recent, sustained declines in 
national  real  estate  prices.  This observation,  combined  with  the  increased  securitization  of 
real  estate  into  diversified  national  portfolios,  gave  buyers  –  and  those  rating  the 
securitizations  –  confidence  that  the  “real  estate  cycle  risk”  was  substantially  mitigated 
through diversification.  
But,  as  Figure  7  shows,  the  assumption  that  a  geographically  diversified  portfolio  of  real 
estate  assets  would  avoid  price  declines  proved  wrong.  While  prices  nationally  had  not 
experienced  a  substantial  decline  in  the  past,  for  three  years  the  U.S.  has  experienced 
substantial and sustained declines in prices.  
Some of my colleagues point out, probably appropriately, that given the historical data the 
failure to anticipate nationwide house prices falling is largely understandable. It was certainly 
very widespread. What may be more surprising is that in the 2005 timeframe, when many 
were  expecting  house  prices  to  slow  down  or  flatten,  there  was  not  much  by  way  of  risk 
mitigation undertaken. 
Myth 2 – Triple-A mortgage securities carried little risk  
The  securitization  market  –  that  is,  the  market  for  securities  based  on  various  slices  of 
pooled mortgages – grew dramatically over the past decade. One reason for the growth in 
securitization  was  investor  interest  in,  and  demand  for,  securities  with  little  credit  risk  but 
returns above those of Treasuries.  
Many buyers of such securities felt sure of two things. First, that national real estate prices 
were  quite  unlikely  to  fall  –  in  other  words,  our  Myth  1.  Second,  that  even  in  the  highly 
unlikely  event  that  the  price  of  a  national  portfolio  did  fall,  they  would  be  protected  by  the 
structure  of the  securitization.  Securitizations  were  structured  so  that  any  losses  were  first 
borne  by  lower-rated  securities  built  from  the  pool  of  underlying  mortgages.  Given  the 
structure, the assumption was that lower-valued securities would take all potential losses if 
borrowers defaulted. Many – but not all, of course2 – assumed that home-price declines and 
related defaults would have to be very extreme before the highest rated, Triple-A securities 
were  impacted.  Under  this  assumption  these  securities  fully  deserved  the  Triple-A  rating 
given by the rating agencies.  
I should note that making this assumption about Triple-A rated mortgage backed securities 
(MBSs)  proved  less  problematic  than  making  this  assumption  about  the  recombined  lower 
                                                 
2   Boston Fed researchers note some examples of contrary analysis of Subprime ABS structures written in 2005 
suggesting vulnerability to even a 5 percent fall in house prices. See “Making Sense of the Subprime Crisis” 
by  Paul  Willen  with  Kristopher  S.  Gerardi,  Andreas  Lehnert  and  Shane  Sherlund  (Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, Fall 2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
tranches of mortgage-backed securities that were billed as Triple-A rated collateralized debt 
obligations  (CDOs).3  But  many  investors  focused  not  on  the  security’s  underlying 
components, merely on the ratings. 
Figure 8 shows that Triple-A securities remained at par values as the securitization boom 
gathered  steam.  However,  Figure  9  shows  that  when  the  severity  of  the  decline in  house 
prices manifested itself, even the Triple-A rated mortgage securities collapsed in value. The 
combination  of  illiquidity,  growing  concerns  with  the  real  estate  market,  and  ebbing 
confidence in the ratings resulted in dramatic declines in the pricing of Triple-A securities as 
the financial crisis worsened.4 
Myth 3 – The “originate to distribute” model limited the balance-sheet risk of banks 
Over the decade preceding the crisis, large commercial and investment banks had become 
increasingly  involved  in  securitizing  mortgage  assets.  They  argued  that  this  provided  a 
steady  stream  of  fee  income  but  generated  little  risk  for  the  bank.  While  they  packaged 
mortgages, they were not retaining the risk in their own portfolio – instead, the risk was taken 
by  those  that  purchased  the  mortgage  securities,  particularly  the  lower-rated  mortgage 
securities.  
What was frequently ignored by many was the rapid growth of Triple-A mortgage securities 
holdings elsewhere within the banks, as well as in off balance sheet structures. While these 
off  balance  sheet  structures  were  considered  separate  entities,  banks  found  the  potential 
reputational risk of not supporting their sponsored off balance sheet risk sufficiently great that 
many  ended  up  supporting  these  off  balance  sheet  structures.  In  a  sense,  “originate  to 
distribute” was, in practice, something more like “originate to hold, loosely, somewhat off to 
the side.”5 
In  addition,  risk  managers,  bank  management,  and  regulators  were  sufficiently  lulled  by 
Myths 1 and 2 to develop their faith in Myth 3. The unfortunate result was that these banks 
were not as protected from falling housing prices as many had assumed, and this contributed 
to the substantial decline in stock prices and the need for government support for many of 
these large financial intermediaries.  
Myth 4 – Investment banks were not subject to runs, because their liabilities were 
collateralized 
There  has  long  been  an  understanding,  and  indeed  a  regulatory  presumption,  that  banks 
could  be  subject  to  “runs,”  resulting  in  a  need  for  both  deposit  insurance  and  a  heavily 
regulated environment to reduce that risk. At the same time, it had largely been presumed 
that investment banks were better protected against such runs. While the balance sheets of 
investment  banks  had  substantial  short-term  liabilities,  many  of  them  were  collateralized. 
Investment  banks  would  buy  longer-term  securities  but  finance  them  with  short-term 
borrowing (using repurchase agreements). It was assumed that because there was collateral 
backing up the loans, borrowers were protected and would not run. 
Financing  securities  with  short-term  borrowing  allowed  investment  banks  to  substantially 
expand  their  balance  sheets,  as  shown  in  Figure 10.  However,  the  lenders  in  this  market 
                                                 
3   Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) constructed from subprime asset-backed securities (ABS) are perhaps 
the most potent example of underestimation of risk. Triple-A rated CDOs did more damage to balance sheets 
than Triple-A rated ABS. 
4   Holding to maturity may have moderated some losses, but many did not have that luxury. Investors needing to 
sell with the threat of downgrades suffered substantial losses, particularly in an illiquid environment. 
5   Others have called the approach “originate to hide.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
were other banks, money-market funds, and hedge funds. As questions about the value of 
the  collateral  became  more  prominent,  and  the  solvency  and  liquidity  of  investment  banks 
became  a  greater  concern,  many  short-term  lenders  abandoned  the  market.  Figure 11 
shows the dramatic change that occurred. The inability to finance large securities holdings 
made the traditional model of investment banking unsustainable, and this contributed to the 
failure  of  investment  banks  and  the  merger  under  duress,  or  conversion  to  bank  holding 
companies, of others. 
What can we do about financial myths, going forward? 
We plumb this history to help us understand what we can do about financial myths, going 
forward, and how we can avoid their damaging impact.  
As the previous slides have shown, taking too much confidence in historical data repeating in 
the future can be dangerous – to the financial health of institutions and the financial system. 
That said, we are probably not likely to see a sea-change in the tendency for overconfidence 
in and reliance on recent statistical regularities.  
However,  there  are  a  variety  of  market  participants  that  could  better  protect  their  own 
interests  –  and  the  financial  system  –  if  they  spend  more  time  understanding  the  key 
assumptions  being  made  in  financial  modeling,  and  have  a  clearer  understanding  of  what 
could happen if those assumptions were invalid. Properly done, stress testing should provide 
valuable information to organizations on key risk drivers. This needs to be more than feeding 
a handful of macroeconomic assumptions into a model. It requires an understanding of the 
events that could lead to that macroeconomic outcome, and what other indirect effects might 
be likely to occur.  
Who should be responsible for regular, thoughtful stress testing? Risk managers, CEOs, and 
boards of directors should all understand key risk drivers – and should consider whether a 
stress  scenario  is  sufficiently  severe,  and  whether  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  are 
reasonably captured. Rating agencies and stock analysts should be increasingly demanding 
better quality stress tests, and that the results be made available to them. Finally, regulators 
should be able to compare and contrast the quality of stress tests across organizations and 
hold accountable those organizations that are not keeping up with their peers.  
As I mentioned at the outset, challenging assumptions and understanding risks should not 
only be the responsibility of the risk manager. These things also need to be better ingrained 
in CEOs, members of boards of directors, and regulators.  
Operationalizing this point is not going to be easy, but it is critical. At a fundamental level, 
debunking  a  myth  requires  individuals  to  go  against  strongly  and  widely  held  beliefs,  to 
convince  decision-makers,  and  to  build  consensus.  For  this  to  happen  we  may  need 
significant changes in the governance of risk management at banks and other parties in the 
financial system. Put more plainly, we need to think about an environment where those in the 
position of most influence have the incentive to “poke holes” in myths via robust stress tests, 
and not the incentives to override their risk managers when the stress-test implications are 
not to their liking, or risk a near-term loss of clients or market share. 
Concluding observations 
New  financial  myths  are  regularly  created.  In  closing,  I  will  just  speculate  on  where  some 
may exist that interested parties should be exploring, now.  
 
Potential Myth 1 – Sovereign debt problems will not be disruptive to the world 
economy. Not long ago, the sovereign debt problems were viewed as manageable 
and confined to one country. However, as interest rate spreads have widened – as 
shown  in  Figure  12  –  investors  are  highlighting  that  problems  in  many  countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 have yet to be resolved. While I believe the most likely outcome is that there are no 
serious disruptions, interested parties should diligently consider scenarios that could 
be disruptive, involving various countries.  
Potential Myth 2 – State and local financing problems will not be disruptive to 
the national economy. While much attention has been given to problems in state 
and local finances, it is generally assumed that the capacity exists to resolve these 
problems.  While  I  expect  these  issues  will  be  resolved  without  widespread  or 
cascading  problems,  we  should  consider  what  scenarios  could  emerge  if  political 
impasses result in more disruptive outcomes.  
These are just two of many potential scenarios that are worth exploring. However, I would 
add  that  the  recent  financial  crisis  highlighted  that  unlikely  events  can  happen,  and  when 
they  do,  the  outcomes  can  be  quite  costly  for  everyone.  So  the  need  for  better  risk 
management is clear. Fortunately, the opportunity is there as well. 
Thank you. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    7
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
