Ewald Nowotny: The future of European integration – some economic 
perspectives 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Austria, at the 39th OeNB (Austrian National Bank) Annual Economic Conference on “The 
Future of European Integration: Some Economic Perspectives”, Vienna, 23 May 2011. 
 the 
to  welcome  you 
the  39th  Economics  Conference  of 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased 
to 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank here in Vienna. 
I  am  proud  that  we  have  once  again  managed  to  prepare  a  highly  interesting  program 
featuring  distinguished  speakers  and  discussants  from  different  backgrounds  in  academia, 
policy-making  and  policy-commentating  who  have  in  common  a  vital  interest  in  economic 
issues. I should like to thank all of them in advance for coming to Vienna and for contributing 
to this year’s Economics Conference. I would also like to take the opportunity to thank the 
staff members of the OeNB for their great efforts in organizing this event. 
My particular welcome goes to Federal Minister Rudolf Hundstorfer, who will address the 
participants of this year’s conference as our first speaker. I am very honored to welcome Olli 
Rehn, Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Commission, who 
will  join  us  today.  I  am  also  very  grateful  that  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  has  found  the  time  to  be  with  us  today. 
Lorenzo Bini Smaghi is not only a dear colleague of mine on the Governing Council of the 
European Central Bank, he has also been one of the most eloquent commentators on the 
future of the European project over the last few months. Thank you very much for joining us 
today. 
Finally, I would like to add that I am very glad to see such a densely packed audience here 
today.  This  confirms  that  this  year’s  conference  topic  –  “The  Future  of  European 
Integration” – strikes a chord with many people from different walks of life. As you all know, a 
conference  of  this  size  is  not  arranged  within  a  couple  of  days.  In  fact,  the  lags  of 
transmission  between  a  decision  and  its  visibility,  which  are  well  known  from  monetary 
policymaking,  are  also  present  in  organizing  a  monetary  policy  conference.  Sometimes  a 
topic  that  appears  to  be  timely  and  urgent  in the  planning  phase  of a  conference  has  lost 
some  of  its  appeal  by  the  time  the  event  actually  takes  place.  This  year,  however,  it  was 
almost  the  exact  opposite.  When  we  first  thought  about  a  possible  topic  for  the  2011 
Economics  Conference  last  fall,  we  did  not  expect  –  and  could  not  have  expected  –  how 
significant  and  intensively  debated  this  very  topic  would  be  in  May.  The  debt  crises  and 
institutional reforms we have observed over the recent months have moved the topic of the 
future path of integration to the top of both the European and the international agenda. I am 
therefore  looking  very  much  forward  to  our  discussions,  which  promise  to  be  lively  and  
– hopefully – also fruitful. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
From its beginning, Europe has been characterized by alternating periods of integration 
and disintegration. This, however, is not to say that every step toward more integration has 
to be followed by a step in the opposite direction. Historical progress does not follow such a 
simple pattern. In the sixty-six years since the end of World War II, a model of European 
integration has developed which is – for the first time – neither based on strategic alliances 
nor on involuntary association. The connections between countries have become closer and 
closer over the years, even though this process has not been linear but has had its ups and 
downs,  its  “speed-ups  and  slow-downs”  so  to  say.  Every  setback,  however,  was  typically 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
followed by a further leap forward. If the picture of circular movements is at all accurate, one 
should think of European integration not as a wavelike process but rather as a spiral stair 
where each cycle is accompanied by an upward movement. 
In recognizing this pattern, I do not wish to diminish the challenges we are facing today. Nor 
do I wish to suggest that it will be easy to find the right answers to these challenges. We 
have  heard  many  different  assessments  of  the  causes  and  underlying  mechanisms  of  the 
current  situation  and  equally  many  proposals,  suggestions  and  solution  strategies. 
Politicians,  economists  and  commentators  are  in  disagreement  on  many  of  the  issues 
currently  at  stake.  It  is  rather  telling  that  this  disparity  of  positions  is  also  reflected  in  the 
public  opinion  and  in  noneconomic  newspaper  articles.  Two  well-known  German-speaking 
authors,  for  example,  recently  expressed  their  views  on  the  European  project  –  and  they 
have come to almost diametrically opposed conclusions. While one of them talks about the 
“Gentle  Monster  Brussels,”  the  other  praises  the  qualification  and  dedication  of  its 
bureaucracy. 
In light of the already existing multitude of opinions, let me offer just some brief observations 
on our current situation and on a possible way forward. Let me start by saying that I see a 
“double  heterogeneity”  as  one  of  the  main  causes  of  our  present  constellation:  a 
heterogeneity  of  national  economic  developments  and  a  heterogeneity  of  supranational 
institutions.  Let  me  begin  with  the  latter  –  the  heterogeneity  of  institutions.  On  the  one 
hand, a majority of EU countries have handed over the responsibility for monetary policy to 
an  independent  supranational  institution:  the  European  Central  Bank.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  economic  policy,  which  still  is  –  in  large  part  –  the  responsibility  of  the  individual 
Member States. This set-up follows from the subsidiarity principle, which aims to respect and 
support  local  policy  decisions  wherever  they  are  reasonable.  We  have  had  to  realize, 
however,  that  it  is  often  not  easy  to  specify  the  optimal  level  of  policymaking.  The  lack  of 
more  centralized  economic  governance 
the  second 
heterogeneity – the one between countries – becomes visible, as has been the case in the 
recent past. 
Cross-country  heterogeneity  is,  in  the  first  place,  a  structural  phenomenon.  Individual 
countries have reached different stages in their economic development; they are specialized 
in  different  areas  of  economic  production;  they  are  characterized  by  different  sets  of 
institutions and they have different preferences regarding the reach of the market and role of 
the  welfare  state.  While  these  structural  differences  reflect  national  histories,  national 
institutions and national preferences, they are nonetheless not a strictly national affair. They 
are not, because the idiosyncratic situation in one Member State can easily spill over to other 
countries and to the EU as a whole. A fiscal crisis typically only breaks out at the end of a 
longer process of unhealthy and unsustainable development, although budgetary distress is 
sometimes – but not always – visible earlier on. 
Cross-country differences are nowadays clearly reflected in almost any macroeconomic and 
financial time series, starting from interest rate spreads to economic forecasts. In fact, the 
signals coming from the most recent forecasts for the European Union are quite positive 
and the first quarter of 2011 has shown improvements that were larger than expected. The 
outlook  for  the  global  economy  has  also  improved,  and  this  synchronicity  might  lead  to 
further  positive  reinforcement  effects  for  the  European  economy.  One  cannot  exclude  the 
possibility of a slowdown in recovery, but I think that the risks of an L-shaped or a W-shaped 
development have decreased. The picture is particularly encouraging for Germany and for a 
number  of  smaller,  export-oriented  countries,  while  some  peripheral  countries  are  lagging 
behind,  both  in  terms  of  GDP  growth  rates  and  of  unemployment  rates.  Although  this 
divergence is of course worrisome, we should not immobilize ourselves by focusing on the 
problematic cases alone. If we do, we might forget that on average the performance of the 
EU economy was good – both during and after the crisis. The flexible way in which many 
countries reacted to the unexpected events was certainly facilitated by the past progress of 
European integration, which was accompanied by structural progress and an intensification 
is  especially  noticeable  when 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of trade. The remaining divergence in economic development, however, is in my view a clear 
mandate to further reduce the institutional heterogeneity of economic governance. 
In order to shape the new institutional landscape in the best possible way, it is useful to look 
back  for  a  moment  and  analyze  the  trends  and  conditions  that  made  a  crisis  of  this  size 
possible. A correct account of the crisis period is not only important for economic historians. 
It  is  even  more  important  for  today’s  policymakers  as  it  enables  them  to  identify  the  main 
weaknesses and to tackle them in an adequate way. In many respects the chronology of the 
recent  contraction  has  followed  the  prototypical  sequence  of  events  characteristic  for 
severe  financial  crises.  The  main  preconditions  were  a  number  of  slowly  emerging 
disequilibriums on the real side of the economy, accompanied by suboptimal behavior and 
regulation  in  the  financial  sector.  These  real  factors  include,  for  example,  the  global 
imbalances that led to the “paradox” financial flows from emerging to advanced economies. 
This caused a relative abundance of available funds in the advanced economies, which was 
further  amplified  by  a  rapidly  growing  financial  industry  and  a  period  of  rather  low  global 
interest  rates.  These  elements,  among  others,  contributed  to  an  increase  in  household 
indebtedness and to low private savings rates. The financial sector, on the other hand, was 
eager  to  satisfy  the  demand  for  apparently  safe  assets  by  designing  and  selling  exotic 
products.  At  the  same  time,  one  could  observe  a  deterioration  of  lending  standards, 
excessive  leverage  ratios  and  the  extension  of  management  contracts  that  favored  short-
term  behavior  and  excessive  risk-taking.  In  the  financial  crisis,  all  of  these  factors  worked 
together to cause a massive fall in asset prices, a wave of fire sales and an almost complete 
breakdown of the interbank market. These turmoils in the financial market then led to a loss 
of confidence in the real sector and a plunge in production and trade. The shockwaves finally 
reached the fiscal sector and have led to a – sometimes huge – increase in deficits and in 
public  debt.  This  was  particularly  true  for  countries  which  had  recorded  large  imbalances 
before the crisis and which, in addition, had structural problems to struggle with. Often, these 
were problems that had been present for some time but had remained hidden in the periods 
of easy money, credit booms and increasing indebtedness. 
This short and necessarily sketchy and incomplete account suggests that there have been 
weaknesses  and  failures  in  at  least  four  areas  of  economic  governance:  the 
governance of the financial sector, of national economic structures, cross-country balances 
and  fiscal  policies.  We  need  reforms  in  all  four  of  these  areas.  This  is  important  to  stress 
since  the  events  of  the  recent  months  have  put  fiscal  problems  and  the  role  of  the 
government to the fore. It goes without saying that national and supranational bodies did not 
work in the most efficient way before and during the crisis and that it is necessary to improve 
their  functioning.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  this  is  only  one  field  that  calls  for  reform 
efforts. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We have already seen some reform progress over recent months. I do not need to give you a 
detailed account of all the institutional adaptations and innovations which have been put 
into  place  recently  or  which  are  scheduled  to  be  implemented  in  the  near  future.  First, 
because most of you will have followed these events closely and second, because I am sure 
that  we  will  hear  much  more  about  them  in  the  course  of  this  conference.  I  just  want  to 
mention some of the innovations that are related to all four areas that I identified before as 
the crucial targets of reform: the modification of the Stability and Growth Pact (to allow for a 
higher  degree  of  automatism  of  –  and  a  stricter  adherence  to  –  the  rules);  the  Euro  Plus 
Pact,  which  will  improve  the  coordination  of  national  economic  policies  and  help  identify 
macroeconomic imbalances; the set-up of new supervisory authorities for securities, banking 
and  insurance;  and  the  establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  to  monitor  macrofinancial  stability  and  manage  future 
sovereign debt crises. At the same time we have also seen that some countries have tackled 
their own specific structural deficiencies to be better able to cope with the current crisis and 
with future economic shocks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The biggest challenge for this new institutional architecture is to implement improvements in 
monitoring and coordination with respect to fiscal policy and macroeconomic imbalances. 
In both fields we will have to find rules and regulations to help us decide when a country’s 
budgetary or macroeconomic development looks sustainable and when it seems to be on the 
wrong  track.  But  this  task  of  identifying  fiscal  or  macroeconomic  imbalances  is  inherently 
difficult. In most cases it is not possible to draw a clear line between the states of insolvency 
and  illiquidity  or  between  a  macroeconomic  divergence  that  is  just  the  consequence  of  a 
catching-up process and one that is the sign of an alarming disequilibrium process. 
In this context, I see a number of guiding principles that could be useful in defining a new 
structure of European economic governance. 
First, we tend to be particularly alerted if we see balances in the red, if we see minus signs, 
negative numbers and apparent deficits. As a consequence, most reform activities normally 
concentrate on the bad times and on deficit countries. But we should not forget that the fiscal 
crisis  has  become  so  severe  because  most  countries  did  not  manage  to  restructure  and 
improve their budgets during the good times of rather high growth. As it is much easier to 
implement  far-reaching  reforms  when  the  general  economic  outlook  is  positive,  we  should 
put  much  more  emphasis  on  appropriate  anticyclical  policies  during  periods  of 
upswing. 
Second,  given  the  uncharted  territory  that  we  are  currently  exploring  and  the  many 
uncertainties  concerning  the  functioning  and  the  effects  of  each  institutional  reform,  it  is 
probably  wise  to  take  a  gradualist  approach  and  to  gradually  add  new  elements  to  the 
already existing and functioning structures. 
Third, apart from establishing a new institutional architecture, we also have to accomplish the 
more  immediate  task  of  reducing  debt  levels  and  securing  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances. Given the exceptional nature of the current crisis, it is necessary to think carefully 
about a reasonable and balanced reform package to be able to distribute the costs of the 
crisis in an equitable manner. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Coming to the end of my remarks, I would like to emphasize that we also need to improve 
–  and  maybe  regain  acceptance  for  –  our  unique  and  precious  European  project.  I  am 
confident that European integration will proceed despite the difficulties that we have faced 
over the past years. I look forward to having a day and a half with you to discuss the future of 
Europe from a multitude of perspectives. I hope you will find our Economics Conference a 
useful and an insightful event. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
