Jean-Claude Trichet: Two continents compared 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
“ECB and its Watchers XIII” conference, Frankfurt am Main, 10 June 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As always, it is a pleasure for me to open this conference today.  
Four  years  ago  at  this  gathering,  I  compared  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  and  in  the 
United  States.  Today,  I  would  also  like  to  talk  to  you  on  the  theme  of  “two  continents 
compared”. As we are all too well aware, much has happened on both sides of the Atlantic 
since 2007, and it is useful to take stock again. But this time, I would like to focus less on 
monetary policy and more on the wider economies of the two continents.  
The  crisis  has  exposed  in  both  continents  the  issue  of  heterogeneity  –  a  wide  diversity  of 
experience across different parts of the whole. As we will see, the economic fallout from the 
crisis  and  the  ensuing  recovery  have  shown  considerable  variation  among  the  US  states. 
And as we know, the same is true in the euro area, where some countries are a particular 
focus of attention.  
But before turning to the issue of regional heterogeneity and the appropriate coordination of 
regional policies within an economic and monetary union (EMU), let me briefly take a bird’s 
eye view of the euro area.  
A bird’s eye view of the euro area 
I. 
Speaking here four years ago I looked back at the ECB’s monetary policy over the period 
1999–2006. I showed a scatterplot of inflation volatility and output volatility for the euro area 
and other advanced countries.  
Academic research suggests that there might be a trade-off between these two variables and 
that it is therefore difficult to have low inflation volatility and low output volatility at the same 
time. But what the chart showed was that the euro area scored well on both dimensions. 
This seemed puzzling given that the euro area has quite rigid product and labour markets, at 
least compared with the United States. The higher degree of price and wage rigidity in the 
euro area would suggest that output volatility should be significantly larger in the euro area 
than in the more flexible US economy.  
This would be particularly true during a period when the economy is subject to supply-side 
shocks,  which  are  exerting  simultaneously  inflationary  and  recessionary  influences.  Yet 
surprisingly, and despite the negative supply-side shocks that had been hitting the euro area 
economy  over  the  years  up  to  2007,  the  data  suggested  that  both  inflation  volatility  and 
output volatility in the euro area were lower than elsewhere. 
Has the crisis changed this picture?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 
Obviously, output volatility in the euro area is much higher when the crisis is included in the 
sample. But, remarkably, the euro area still scores well on both dimensions compared with 
other advanced countries. 
So  what  is  behind  this  apparent  puzzle?  How  can  nominal  rigidities  plus  supply-side 
pressures not produce bad or worse macroeconomic outcomes?  
As  I  explained  in  detail  four  years  ago,  I  believe  that  the  strong  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations in the euro area is the key to understanding these developments. 
 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Inflation  expectations  have  remained  solidly  anchored  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price 
stability  throughout  the  crisis.  There  was  no  materialisation  of  a  deflation  risk.  This  has 
enormously facilitated our task, especially during the period of economic freefall in the winter 
of 2008/09. 
Other  indicators  corroborate  the  finding  that  at  the  aggregate  level  the  euro  has  been  a 
remarkable success: 
• 
Annual inflation over the first 12 years of EMU has been 1.97% on average. This 
outcome is fully in line with our aim of keeping inflation below, but close to 2% over 
the medium-term. What is equally noticeable is that it is a better result, in terms of 
price stability, than in the euro area Member States over the last 50 years.  
Real  output  per  capita  has  grown  at  a  similar  pace  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the 
United States, which – in terms of economic dynamism – remains the benchmark for 
the advanced countries. 
 Employment growth in the euro area has been strong over the past 12 years. More 
than 14 million jobs have been created since the introduction of the euro, compared 
with 8 million in the United States. 
Finally, public finances in the euro area as a whole are sound. As elsewhere, the 
financial crisis has left its mark on government deficit and debt in the euro area. Yet, 
the fiscal deficit in the euro area on aggregate for this year is estimated at less than 
one half of that in the United States and Japan. Recent forecasts indicate that the 
euro  area  as  a  whole  is  on  track  to  bring  the  deficit  to  GDP  ratio  below  the  3% 
reference  value  by  2013  and  to  stop  the  adverse  debt  dynamics  caused  by  the 
financial crisis. 
Of  course,  there  is  absolutely  no  reason  for  complacency  in  the  euro  area.  Much  more 
remains  to  be  done,  especially  in  terms  of  employment  creation,  reduction  of  the  level  of 
unemployment and enhancement of Europe’s growth potential.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But, we should recognise that the euro has acted in many areas as a catalyst for structural 
change. If euro area member states take up the challenge of adjusting, there is every reason 
to be confident about the future.  
Heterogeneity in the euro area and the United States 
II. 
So much for the bird’s eye view. Let me now zoom in on the regional dimension and focus on 
heterogeneity within EMU compared with the United States.  
You  may  argue  that  the  bird’s  eye  view  is  misleading.  The  US  economy  may  be  more 
homogeneous than the economy of the euro area. In other words, aggregate economic data 
may hide the variance in economic performance across regions within a monetary union.  
Looking more closely at the regional dispersion across US regions and euro area economies 
suggests otherwise. In fact, the dispersion of many of the key indicators is similar. 
Let me start off with the inflation indicator. Before the crisis, the dispersion of HICP inflation 
in euro area countries had remained broadly stable since the late 1990s, at a level similar to 
the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas. During the crisis we saw a temporary increase in 
inflation dispersion in the euro area but this has been reversed over the past 12 months. 
 
  The picture is similar for the dispersion of GDP growth. Before the crisis the dispersion of 
growth rates was around 2%, in both the euro area and the United States. Dispersion rose 
somewhat during the crisis in both currency areas but remained broadly in line with pre-crisis 
patterns overall.1 
 
                                                 
1  The  2010  data  for  US  regions  are  provisional  estimates  published  by  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis  on 
7 June 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Going one step further, investigation of the sources of this growth dispersion in the US and 
euro  area  economies  reveals  parallels  even  in  the  root  causes  of  dispersion  in  economic 
performance. Both currency areas comprise regions that experienced a significant boom and 
bust  cycle  over  the  past  decade.  Both  also  contain  regions  that  are  facing  significant 
structural challenges of a more long-term nature. 
In  the  United  States,  for  example,  Nevada,  Arizona,  Florida  and  California  experienced 
increases in house prices that outpaced the national average by a wide margin. The steep 
house price increases probably contributed to above average growth in these states, owing 
to strong positive contributions from real estate, construction and financial services. These 
sectors  all  saw  their  share  in  terms  of  value  added  to  GDP  increase  at  the  national  level 
during the years of the housing boom. 
But at the same time, some US states, particularly the former manufacturing powerhouses in 
the “Great Lakes” region, have seen a long episode of below average growth. Below average 
performance of the region – and particularly weaker growth rates in the states of Michigan 
and  Ohio  –  are  related  to  strong  reliance  on  manufacturing.  Structural  shifts  in  the  US 
economy towards services have gradually reduced the value added of manufacturing relative 
to GDP, with implications for areas with a high concentration of companies in manufacturing 
industries other than information and communications technology. 
The sharp fall in house prices in Florida and the south-western US states turned boom into 
bust. These states experienced the harshest recession among the US states.  
But GDP growth in the ”Great Lakes” region, which was below average before the crisis, also 
remained below average during the crisis. 
Note  that  the  states  with  the  best  economic  performance  in  the  United  States  during  the 
crisis  –  among  them,  Wyoming  and  Alaska  –  have  benefited  from  their  dependence  on 
mining. 
Similarly,  in  the  euro  area  some  countries  experienced  asymmetric  boom-and-bust  cycles. 
Several euro area countries had higher than average growth in the pre-crisis years. In Ireland 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
and Spain particularly, a large part of this growth can be ascribed to increases in housing 
prices. 
Other countries in Europe – Portugal, for example – have  experienced growth persistently 
below  the  euro  area  average  for  the  past  decade  due  to  structural  issues  that  could  have 
been tackled with more determination.  
Just  a  few  years  ago,  this  group  of  countries  included  Germany  –  then  labelled,  totally 
wrongly, the “sick man of Europe”. Yet Germany is now an example of how big the dividends 
of reform can be if structural adjustment is made a strategic priority and implemented with 
sufficient patience. 
The effect of the crisis on the different euro area economies follows a similar pattern to those 
of comparable US states. The countries in the euro area that have been hit hardest are those 
in which either large asset-bubble driven imbalances unwound or structural problems were 
left  unaddressed  before  the  crisis.  More  specifically,  Ireland  and  Greece,  in  particular, 
remained in recession in 2010.  
Those countries that have yet to implement more far reaching structural reforms also have 
relatively low growth prospects after the crisis. 
These relatively low growth rates are linked to a deterioration of competitiveness, driven, for 
example, by persistent above average unit labour costs.  
Ahead of EMU, unit labour costs converged in the euro area. What is more – disregarding 
the  most  recent  countries  to  join  the  euro  area  –  dispersion  both  ahead  of  the  crisis  and 
during the crisis was very similar in the euro area and the United States.  
 
 
At the same time, it is worth noting that both currency areas include regions with persistently 
above  or  below  average  unit  labour  cost  growth.  Again  leaving  aside  the  most  recent 
countries to join the euro area, here, Greece, Portugal and Ireland, in particular, have lost 
competitiveness vis-à-vis their main trading partners in the euro area. Germany, in contrast, 
has been able to lower relative unit labour costs over the same period of time.  
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Similar  persistent  losses  and  gains  in  competitiveness  are  also  observed  in  the  United 
States.  Some  states  have  experienced  large  or  persistent  increases  in  unit  labour  costs, 
currently  exceeding  the  national  average  by  as  much  as  20%.  Other  states,  on  the  other 
hand,  have  been  gaining  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  the  national  average  over  the  past 
decade. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
In summary, these results suggest that those who are questioning the viability of the euro 
area  as  a  single  currency  area  on  the  grounds  of  economic  heterogeneity  are  misguided. 
Over  the  past  12  years,  heterogeneity  in  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  has  been 
broadly similar.  
This should, however, be no reason for any complacency in the euro area.  
As  the  crisis  has  taught  us,  persistent  losses  in  competitiveness  on  the  part  of  individual 
members in a currency union lead to a build-up of external and internal imbalances. When 
these unravel, the cost for the affected economies can be very large. They can also have 
spillover effects on other members of the currency union. 
In any union, an economic governance framework is needed to prevent developments in an 
individual member state endangering the smooth functioning of the union. But for EMU, the 
economic governance framework devised in the 1990s has not been correctly implemented 
and, in any case, has proved too weak during the crisis. The crisis has exposed a clear need 
for strong reform. As I speak today the reform debate is still in progress, and in the last part 
of  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  talk  briefly  about  the  present  reform  of  economic 
governance in the euro area. 
to  be 
insufficiently  binding  whilst 
Economic governance in the euro area 
III. 
The euro is the only major currency not issued by a single sovereign state, but by a union of 
states.  
The  Treaties  specify  a  clear  division  of  responsibilities  between  European  and  national 
policy-makers within EMU. On the one hand, monetary policy is inherently indivisible, and in 
the euro area it is thus conducted at the supranational level by the ECB. On the other hand, 
fiscal policies remain largely the competence of national governments. 
Today’s reform of the governance framework has to take the current constitutional framework 
as a given. For the foreseeable future we have  to empower the institutional arrangements 
that are already in place to the point at which they can really and durably inspire confidence.  
The  economic  governance  framework  has  been  incorrectly  implemented  and,  more 
importantly,  has  proven 
lacking  appropriate 
comprehensiveness.  
The requirements for a very significant reinforcement of the fiscal surveillance of the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  and  for  the  creation  of  a  new  surveillance  of  competitive  indicators  and 
macroeconomic policy have been discussed widely.  
As  you  know,  the  ECB  takes  the  strong  view  that  there  is  the  need  for  more  speed  and 
automaticity in the sanctioning mechanism, particularly in the Stability and Growth Pact, but 
also  in  the  broader  macroeconomic  policy  surveillance  framework.  The  experience  of  the 
past months has vividly demonstrated the importance of a timely correction of internal and 
external imbalances. 
Beyond faster and more automatic sanctions, the enforcement tools also need to be more 
effective. The macroeconomic surveillance framework, in particular, needs to provide clear 
incentives by imposing  financial sanctions already at an early stage. This also means that 
there should be no room for discretion in the implementation of the surveillance framework.  
At the same time, requirements on fiscal and other macroeconomic policies should be more 
ambitious. To ensure that none of the euro area countries are left behind, they have to bring 
national policies in line with the membership to a currency union. 
The implementation of sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies is best ensured if these are 
solidly anchoring at national level. An effective way of achieving this is to implement strong 
national budgetary frameworks in the euro area Member States.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another important area of reform, at the global level, is the reform of financial governance. 
I have to say that on financial reform we have made more rapid progress. As you know, we 
have  drawn  up  a  set  of  more  stringent  banking  regulations,  more  ambitious  capital 
requirements  to  absorb  losses,  improving  coverage  and  reducing  the  risk  of  excessive 
borrowing. The countercyclical capital buffers are designed to reduce pro-cyclicality.  
At  the  same  time,  the  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  market 
infrastructure has been tightened, and the organisational structure of financial oversight has 
been  overhauled.  The  European  System  Risk  Board  and  the  European  Supervisory 
Authorities – the three new authorities created for the European banking sector, insurance 
and occupational pensions, and capital markets – have taken up their work at the beginning 
of this year. The ESRB is in the process of developing the tools necessary to warn and, if 
appropriate,  make  recommendations  as  regards  systemic  risk.  And  the  ESAs  will  allow 
closer monitoring of the interrelationships in the financial system of the European Union. 
• 
But  much  remains  to  be  done.  Most  importantly,  we  need  to  ensure  the  full 
implementation of the envisioned reforms. In addition, key areas where work is still 
in  progress  –  not  only  at  the  European,  but  also  at  global  level  –  include:  the 
treatment  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions;  the  mechanism  of  bank 
crisis management and resolution; oversight of the shadow banking system; and – 
very importantly – the further regulation and oversight of financial markets and their 
functioning.  
Conclusion  
IV. 
Let me conclude. The euro area as a whole has witnessed an unprecedented degree of price 
stability  since  its  inception  more  than  12  years  ago.  This  has  been  accompanied  by 
economic  performance  in  terms  of  growth  per  capita  and  job  creation  that  compares 
positively with other large advanced economies.  
It  is  also  remarkable  that  there  is  convincing  evidence  that  the  euro  area  and  the  United 
States of America have similar features in terms of diversity of the economies that are part of 
these vast continents: member countries on this side of the Atlantic and the States on the 
other  side.  This  is  documented,  in  particular,  as  regards  asymmetric  inflation,  asymmetric 
growth  developments  and  even  in  terms  of  somewhat  persistent  asymmetric  gains  and 
losses of competitiveness.  
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  redress  a  common  belief  which  is  unfounded,  in  my  opinion, 
namely that the euro area as a whole is significantly more heterogeneous economically, with 
more dispersion and higher levels of standard deviation of a number of important indicators 
than the US.  
But what remains true is that governing these very vast and equally diverse economies with 
a  single  currency  is  more  of  a  challenge  in  a  union  of  sovereign  states  than  in  a  political 
federation.  That  is  the  reason  why  the  European  Central  Bank  is  stressing  tirelessly  the 
necessity of strongly reinforcing the euro area economic governance. The economic policy of 
each  member  of  the  euro  area  has  to  be  aligned  with  the  requirements  of  EMU.  As 
Alexander Hamilton said two hundred years ago: we should ourselves “learn to think (more) 
continentally”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
