Richard W Fisher: ¡Ándale Pues! Get on with advancing hispanic 
prosperity through education 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, at the Hispanic Economic Experience Conference, Dallas, Texas, 
16 June 2011. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
I  am  here  today  not  simply  to  say  bienvenido  and  welcome  you  to  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  Dallas  with  un  fuerte  abrazo,  but  to  underscore  the  importance  I  attach  to  our 
achieving a better understanding of the Hispanic economic experience and, very importantly, 
the potential for greater Hispanic advancement within the U.S. economy. 
Let  me  cut  to  the  quick:  Hispanics  are  underachieving  in  our  society,  especially  in  Texas. 
Here are the data: 
 
There  are  some  50 million  Americans  who  identify  themselves  as  Hispanics.  This 
number  is  up  43  percent  over  the  last  decade.  Roughly  66  percent,  or  some 
32 million, self-identify as Méxicanos.  
Texas  has  the  second-largest  Hispanic  population,  after  California:  9.5 million 
Hispanics, the vast majority of whom are of Mexican origin, live here. A majority of 
them are native born, whereas in the rest of the United States, a majority are foreign 
born. In other words, the majority of Hispanics who live in Texas are as American as 
I am; some maybe more so, as I am a first-generation American born of immigrant 
parents.  
In Texas, 38 percent of the population is Hispanic versus 16.3 percent in the U.S.  
“Jose” has been the top male baby name in Texas every year since 1996, when it 
replaced  “Michael”  and  “Christopher.”  We  are  the  only  state  in  the  union  with  a 
Latino baby name ranked number one.  
  Those are some basic facts. Here are some others for you to consider: 
For  the  past  20  years, the  Eleventh  Federal  Reserve  District  – in  which  96  percent  of  the 
economic  output  is  generated  by  Texas  –  has  outgrown  the  rest  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
districts and the United States by significant margins. We have grown our real – or inflation-
adjusted  output  (real  state  gross  domestic  product)  –  by  3.6  percent  compounded  over 
20 years,  whereas  the  rest  of  the  U.S.  (real  gross  domestic  product)  has  grown  at 
2.5 percent  compounded;  annual  job  growth  in  Texas  has  outpaced  the  nation  by 
1 percentage point a year; population growth  within Texas has compounded over the past 
two decades by 2 percent per annum, versus 1.1 percent for the rest of the nation. 
We now have the second-largest Congressional delegation in the country behind California. 
But the growth dynamic here is vibrant, whereas that of California is stagnant. This is why we 
are picking up population and Congressional seats, while the recent U.S. census apportioned 
no additional seats to California. 
In sum, we are a vibrant and strong economy. The economic tenor in California and the rest 
of America is weary, if not downright weak: Somos fuerte; los otros son flojos. Since the 
recent economic recession ended, Texas has been responsible for 48 percent of all the jobs 
created in America. 
And yet, the Hispanic population is not participating in our economic prosperity in proportion 
to its weight in the Texas census. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The unemployment rate among Latinos here is substantially higher than it is for non-Hispanic 
Texans. Hispanics earn 36 percent less in hourly wages than non-Hispanic whites; median 
household  income  of  Latino-headed  households  in  Texas  is  about  60  percent  of  median 
household  income  of  non-Hispanic  households.  For  the  U.S.  as  a  whole,  Latino-headed 
households earn about 73 percent of non-Hispanic white household income. 
Pia Orrenius and our other economists are hard at work in deciphering what accounts for the 
differences between the economic status of Texas Hispanics and Latinos elsewhere in the 
U.S. Already, one factor is clear: Hispanic educational achievement in Texas is abysmal. 
In Texas, as anywhere else in the United States and in all capitalist societies, “you earn what 
you  learn.”  Every  study  known  to  man,  and  plain  common  sense,  tell  you  that  income  is 
directly correlated to educational attainment. High school graduates earn significantly more 
than high school dropouts; a college degree results in greater lifetime earnings than a high 
school degree; the highest income groups are those with graduate degrees.  
Nearly 50 percent of Texas public schoolchildren are Hispanic, but only 38 percent of high 
school graduates are Hispanic. 
Some 54 percent of non-Hispanic whites and 48 percent of non-Hispanic blacks age 18 to 24 
with a high school degree were in college in 2008. The percentage of Hispanics was only 
43 percent. 
Within the age cohort between 25 and 64, only 14 percent of native-born Texas Latinos have 
college degrees; 23 percent of native-born Hispanics in Texas age 25 to 64 are high school 
dropouts. 
No matter how you slice it or dice it, it is glaringly clear that Hispanics in Texas are failing at 
school. This must be corrected. If not, they will continue to trail in economic achievement. 
And  all  of  us  –  white,  black,  Asian-American,  Hispanic  or  non-Hispanic  –  will  suffer  the 
consequences of economic underperformance. 
Texas is a remarkable place. We embody the “can do” spirit. My favorite Texas historian is 
T.R. Fehrenbach. I recommend his book, Lone Star: A History of Texas and the Texans, 
to anybody who wishes to understand what makes this place unique.  
As Fehrenbach puts it, the key to overcoming the odds in the Lone Star State has been that 
“the  Texas ethic  and  Texas  society  rewarded  enterprise,” ...  “work  was  the  real  virtue.”  … 
“We chose this land; we took it; we made it bear fruit.” We are a people, in Fehrenbach’s 
words,  for  whom  “the  cult  of  courage  was  obvious.”1  And  he  distills  the  Texas  spirit  that 
prevails to this day in one sentence: Here, “men who exist get overrun by men who act.”2 
It is time for our great Latino population to have the courage to face the facts: They must do 
a better job as families and within their communities to dedicate themselves to educational 
achievement. And it is time for all Texans, Hispanics and non-Hispanics, to act to create the 
conditions that will safeguard and nourish the prosperity of all our children and that of our 
children’s children.  
¡Ándale  pues!  Delve  into  the  Hispanic  experience.  Help  us  understand  through  this 
conference and your various studies how to advance Hispanic prosperity. For in doing so, 
you are helping us advance Texas and the nation. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
1  Lone  Star:  A  History  of  Texas  and  the  Texans,  by  T.R.  Fehrenbach,  New  York:  Macmillan  Publishing  Co., 
1985, pp. 708–12. 
2  See note 1, p. 717. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
