Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  the 
Süddeutsche  Zeitung,  conducted  by  Ms  Helga  Einecke  and  Mr  Hans-Jürgen  Jakobs,  and 
published on 23 July 2011. 
 SZ: Mr Trichet, at the start of the 1990s former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, together 
with the then French President, François Mitterand, initiated the Maastricht Treaty and thus 
the euro. Now he is concerned about how Europe and its single currency are developing. Are 
you also concerned?  
Trichet: Helmut Kohl played a pivotal role in establishing a single currency in Europe, and 
Europe owes him an immense debt of gratitude for that. It cannot be disputed that the euro 
has  been  a  remarkable  success  over  the  last  12  years.  Our  currency  has  kept  its  value 
impressively  and  ensured  price  stability  in  Germany  and  throughout  Europe  since  its 
introduction. The level of price stability has been greater than during the 50 years prior to the 
euro. 
SZ: You are forgetting the excessive debt, for example in Greece, Portugal and Ireland. In 
endless new rescue packages, governments are pumping billions and billions of euro into a 
clearly ailing system. That is making the public nervous.  
Trichet: We have a problem with fiscal policy in some countries where mistakes were made 
in  the  past,  meaning  that  these  countries  are  now  saddled  with  deficits  that  are  too  high. 
Governments must take decisive action to correct this. As far as the ECB is concerned, we 
have always called for a strict and rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact, 
and  have  expressed  our  “grave  concerns”  when  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  Pact  were 
breached  in  2004  and  2005.  Today  we  are  calling  for  a  quantum  leap  in  economic 
governance.  
SZ: The euro area summit on Thursday created the next large financial package for Greece, 
this time amounting to €109 billion. How big is the danger that good money is being thrown 
after bad money? 
Trichet:  What  is  fundamental  is  that  Greece  implements  its  economic  and  structural 
adjustment  programme  rigorously  and  comprehensively.  This  is  the  key  for  everything. 
Scrupulous control of implementation, as well as very large-scale technical assistance from 
the  Commission,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  EU  Member  States  are  of  the 
essence. 
SZ: You have warned of the consequences of default and threatened to stop providing Greek 
banks with money. But it has nevertheless now come to a restructuring of debt. Have you 
changed your mind? 
Trichet: We have very clearly and publicly said that our advice to governments was: first, to 
avoid compulsory private sector involvement; second, to avoid a credit event; and third, to 
avoid a selective default. At the moment I am speaking I can say that they have followed our 
first and second advice. With regard to the third piece of advice, we will see what happens. 
But  I  had  also  said  very  clearly  that,  in  case  of  selective  default,  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem  would  ask  for  recapitalisation  of  the  banks  and  for  credit  enhancement  of  our 
collateral in order to have sound counterparties and eligible collateral. The protection of the 
integrity of the central bank is non-negotiable. The Heads have accepted that and decided to 
recapitalise the Greek banks and earmark a pledge of €35 billion to enhance our collateral in 
case of any possible selective default. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
SZ:  The  rescue  umbrella,  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF),  has  been 
significantly  upgraded.  What  is  your  opinion  on  the construction  of  such  a  “European 
Monetary Fund”? 
Trichet: There are four additional areas where the Heads have followed our public advice. 
First, as you mention, an increase in the flexibility of the EFSF, which is something we have 
always  called  for.  Second,  the  reaffirmation  by  member  countries  of  their  inflexible 
determination to honour their signature. Third, the reinforcement of governance in Europe in 
the voting rules within the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact. And fourth, the 
considerable reinforcement of technical assistance. Now the key word is “implementation”. 
Rigorous and permanently controlled implementation.  
SZ: How did the debt crisis spread so far?  
Trichet: 2007–08 saw the worst financial crisis since the Second World War. All advanced 
economies  have  been  heavily  touched  and  have  proven  fragile.  Weaknesses  have  to  be 
corrected in all advanced economies, in Europe as well as in the United States and Japan.  
SZ:  20  years  ago  you  were  personally  involved,  on  the  French  side,  in  constructing  the 
Maastricht  Treaty.  Did  you  factor  in  the  risk  that  some  countries  could  run  riot  in  terms  of 
fiscal policy? 
Trichet: It was a privilege for me to be involved in the construction of the Maastricht Treaty, 
together with Horst Köhler, who was State Secretary at the time. We were all fully aware that 
it was necessary to prevent governments from running irresponsible fiscal policies. That is 
why we made it a legally binding part of the Treaty that no country can have a deficit of more 
than  3%.  It  was  a  very  strong  request  by  Chancellor  Kohl  and  the  finance  minister  Theo 
Waigel  to  create  strict  criteria  to  guarantee  fiscal  soundness.  That  was  the  binding  legal 
framework.  Unfortunately, the governments did  not carry out the strict peer surveillance of 
behaviour that was called for by the Pact. 
SZ: And in the end, the financial markets and rating agencies had to take control as Europe’s 
governments were not in a position to do so. 
Trichet:  Public  authorities  have  to  be  permanently  alert,  ensure  fiscal  soundness  and 
preserve competitiveness. They cannot rely only on the financial markets’ judgment. In the 
years  before  the  2008  crisis,  the  markets  were  totally  ignoring  the  bad  policies  in  some 
countries. That being said, we should not forget that the euro area as a whole will post, by 
the end of this year, a fiscal deficit of around 4.5% of GDP, compared with around 10% in the 
United States and Japan. The fiscal problems are concentrated in a few countries and not, 
fortunately, in the euro area as a whole. 
SZ: ..countries on the periphery you mean? 
Trichet: The countries that are part of an IMF and EU programme, also taking into account 
that Greece is a unique case.  
SZ:  In  any  case,  many  Germans  are  worried  that  their  tax  money  will  soon  be  used  to 
support indebted countries and that, what’s more, the euro could fall apart. 
Trichet: The euro is a solid, strong and credible currency. We do not have a currency crisis 
because the euro is stable and keeps its value extremely well. Since the single currency was 
introduced, inflation in Germany has stood at only 1.5% per year! And in the euro area as a 
whole it has been 1.97%, which is less than, but close to 2%! The ECB is the guardian of the 
euro  and  represents  an  anchor  of  confidence  and  stability  in  Europe.  What  we  need  is  a 
strong and strict implementation of the fiscal adjustment programmes.  
SZ: So it is all exaggerated? 
Trichet: The people of Europe and particularly the German citizens can have full confidence 
in the ECB’s will and capacity to deliver price stability. Our track record proves this.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
SZ: First, only small EU states were rescued. Most recently, however, Italy – a core country 
that is also highly indebted – was on the verge of being pulled into the maelstrom. There was 
hardly anyone who wanted their government bonds. 
Trichet: I have confidence that all countries in the euro area will not only rigorously keep their 
present commitments, but will be “ahead of the curve “ and take appropriate measures, as is 
the case for Italy.  
SZ: Europe’s citizens have heard this kind of appeal too many times before. 
Trichet:. As I said, all advanced economies must put their house in order. The United States 
and  Japan,  for  instance,  have  to  adjust  their  fiscal  policy.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  a  major 
problem  is  the  need  to  make  decisive  improvements  in  its  governance.  The  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  must  be  strengthened.  And  we  will  have  a  new  pillar  of  surveillance  of 
competitiveness indicators and imbalances inside the euro area, namely the new legislation. 
SZ: How will the new controls work? 
Trichet:  We  are  advising  the  governments  and  the  European  institutions  to  develop  the 
surveillance  functions  so  that  they  operate  as  automatically,  quickly  and  professionally  as 
possible,  both  in  their  preventive  arm  and  in  their  corrective  arm.  And  the  sanctions  are 
essential to prevent disorderly developments.  
SZ: Is a new institution needed for this? 
Trichet:  At  this  stage  we  need  to  finalise  the  negotiations  of  the  “trialogue”  –  between  the 
Council,  Parliament  and  Commission  –  on  the  new  legislation  for  European  governance. 
What has just been announced by the heads of the euro area should contribute to improving 
the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact in line with our recommendations. 
SZ: You yourself were much more daring when you were awarded the Charlemagne Prize in 
Aachen. There you spoke about a common finance minister for Europe. 
Trichet: I think that in order to put Thursday’s decisions into perspective, it is important and 
legitimate to have a vision of what could be done – as I said in Aachen – tomorrow and even 
the day after tomorrow. That would require a change to the Treaty and is therefore fully in the 
hands  of  our  democracies  and  of  Europe’s  citizens.  Tomorrow  it  should  be  possible  to 
impose measures on a country that does not implement the agreed adjustments. And as for 
the day after tomorrow, speaking as a European citizen, I think that the Europeans will invent 
a  new  type  of  confederation  which,  however,  will  not  be  like  the  federation  in  the  United 
States;  Europeans  have  their  traditions  and  their  history.  At  the  level  of  this  possible 
confederation,  we  would  have,  naturally,  a  European  finance  ministry  with  its  own 
responsibilities. 
SZ: That is still a political utopia. 
Trichet:  We  are  talking  about  a  historic  process  that  began  60  years  ago.  The  vision  of 
European unity goes back many centuries. You feel that very profoundly in Aachen when you 
are  in  front  of  the  throne  of  Charlemagne.  I  firmly  believe  that,  from  the  economic  and 
monetary angle, there are even more reasons to unify Europe today than 60 years ago, with 
India, China and the formidable progress of the emerging economies.  
SZ:  French  politicians  have  also  spoken  in  favour  of  a  European  ministry  –  as  a 
counterbalance to the ECB. 
Trichet:  I  think  they  understood  that  it  was  a  totally  wrong  approach.  The  ECB  is  fiercely 
independent  and  this  is  not  challenged  anywhere  in  Europe.  It  is  at  the  heart  of  the 
Maastricht Treaty. And I do not forget that the Germans have always said in the past that 
there needs to be progress in terms of political union, together with Economic and Monetary 
Union. 
SZ: Are there enough Europeans who support your vision? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Trichet:  I  speak  as  a  European  citizen,  reasoning  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  It  seems 
clear to me that the European construction has not been completed.  
SZ: If all of that is true, then there should also be shared eurobonds, guaranteed by all the 
Member States.  
Trichet: We have looked into the issue and we are not in favour of it.  
SZ: But that could be part of your vision? 
Trichet: No, not necessarily. The ministry that I have in mind for the future shouldn’t have a 
large budget.  
SZ:  How,  in  your  view,  should  the current  debt  problems  in  Europe  be  resolved?  You  are 
something of an expert on debt – after all, you previously played a leading role in the Paris 
Club in negotiating the debt restructuring of Brazil, Poland, Egypt and the Soviet Union. This 
always involved partial losses for creditors, or a “haircut”. 
Trichet:  Our  position  for  Europe  was  always  clear.  We  were  not  responsible  for  the 
negotiations concerning Greek debt. That was the task of the governments. We will monitor 
events closely.  
SZ: Two years ago, you said that the entire regulation of the financial system needed major 
improvements. Has this already happened, or does more need to be done? 
Trichet: We are half-way there. There has been a global increase in the capital requirements 
for banks, including those that are systemically relevant. What is still open is how we deal 
with other financial entities that are non-banks, what we sometimes call the shadow banking 
system. More transparency and appropriate oversight are needed here. Conflicts of interest 
must  be  eliminated.  There  are  also  still  too  many  pro-cyclical  elements  in  the  financial 
system that should be eliminated. All of this is hard work, and we still have to make a lot of 
progress  
SZ: The banks are moaning about too much regulation. 
Trichet:  I  do  not  accept  the  idea  that  we  have  over-regulation.  We  have  in  any  case  an 
absolute obligation to make the financial system much more resilient. The idea of going back 
to business as usual is deeply inappropriate.  
SZ:  Is  the  euro  still  an  important  factor  in  the  integration  of  Europe?  Or  is  it  now  causing 
divisions? 
Trichet: I believe that the euro is crucial to the achievement of a single market. Do you think 
we  would  consider  the  United  States’  single  market  complete  if  the  money  used  in  North 
Carolina were different from that used in Wyoming, California or Florida?  
SZ: After eight years as “Monsieur Euro”, as the top central banker, do you leave any kind of 
legacy?  
Trichet: My colleagues and I are very proud of the fact that, in the first 12 years of the euro’s 
existence,  we  have  been  able  to  keep  prices  stable  for  331  million  people.  That  is  our 
mission and our mandate.  
SZ:  How  does  it  fit  into  your  mission  that  the  ECB  suddenly  began,  in  May  2010,  to  buy 
government bonds from indebted countries such as Greece, Ireland and Portugal? The ECB 
had previously rejected such a policy. Was it a mistake?  
Trichet: Certainly not. It was one of our “non-standard” measures that we introduced together 
with the policy of refinancing banks at fixed interest rates with full allotment of bids, and the 
Covered Bond Purchase Programme. All these measures, without exception, were designed 
to help restore a better monetary policy transmission at a time when markets were disrupted. 
At the same time, we completely separated these measures from the interest rate decisions 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
–  our  “standard  measures”  are  entirely  designed  to  deliver  price  stability.  This  separation 
principle is for me absolutely fundamental.  
SZ:  The  euro  area  countries  have  set  up  a  rescue  fund,  the  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility, soon to be called the European Stability Mechanism. What do you think of the idea 
of this fund taking over the government bonds held by the ECB, which are worth €75 billion? 
Your balance sheet would then be clean again. 
Trichet: It goes without saying that the governments will have to redeem their bonds that are 
on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Eurosystem  without  any  change.  Of  course,  being  part  of  the 
official  sector,  we  will  not  be  participating  in  the  voluntary  private  sector  involvement 
mentioned on Thursday as regards Greece.  
SZ: Some even say that the ECB is a “bad bank”, speaking as if it were Goldman Sachs, 
BNP  Paribas,  Unicredit  or  Deutsche  Bank,  conducting  securities  transactions  on  its  own 
account.  
Trichet: That is clearly absurd. We are the central bank for 17 countries in a single market 
with a single currency. And our integrity is fundamental and fully protected.  
SZ:  Critics  even  say  that  the  ECB  and  President  Trichet  are  against  debt  restructuring 
because you have taken too many risks onto your books and would then need to write down 
losses. 
Trichet: That is ridiculous. The integrity of the ECB and the Eurosystem is fundamental and 
fully guaranteed.  
SZ: Mr Trichet, you have lived in Germany for eight years and so know both the Germans 
and the French very well, nations that were enemies until the end of the Second World War. 
How well do you think these two core euro area countries get on now? 
Trichet: Yes, there were wars, but the two neighbours were frequently also friends and lived 
closely  together.  Charlemagne  ruled  the  Germans  and  the  French  in  one  country.  Three 
citizens of the small Breton town St Malo, to which I am closely attached, were, for example, 
members of the Berlin Academy under Frederick the Great! And the two nations know that 
their friendship is fundamental when it is put to the service of Europe as a whole.  
SZ:  Is  this  shared  history  enough,  or  will  there  soon  need  to  be  noticeably  more  shared 
undertakings? 
Trichet:  The  successes  of  European  unification  over  the  last  60  years  have  been 
considerable. What we have today is, after all, what the euro’s founding fathers dreamed of. 
We have to make further progress along this historic path. 
SZ: Can your two sons and granddaughters understand this?  
Trichet:  My  sons  are  convinced  Europeans.  But  I  notice  that  today’s  generation  takes  the 
success of the European Union and the euro as a given. We have to explain that if we have 
had peace, stability and prosperity over the last 66 years, it is not by chance, but because of 
Europe. 
SZ:  Germany  and  France  could  begin  by  having  a  joint  finance  minister  in  order  to  liven 
things up.  
Trichet: (laughs) Do you think they are already ready for that?  
SZ: What will you be doing in November? 
Trichet: I will think about that on 1 November. Until then, I am sufficiently occupied and not 
thinking about the future. 
SZ: Sleeping, reading, writing a book? 
Trichet: I will certainly have more time when I finish on 1 November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
