Peter Praet: A new voice on a familiar topic – SEPA from his perspective 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the off-site meeting of the European Payments Council, Brussels, 31 August 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at your off-site meeting today. From 2004 to 
2010, with only one exception, Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell presented the ECB’s views and 
expectations  regarding  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA)  to  the  EPC  Coordination 
Committee. Today, I have the honour of taking over. I am committed to continuing the fruitful 
dialogue  that  has  been  established  between  the  ECB  and  the  EPC  over  the  years  in  the 
same spirit of openness and trust. 
Let me first discuss the SEPA project as it stands now in comparison with the situation in 
mid-2010.  Then,  I  will  make  some  remarks  on  cash.  Subsequently,  I  will  focus  on  three 
issues that are important for the retail payments market in general in coming years: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
In this context, it is essential that we keep up a continuous dialogue with all stakeholders, 
including that with the EPC, a very prominent actor. 
innovation; 
competition; and 
globalisation. 
2010–11 review: end-date for migration to SEPA, competitive European cards market, 
security of retail payments 
Where do we stand? In 2010, the SEPA project was largely dominated by the intense debate 
on the proposal to set an end-date for the migration to SEPA by regulation. A great deal of 
time and many resources of both public authorities and the financial sector have gone into 
shaping the proposal by the European Commission. This has not been an easy process, and 
there  has  been  some  controversy  between  the  European  Commission  and  the  financial 
industry with regard to the contents and coverage of the regulation, particularly the technical 
requirements  for  credit  transfers  and  direct  debits  and  the  direct  debit  interchange.  The 
Eurosystem expects the SEPA credit transfer and the SEPA direct debit, which can comply 
with the technical requirements, to become the credit transfer and direct debit schemes used 
for  euro  payments  in  the  EU.  Where  direct  debit  interchange  is  concerned,  the  draft 
regulation now provides legal certainty. 
Despite  the  controversy,  we  all  share  the  conviction  that  determining  a  clear  deadline  for 
migration to the SEPA credit transfer (SCT) and the SEPA direct debit (SDD) is necessary to 
bring SEPA to a successful conclusion. Thus, I would encourage you to focus on what lies 
ahead, and not to be dissuaded from pursuing your initiatives and projects. 
As  you  know,  one  of  the  areas  that  needs  to  be  driven  further  forward  by  the  EPC  is  the 
standardisation of cards. Last year, Ms Tumpel-Gugerell discussed three elements that are 
required for a move towards a competitive European payment card market: 
 
 
 
first, the development of an additional European card scheme; 
second, the separation of card schemes from processing entities; and 
third, card standardisation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Progress  in  the  development  of  an  additional  card  scheme  has  been  considerably  slower 
than hoped for. The slow progress in this area gives further weight and importance to card 
standardisation,  which  should  ensure  interoperability  and  the  harmonised  use  of  cards 
across Europe. Here, I would like to emphasise that the EPC should provide guidance for 
standardisation  initiatives  in  the  different  domains  (card-to-terminal,  terminal-to-acquirer, 
acquirer-to-issuer, and certification and type approval) on which standards are to be used for 
SEPA. Equally important, the EPC should also provide guidance on how to implement them. 
With  regard  to  the  SEPA  Certification  Framework,  the  ECB  has  submitted  some 
recommendations  to  the  EPC  on  how  to  facilitate  agreement  between  the  different 
stakeholders. Now that the summer break is over, we would expect to receive your feedback 
on these recommendations in the near future. 
The  third  issue  addressed  last  year  was  the  security  of  retail  payments.  Here,  the 
establishment of the SecuRe Pay Forum, which aims to deliver concrete recommendations 
on  card-not-present  and  online  payments  by  the  end  of  this  year,  should  contribute  to  the 
creation of a level playing field with a high level of security in Europe. The ECB welcomes the 
fact that the EPC regards the prevention of card fraud as one of its top priorities and that it 
has  defined  measures  to  reduce  fraud  and  protect  payment  data.  However,  the  market 
should be more ambitious and follow the Eurosystem’s recommendation to issue “chip only” 
cards  and,  in  addition,  to  start  with  implementing  intermediate  fraud  prevention  measures 
such  as  the  regional  blocking  of  card  transactions.  In  this  respect,  it  is  encouraging  that 
EUROPOL  has  called  on  the  United  States  to  close  this  loophole  for  fraudulent  card 
transactions. The recent announcement of VISA Inc. to accelerate migration to EMV in the 
United  States  and  to  institute  a  shift  in  liability  for  counterfeit  card-present  point-of-sale 
transactions can thus be considered a real breakthrough. 
Cash 
Before I turn to innovation, let me first say a few words about cash, taking into account that 
banknotes are issued by the Eurosystem itself. In practice today, cash is still by far the most 
frequently used means of payment for retail (i.e. point-of-sale) transactions in the euro area. 
Society is neither willing nor ready to do without cash. 
The continued availability of cash as an easy-to-use, reliable and cheap means of payment 
requires a resilient and efficient cash cycle. Indeed, it is likely, both with respect to resilience 
and with respect to efficiency, that the bar in this respect will be raised in the period ahead.  
Against  this  background,  I  welcome  your  efforts  in  this  area.  The  standardisation  and 
upgrading of the cassettes used for the storage and transportation of banknotes, which you 
will discuss tomorrow, is a case in point, serving both the efficiency and the resilience of the 
cash cycle. 
I know that my colleagues in the cash area appreciated the constructive cooperation that you 
have been able to establish over the years, and they look forward to seeing further progress 
on these issues. 
Fostering innovation: 21st century ways to pay 
25 years ago, nobody would have expected that the way we work, communicate and access 
information  and  entertainment  would  be  changed  as  profoundly  as  it  has  through  the 
invention  of  the  chip,  the  internet  and  the  mobile  phone.  However,  the  diffusion  of 
innovations in retail payments has been strikingly slow. Technological progress, which has 
revolutionised work, communication and entertainment media, has not had a major effect on 
means of payment and payment habits. The methods used for payments in Europe are still 
deeply rooted in the 20th century. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
There are several reasons why innovation in retail payments is difficult. Consumer demand is 
a very significant factor in payments – the response of the general public to any new means 
of payment can make it or break it. It has often been argued that many consumers dislike 
change. Recently, the Payments Council in the United Kingdom had to cancel the target for 
the  possible  closure  of  the  cheque  clearing  in  2018  due  to  complaints  from  stakeholders. 
Still, we should not forget that neither consumers nor merchants can generate demand for 
what is not on offer – the notorious chicken and egg problem. Furthermore, on the supply 
side,  providers  are  confronted  with  the  first-mover  disadvantage:  network  externalities,  the 
lack of critical mass and switching costs. These factors make it important that innovation is 
tackled in a coordinated way and that an innovation-friendly legal and regulatory environment 
is ensured.  
It is important that these factors are considered when talking about innovation. Still, in many 
constituencies, the strong persistence of cash usage may not be driven only by choice, but 
also – due to the factors discussed above – by the absence of choice. This is particularly 
relevant for the unbanked or underbanked population. Innovation in retail payments might be 
a tool to increase financial inclusion – not only in the developing countries. 
Absence of choice is also manifest in e-commerce/internet shopping. The ECB has observed 
that  in  many  constituencies,  the  payment  instruments  offered  for  online  payments  are  not 
those most suitable for remote payments. To give you a practical example, I would like to 
mention  a  web  merchant  in  Germany  that  offers  either  prepayment,  cash  on  delivery  or 
payment  by  Sofortüberweisung  (an  overlay  service).  Such  slim  choice  and  lack  of 
competition  is  clearly  an  obstacle  to  the  growth  of  e-commerce  in  Europe,  and  I  can  only 
reiterate the Eurosystem’s call for the banking industry to engage in the delivery of suitable 
SEPA-wide online-e-payment solutions. Otherwise, banks may run the risk of being crowded 
out by other providers that have already entered the market. At the same time, merchants – 
both in the virtual and in the brick-and-mortar sphere – should recognise that it is in their own 
individual  and  common  interests  to  have  a  secure  means  of  payment  and  to  adopt  the 
necessary measures. 
Fostering competition: striking the right balance between cooperation and 
competition 
I would now like to discuss the prerequisites for fostering competition that benefits innovation 
in means of payment – and retail payments in general – through SEPA. The Eurosystem has 
argued from the outset that the harmonisation of standards and rules for retail payments is 
necessary to overcome the current fragmentation of payment instruments and infrastructure 
in Europe. Giving greater choice to European businesses and consumers, and opening up a 
larger market to payment service providers, will boost competition. The EPC plays a pivotal 
role in this process, and therefore also has responsibility for bringing the requirements of the 
other stakeholders in SEPA on board. 
It  has  always  been  clear  that,  as  a  network  industry,  payments  can  only  be  processed 
smoothly  if  common  standards  and  rules  are  available.  It  is  also  clear  that  standards  and 
rules should be open and non-proprietary so as to prevent closed markets. But it is also clear 
that the scope for cooperation needs to be delineated carefully from that for competition. 
The optimum balance between the cooperative and the competitive space is as hard to find 
as that between efficiency and consumer convenience, on the one hand, and security and 
reliability,  on  the  other.  It  is  of  paramount  interest  of  the  public  authorities  that  the  right 
balance is struck between these poles. Generally, it is more efficient to foster competition on 
the basis of common standards than to foster competition for standards. However, it has to 
be  ensured  that  these  common  standards  do  not  end  up  as  being  the  lowest  common 
denominator. Therefore, public authorities regard it as their responsibility to look carefully into 
this  balance  between  competition  and  cooperation,  and  interfere  whenever  required.  That 
having been said, I would like to reiterate the Eurosystem’s support for the creation both of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
rulebooks  and  frameworks  for  retail  payments  in  general  and  of  a  framework  for,  and 
measures to ensure the interoperability of, existing online e-payment schemes in particular, 
provided 
that  allow  other 
communities/schemes to join if they wish to do so. 
transparent  and  open  standards 
these  are  based  on 
Fostering European direction at the global level 
In my final point, I will take a further step back from the level of detail of the discussion of 
SEPA. In the day-to-day business, we tend to focus, to a large extent, on the difficulties we 
are facing along the road towards making SEPA reality. When reading the documentation on 
SEPA,  I  have  often  found  the  phrase  “yes  …  but”:  yes,  the  indicator  for  migration  to  the 
SEPA credit transfer is growing, but not fast enough; yes, the SEPA direct debit is available, 
but it is hardly used; yes, the proposed regulation will fix a migration end-date, but it is too 
early;  and  so  on.  Of  course,  we  have  to  deal  with  problems  and  obstacles,  but  for  a  few 
minutes at least, let us focus, for a change, on what has been achieved. 
SEPA is an unprecedented initiative to harmonise cashless retail payments across countries, 
with  the  added  difficulty  of  replacing  existing  and  widely  accepted  national  payment 
instruments. SEPA is not limited by the borders of either the euro area or the EU. Iceland, 
Norway, Liechtenstein, Switzerland and Monaco are part of SEPA, enabling cashless euro 
payments under the same basic rights and conditions for their citizens and businesses as in 
the EU. And the impact of SEPA clearly goes beyond Europe. International initiatives such as 
the  International  Payments  Framework  (IPF)  see  the  SEPA  schemes  as  a  blueprint  for 
developing their own schemes. Even in China, bankers know that SEPA does not stand only 
for  the  Chinese  State  Environmental  Protection  Administration,  but  for  a  pan-European 
initiative  that  they  are  watching  with  great  interest.  All  this  shows  that  we  are  on  the  right 
path, and that we have an international role to play in retail payments. 
However,  this  needs  to  go  both  ways.  Particularly  in  the  area  of  standardisation,  the 
coordinated presence of European payment service providers, schemes and processors is 
required  to  ensure  that  changes  in  global  standards  that  may  affect  SEPA  schemes, 
frameworks  and  guidelines  are  identified  in  a  timely  manner.  In  the  7th  SEPA  Progress 
Report, the Eurosystem identified a strong need for the direct and coordinated involvement of 
the  European  payments  industry  in  global  card  standardisation  bodies.  In  this  respect,  we 
welcome  the  EPC’s  presence  on  the  advisory  boards  of  EMVCo  and  PCI,  and  the 
negotiation of Memoranda of Understanding with these two entities. 
Conclusion 
With the publication of the 7th SEPA Progress Report in October 2010, the Eurosystem, in its 
role  as  catalyst,  provided  analysis  and  guidance  on  the  way  forward  for  SEPA  in  the 
forthcoming  period.  In  today’s  speech,  I  have  discussed  some  factors  at  a  broader  level: 
innovation,  striking  the  right  balance  between  the  cooperative  and  the  competitive  space, 
and  the  positioning  of  European  retail  payments  at  a  global  level.  To  drive  the  future 
development in retail payments, payment service providers and public authorities/regulators 
will have to be able to respond proactively to these factors. 
The  three  “Es”  –  the  European  Payments  Council,  the  Eurosystem  and  the  European 
Commission – largely favour the integration and modernisation of the retail payments market. 
While there are sometimes differences in their understanding of how best to achieve these 
goals, I am confident that we have managed, and will continue to manage, to successfully 
drive our vision of SEPA forward. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
