Júlia Király: Governance, efficiency and integration in retail payments 
Speech by Ms Júlia Király, Deputy Governor of Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank of 
Hungary),  at  the  joint  Retail  Payments  Conference  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 12 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour  that  a  Hungarian  central  banker  has  been  invited  to  represent  the  out  EU 
countries in this panel. Maybe I will not make a big mistake if I assume that this is somehow 
linked to the fact the Hungary is the President of the EU Council in the first half of 2011. I will 
focus on three 3 major topics: governance, efficiency and integration. I will speak primarily 
about Hungarian aspects, and I would like to show you that most of Hungarian aspects are 
closely linked to the European issues. 
Governance 
I will take a bird’s eye view first. In my view in a network market such as that of payments, 
public authorities clearly have a responsibility in fostering the public good. We should not be 
shy even if this can be achieved only via regulation. 
Governance mechanisms that integrate all stakeholders are very important. In lack of this, 
central bank or other public policy intervention is warranted. 
It is very important to find the proper governance model to steer the retail payments market 
at domestic level. In most countries, including Hungary as well, central banks and banking 
communities  set  up  payments  councils  or  other  special  fora  discussing  payments  related 
issues. In ideal case these fora should consist of representatives of market participants (both 
supply and demand sides, i.e. payment service providers and payment service users), and 
regulators. 
The  involvement  of  payment  service  users  is  more  difficult  than  the  involvement  of  the 
payment service providers as the variety of users is significantly wider than that of payment 
service  providers.  Consumers,  retailers,  businesses/corporates,  small  and  medium-sized 
companies and national public administrations belong mostly to payment service users. We 
have to notice however, that the groups of payment service users are not homogenous and 
there is usually no single association for payment service users. 
Therefore central banks have a key role in the governance of payments related issues. They 
should support the interest of customers, and act in accordance with the interest of the entire 
society  and  public  good.  Central  banks  should  act  for  social  efficiency  and  should  not  be 
captive  of  short  term  banking  community  interests.  I  mention  this  because  during  our 
presidency  work  sometimes  we  have  the  impression  that  some  central  banks  represent 
rather the short term interests of their banking communities and not those of end-users. 
Central  banks  should  bring  policy  aspects  in  decision-making  since  market  mechanisms 
alone may not be enough to achieve the maximum public welfare. In extreme cases it may 
be necessary that central banks like “benevolent dictators” advocate and enforce the public 
good  either  through  moral  persuasion  or  legally  binding  regulation.  In  order  to  be  able  to 
serve public good central banks should be simultaneously initiators, coordinators, catalysts, 
regulators and inspectors, or that they sit in the driving seat. 
Having said that I would like to emphasize that we should not behave like a bull in a china-
shop,  like  regulators  sometimes  do.  Thus  the  functioning  of  market  forces  should  not  be 
restricted unless it is directly required by the interest of the public good. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
SEPA process is a good example of why in some cases self-regulation may not be enough 
due to short term business interest of intermediaries. 
Taking a historical overview we can conclude, that the European Payment Council was able 
to  produce  high  quality  standards  and  recommendations  for  a  number  of  payment 
instruments, e.g. SEPA credit transfers, SEPA direct debits, and cards over its 9-year history. 
The SEPA credit transfer was launched without direct involvement of regulators in January 
2008, but for the launch of the SEPA direct debits joint statement had been required by the 
European  Commission  and  the  European  Central  Bank  specifically  flagging  the  long  term 
use of multilateral interchange fees. Given the slow migration to SEPA credit transfers and 
direct debit, and failed self-regulation on end dates, the legislator has been invited again, this 
time, to adopt a legally binding regulation on end date(s) for credit transfers and direct debits. 
The Commission elaborated a proposal for the regulation by the end of 2010. In cooperation 
with the European institutions and Member States, Hungarian Presidency is working hard on 
finding compromise in relation to the proposal for the regulation. The Hungarian Presidency 
takes fostering the migration very seriously and acts on the matter in the spirit of European 
responsibility. Hopefully general approach can be reached in the Council by the end of June, 
and then the work can be followed in the context of trialogue during the forthcoming Polish 
Presidency. 
We had a déjà vu when we saw the Hungarian discussions on an intraday clearing project 
because  virtually  there  were  the  same  developments  that  have  happened  in  the  SEPA 
process. Hungarian banks supported intraday clearing from a technical point of view but not 
from a business point of view. They asked for regulation but did not like what they got in the 
end. 
5  years  ago  the  MNB  proposed  to  the  banking  community  that  the  current  T+1  clearing 
should  be  shortened,  made  intraday  and  based  on  the  new  European  (SEPA)  standards. 
The main motivating factors included (i) a clear demand from corporates for faster (close to 
real time) retail clearing, (ii) unsuitability of real time gross settlement transactions for retail 
payments), (iii) reduced competition among banks due to the widely used intrabank (on-us) 
transactions, which are settled in real time and are based on banking practice of corporates 
keeping  accounts  with  a  number  of  banks,  including  mostly  some  big  banks.  We  have 
prepared  studies  on  liquidity  management  changes,  costs  etc.  but  the  Hungarian  banking 
community was reluctant to launch the intraday clearing project during the most of a 5-year 
period devoted to the preparation of the project. 
Banks were quite happy with t+1 clearing, as they could enjoy a one- (business) day float. 
They  raised  doubts  about  the  effective  demand  of  customers.  They  indicated  shortage  of 
funds  for  adapting  their  systems  to  the  outcome  of  the  project  by  saying  that  it  would  not 
generate competitive advantages for themselves. SEPA migration was in principle welcome, 
but not immediately, only in “due course”, i.e. in case of a close and realistic target date for 
the adoption of the euro. Some banks advocated a central bank regulation for guaranteeing 
strict enforcement of a go-live date. With all documents, plans, cost analyses, and detailed 
specifications  ready,  the  decision  on  actual  start  of  implementation  has  been  postponed 
several times. 
Amid  conflict  of  interests  of  individual  banks  and  the  reluctance  of  banking  community  to 
make decision on actual start of implementation, the Hungarian central bank has decided to 
use its regulatory power, as the timely implementation of the project was in the interest of the 
entire  society  and  the  public  good  through  the  elimination  of  the  float  on  banks’  side  and 
improvement in the quality of services provided to customers. 
The Hungarian central bank has regulated rather the intraday clearing side than the SEPA 
side of the project, requiring to credit the payees’ bank within at most 4 hours starting from 
the  receipt  of  the  payment  orders  from  payers.  This  rule  will  enter  into  force  as  of  1  July 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2012,  which  becomes,  in  accordance  with  the  decision  of the  Hungarian  payment  council, 
the deadline for the implementation of the Hungarian intraday clearing project. 
Is there a happy end? Yes, there is. Together with banks and Giro, we are working hard to 
make the project to come through. Seen retrospectively, there are a number of banks who 
are now already happy about the actual start of the project and thus they share with us the 
same  vision  towards  a  more  integrated  and  efficient  retail  payments  market.  A  mixture  of 
talks, technological innovation, standardisation, self-regulation and legally binding regulation 
has  been  used,  and  in  addition  to  this  mixture  we  closely  monitor  the  implementation  of 
project and in due time, i.e. after the go-live date: 1 July 2012 we will control the compliance 
with the regulation. 
Efficiency 
Going to the second topic of efficiency let me start with a very popular research topic of the 
past years. 
In  the  last  couple  of  years  it  is  in  fashion  that  central  bankers  publish  so  called  cost  of 
payments studies. One may raise the question whether it is a good or bad fashion. I definitely 
belong  to  that  group  of  supporters,  who  perceive  cost  of  payments  surveys  as  a  very 
important  form  of  communication  to  policy-makers  and  strong  underpinning  why  public 
welfare can warrant public policy intervention in these markets. 
In a free market economy, one has to prove – and not just say – that on the one hand the 
social costs of cash are higher than that of electronic payment instruments and on the other 
hand,  the  market  alone  –  due  to  the  strong  externalities  that  exist  in  this  field  –  cannot 
achieve social optimum. 
The Hungarian central bank has therefore joined the pan-European survey on social costs of 
retail payment instruments. We have prepared our own analysis on the costs of Hungarian 
retail  payment  instruments.  We  have  done  it,  because  the  use  of  cash  is  excessive  in 
Hungary  in  comparison  with  other  European  countries.  The  value  of  cash  in  circulation 
corresponds  to  about  8%  of  GDP  in  Hungary,  and  partly  we  face  the  implications  of  the 
hidden economy. We need systematically collected and processed information on the use of 
various  retail  payment  instruments  and  the  related  costs  along  the  payment  chain,  to 
underpin  our  policy  decisions.  We  wanted  to  be  convinced  of  the  lower  social  costs  of 
electronic payments in relation to that of paper- or cash based ones. 
At  the  same  time  we  have  overhauled  the  payment  habits  of  the  Hungarian  public  sector, 
and indentified the most in-effective areas in their payment habits. Our key motivation was 
that  payments  by  and  from  public  sector  account  for  about  30%  of  retail  payments  in 
Hungary. 
We  have  taken  a  snapshot  of  the  payment  habits  of  Hungarian  households,  and  we  have 
prepared  a  geographical  and  time  map  of  the  Hungarian  payment  transactions  and  the 
underlying  infrastructure  (availability  and  location  of  ATMs,  POS  terminals,  branch  offices, 
etc.). In cooperation with the Hungarian Competition Authority we have analysed the current 
size of interchange fees applicable for domestic card transactions and the pros and cons of 
intervening into the functioning of this market. 
Let  me  shed  some  light  on  the  summarised  outcome  of  the  above-mentioned  studies  and 
main conclusions we have drawn for the future. 
The  costs  of  payment  transactions  are  too  high.  The  annual  social  costs  amount  to 
EUR  billion  1.38  (or  1,5%  of  the  GDP),  and  almost  2/3  of  these  costs  relate  to  cash 
transactions or cash intensive postal transactions (postal inpayment money orders for utility 
bills  and  postal  outpayment  money  orders  for  pensions).  In  contrast  with  the  electronic 
payments,  cash  transactions  and  cash  intensive  postal  transactions  are  characterised  by 
relatively  high  variable  cost  shares,  and  consequently  the  cost  of  an  additional  payment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
transaction  is  higher  than  in  case  of  electronic payment  instruments.  At  certain  breakeven 
points the electronic payments will become less expensive than cash transactions and cash 
intensive  postal  transactions.  Consequently  cost  savings  can  be  achieved  exclusively 
through changes in payment habits. 
Annually about 380 million euro (or 0.41% of the current GDP) could be saved in Hungary if 
the  payment  habits  changed.  We  assumed  a  situation  with  no  change  in  the  combined 
number  of  transactions,  but  a  payment  pattern  very  different  from  the  currently  used  one 
i.e. a vigorous increase in the number of electronic credit transfers, direct debits, and debit 
card transactions. The potential saving is large enough not to wait until the organic evolution 
alone  will  produce  results  and  thus  it  encourages  us  to  make  a  trial  for  accelerating  the 
process of changes and influencing the selection of payment instruments by users. 
Each third payment from or to the Hungarian public sector is currently based on the use of 
cash. In value terms the cash based payments of the public sector corresponds to 17% of 
the Hungarian GDP. Thus the public sector does not show a positive example in the use of 
efficient  payment  instruments,  what  is  prominently  characteristic  for  the  about  3000  local 
governments (both on the incoming and outgoing payments), as they use very heavily cash. 
This statement is also valid for the central government with respect to outgoing payments. 
About 51% of the pensions are paid in cash via the post offices. Moreover the liquidity and 
account management are decentralised in the sector of local governments. 
About 89% of households has at least 1 payment account, and about 85% of households has 
at  least  1  payment  card,  but  households  still  use  cash  mostly.  The  low  usage  rate  of 
electronic  payments  is  explained  by  the  continued  existence  of  traditional  payment  habits, 
lack of information, motivation and partly confidence. It may also happen that even in case of 
willingness to pay electronically, the lack of infrastructure hinders the use of payment cards. 
The infrastructure is still underdeveloped; the spread of POS terminals is currently governed 
mostly  by  tourism  in  the  countryside,  while  the  branch  offices  of  credit  institutions 
concentrate clearly on larger settlements. 
The  interchange  fees  account  for  about  0.5%  of  the  payment  card  transaction  value  what 
seems to be higher than the limits undertaken by the 2 main international card companies 
(MasterCard and VISA) who dominate the Hungarian market. 
Both the use of non-cash instruments and the spread of POS terminals have been constantly 
growing,  nonetheless  the  growth  rate  is  less  than  desired,  and  it  would  take  at  least 
10–15 years before we could reach the present status of the Nordic countries. 
Based on the results of the cost study and aimed at enhancing social benefits, the Hungarian 
central  bank  has  started  a  more  active  communication,  as  a  neutral  position  would  not 
facilitate  the  fast  realisation  of  cost  savings.  In  our  view,  all  stakeholders  should  seek 
together the ways to influence payment habits and thus intervene into the individual decision-
making  on  the  choice  of  payment  instruments.  The  Hungarian  central  bank  has  therefore 
launched a social dialogue. The very first step in this direction has been a recent domestic 
conference  held  on  the  presence  and  future  of  the  domestic  payment  industry,  where  we 
presented the results of the studies and ideas for influencing payment habits. I am convinced 
that much better is for the whole economy if the responsible authorities first measure, then 
analyse  and  thereafter  regulate.  Unfortunately  we  see  a  lot  of  examples  when  regulation 
happens first without any measurement and analyses which leads to disturbances. 
Before outlining some possible measures aiming at influencing Hungarian payment habits, 
let  me  draw  a  parallel  between  the  Hungarian  and  European  developments.  Neither  the 
Hungarian public sector, nor a very large number of European public administrations lead the 
process towards a more progressive payment pattern and SEPA migration respectively. We 
know from the recent communication of the European Commission, that the share of SEPA 
credit transfers out of all credit transfers undertaken by public administration is below 10% 
e.g. in the Netherlands, Italy, Germany and France. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Therefore we can say, that public authorities’ behaviour in the payments market can be in 
sharp contrast to what their public policy intentions and communication are. Public authorities 
should start change with themselves. 
Returning  to  Hungarian  fields  we  see  vast  opportunities  in  the  reduction  of  cash  usage  in 
public  sector.  To  the  reasonably  greatest  extent  all  government  outflows  (pensions,  social 
benefits)  should  be  made  to  payment  accounts.  We  consider  the  better  involvement  and 
wider  electronisation  of  the  network  of  the  Post  offices  in  order  to  improve  the  access  to 
payment  services.  The  extension  of  the  POS  network  might  be  supported.  Ensuring 
government control above the interchange fees is being further analysed. Sharing the fees 
between payers and payees for the widely used postal instrument is also an option, but we 
might  achieve  it  through  a  more  transparent  pricing  of  the  underlying  services,  such  as 
electricity, gas, water bills, insurance premia, etc.  
We would like to investigate the feasibility of the establishment of an EBPP scheme which 
covers  the  entire  Hungarian  banking  system  and  which  is  open  to  each  service  provider 
(public utilities, insurance companies, etc.) and any consumers. This is again an area which 
is closely linked to the European developments. 
Integration  
I have asked my magic ball about the issue and it answered me that we still have a long way 
to go to achieve full integration and a single market but in case of lucky constellation of stars 
the process may accelerate. Credit transfers and direct debits are far from constituting the 
full payments market. Cards and e-products are the future and we have a responsibility not 
to allow fragmentation in those segments of the single market. 
Cross-border  integration  is  very  important  and  is  in  the  direct  interest  of  payment  service 
users, especially in a small open economy. 
In  case  of  certain  banks,  cross-border  optimalisation  is  the  driving  force  behind  the 
transformation process. This holds particularly true for Hungary, as  most of the Hungarian 
banks are either subsidiaries or branches of multinational groups, and they aim at profitability 
at a group level. It goes without saying that cross-border optimalisation and the underlying 
economies of scale are more feasible when the same standards and the same currency are 
used across the region where the group is engaged in activities. 
The  efficiency  of  cross-border  transactions  is  of  great  importance  for  each  open  economy 
irrespectively of being a small or a big country, a euro area or a non euro area country. The 
importance of regional requirements is increasing steadily in line with the implementation of 
SEPA. 
To  achieve  a  truly  single  market  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  European  or  broader 
standards are developed and used already at the start-up phase of innovative e-payments 
products, so that innovation become truly European and not only national. The responsibility 
of European authorities and central banks is to create an environment that ensures this. 
We  have  to  prevent  from  causing  a  fragmentation  of  e-payments,  because  there  is  a 
stressing demand at each national market where such scheme has not yet been available to 
come up with something. It would save lot of resources for each concerned country if they 
could resort to a truly European scheme. 
It is very important that any type of national or European regulation (e.g. the SEPA end date 
regulation) do not hamper innovation by rules carved into stone and integration by country-
specific waivers and niche products. 
Finally I would like to touch upon the issue of payment infrastructures. At the outset of the 
euro  era  it  was  expected  that  the  fragmentation  of  retail  payment  markets  would  be 
abolished.  Some  national  clearing  houses  have  merged,  some  pan-European  clearing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
houses have emerged, but still national clearing houses are the dominant institutions in this 
field in most of the Members States. I am convinced that the use of SEPA standards and 
achieving interoperability will increase the competition between the clearing houses and thus 
accelerate  the  process  of  consolidation  which  will  lead  to  economies  of  scale.  But  if  we 
achieve this we might face a duopoly or monopoly situation, and a new task will emerge how 
to handle the pricing by the winners in such a new environment. 
 Let me conclude. I am convinced that when European and national institutions take up the 
tasks that are ahead of them then we will have better integrated and more efficient European 
retail payment market. This is of utmost importance as we understand the significance of the 
public  sentiment.  As  Abraham  Lincoln  said  in  a  speech  delivered  at  Bloomington  on 
26 September 1854: “With public sentiment, nothing can fail; without it nothing can succeed.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
