Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: One size fits all? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 16th Annual Conference of the German-British Forum “The European Central 
Bank in a global perspective – central banking and the challenge of rising inflation”, London, 
26 May 2011. 
 I wish to thank Huw Pill and Oreste Tristani for their contributions to the speech. I remain solely responsible for 
the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure to speak at this German British Forum on the important issue of “The 
European Central Bank in a global perspective – The challenge of rising inflation”.  
I would like to address an issue which is raised time and again, namely, can the monetary 
policy  implemented  by  the  ECB  fit  different  underlying  economic  performances  in  the 
Member States of the euro area? And in the current situation, the question is often asked 
whether  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  doesn’t  risk  hampering  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area 
periphery and jeopardising the implementation of the adjustment programmes.  
As I said, the issue is not new, but it is certainly topical. I am sometimes tempted to answer 
that this is not the right question, or at least that the question comes too late, given that we 
now  have  had  a  monetary  union  for  more  than  11  years  and  there  are  no  alternatives  in 
sight. But I realise that some more structured answers have to be given at some point, and 
that’s what I would like to do today. 
As  you  all  well  know  by  now,  the  ECB  has  been  assigned  the  primary  objective  of 
maintaining price stability in the euro area. The ECB therefore has no choice but to take a 
euro area perspective: its policy decisions aim at area-wide price stability. Those decisions 
draw  on  all  available  information,  including  that  deriving  from  national  indicators,  but  they 
cannot be tailored to the specific needs of a single Member State. 
As  we  have  seen,  economic  divergences  can  emerge  and  persist  across  countries  and 
regions within the euro area. In principle, there are several reasons why such variations in 
growth  or  inflation  may  emerge  within  a  monetary  union.  Initial  differences  in  the  level  of 
development or income may lead to some countries catching up with the area-wide average 
through a period of faster growth, associated with relative price changes.1 Certain economic 
shocks  may  affect  the  economic  performance  of  one  country  but  not  another.2  The 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  may  differ  across  countries  and  regions  because  of 
variations in economic and financial structures.3  
Although  the  economic  literature  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro  emphasised  the 
importance  of  asymmetric  shocks,  the  cross-country  variation  in  growth  and  inflation  in 
                                                 
1  One explanation of these catch-up effects is the so-called Balassa-Samuelson effect, see: Balassa, B. (1964). 
“The  purchasing  power  parity  doctrine:  A  reappraisal,”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  72,  pp.  584–596;  and 
Samuelson,  P.  (1964).  “Theoretical  notes  on  trade  problems,”  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics  46, 
pp. 145–154. For an application to the euro area, see: Honohan, P. and P.R. Lane (2003). “Divergent inflation 
rates in the euro area,” Economic Policy 37, pp.359-94. 
2  See: Bayoumi, T. and B. Eichengreen (1992). “Shocking aspects of European Monetary Unification,” NBER 
working paper no. 3949; Obstfeld, M. and G. Peri (1999), “Regional nonadjustment and fiscal policy: Lessons 
for EMU,” NBER Working Paper No 6431. 
3  An analysis of this issue made prior to the introduction of the euro is offered by: Dornbusch, R., C.A. Favero 
and F. Giavazzi (1998). “Immediate challenges for the ECB: Issues in formulating a single monetary policy,” 
Economic Policy 26, pp. 25–64. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
recent years has been driven by differences in the impact and diffusion of a common shock, 
namely the financial crisis.  
The crisis has been a global shock that affected all countries in the euro area – and others, 
of  course.  It  started  with  the  emergence  of  market  tensions  in  mid-2007  associated  with 
uncertainty about the valuation of US mortgage-backed securities and escalated sharply in 
September 2008 with the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. The varying impact of this shock 
on  financial  conditions  across  countries  has  led  to  a  potential  for  dramatically  different 
transmission  of  the  single  monetary  policy  stance  determined  by  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council. This is especially the case in the most recent phase of the crisis, when sovereign 
debt  concerns  and  their  interaction  with  the  strength  of  bank  balance  sheets  have  been 
central. 
In those euro area countries where government and banking sector balance sheets remain 
sound and access to external financing has been maintained, the transmission of monetary 
policy continues in line with historical regularities. But in those countries where the sovereign 
debt and bank funding markets have virtually seized up, its transmission is threatened.  
The  interest  rates  on  corporate  loans  and  on  mortgages,  which  ultimately  affect  real 
economic activity, will be higher in countries where banks are having funding problems. The 
increase  in  bond  yield  spreads  experienced  by  the  countries  hardest  hit  by  the  sovereign 
debt crisis is likely to be passed through, in large part, to the cost of financing for the private 
sector.  Indeed,  the  latest  data  on  bank  interest  rates  show  that  mortgages  and  corporate 
loans  are  significantly  more  expensive  to  service  in  those  countries  with  sovereign  debt 
tensions.  For  example,  while  lending  rates  on  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  have 
tended to fall in all euro area countries since October 2008 – following the reduction of ECB 
policy rates – the fall has been less pronounced in Greece and Portugal. In December 2009, 
lending  rates  on 
two  countries  were 
approximately 1 percentage point higher than in Germany. Similarly, long-term rates on bank 
mortgage  loans  to  households  have  increased  in  Greece,  Ireland  and  Spain  since  the 
eruption of the sovereign debt crisis in May 2010, while they continued to fall in France and 
Germany until the end of 2010.  
Considering  the  scale  of  the  underlying  problems  and  thus  the  time  it  will  take  to  resolve 
them, the potential for cross-country variation in monetary policy transmission will persist. So 
the  single  monetary  policy  may  have  different  effects  in  different  parts  of  the  euro  area, 
leading to persistent differences in economic performance, even with the single policy stance 
established by the ECB’s Governing Council. 
We are already seeing greater variation from country to country than in the pre-crisis period. 
While the German economy appears to have recovered quickly from the recession – growing 
1.5% in the first quarter of this year – in those countries most affected by the sovereign debt 
crisis  growth  remains  sluggish.  As  a  result,  current  cross-country  growth  differentials  are 
significant compared with the pre-crisis period.  
To  some  extent,  these  differences  are  a  mirror  image  of  those  before  the  crisis.  Those 
countries  which  had  more  buoyant  growth  during  the  pre-crisis  period  are  also  those  that 
have accumulated large financial imbalances. In the middle of the past decade, the strong 
growth  in  household  loans  fuelled  housing  and  construction  booms  in  countries  such  as 
Spain and Ireland. Loan growth rates there peaked at annual rates of around 25%, compared 
with an area-wide peak of 10%.  
As  a  result  of  the  crisis,  these  countries  have  been  undergoing  a  painful  adjustment, 
unwinding  the  imbalances  created  during  the  boom.  The  recessions  affecting  them  have 
sometimes been much deeper, with GDP growth several percentage points below that seen 
to  non-financial  corporations 
these 
loans 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in the euro area as a whole.4 Consistent with this, loan growth has fallen significantly. For 
example, household loan growth has turned strongly negative in Ireland and has remained 
stagnant in Greece and in Spain over the past 2 years, while it returned to positive growth 
rates in 2010 in the euro area average. 
Has  the  single  monetary  policy  exacerbated  these  cross-country  differences?  The  answer 
depends greatly on the counterfactual scenario you choose.  
It  is  certainly  possible  to  construct  a  theoretical  counterfactual  within  which  credible  and 
independent national monetary policies would have ensured price stability in every country 
now in the euro area, rather than only at the average euro area level. In this scenario, cross-
country  inflation  differentials  would  have  been  reduced,  although  I  should  emphasise  that 
these  have  remained  small  in  the  euro  area,  even  when  compared  with  those  in  different 
regions of the United States, which is a currency area typically seen as being closer to the 
optimum size and structure.  
However,  a  more  realistic  counterfactual  would  envisage  euro  area  countries  being 
connected by some version of the old Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), with the policies of 
several  countries  being  in  some  way  related  to  the  policies  implemented  in  particular  by 
Germany and the respective currencies linked to the DM.  
Arrangements  like  the  ERM  imply  a  strong  interdependence  of  national  monetary  policies, 
not  a  free  float  with  complete  monetary  independence.  In  practice,  because  of  the 
importance  of  the  German  economy  in  Europe  and  the  stability  of  its  currency,  the  ERM 
accorded a central role to the monetary policy implemented by the Bundesbank, set on the 
basis of German macroeconomic conditions.  
If we think about how such a system would have worked prior to the crisis, we would get to 
the conclusion that it would have made the divergences between countries more acute than 
those  we  have  actually  seen  within  the  euro  area.  For  example,  policy  interest  rates 
determined  by  the  Bundesbank  on  the  basis  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments  in 
Germany alone would probably have been lower before the crisis than those determined by 
the ECB for the euro-area as a whole. Within an ERM regime, lower German interest rates 
would have been transmitted elsewhere in Europe, including to countries such as Spain or 
Ireland, where domestic inflation and house price developments would not have warranted 
such  an  easy  policy  stance.  The  resulting  lower  real  interest  rates  and  easier  financing 
conditions might well have exacerbated the accumulation of financial and real imbalances by 
supporting even bigger asset and credit bubbles and ultimately have led to a larger crisis as 
these bubbles burst. 
During the crisis, Monetary Union has also helped to contain cross-country heterogeneity in 
bank credit conditions and supported the availability of loans to the private sector. Not only 
have  standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  served  to  ease  financial 
conditions  on  average,  they  have  also  helped  to  limit  the  dispersion  of  bank interest  rates 
across  countries.  For  example,  the  range  of  long-term  rates  on  bank  mortgage  loans  to 
households across euro area countries has been limited to around 1½ percentage points in 
recent  years,  which  is  similar  to  the  dispersion  seen  at  the  end  of  2006,  before  the  crisis 
started. While the spreads between interest rates on bank loans to non-financial corporations 
in  Greece  and  Portugal  have  increased  by  up  to  2  percentage  points  over  the  euro  area 
average, the equivalent spreads for Ireland and Spain have remained modest over the entire 
crisis period.  
                                                 
4 
In 2009 and 2010, GDP growth equalled:  –7.6% and  –1.0%, respectively, in Ireland;  –2.3% and –4.4% in 
Greece; and  –2.6% and 0.8% in Portugal. These figures compare with GDP growth of  –4.1% and 1.8% in the 
euro area as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Another theoretical argument can be made suggesting that independent national monetary 
policies  could  be  more  expansionary  when  national  fiscal  policies  turn  restrictive  in  the 
pursuit of fiscal consolidation. In principle, national monetary policies have the advantage of 
being able to counter the negative pressure on inflation produced by the fiscal tightening. In 
practice,  however,  countries  in  urgent  need  of  fiscal  retrenchment  do  not  necessarily 
experience  lower  inflation.  At  present,  inflation  is  higher  than  the  euro  area  average  in 
Portugal, Ireland, Spain and, in particular, Greece. In a counterfactual without the euro, the 
national  monetary  authorities  responsible  for  monetary  policy  could  not  implement  a  more 
expansionary  policy  stance  than  is currently  the  case  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  without 
endangering their credibility and the maintenance of price stability. 
These  observations  are  broadly  supported  by  the  experience  here  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
Despite the extra degree of freedom offered to policy-makers by remaining outside the euro 
area,  economic  activity  in  the  UK  remains  further  below  its  pre-crisis  peak  than  either  in 
Germany or France. In relative terms, the depreciation of sterling against the euro has not 
cushioned growth but rather led to a higher rate of domestic inflation in Britain than in the 
euro area. 
In  sum,  I  would  maintain  that  there  are  no  clear  reasons  for  believing  that  cross-country 
variation in economic performance within the euro area has proved larger than would have 
been the case if national monetary policies had been retained and the euro not introduced. 
But, at the same time, I do not think that cross-country differences in Monetary Union, which 
raise  the  potential  for  persistent  divergence  of  economic  performance,  can  or  should  be 
ignored.  
Looking forward, the financial crisis and its impact on the functioning of financial markets in 
some  countries  has  led  to  a  situation  in  which  cross-country  heterogeneity  owing  to 
differences in monetary policy transmission may be more pronounced than before the crisis – 
at least if effective remedial measures are not taken. 
This  new  environment  has  posed,  and  will  continue  to  pose,  challenges  to  the  single 
monetary policy. How is the ECB dealing with these challenges? 
Since  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  ECB  has  implemented  a  set  of  non-standard 
measures,  taking  advantage  of  the range  of  instruments  available  within  the  Eurosystem’s 
framework for the implementation of monetary policy. Foremost among these measures has 
been the adoption of a fixed rate tender procedure with full allotment in the ECB’s monetary 
policy  operations.  In  conjunction  with  the  flexible  nature  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral 
framework,  these  measures  allow  banks  to  obtain  funding  even  in  the  face  of  market 
dislocation.5  This  has  avoided  a  disorderly  deleveraging  of  bank  balance  sheets  and  the 
associated potential for a fire sale-driven, vicious downward spiral in asset prices and bank 
capital. 
In  the  face  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  these  non-standard  measures,  supplemented  by 
targeted asset purchases under the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme, have addressed 
and  contained  the  country-specific  impediments  to  monetary  policy  transmission.  The 
Eurosystem has provided – and is still providing – support to those national banking systems 
which  face  liquidity  needs.  I  would  like  to  underline  that  the  key  precondition  for  such  a 
support is that the country concerned sticks to the EU/IMF adjustment programme and are 
on track. In other words, the responsibility for ensuring the conditions for the Eurosystem to 
support  the  banking  system  of  the  countries  under  stress  is  with  the  authorities  of  the 
countries themselves. There should be no doubt about it. 
                                                 
5  For further details, see Trichet, J-C. (2009). “The ECB’s enhanced credit support”, address at the University of 
Munich, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2009/html/sp090713.en.html. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The support provided to the banking system has been substantial. It is reflected in financing 
conditions  at  the  euro  area  level,  which  have  become  more  favourable  of  late,  amid  an 
ongoing gradual normalisation. 
Recent  euro  area  bank  lending  surveys  show  signs  of  improvement  in  credit  conditions 
compared with the peaks recorded during the apex of the financial crisis. While in most euro 
area Member States we have seen broadly unchanged or slightly loosened credit standards 
over  the  past  few  quarters,  in  a  few  others  the  bank  lending  surveys  point  to  constraints 
remaining in the supply of bank loans to firms and households. 
On the basis of these and other data, recent analyses by ECB staff members suggest that 
the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is normalising.6 The impact of a monetary 
policy tightening on economic activity – at almost all horizons – is currently not statistically 
different from pre-crisis regularities. The impact on inflation shows a similar pattern in terms 
of time variation.7 
In  sum,  the  monetary  policy  framework  of  the  ECB  allows  policy  rates  to  be  changed 
according  to  macroeconomic  and  price  developments  area-wide,  while  its  non-standard 
measures aim to maintain monetary policy transmission so as to make the stance of policy 
rates effective throughout the euro area.  
The  standard  and  non-standard  measures  thus  complement  one  another.  The  standard 
monetary  policy  instrument  has  been  used  to  pursue  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  of  price 
stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The  non-standard  measures  have  addressed  the 
impediments  to  monetary  policy  transmission  stemming  from  financial  market  dislocations 
and  related  threats  to  financial  stability,  and  have  thus  helped  to  avoid  cross-country 
divergence arising from discrepancies in the national transmission of the common monetary 
policy.  
These  measures  have  maintained  the  effectiveness  of  the  single  monetary  policy  in 
challenging circumstances. During the crisis, the credibility of the ECB has been instrumental 
in  ensuring  that  medium-term  inflation  expectations  have  remained  well-anchored  around 
price  stability.  This,  in  turn,  has  significantly  helped  to  ensure  that  lower  nominal  yields  at 
various maturities translate into lower real interest rates, and thus support aggregate demand 
and avoid the spectre of a deflationary spiral. 
Current challenges therefore do not call into question the primacy of the ECB’s objective of 
price stability. On the contrary, it is precisely in this challenging environment that the benefits 
of price stability for Monetary Union as a whole will be reaped. 
The credible achievement of price stability reduces overall uncertainty in the macroeconomic 
environment and thereby keeps risk premia embedded in financial yields lower than would 
otherwise  be  the  case.  In  turn,  this  will  foster  growth,  and  thus  provide  support  to  those 
countries facing financing difficulties. At the same time, price stability is a crucial element in 
restoring stability to financial markets and improving market access for distressed sovereigns 
and banks.  
That said, we must be careful not to overburden monetary policy, in both its standard and 
non-standard incarnations. Obviously, monetary policy cannot take up the slack where fiscal 
or other authorities fail to live up to their responsibilities.  
While central banks can, should and do provide liquidity support to financial markets, they 
cannot provide solvency support. That would represent an encroachment upon the domain of 
                                                 
6  See the analysis presented in Giannone, D., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2011). “Non-standard monetary 
policy measures and monetary developments,” ECB Working Paper No 1290. 
7  See the framework developed in Ciccarelli, M., A. Maddaloni and J-L. Peydró (2010). “Trusting the bankers: A 
new look at the credit channel of monetary policy,” ECB Working Paper No 1228. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the  fiscal  authorities  and  blur  the  distinction  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  It  would 
threaten the independence of the central bank, on which the credible pursuit of price stability 
relies. In the face of a financial crisis, the fiscal authorities may be called upon to shore up 
capital in the banking system. The monetary authorities cannot and should not play any role 
in this area. 
Structural reforms are also crucial. In those countries suffering from anaemic growth due to a 
lack  of  competitiveness,  reforms  to  reduce  unit  labour  costs  have  to  be  put  in  place. 
Foremost among them are measures to improve the flexibility of the labour market. Member 
States  with  large  fiscal  imbalances  and  debt  overhangs  must  address  them  by  adopting 
measures to achieve a primary fiscal surplus.  
I  recognise  that  implementing  these  measures  is  challenging.  And  the  starting  point  is,  in 
many  cases,  unfavourable.  Disinflation  to  improve  price  competitiveness  may  serve  to 
increase the real burden of a country’s debt overhang. 
But there is no alternative to these measures if Monetary Union is to work effectively, and the 
countries concerned are to regain the stability and prosperity that they seek. 
And, in all cases, convergence has to be with the best performer in the euro area. We cannot 
accept any weakening that would be implied by the averaging-out of the performance of all 
Member  States.  Indeed,  all  countries  have  homework  to  do:  there  is  much  scope  for 
improvement even in the strongest countries if the benefits of price stability are to be fully 
reaped by the people of Europe. 
The responsibility for fiscal and structural policies remains at national level. But we may need 
to consider some policy areas where, in order to ensure the stability of Monetary Union and 
the euro, more responsibilities should be assumed at area-wide level. The financial crisis has 
demonstrated  that  a  lack  of  financial  integration  can  complicate  the  implementation,  and 
threaten  the  effectiveness,  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Policy  interest  rates  can  only 
guarantee price stability when their transmission to the economy is effective and reasonably 
uniform.  
To  ensure  such  transmission,  we  need  greater  harmonisation  in  financial  supervision  and 
regulation. These are tasks that should be performed at euro area level. 
Harmonised financial supervision and regulation will also support deeper financial integration 
within the euro area. In turn, such integration will foster risk-sharing and improve the shock-
absorbing capacity of Monetary Union. Some of the vulnerabilities of the euro area we have 
seen in recent years stem – at least in part – from the fragmented nature of the European 
financial sector and the supervisory regime that supports it.  
What we have witnessed over the past few years in financial markets represent the growing 
pains of the euro, not its death throes. With the necessary actions taken at national and area-
wide level, I am confident the euro will go from strength to strength.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
