José De Gregorio: Current challenges to central banking in emerging 
market economies 
Presentation  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the 
International  Symposium  of  the  Banque  de  France:  Regulation  in  the  Face  of  Global 
Imbalances, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 I am very grateful for comments and discussions with Rodrigo Cifuentes, Kevin Cowan, Luis Oscar Herrera, and 
Enrique Orellana. 
I am very grateful for the invitation to participate in this panel on Lessons from the Crisis on 
the Role of Central Banks. The crisis has revealed weaknesses in the functioning of financial 
markets  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  several  advanced  economies, 
which  went  through  years  of  credit  expansion  and  leveraging  that  ultimately  proved 
unsustainable.  There  are  many  lessons  to  be  learned  in  order  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of 
another crisis of this magnitude. Indeed, many of the policies implemented during the recent 
crisis,  and  which  helped  to  avert  a  catastrophe,  were  lessons  we  learned  from  the  Great 
Depression. 
But  the  recent  episode  has  also  revealed  the  strengths  of  policy  frameworks  and  financial 
systems in emerging market economies (EMEs) that were able to successfully mitigate the 
effects  of  the  worst  global  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression.  Fiscal  prudence,  more 
autonomous central banks, low inflation, flexible exchange rates, and financial regulation and 
supervision, consistent with their lower degree of financial sophistication, were central to this 
unprecedented  performance.  Many  of  these  lessons  have  been  learned  the  hard  way, 
through  decades  of  macroeconomic  mismanagement,  and  several  costly  experiences  of 
currency and financial crises. 
Today,  however,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  challenges  to  macroeconomic  management 
faced  by  EMEs  in  the  current  global  environment.  Indeed,  the  two-speed  recovery  of  the 
global  economy  is  creating  tensions  in  EMEs,  putting  pressure  on  macroeconomic 
management,  in  particular,  in  the  context  of  inflationary  pressures,  capital  inflows  and 
currency  appreciation.  I  will  refer  to  these  challenges,  starting  from  monetary  policy  and 
exchange rate appreciation, to then move to financial stability issues. 
Inflation and currency appreciation 
The conduct of monetary policy by independent central banks with a clear mandate for price 
stability  was  central  to  allow  for  the  implementation  of  countercyclical  monetary  policies  in 
EMEs  during  the  Great  Recession.  Today  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  must 
avoid  the  buildup  of  inflationary  pressures  in  a  world  of  rising  commodity  prices  and 
economic  activity  close  to  full  capacity  in  many  EMEs.  Failing  to  act  decisively  against 
inflation  pressures  will  undermine  credibility,  with  negative  consequences  on  the  ability  to 
achieve stable inflation with low output costs in the future.  
Perhaps the main apprehension of policymakers in tightening monetary policy is the fear of 
further  appreciation  of  their  currencies.  As  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  is 
expected to remain very expansionary for a prolonged period of time, many EMEs that have 
been tightening monetary policy have also experienced appreciation of their currencies. Not 
dealing  with  inflationary  pressures  in  a  timely  manner,  however,  could  result  in  economic 
overheating and rising inflation.  
Most  emerging  markets  have  enjoyed  great  success  from  trade  openness  and  export-led 
growth,  and  hence  their  worries  arising  from  exchange  rate  appreciation  are  well  justified. 
However, it is important to distinguish between real appreciation – the relevant variable from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  competitiveness  standpoint  –  and  nominal  appreciation.  Exchange  rate  actions  that 
attempt to mitigate a real exchange rate appreciation will have only transitory effects, which 
could provide valuable time for the economy to adjust to a new global environment and might 
hence be relevant from the point of view of welfare, but cannot be thought of as a permanent 
tool to foster competitiveness. In order to sustain the real exchange rate, real actions need to 
be taken, such as increasing domestic savings. It is time to rebuild fiscal buffers in emerging 
market economies and accelerate the pace of reforms to achieve productivity gains that can 
sustain competitiveness. 
It is important to note that the economic strength of EMEs relative to advanced economies is 
the main reason why their real exchange rates are appreciating. In addition, the correction of 
global imbalances requires both an increase in consumption in surplus economies and a shift 
of this greater demand towards goods produced by advanced economies, especially since in 
the latter growth of domestic demand will be sluggish because of the post-crisis deleveraging 
process. Relative price adjustments around the world should help this process. Many EMEs 
have been trying to mitigate the appreciation through exchange rate intervention, with partial 
success. Chile is one of the latest to join this group. Others have sought the use of capital 
controls  or  macro-prudential  regulations,  not  only  for  exchange  rate  reasons,  but  also  to 
avoid  the  buildup  of  excessive  market  or  liquidity  risk  associated  to  the  foreign  exchange 
position. 
In January this year we announced a program of reserves accumulation of 12 billion dollars, 
about 5 percent of GDP. This measure had a dual purpose. On the one hand, it would relieve 
some  pressures  on  the  exchange  rate,  facilitating  the  adjustment  of  the  economy  to  the 
current international environment. On the other hand, it would increase Chile’s international 
liquidity position to levels around 17 percent of GDP. Indeed, evidence shows that having a 
high level of reserves makes economies more resilient to financial turbulences, even though 
they are generally not massively used. Reserves act as a deterrent against sharp capital flow 
reversals.1  In  addition,  reserves  allow  central  banks  to  credibly  establish  foreign  currency 
liquidity facilities. These played an important role in normalizing both domestic currency and 
foreign currency short term debt markets in many EMEs during the recent global crisis. 
After an initial sizable depreciation, the peso has strengthened, for some days even reaching 
levels  similar  to  those  prevailing  before  the  intervention  announcement.  This  contrasts 
sharply with the experience of the previous period of reserve accumulation initiated in April 
2008 (Figure 1). In that episode and with the global financial crisis intensifying it was deemed 
appropriate to accumulate about 4 percent of GDP over a period of 8 months. This process 
was suspended after the collapse of Lehman Brothers that triggered a sharp depreciation of 
most currencies in EMEs. During that episode, the currency depreciated almost continuously 
by  about  18  percent  between  early  April  and  late  August.  Two  very  important  issues  help 
explain  to  a  large  extent  the  difference  between  the  two  episodes.  In  2008,  the  dollar 
strengthened  and  the  price  of  copper  fell.  Today,  the  dollar  has  remained  weak  and  the 
copper price has reached all-time highs (Figure 2). This example shows how the effects of 
the  intervention  are  confounded  by  other  macroeconomic  developments.  Overall,  available 
estimations  indicate  that,  without  the  intervention,  the  peso  would  be  between  3  and 
5 percent stronger than it is today. 
A  key  uncertainty  for  policymakers  in  EMEs  is  how  long  the  period  of  decoupling  and 
“exchange rate tensions” will last. Part of the tensions will be persistent, as many EMEs have 
proven very resilient in the current crisis – validating their policy frameworks. This resilience 
should  be  factored  into  a  lower  risk  premia  for  the  assets  issued  by  these  economies. 
However,  some  of  the  tensions  will  prove  transitory  and  will  subside  once  activity  in 
                                                 
1  For  further  discussion,  see  “International  Reserve  Holdings  in  Emerging  Markets”  by  José  De  Gregorio, 
Central Bank of Chile Economic Policy Paper No. 40, January 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
advanced  economies  recovers  more  strongly.  Therefore,  over  time  some  tensions  should 
alleviate, and this depends crucially on a healthy recovery of advanced economies. 
The cyclical difference between EMEs and advanced economies, with the consequences on 
expected relative returns and risk, is inducing large gross capital inflows to EMEs. Net capital 
inflows,  however,  are  well  below  the  levels  seen  in  the  early  1990s.  Indeed,  at  this  time 
EMEs  are  running  current  account  surpluses  on  average,  while  in  the  early  1990s  deficit 
predominated.  In  the  case  of  Chile,  we  have  not  seen  net  capital  inflows  yet.  But,  as  the 
adjustment  progresses  we  should  observe  rising  net  capital  inflows  to  EMEs.  In  addition, 
large gross capital inflows raise concerns from a financial stability perspective, an issue to 
which I will turn next. 
Financial stability and capital inflows 
We  can  think  of  three  ways  through  which  unsteady  gross  inflows  may  affect  financial 
stability in a country. The first one is that in small and often illiquid markets capital inflows 
may increase asset prices beyond fundamentals. The problem arises if asset prices respond 
significantly to inflows, and these inflows stop or revert suddenly. A sharp decline in asset 
prices affects the balance sheets of local and foreign agents. If, in addition, the financing of 
asset purchases is highly leveraged, the fall in asset prices may trigger solvency problems, 
just as those of the subprime crisis. In addition, drastic reductions of positions in domestic 
markets by non residents may also introduce excess volatility in the exchange rate markets 
as  investors  leave  the  country.  Through  these  chains  of  effects,  a  reversal  or  even  a 
slowdown in capital inflows may significantly weaken financial stability in the local economy 
and also potentially in the economies from which the inflows are being financed. 
A  second  source  of  vulnerabilities  may  arise  from  cross  border  flows  that  provide  debt 
funding  to  local  agents.  These  can  be  financial  intermediaries  or  non-financial  companies, 
and the funding can be via deposits or lending. If lending is short term, then this may result in 
maturity mismatches. If lending is in a foreign currency, then the risk of currency mismatches 
must also be factored in. The problem arises if local agents do not correctly internalize these 
risks or if regulation limiting these risks in the financial sector is inadequate. 
A third source of problems is that capital flows may increase the scale and the complexity of 
the local financial system, and this expansion may expose weaknesses in the regulatory and 
supervisory structure. For example, if external funding has not been readily available in the 
past  for  certain  intermediaries,  awareness  of  currency  mismatches  can  be  weak  for  these 
institutions  or  for  their  customers,  and  may  not  be  properly  addressed  in  the  regulatory 
framework. Similarly, the availability of new funding may cause credit to rise at a faster pace 
than that of the supervisory capacity required to monitor its quality. 
These three sources of risk call for different policy actions. 
The  first  approach  for  dealing  with  asset  price  misalignments  is  for  authorities  to 
communicate  their  views  on  the  extent  of  potential  asset  price  distortions  and  their 
consequences  for  financial  stability.  These  “verbal  interventions”  are  relatively  common 
regarding  the  exchange  rate.  I  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  use  them  also  for  other 
assets such as bonds and equity, since they are relevant variables from the point of view of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Indeed,  recent  experience  has  shown  that  central 
banks need to be more assertive and communicative about the conduct of financial systems. 
In  our  last  Financial  Stability  Report  we  indicated  that  evidence  pointed  to  some 
overvaluation  of  stock  prices in  Chile,  but  we  also  indicated  that  financial  stability was  not 
threatened  by  potential  corrections,  even  sharp  corrections,  in  these  prices.  Of  course, 
making this assessment is not a trivial task – as modeling asset prices is complex – and it is 
not the role of central banks to communicate continuous assessments of asset prices. For 
this  reason,  this  kind  of  communication  must  be  done  exceptionally,  and  in  the  context  of 
discussing  the  potential  implications  of  these  price  developments  on  current  and  future 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
financial  stability.  In  addition,  communication  must  be  done  in  a  timely  manner,  before 
vulnerabilities build up. 
In  addition,  central  banks  may  choose  to  participate  in  distorted  financial  markets  where 
there may be threats to financial stability, as is sometimes done with reserve accumulation 
and exchange rate intervention in EMEs, or as has been the case of some interventions in 
debt  and  other  asset  markets  in  advanced  economies.  However,  interventions  beyond 
currency markets must be truly exceptional and only on the grounds of preserving financial 
stability or complementing monetary policy. 
Another way to control the vulnerability of the system to the reversals of asset prices is to 
limit  the  amount  of  debt  that  finances  the  purchase  of  those  assets  with  higher  prices  or 
increase capital buffers for such debt. In terms of macro prudential policies there are a series 
of options for this. Higher capital requirements for intermediaries participating in the business 
of making leveraged purchases of financial assets are one option. In the same vein, reducing 
loan  to  value  (LTV)  ratios  in  mortgage  loans,  increasing  provisions  for  housing  loans  or 
increasing capital requirements on mortgage lending are all viable options if the distortion is 
in the housing market. Several countries in Asia have been actively using LTV caps over the 
last  couple  of  years  to  reduce  the  risks  from  housing  price  booms.  Which  of  these  tools 
should  be  used  will  depend,  however,  on  the  institutional  setting  of  each  country,  the 
functioning of the financial system and the asset price that is distorted. For example, in Chile, 
if  it  were  determined  that  housing  prices  are  distorted  and  lenders  are  not  correctly 
internalizing  this  distortion,  then  the  Superintendent  of  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions 
(SBIF) has the authority to increase provisions and capital requirements on housing loans. 
Addressing the risks that arise from expanding cross border debt requires, at the very least, 
that existing prudential regulation ensure that funding liquidity risk is dealt with adequately by 
financial intermediaries. Often, however, this may simply lead to a transfer of this risk to the 
non-financial sector. Hence, there remains a role for a foreign currency liquidity buffer made 
up of international reserves. 
Vulnerabilities regarding currency risk that often come hand in hand with increased foreign 
debt,  merit  special  attention.  In  the  past  we  have  seen  many  crises  originating  from  the 
accumulation  of  unhedged  foreign  currency  debt  in  banks  and  non-financial  corporations. 
This was one of the main amplifiers of the Chilean banking crisis of the early 1980s – where 
firms in the domestic sector built up substantial amounts of dollar-denominated debt during a 
period of fixed exchange rates and capital account opening. It was also an important factor in 
the  Mexican  crisis  of  1995,  in  the  Asian  crisis,  and  more  recently  in  financial  problems  in 
some Eastern European countries. On the other hand, low currency mismatches allowed the 
central  banks  of  many  EMEs  to  lower  interest  rates  aggressively  as  a  response  to  falling 
demand during the crisis. In the past there was fear of exchange rate depreciation because 
of currency mismatches. 
Exchange  rate  flexibility  is  a  key  component  in  any  policy  mix  to  reduce  currency 
mismatches. Indeed, this is an example of a macroeconomic policy that also contributes to 
financial  stability.  In  the  case  of  Chile,  and  elsewhere  in  Latin  America,  we  saw  currency 
mismatches drop after currencies were allowed to float following the Asian crisis, as agents 
and  regulators  adjusted  to  increased  exchange  rate  volatility  (Figure  3).  Indeed,  bank 
regulation should not only incorporate currency risks explicitly, but also indirectly by dealing 
with the credit risks that arise from currency mismatches in the corporate sector. 
Finally,  the  growth  in  size  and  complexity  of  the  financial  system  that  often  accompanies 
capital flows calls for a continuous process of revision in micro prudential regulation. One of 
the key elements to consider here is the scope of financial regulation and supervision. For a 
start,  in  periods  of  abundant  foreign  capital,  intermediaries  that  have  not  accessed  cross-
border financing may begin doing so, lacking both the adequate regulation and internal risk 
management.  Furthermore,  if  prudential  regulation  on  traditional  intermediaries  tightens  in 
these episodes, incentives are increased for by-passing these intermediaries. An additional 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
element to consider is the speed at which financial innovations are incorporated into middle 
income economies. For sure, large global financial institutions have incentives to expand the 
scope of their financial services. However, if possible, the speed at which this is done should 
be  kept  in  line  with  the  capacity  of  domestic  regulators  and  supervisors  to  monitor  and 
respond to the potential risks generated by these changes. 
Concluding remarks 
Regarding  monetary  policy,  the  main  challenge  of  EMEs  today  is  to  avoid  persistent 
deviations  of  inflation  from  its  target,  especially  in  an  environment  where  the  price  of 
agricultural commodities and oil have been rising sharply. Changes in relative prices have to 
take  place,  but  the  risk  of  propagation  to  other  prices  has  to  be  mitigated,  in  particular  in 
economies,  like  Chile,  that  are  operating  close  to  full  capacity.  Monetary  policy  cannot  be 
subordinated  to  exchange  rate  objectives,  even  in  cases  where  measures  to  alleviate 
exchange  rate  appreciation  have  been  adopted.  This  is  the  reason  why  in  Chile  we 
implement sterilized intervention in a fully transparent way, with pre-announced magnitudes 
for foreign exchange purchases. This allows preserving independence of monetary policy to 
stabilize inflation. 
Regarding  financial  stability,  I  have  outlined  some  issues  relevant  to  EMEs,  but  there  is  a 
need for global cooperation. My opinion is that too much of the recent discussion on capital 
inflows  has  been  framed  from  the  perspective  of  recipient  countries.  Although  this  view  is 
certainly relevant, it is incomplete. The risks of excessive currency mismatches, overvalued 
assets,  complex  products  and  so  on,  are  also  relevant  for  the  institutions  making  these 
investments  –  be  they  large  internationally  active  banks,  defined  benefit  pension  funds  or 
insurance companies. Hence, addressing the global risks to financial stability requires that 
source countries also properly monitor and control these risks with adequate supervision and 
regulation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Figure 1
Nominal Exhange Rate
(CLP pesos per US Dollar; day of intervention announcement = 100)
116 
112 
108 
104 
100 
96 
92 
t
t+5
t+10
t+15
t+20
2008
t+30
t+35
t+25
2011
Source: Central Bank of Chile.
 
 
 
 
Figure 2
Copper Price
(day of intervention announcement = 100)
110
105
100
95
90
85
t
t+7
t+14
2011
t+21
t+28
t+35
2008
116 
112 
108 
104 
100 
96 
92 
  110
105
100
95
90
85
Fuente: Bloomberg.
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 3
Dollarization of liabilities of the corporate sector in Latin America: 1992-2009
(in percent, annual average across firms )
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
64
56
48
40
32
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
25
20
15
10
5
29
25
21
17
13
93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09
93
96
99
02
05
08
93
96
Colombia
Mexico
50
45
40
35
30
25
93
96
99
02
05
90
93
96
99
02
05
08
74
68
62
56
50
44
38
05
08
02
99
Peru
93
96
99
02
05
08
Exchange Rate Regime:
Fixed or Pegged
Managed and Independently
Floating
Source: IMF.
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
