Carlos da Silva Costa: Sovereign debt crisis, risks or opportunities 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the 2nd Reuters-
TSF Conference: “Sovereign debt crisis, risks or opportunities”, Lisbon, 28 February 2011. 
 According  to  the  latest data  available  for  2010,  the  Portuguese  economic  situation  can  be 
summarised as follows: 
 
A fiscal deficit estimated at around 7% of GDP compared with deficits of 6.3% in the 
euro area and 10.5% in the UK;  
A public debt around 83% of GDP, compared with 84.1% in the euro area;  
A growth rate of 1.4% in 2010, compared with 1.8% in the euro area;  
Financing needs of the Portuguese economy as measured by the combined current 
and capital account amounting to 8.7% of GDP in 2010;  
A  net  debtor  international  investment  position  above  100%  of  GDP,  and  a  net 
external debt equivalent to 85.3% of GDP in 2010, of which 48.0% corresponds to 
the general government sector.  
  These figures only provide a snapshot, which needs to be considered in the context of the 
underlying driving forces. More specifically, to understand where we are today, we need to 
know where we came from and where we are going. There is no other way to assess and 
understand the size of the challenges faced by the Portuguese economy and the consistency 
of  its  path.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  in  the  last  decade  the  Portuguese 
economy recorded: 
 
A weak rate of growth in the years that preceded the international crisis – with an 
annual average growth rate of 1% between 2001 and 2008;  
A steady decline in the potential growth rate, as a reflection of the reduction in the 
growth of labour productivity, capital and total factor productivity;  
An  increase  in  public  indebtedness  from  48.7%  of  GDP  in  2000  to  nearly  83%  of 
GDP in 2010, mirroring a rise in public expenditure of virtually 8 percentage points 
during  the  same  period.  This  despite  a  reduction  in  debt  servicing  costs  resulting 
from the adoption of the euro in conjunction with the benefits of the so-called Great 
Moderation period;  
An increasing level of household indebtedness, which rose from less than 80% of 
disposable income in 1999 to more than 120% in 2008, reflecting easier access to 
consumer and mortgage credit, in terms of both volume and cost;  
A rising level of external indebtedness, resulting from recurrent external deficits, as 
a  reflection  of  the  expansion  of  domestic,  public  and  private  demand,  and  a 
deterioration in the net international investment position, which shifted from –39.6% 
in 2000 to –108.5% in 2010.  
Finally,  a  gap  between  deposits  and  loans  resulting  in  external  financing 
dependency.  Such  gap  mirrors  the  key  role  played  by  the  banking  system  in  the 
financing  of  the  Portuguese  economy  and  the  increasing  shortage  of  domestic 
savings to meet the financing needs of the State, corporations and households.  
     This is the background that should be borne in mind, 
 
First, to understand the questions raised by foreign investors about the sustainability 
of both public and external debt of the Portuguese economy;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   Second,  to  understand  that  the  consolidation  of  public  finances  is  inevitable  and, 
hence  that  budget  execution  in  2010  is  extremely  important  as  well  as  the 
achievement of the objectives set for 2011 and 2012. At the same time, it is also 
vital to understand that achieving these objectives is important, but not sufficient to 
ensure medium to long-term sustainability of public finances;  
Third,  to  understand  that  the  imperatives  faced  by  the  Portuguese  economy  go 
beyond fiscal consolidation, which is a necessary but not sufficient condition to solve 
our economic troubles. Solving the problems of the Portuguese economy, implies an 
increase in household savings, a rise in the self-financing capacity of corporations 
and a boost in the growth rate of potential output;  
Finally, to understand the importance of the stability and efficiency of the financial 
system for the dynamics of the Portuguese economy, namely to meet the financing 
needs of the productive sector and to enhance resource allocation.  
Therefore, it is important to remember that the Portuguese economy must continue to rely on 
foreign  investors,  as  it  is  not  realistic  to  think  that  the  external  deficit  can  be  immediately 
rebalanced. Thus, the confidence of foreign investors is crucial for the development of the 
Portuguese economy. Such confidence should rest on a sustainable path of public debt and, 
hence,  of  the  fiscal  deficit,  as  well  as  on  the  sustainability  of  external  indebtedness.  The 
sovereign  debt  crisis  results  from  increasing  indebtedness,  in  a  context  of  heightened  risk 
aversion  and  higher  scrutiny  of  the  repayment  capacity  of  indebted  countries.  Investor 
confidence depends not only on the indebtedness level but also on the repayment capacity, 
which  in  turn  depends  on  potential  output  growth  and  on  the  nature  of  the  development 
process.  That  is,  the  confidence  of  foreign  investors  varies  in  direct  proportion  to  the 
robustness of the Portuguese economy’s growth, or more specifically it depends directly on 
the sustainability of its development process. 
Second, it should be borne in mind that the process of reduction of the fiscal deficit (which 
had been pursued over past years but was interrupted in 2009 in the context of the financial 
crisis)  was  resumed  in  2010  and  is  an  important  step  in  the  critical  and  wider  process  of 
reforming  public  finances.  I  have  already  referred  to  this  process  on  other  occasions,  so 
today I will not go into further detail. I only insist that this process not only has an institutional 
and  regulatory  dimension  but  also  it  requires  a  multi-annual  and  binding  programme  that 
ensures the reduction of the public debt to GDP ratio, while setting a limit to the growth of 
public  expenditure.  The  latter  is  crucial  to  restrain  tax  increases  and  to  safeguard  the 
attractiveness  of  the  country  as  a  destination  for  investments  that  support  potential  output 
and employment. 
Third, there is a need to rebalance the development model, by creating favourable conditions 
for  the  expansion  of  the  tradable  goods  sector;  for  the  growth  of  capital  and  labour 
productivity, as well as total factor productivity; and for innovation as regards both production 
processes  and  technologies  and  products.  It  should  be  recalled  that  the  growth  and 
employment creation model of the past years is not sustainable: it relied on the expansion of 
public demand, reflected on the imbalance of public finances and on the expansion of private 
demand.  In  turn,  the  latter  was  fuelled  by  the  favourable  financing  conditions  enjoyed  by 
households, mirrored in rising indebtedness and lower savings. The growth and employment 
creation  model  of  the  past  years  triggered  an  increasing  indebtedness  ratio,  which  would 
become  unsustainable  if  it  were  not  corrected.  The  Portuguese  economy  must  create 
employment in the tradable goods sector, in order to: 
 
absorb  the  employment  that,  due  to  the  adjustment  of  domestic  demand,  the 
nontradable goods sector will not be able to retain; and  
offset the reduction in the incorporation of labour per unit of output, which will result 
from a broad-based and imperative rise in productivity.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 The  sustainability  of  the  development  model  implies  more  far-reaching  structural  reforms, 
with  priority  to  those  that  have  an  immediate  impact  on  competitiveness,  on  available 
capacity and on the value added of the goods and services export sectors. I would like to 
emphasize  that  there  are  no  mechanical  and  definite  causalities  in  the  growth  of  potential 
output. The future is shaped by the way resources are allocated between alternative uses, by 
the quality of public policies (most notably, by their impact on incentives) and by corporate 
strategies. 
In this regard, the role of the so-called national innovation system should be stressed, i.e. the 
network of public and private sector institutions and the interaction mechanisms behind the 
production, use, diffusion, absorption and exploitation of new knowledge and technologies by 
a  company  or  group  of  companies.  Empirical  evidence  shows  that  R&D  expenditure,  the 
level  and  type  of  education  and  the  articulation  between  the  educational  and  professional 
training  subsystems  are  responsible  for  the  position  of  countries  within  the  international 
division of labour and, in particular, for the specialisation pattern (intersectoral specialisation, 
or as an alternative, intrasectoral vertical specialisation). On the one hand, the articulation 
between  the  three  subsystems  (research,  education  and  professional  training)  should  be 
enhanced. On the other hand, the articulation between the national innovation system and 
corporate needs, in particular in the tradable goods sector, should also be improved. 
Finally, I would like to point out the critical importance of maintaining and strengthening the 
stability of the financial system. This system plays a fundamental role in the functioning of the 
Portuguese  economy  and,  in  particular,  in  an  efficient  allocation  of  internal  and  external 
resources, channelling them to the sectors and economic agents with funding needs. 
The Portuguese banking system is solid. It was not exposed to the sub-prime crisis or to the 
speculative bubble in the real estate sector. Own funds are adequate given the current level 
of balance sheet risk: the Tier 1 capital ratio stood at 9% in 2010 and the core Tier 1 capital 
ratio  at  8.2%.  Obviously,  the  banking  system  suffered  from  the  impact  of  the  international 
crisis  and  the  decline  in  growth.  As  expected,  between  2007  and  2010,  the  total  ratio  of  
non-performing loans increased from 1.5% to 3.3% and the return on equity decreased from 
14.63% in 2007, to 7.37% in 2010, after having dropped to 3.44% in 2008. 
However,  the  Portuguese  financial  system  shows  some  specificities  that  should  be 
addressed. 
First,  as  a  reflection  of  the  above-mentioned  imbalance  between  domestic  savings  and 
domestic borrowing requirements – resulting from the development model of the Portuguese 
economy in the past few years – the transformation ratio of deposits into loans stands at 1.44 
for  the  Portuguese  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Due  to  this  fact,  there  is  a  significant 
dependence  on  external  financing.  This  explains  the  reason  why  the  Portuguese  banking 
system became heavily exposed to the sovereign debt crisis. 
Second, the capital adequacy of banks is a dynamic reality. Therefore, it must be seen in the 
context  of  both  the  current  level  of  balance  sheet  risk  and  of  the  negative  impact  that  a 
deterioration  in  the  Portuguese  economic  situation  may  have  on  the  quality  of  assets. 
Moreover, it must also be viewed in terms of the additional capital requirements arising from 
the  new  prudential  rules,  known  as  Basel  III,  and  the  fact  that  investors  and  their 
counterparties tend to consider the new prudential rules as financial soundness benchmarks 
even before their enforcement.  
In  this  context,  Portuguese  banks  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  environment  in  which  they 
operate imposes the narrowing of the gap between deposits and loans and an increase in 
own funds. 
Portuguese  banks  should  therefore  embark  on  orderly  de-leveraging,  through  a  selective 
sale of assets, namely credits, that will allow them to soften the impact on the financing of the 
productive sector, in particular of the companies more dependent on bank financing. In this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
regard,  it  would  be  welcome  that  the  large  companies  that  have  or  may  have  access  to 
external financing and to the capital market would reduce their recourse to domestic credit. 
Second,  Portuguese  banks,  being  aware  that  this  will  be  key  to  the  assessment  by 
counterparties  and  investors,  should  further  strengthen  their  own  funds.  We  all  know  that 
conditions  in  the  capital  market  are  particularly  difficult.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  that  banks 
envisage other ways of expanding or reinforcing their shareholder basis. 
Third,  given  the  critical  importance  of  preserving  profitability  as  well  as  the  rigidity  of  the 
financial margin that results from the relative weight of mortgage credit, Portuguese banks 
must pay particular attention to their efficiency ratios. 
Finally,  and  in  the  very  short  term,  Portuguese  banks  like  the  other  European  banks  will 
undergo  very  tough  tests.  The  new  round  of  stress  tests  is  aimed  at  examining  bank 
performance under a far more adverse scenario than in 2010. It is crucial that banks show 
that  capital  shortages  resulting  from  the  accommodation  of  losses  induced  by  a  weaker 
economic environment can be adequately met. Therefore, and as a result of the commitment 
by  EU  Member  States,  we  will  have  to  prepare  the  mechanisms  that,  if  needed,  will  be 
activated  to  reinforce  banks’  own  funds.  Such  mechanisms  may  rely  on  the  individual 
financial institutions or public funds (the so-called back-stop facility). 
In sum, and as I mentioned at the beginning, the results for 2010 provide a snapshot that 
must be considered in the context of the underlying driving forces. We must keep in mind 
where we started and where we are going. We come from a growth path underpinned by the 
expansion  of  domestic  demand.  Now  we  want  to  be  on  a  path  of  sustained  development 
supported by an increase in value added per head and employment creation, coupled with 
sustainable  public  finances  and  external  accounts.  The  first  step  was  given  in  2010. 
However, the way ahead is very hard, requiring more than fiscal consolidation: it implies a 
range of structural reforms inducing entrepreneurial dynamics and productive investment that 
strengthen the competitiveness of the Portuguese economy in a sustained manner. That is 
the challenge. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
