Paul Tucker: Clearing houses as system risk managers 
Speech  given  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Deputy  Governor  for  Financial  Stability  at  the  Bank  of 
England,  at  the  Depository  Trust  &  Clearing  Corporation  (DTCC)-Centre  for  the  Study  of 
Financial Innovation (CSFI) Post Trade Fellowship Launch, London, 1 June 2011. 
 It is a real pleasure to be here this evening. The new “Post-Trade Fellowship” is an excellent 
idea, and I am delighted Peter Norman is the first incumbent. Like CSFI, Peter has made a 
very considerable contribution to thinking about the financial system – and no more so than 
in his latest book, The Risk Controllers. There is hardly a more important topic right now. The 
community  has  rediscovered  the  importance  of  the  financial  system’s  plumbing.  Your  new 
Fellowship will help to sustain that interest as the years pass. And that is of special interest to 
the  Bank  of  England  given  the  government’s  plan  to  transfer  to  us  responsibility  for 
supervising critical financial infrastructure – settlement systems and clearing houses.  
CCPs and the financial network 
Right now, the biggest “plumbing” issues follow from the decision of the G20 that more of the 
over-the-counter derivatives market should be cleared via central counterparties.  
But  this  is  not  just  about  derivatives  markets.  Compared  to  their  origins  in  clearing 
commodity futures and then exchange-traded financial derivatives, CCPs have increasingly 
been  clearing  cash  instruments  –  notably  equities  and,  in  recent  years,  government  bond 
repos.  In  London,  LCH’s  move  to  clear  repos  in  Spanish  government  bonds  helped  that 
market stay open during some dark days last year. 
Why  are  CCPs  important?  There  has  been  a  resumption  of  interest  in  the  network 
characteristics  of  the  financial  system.  CCPs  simplify  the  complex  web  of  counterparty 
exposures  through  multilateral  netting  –  precisely  what  the  US  authorities  contemplated 
trying to achieve ad hoc towards the end of a weekend when Lehman was slipping away. But 
they  do  more  than  facilitate  multilateral  netting.  They  substitute  themselves  as  the 
counterparty to the trades they clear – hence a central counterparty.  
This  makes  them  unusual  financial  institutions,  because  they  run  a  completely  matched 
book,  and  so  ordinarily  are  not  exposed  to  market  risk  in  their  core  activity.  They  are 
exposed  in  a  big  way  to  counterparty  credit  risk.  If  a  counterparty  defaults,  they  have 
uncovered  market  risk  positions,  and  need  to  enter  the  market  to  get  back  to  square. 
Everything  important  about  a  CCP  concerns  how  they  manage  those  risks.  In  essence, 
having centralised risk upon themselves, they redistribute it to their clearing members. They 
do that through a waterfall under which, in the event of a counterparty defaulting, the CCP 
can draw on, first, the margin pledged by the firm, then its contribution to the default fund, 
then the rest of the default fund etc.  
CCPs as risk managers  
Given that CCPs centralise and concentrate risk, their job is not just to deliver ever greater 
operational and capital efficiency for their clearing members. It is not just about IT. It is about 
making it less likely that their clearing members will default on their obligations to the clearing 
house;  containing  the  spillovers  from  any  failure  of  clearing  members;  and,  above  all, 
ensuring  their  own  financial  integrity.  They  are  de  facto  regulators  and  supervisors  for  the 
markets they clear; and risk managers of their own balance sheet. In protecting themselves, 
they  impose  some  financial  discipline  on  their  clearing  members.  They  do  this  through 
financial  soundness  and  operational-capacity  requirements  for  access;  initial  and  variation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
margining;  and  levying  contributions  to  a  default  fund.  And  they  act  as  a  central  market 
authority for valuing positions and setting minimum margin levels. 
To  deliver  those  quasi  regulatory  and  supervisory  responsibilities,  CCPs  need  to  adopt 
prudent collateral policies; but also to monitor the robustness of their clearing members and 
risks from the business that they are bringing to the CCP. Amongst other things, that means 
collecting and analysing information from clearing members on large positions taken by their 
customers. I am not convinced that that is sufficiently recognised by clearing houses or by 
standard setters.  
CCPs  are,  in  truth,  system  risk  managers.  They  absolutely  must  think  of  themselves  as 
that, and organise themselves accordingly.  
Margining and systemic risk  
The margining policy of CCPs matters enormously to the stability of the system.  
CCPs should take care to avoid having margining policies that are unnecessarily procyclical 
– chasing after events and amplifying market moves. At the other end of the spectrum, there 
is an important question of whether the macroprudential authorities should be able to require 
changes in initial margin levels in the face of market exuberance. In the UK, there will be a 
debate about whether the Bank of  England’s Financial Policy Committee should have that 
power. The Basel Committee of the Global Financial System has already produced a report 
on it.1 
In  a  different  dimension,  there  is  an  important  question  about  whether  clearing  houses 
should adopt what is called Gross Margining rather than Net Margining. What this means is 
that a clearing member – ie a dealer – could not net off positions of their various customers 
and their own house position when the amount of margin they have to hold with the clearing 
house  is  determined.  That  would  affect  the  incentives  of  clearing  members  to  collect 
minimum  margin  amounts  from  their  customers.  And,  more  generally,  it  would  probably 
reduce  the  amount  of  leverage  in  the  system  and  simplify  the  chain  of  credit.  In  terms  of 
public  policy  objectives,  this  is,  therefore,  about  more  than  investor  protection  through  the 
segregation  of  client  moneys,  and  so  needs  to  be  debated  against  the  goal  of  preserving 
stability without impairing efficiency. 
The resolution of CCPs  
If  CCPs  can  do  a  lot  of  good  by  simplifying  the  network  of  counterparty  exposures  and 
imposing standard valuations and margin requirements, conversely it is an understatement 
that  it  would  be  a  disaster  if  a  clearing  house  failed.  Commentators  have,  indeed,  been 
emphasising  that  CCPs  are  becoming  systemic.  To  my  own  way  of  thinking,  they  have 
already been systemic for the markets they clear for a very long time.   
Three  clearing  houses  have  failed  in  recent  decades.  In  1974,  the  Caisse  de  Liquidation 
failed in Paris, due to default on margin calls when sugar-futures prices fell sharply. In 1983, 
it was the turn of the Kuala Lumpur Commodities Clearing House, when half a dozen large 
brokers  defaulted  following  a  crash  in  palm-oil  futures.  And,  most  dramatically,  the  Hong 
Kong Futures Exchange clearing house failed in the wake of the global stock market crash in 
1987.  The  effects  were  devastating.  The  Futures  Exchange  had  to  close.  Traders  had 
hedged margin-financed cash equity positions in the futures market. They faced margin calls 
on their cash positions but, with the futures market closed and the clearing house bust, they 
                                                 
1  
“The role of margin requirements and haircuts in procyclicality”, Committee on the Global Financial System, 
March 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
could not get margin moneys returned on their profitable futures positions. For that and other 
reasons, the stock market closed too. The upshot was that Hong Kong’s main capital market 
shut down. Reopening the market was no small feat. World markets had fallen further in the 
meantime, so there was a risk that a modestly “recapitalised” Clearing House would go broke 
again  if  positions  had  to  be  marked  down  immediately.  In  the  event,  the  Hong  Kong 
Government and the clearing banks underpinned the Clearing House.  
This episode warrants more study than it has received. Had it been London, Chicago or New 
York, it would have entered the folklore of policy memory.  
As  with  banks,  public  policy  has  to  have  two  components.  First,  minimum  standards  to 
ensure that CCPs do not fail. IOSCO/CPSS are currently consulting on updated standards. 
(My earlier remarks go to that.) But second, a clear ex ante framework is needed for limiting 
disorder if, nevertheless, a CCP does in fact fail. 
I shall therefore close with a few preliminary thoughts on frameworks for handling the failure 
of a CCP. As with any business activity, if an institution is insolvent or otherwise cannot pay 
its debts, it has to stop trading, close and go into liquidation. That can be a disastrous course 
for a major financial institution at the very heart of important capital markets. Policy in this 
general area revolves around building regimes that avoid taxpayer solvency support but are 
less disruptive than orthodox corporate liquidation. In the banking sphere, where a great deal 
of work is underway internationally, this is known as “resolution”. 
In the case of a distressed CCP, it is most likely that it would have been brought down by the 
failure of a very large clearing member and so would have unmatched positions as well as 
continuing matched positions. For the surviving clearing members, they would suddenly find 
themselves  having  unmatched  positions,  with  continuing  obligations  to  clients  but  a 
non-performing CCP on the other side. Two strategies come to mind, which I am airing for 
debate. The first would be “recapitalising” the CCP so that it can carry on. The second would 
be to aim to bring off a more or less smooth unwinding of the CCP’s book of transactions.  
On  the  former  route,  in  the  banking  sphere  the  basic  strategy  is  to  develop  regimes  for 
bondholders  to  share  in  the  losses  after  the  equity  is  wiped  out;  a  distressed  bank  gets 
“recapitalised” in some way through a reconstruction of its liabilities. But CCPs do not issue 
debt,  so  there  is  not  obviously  an  economic  equivalent  of  recapitalisation  by  way  of 
haircutting the debt claims of bondholders. Recapitalisation would seem to entail an injection 
of new outside capital. That should not come from the public sector. So the only options are 
the surviving clearing members themselves or a new “owner”. On the face of it, the clearing 
members would have to be involved, as surely the stricken CCP’s default fund would also 
need replenishing in order for it to continue. 
If  the  default  fund  were  to  be  replenished  by  its  surviving  clearing  members,  that  could  in 
principle be sorted out at the time or it could be pre programmed. In practice, making it up at 
the time must be dangerous. A pre-programmed allocation of losses would be akin to the old 
“Down To The Last Drop” rule that used to be employed by a Chicago clearing house, under 
which  surviving  clearing  members  ultimately  had  collectively 
losses: 
mutualisation.  (It  was  dropped  because,  as  banks  became  futures-exchange  clearing 
members, bank supervisors didn’t like the unlimited exposure of CMs who were banks. An 
example of unjoined-up thinking.) 
That’s the option around propping up the clearing house to keep it going.  
The other option is some kind of wind down of the Clearing House’s book. That involves a 
combination  of  closing  out  part  of  the  book  in  the  market,  and  doing  something  with  any 
residue that can’t be dealt in the market. One obvious thing to do with the residue is to put it 
back, pro rata, to the surviving (and fit) clearing members. But that is also a variant of the 
DTTLD rule, but “in kind” rather than cash. 
to  absorb  all 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Maybe  I’ve  got  this  wrong  but,  in  summary,  it  seems  to  me  that  questions  about  orderly 
resolution of a failed CCP have to involve clarity around the extent to which surviving clearing 
members pick up the pieces.  
Summary 
The  design,  management  and  oversight  of  CCPs  is  something  that  we  are  going  to  come 
back to again and again in the years ahead.  
I want, therefore, to conclude, if I may, with a quote from the post-‘87 crash Report of the 
Hong Kong Securities Review Committee, published in the summer of 1988, nearly a quarter 
of a century ago:  
“When  everything  else  is  stripped  away,  the  most  pressing  issue  is  the 
management  of  risk.  The  focus  of  this  is  ......increasingly,  the  central  clearing 
houses  –  indeed  [their] prudent  operation  is  perhaps  the  single  most  important 
objective for the market authorities and regulators.”2 
It is time to catch up with that insight. Your new Post-Trade Fellowship will surely help us to 
do so. 
                                                 
2  Paragraph 3.21, Report of the Hong Kong Securities Review Committee, 1988. I should disclose that I was an 
Advisor to the SRC. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
