Caleb M Fundanga: Corporate governance and its impact on financial 
institutions 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Institute  of 
Directors  Business  Luncheon  on  Corporate  Governance  and  its  Impact  on  Financial 
Institutions, Lusaka, 27 April 2011. 
 The Institute of Directors National Vice President Mrs. Sue M. Mwaanza  
The Chairman Membership and Publicity Committee, Mr. Augustine C. Seyuba  
Directors and Chief Executive Officers Present  
Distinguished Invited Guests  
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am honoured to be here today to share with you some thoughts on Corporate Governance 
and its Impact on Financial Institutions.  
I  am  certain  that  Corporate  Governance  is  not  a  new  topic  to  all  of  us  in  this  room.  It  is 
obviously of fundamental importance to this audience, given that most of you are company 
directors.  Corporate  Governance  is  critical  to  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  in  its  capacity  as 
supervisor and regulator of the banking system. 
Until  fairly  recently,  corporate  governance  was  not  a  topic  that  attracted  much  public 
attention.  It  was  a  topic  reserved  for  discussion  in  the  Board  room  or  in  academic 
environments.  However,  recent  events,  such  as  the  Enron  scandal  and  other  corporate 
governance  failures  including  events  that  led  to  the  recent  financial  crisis,  have  made 
corporate  governance  a  major  topical  issue.  The  recent  events  have  highlighted  the 
important role that corporate governance plays in a modern financial sector and the economy 
at  large.  I  am  therefore  delighted  that  the  Institute  of  Directors  has  chosen  this  topic  for 
discussion today.  
Perhaps it would be useful to begin by defining what corporate governance means. There is 
no  single,  accepted  definition  of  what  “corporate  governance”  means.  The  majority  of  the 
definitions  employed  by  corporate  practitioners  relate  corporate  governance  to  “control”  of 
the  company.  In  this  regard,  corporate  governance  is  defined  as  a  set  of  processes, 
customs,  policies,  laws  and  institutions  affecting  the  way  a  corporation  is  directed, 
administered  or  controlled.  Corporate  governance  influences  how  the  objectives  of  the 
company are set and achieved, how risk is monitored and assessed and how performance is 
optimised.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, corporate governance is of key importance to any financial system. 
In Zambia the financial sector is dominated by banks and these remain the main source of 
finance in the economy. The failure of corporate governance in banks may therefore pose 
serious  consequences  for  the  banking  sector  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  It  is  also 
important to note that the health of the financial system largely depends on their capacity to 
identify measure, monitor and control their risks. Banks face a wide range of complex risks in 
their day to day operations, including risks relating to credit, liquidity, exposure concentration, 
market risks, settlement, and internal operations. The nature of banks’ business particularly 
the maturity mismatch between their assets and liabilities, their relatively high gearing and 
their reliance on creditor confidence creates particular vulnerabilities. The consequences of 
mismanaging  their  risks  can  therefore  be  very  severe  not  only  for  the  individual  bank,  but 
also for the system as a whole.  
Chairperson, it must further be noted that Banks are highly leveraged institutions, funding 
their  assets  largely  from  customer  deposits.  Banks  must  therefore  be  accountable  to  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
depositors. The  failure of  a  bank  can  therefore  result  in  monetary  loss  for  depositors.  The 
interests  of  depositors  must  therefore  be  protected.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  corporate 
governance for banks and other financial institutions is crucial and therefore the boards of 
directors  and  management  of  banks  have  to  pay  particular  attention  to  the  interests  of 
depositors and other creditors.  
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  states  that  “effective  corporate  governance 
practices  are  essential  to  achieving  and  maintaining  public  trust  and  confidence  in  the 
banking  system,  which  is  critical  to  the  proper  functioning  of  the  banking  sector  and  the 
economy as a whole. Poor corporate governance may contribute to bank failures, which in 
turn can pose significant costs on the treasury and can have other macro-economic effects 
like contagion risks. Additionally poor corporate governance can lead to financial markets to 
lose  confidence  in  the  ability  of  banks  to  properly  manage  their  assets  and  liabilities, 
including customer deposits, and this could in turn trigger a run on a bank or precipitate a 
liquidity crisis.  
Furthermore,  effective  corporate  governance  is  also  crucial  for  banks  since  it  enhances 
transparency. Ownership structures of banks in Zambia are varied with some banks being 
foreign  owned,  others  owned  by  private  entities  while  others  have  some  degree  of  state 
ownership. Each type of ownership structure poses governance challenges. In all instances, 
transparency  and  fairness  in  banks’  lending  and  investment  decisions,  becomes  a  critical 
requirement.  
Banks  also  operate  on  the  basis  of  trust  and  therefore  reputation  risk  becomes  a  critical 
factor that can affect a bank seriously if not properly managed. For this reason, banks need 
to adopt good governance practices and customer services standards in order to build public 
confidence in the credibility of their operations. It must be remembered that banks operate in 
a  volatile  environment  where  perceptions  in  their  dealings  could  trigger  a  run  on  a  banks’ 
deposits. For instance some of you in this room may remember that in 1997, First Merchant 
Bank  Zambia  Ltd,  experienced  a  run  and  was  subsequently  closed  two  days  later  after  a 
local newspaper reported that a customer of the bank was involved in money laundering.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the importance of the payment system to an economy cannot be 
over-emphasized.  The  payment  system  provides  the  means  by  which  vast  numbers  of 
transactions are made each day. The payment system involves many different components, 
including systems for settling large, inter-bank and inter-corporate payment transactions, and 
systems  for  handling  a  number  of  smaller  transactions.  However,  the  payment  system 
operators also face a number of risks including operational risks. In particular, they need to 
ensure  that  the  systems  for  processing  payments,  the  back-up  arrangements,  and  the 
internal governance structures are robust. A major operational failure in the payment system 
has the potential to cause severe disruption to the financial system and wider economy. At its 
worst, a major payment system failure would bring countless commercial transactions to an 
abrupt  halt,  impede  the  operation  of  business  in  virtually  all  parts  of  the  economy  and 
fundamentally undermine investor and business confidence.  
It  is  thus  imperative  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  as  well  as  payment  system 
operator  maintain  proper  systems  to  enable  them  to  identify,  monitor  and  control  risks. 
Sound corporate governance is the foundation for effective risk management.  
The recent financial crisis has shown that the presence of a well regulated financial sector 
and properly run corporate entities is key to the prosperity of any economy. In particular, the 
crisis  was  caused,  in  part,  by  excessive  exposure  concentration,  poor  credit  policies  and 
inadequate management of credit risk. These risk management failures reflect a breakdown 
in  corporate  governance.  They  reflect  poor  management  of  key  banking  risks,  and  poor 
oversight by boards of the mechanisms for managing their banks. In some cases, a lack of 
independent directors on the boards of banks was also a significant factor in weakening the 
effectiveness of boards with poor quality financial disclosures and ineffective external audit.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In Zambia, although the financial sector was not adversely affected by the crisis in a direct 
fashion,  over  the  period  1995–2000,  the  sector  experienced  numerous  episodes  of  bank 
failures that have had adverse effects on the confidence in the financial system. A total of ten 
banks were closed during this period and a major weakness noted in all the failures were the 
weak  governance  structures  and  practices  in  the  banks.  A  close  examination  of  the  failed 
banks identified the following weaknesses which were common in most of them; large credit 
exposures,  lending  to  connected  parties,  poor  or  absence  of  a  credit  policy,  incompetent 
management coupled with ineffective boards, foreign exchange exposures and an absence 
of or inadequate risk management frameworks. In other banks, the board chairman was also 
the majority shareholder and the chief executive of the bank. Such basic risk management 
failures, to a large extent reflect a breakdown in corporate governance.  
Chairperson,  you  may  wish  to  note  that  the  Zambian  Banking  system  is  stronger  and 
properly regulated today than it was in the 1990s. The Bank of Zambia has been periodically 
reviewing  the  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Act  (BFSA)  to  bring  it  up  to  date  with 
international  standards  and  current  global  practices.  One  of  the  areas  the  Banks  has 
continued to strengthen is the corporate governance provisions to ensure that the board of 
directors  and  senior  management  of  banks  and  financial  institutions  conduct  the  affairs  of 
their institutions prudently. In particular Chapter III, Part III and IV of the BFSA deal with the 
boards of directors of banks and financial institutions. Under these parts:  
 
Every bank or financial institution is expected to have a board of directors in which 
shall vest all the powers of management and control and which shall be responsible 
for the formulation of policies of the bank or financial institution (Section 30(1);  
The Board of directors shall consist of not less than 5 members (Section 30(2);  
Every  financial  service  provider  must  have  a  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief 
Financial Officer who shall not qualify to hold office unless it is shown that; they are 
fit and proper persons, above 21 years old, have not been convicted of a felony or 
offence  involving  dishonesty,  are  not  mentally  incompetent,  have  never  been 
removed from office under the BFSA, have not managed a company that has gone 
into liquidation or entered into a composition with creditors (Section 31);  
The majority of directors must be from outside the bank (Section 32(1);  
Directors, Chief Executive Officers and Chief Financial Officers are expected to act 
honestly, in good faith and in the interest of the company whilst exercising due care, 
diligence and skill (Section 33);  
A  director  is  required  to  declare  in  writing  to  the  board  annually,  the  names  and 
addresses of the director’s associates and full particulars of every material interest 
(Section 35);  
A  director  who  (a) negligently  or  with  intent  to  deceive,  makes  any  false  or 
misleading statement or entry or omits any statement or entry that should be made 
in  any  book,  account,  report  or  statement  of  the  financial  service  provider,  or 
(b) obstructs or endeavours to obstruct (i) the proper performance by an auditor of 
the  auditor’s  duties  in  accordance  with  this  provisions  of  this  Act;  or  (ii)  a  lawful 
inspection of the service provider by a duly authorised inspector appointed by the 
Bank  of  Zambia,  commits  an  offence  and  is  liable  on  conviction  to  a  fine  or  to 
imprisonment (Section 36).  
    In addition to the provisions of the BFSA, there are a number of regulations in place that are 
aimed at enhancing corporate governance for the Financial Service Providers regulated by 
the Bank of Zambia, some of which are listed below;  
 
The Prohibition and Prevention of Money Laundering Act of 2001 (PPMLA) and the 
Anti-Money  Laundering  Directives  obligate  the  board  of  directors  to  formulate  anti 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 money  laundering  policies  and  ensure  senior  management  implement  these 
policies.  
The Corporate Governance Guidelines for Financial institutions issued in November; 
2006.  These  guidelines  set  forth  a  broad  framework  of  fundamental  corporate 
governance  principles  to  guide  the  actions  of  the  directors  and  managers  of  the 
institutions operating in Zambia. (Infact, in every letter authorizing the appointment 
of directors of financial institutions, the Registrar of Banks and Financial Institutions 
makes reference to these guidelines).  
Chairperson, we are also aware that the mission of the Institute of Directors is to ensure the 
highest professional and ethical standards amongst directors and the boards on which they 
serve.  Similarly,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  scrutinises  all  persons  proposed  for  appointment  as 
directors and senior management as a way of ensuring that only people who are credible, fit 
and proper are allowed to manage affairs of financial institutions. In cases where a serving 
director or senior manager of a financial institution falls short of the expected standards of 
conduct, the Bank of Zambia has powers to cause their removal from such positions.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, another important safeguard relates to the requirement for financial 
institutions to have in place certain board committees such as the Audit, Risk Management 
and Loans Review Committees. This is intended to ensure independence, transparency and 
accountability to board oversight over management actions. All companies should strive to 
ensure that such safeguards are put in place for the effective oversight of management.  
Finally,  allow  me  to  congratulate  the  Institute  of  Directors  for  continually  trying  to  improve 
professionalism  and  ethics  in  our  corporate  entities.  This  is  commendable.  I  also  wish  to 
acknowledge the mutual cooperation that has always existed between the Bank of Zambia 
and  the  Institute  of  Directors.  You  will  recall  that  the  Institute  of  Directors  conducted  a 
number of seminars on core principles of corporate governance under the first phase of the 
Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP).  
Similarly, it is our expectation that we will continue to work together under the second phase 
of the FSDP in the area of developing and introducing an ethics and corporate governance 
code for the financial sector.  
I Thank You For Your Attention 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
