William C Dudley: The road to recovery – Puerto Rico and the mainland 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  E-3  Summit  of  the  Americas:  Export  Trade  Basics 
Forum 101, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 1 April 2011. 
 Good morning. I am pleased to be back in Puerto Rico to speak to you and meet with various 
communities  in  the  Commonwealth.  Each  visit  gives  me  a  chance  to  deepen  the  Bank’s 
relationship with the island. Last year I visited La Cantera and met with community leaders, 
business  people,  academics,  bankers  and  government  officials.  This  year  I  visited  Goya 
Foods – the oldest Hispanic-owned plant in our country with subsidiary facilities in my home 
state, New Jersey, and upstate New York. I will also meet with a similar wide range of people 
to talk about what we do and to hear first-hand the economic and financial issues important 
to Puerto Ricans so that I can best represent all my constituents in my work at the Fed. Your 
beautiful  island  is  unique  within  the  Second  Federal  Reserve  District.  For  me,  personally, 
being here also recalls special memories of my childhood visit with my parents.  
I thank the organizers for inviting me to speak at the Export Trade Basics Forum, to help kick 
off  the  week-long  summit  on  Education,  Exports  and  Entrepreneurship  that  begins  next 
week. This morning I will talk about economic conditions in the mainland and in Puerto Rico, 
paying  particular  attention  to  the  developments  since  my  visit  last  year  and  to  the  role  of 
exports. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
Introduction to the New York Fed 
By way of introduction, let me start with a synopsis of what the New York Fed is, what we do, 
and what makes my job so interesting. 
The  New  York  Fed  is  part  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  America’s  central  bank,  which 
was created by Congress in 1913. With this act, Congress delegated to the Fed System its 
constitutional authority to manage the supply of money in the nation’s economy. Congress 
designed  the  central  bank  to  be  decentralized,  representative  of  all  regions  of  the  country  
– including Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands – and independent of the political process. 
The  Fed  System  is  comprised  of  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.  –  a  federal 
agency currently led by Chairman Ben Bernanke – plus 12 regional Reserve Banks that span 
the  country.  For  example,  the  district  overseen  by  the  New  York  Fed  includes  all  of  New 
York, the 12 northern counties of New Jersey; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
Each Reserve Bank is distinct, with its own charter and a board of directors drawn from its 
district, but overseen by the Board of Governors. The law that created the Federal Reserve 
made  the  central  bank  independent  so  that  policymakers  could  make  decisions  about 
monetary  policy  –  such  as  whether  to  adjust  interest  rates  –  in  the  national  interest, 
somewhat insulated from political pressure. However, the Fed is accountable to Congress. 
Congress  has  set  an  explicit  objective  for  monetary  policy:  To  pursue  the  highest  level  of 
employment  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  objective  is  often  referred  to  as  our  “dual 
mandate,” because it combines two goals: high employment, and low and stable inflation. In 
order to promote these objectives, we also pay close attention to financial stability, because 
without financial stability, it is very hard to achieve our goals for jobs and inflation. 
The FOMC consists of the Board of Governors plus the presidents of each of the 12 district 
Banks. It meets in Washington, D.C., eight times per year to deliberate and vote on monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
policy.  As  the  current  New  York  Fed  president,  I  am  vice  chairman  at  these  meetings.  At 
these  meetings,  each  committee  member  presents  his  or  her  current  outlook  for  the 
economy.  For  these  assessments,  we  augment  input  from  our  research  departments  with 
critical  information  about  local  economic  conditions  supplied  by  our  boards  of  directors, 
regional advisory councils and conversations with local stakeholders. My visit to Puerto Rico 
today is a part of these regional activities, in which I learn first-hand about the economic and 
financial conditions important to Puerto Ricans. 
One thing that makes my job even more interesting is that New York has some roles unique 
within  the  Fed.  For  example,  the  New  York  Fed  is  the  Reserve  Bank  charged  with 
implementing monetary policy. This means that at the direction of the FOMC, we buy and sell 
Treasury  securities.  We  are  also  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  Fed  on  Wall  Street,  and  we 
supervise many of the largest financial institutions in the country. We operate Fedwire® – the 
conduit for large money transfers between banks. And, we provide banking services to the 
U.S. Treasury, and central banks and governments from around the world. 
Finally,  I  must  mention  that  the  New  York  Fed’s  district  could  be  the  most  diverse  in  the 
System: ranging from the urban density of New York City to the forested sparseness of the 
northern Adirondacks, to here in the Caribbean island of Puerto Rico. All in all, there is a lot 
to keep my colleagues and me quite busy – even in normal times. 
U.S. economic outlook 
Now, what is the outlook for economic activity, employment and inflation on the mainland? In 
particular, what are the areas of vulnerability that we should be most concerned about? 
I am pleased to say that the economic outlook for the mainland has improved in the past six 
months. Despite this, we are still very far away from achieving our dual mandate of maximum 
sustainable employment and price stability. Faster progress toward these objectives would 
be very welcome. 
On  the  activity  side,  a  wide  range  of  indicators  show  a  broadening  and  strengthening  of 
demand by households and production by firms. For example, on the demand side, after an 
unusually  deep  retrenchment  during  the  recession,  consumer  spending  has  begun  to 
recover,  and  that  recovery  strengthened  considerably  in  the  final  months  of  2010.  Not 
surprisingly, businesses’ orders and production are following suit. 
These  factors  led  to  a  3.1  percent  growth  rate  in  our  most  comprehensive  measure  of 
national  output  (real,  or  inflation-adjusted,  gross  domestic  product  or  GDP)  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2010. Growth for the first quarter looks likely to be similar, near 3 percent. In my 
view, the revival in demand and production – while not as strong as desired – suggests that 
we  may  be  much  closer  to  establishing  a  virtuous  circle  that  will  support  stronger  growth. 
What  I  have  in  mind  is  a  cycle  in  which  rising  household  and  business  demand  generate 
more rapid income and employment growth, which in turn bolsters confidence and leads to 
further increases in spending. This is why we upgraded our assessment of the economy at 
last  month’s  FOMC  meeting,  noting  the  economy  is  now  on  a  “firmer  footing”.  The  major 
missing piece of the puzzle has been the absence of strong payroll job growth. We will need 
to see sustained strong employment growth in order to be certain that this virtuous circle has 
become firmly established. 
With respect to the labor market, we have seen some conflicting signals. On one hand, the 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  sharply  over  the  past  four  months,  dropping  to  8.8  percent 
from  9.8  percent  in  November.  On  the  other  hand,  payroll  employment  gains  have  been 
relatively modest. 
The good news is that the data on payroll employment for the past two months was better 
than for the prior months. The economy added a notable 216,000 jobs in March. Particularly 
encouraging is the growth of manufacturing jobs. Over the past year we have added factory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
insurance  benefits  and 
jobs at the fastest pace since the 1990s. Other labor market indicators, such as initial claims 
for  unemployment 
the  employment  components  of  both 
manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing  business  surveys  have  also  shown  improvement 
recently. 
Although there is still uncertainty over the timing and speed of the labor market recovery, I 
am  hopeful  that  job  growth  will  increase  more  rapidly  in  the  coming  months.  We  would 
welcome this. A substantial pickup is sorely needed. Even if we were to generate growth of 
300,000 jobs per month, we would still likely have considerable slack in the labor market at 
the end of 2012. 
So,  why  is  the  economy  finally  showing  more  signs  of  life?  In  my  view,  the  improvement 
reflects three developments. 
First,  household  and  financial  institution  balance  sheets  continue  to  improve.  On  the 
household  side,  the  2008–09  rise  in  the  saving  rate  appears  to  have  stabilized  in  the 
5 percent  to  6  percent  range.  Meanwhile,  the  amount  of  money  that  households  need  to 
service their debt (for mortgages, cars, credit cards) has fallen sharply to levels that prevailed 
during  the  mid-1990s.  Debt  service  has  been  pushed  lower  by  a  combination  of  debt 
repayment, refinancing at lower interest rates and debt write-offs. Financial institutions have 
strengthened their balance sheets by retaining earnings and by issuing equity. Bank lending 
standards, while  still  tight,  have  begun  to  ease  somewhat.  As  a  result,  some  measures  of 
bank credit are beginning to expand again. 
Second,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  have  provided  support  to  the  recovery.  On  the 
monetary  policy  side,  we  at  the  Fed  have  maintained  unusually  low  levels  of  short-term 
interest rates and engaged in large-scale asset purchases. These measures have fostered a 
sharp  improvement  in  financial  market  conditions.  On  the  fiscal  side  (that  is,  government 
spending  and  taxation),  the  economy  has  been  supported  by  the  shift  in  policy  to  help 
support  growth.  In  particular,  the  temporary  reduction  in  payroll  taxes  could  have  a  strong 
impact on growth during the first part of this year. 
Third – and very much linked to the topic of this meeting – is growth abroad. Much of the rest 
of the world – especially the emerging market economies – have been growing strongly. This 
growth has led to an increase in the demand for U.S.-made goods and services. Over the 
four  quarters  of  2010,  real,  or  inflation-adjusted,  exports  rose  9.2  percent.  All  told,  real 
exports accounted for about 40 percent real GDP growth in 2010. In a few moments, I will 
talk about how this growth abroad also presents an opportunity for Puerto Rico.  
The firming in economic activity, in short, is due both to natural healing and past and present 
policy support. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  emphasize  that  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  have  been 
expecting the economy to strengthen. We provided additional monetary policy stimulus via 
the  asset  purchase  program  to  help  ensure  that  the  recovery  regained  momentum.  A 
stronger recovery with more rapid progress toward our dual mandate objectives is what we 
have been seeking. This is welcome and not a reason to reverse course. 
Yet, we must not be overly optimistic about the growth outlook. The coast is not completely 
clear – the healing process in the aftermath of the crisis takes time and there are still several 
areas of vulnerability and weakness. In particular, housing activity remains unusually weak 
and home prices have begun to soften again in many parts of the country. State and local 
government finances remain under stress, and this is likely to lead to further spending cuts, 
tax increases, or job losses in this sector that will offset at least a part of the federal fiscal 
stimulus.  
Moreover, in recent weeks we have experienced several shocks from abroad that could have 
some impact on the economy’s forward momentum, at least in the short term. For example, 
higher oil prices cut into household purchasing power, and the tragedy in Japan is leading to 
supply disruptions that may dampen growth somewhat in the near-term. Also, conditions in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Japan, the Middle East and North Africa remain uncertain and could worsen, with negative 
implications for global economic growth. Furthermore, we cannot ignore the risks stemming 
from the longer-term fiscal challenges that we face in the United States. 
But  in  the  near-term,  the  most  immediate  domestic  problems  may  recede  rather  than 
become  more  prevalent.  On  the  housing  side,  stronger  job  growth  should  lead  to  more 
household  formation.  For  example,  more  young  people  will  be  able  to  move  out  of  their 
parents’  homes  when  they  get  jobs.  This  trend  should  provide  more  support  to  housing 
demand. On the state and local side, a rising economy would boost sales and income tax 
revenue, and help narrow near-term fiscal shortfalls. 
We also need to remain watchful to ensure that low interest rates do not foster a buildup of 
financial excesses or bubbles that might pose a medium-term risk to both full employment 
and  price  stability.  In  this  regard  we  monitor  interest  rates  on  risky  and  safer  assets.  An 
unusual  narrowing  of  these  differences  could  signal  that  risk  is  not  being  appropriately 
assessed.  These  differentials  for  risk  on  U.S.  assets  in  general  do  not  seem  obviously 
compressed today.  
On the inflation side of the ledger, the risk of deflation is greatly diminished. At the moment, 
both  total,  or  headline,  inflation  and  core  inflation,  which  excludes  the  volatile  food  and 
energy  prices,  have  increased  but  remain  below  levels  consistent  with  our  dual  mandate 
objectives – which most members of the FOMC consider to be 2 percent or a bit less on the 
personal consumption expenditures measure. Moreover, the rise in commodity prices is likely 
to  put  further  upward  pressure  on  headline  inflation  in  the  coming  months.  Provided 
commodity prices level off around current levels, the effect on inflation should be transitory. 
But  we  will  need  to  ensure  that  commodity  price  pressures  do  not  cause  inflation 
expectations to become unmoored. If that were to occur, it would be more difficult to keep 
inflation in check.  
To  sum  up,  economic  conditions  have  improved  in  the  past  year.  Yet,  the  recovery  is  still 
tenuous.  And,  we  are  still  far  from  the  mark  with  regard  to  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate.  In 
particular, the unemployment rate is much too high. 
Economic conditions in Puerto Rico 
Now let me turn to economic conditions in Puerto Rico. In contrast to the situation during my 
last visit, I am pleased to see signs that the Commonwealth may finally be emerging from 
this painful recession. Nevertheless, conditions remain difficult for many families.  
The recession here has been deeper than the downturn on the mainland. By mid-2010, total 
employment in Puerto Rico had fallen by 13 percent or 138,000 jobs from its peak in 2005. 
This is almost double the 7 percent job loss on the mainland from the employment peak to its 
trough. Furthermore, the recession in Puerto Rico has lasted about five years – three times 
as long as the mainland downturn. The recovery has also lagged that of the mainland. While 
the mainland’s economy began to recover in mid-2009, Puerto Rico’s economy continued to 
decline for another year.  
But, since mid-2010 there have been promising signs: Recently released revisions suggest 
that job growth on the island, while still very weak, improved modestly since last summer. 
And most of the weakness since then has not been broad-based, but instead concentrated in 
construction  and  manufacturing.  The  unemployment  rate  has  come  down  by  a  full 
percentage point since its peak. However, at just over 16 percent, it remains unacceptably 
high.  
Inflation generally remains subdued on the Commonwealth – although there has been some 
recent volatility. After a period of falling prices in 2009, inflation picked up in December 2009 
with annualized rates of around 4 percent for a few months – with medical care a key driver 
for  these  increases.  Since  June  2010,  reported  inflation  rates  have  reverted  to  a  range 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
between  1 percent  and  2  percent. However,  the  rise in  food  and  energy  prices  is  likely  to 
push inflation somewhat higher over the next few months.  
To help keep track of conditions in Puerto Rico, we can now look at the Institute of Statistics’ 
new Manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index (PR-PMI), which is conducted in conjunction 
with  the  Puerto  Rico  Manufacturers  Association  and  Scotiabank.  The  survey  shows  that 
business conditions on the island were steady in January, following improvement at the end 
of  2010.  The  PR-PMI  has  signaled  growth  for  seven  of  the  past  nine  months.  It  will  take 
some  time  before  this  new  index  has  a  clear  track  record,  but  we  welcome  this  source  of 
timely information on economic activity in Puerto Rico.  
Now, what about credit conditions in Puerto Rico: how much debt do families have and how 
have they been doing in terms of meeting their obligations? I needn’t tell you how important it 
has  been  to  monitor  these  trends  over  the  course  of  the  Great  Recession.  Using  a  new 
source of information – the New York Fed’s Consumer Credit Panel – we can now track how 
families in the mainland and Puerto Rico have managed their credit in recent years.  
Overall, compared with the mainland, Puerto Ricans avoided much of the recent boom and 
bust in the use of household credit. Yet, signs of distress are readily apparent, owing to the 
long and deep recession here. Unlike the mainland, households on the island did not raise 
their borrowing much in the run-up to the recession. Thus, it is not surprising that Puerto Rico 
did  not  see  the  sharp  spike  in  loan  delinquencies  that  many  areas  saw  from  late  2007  to 
early 2009. Instead, Puerto Rico’s delinquencies on household debt – that is, the proportion 
of debt where payments are 90 or more days late – have risen gradually as the recession 
has persisted. In 2005, households were behind on about 5 percent of the total debt. As of 
2010, they were delinquent on about 9 percent of the debt, about the same as the national 
average – reflecting the stress imposed on many families by the deep and long recession.  
The outlook and exports 
Looking ahead to the rest of 2011, I see grounds for cautious optimism. In particular, exports, 
which have been so important to the economic recovery on the mainland, have the potential 
to contribute to growth here in Puerto Rico as well.  
Currently, Puerto Rico runs a sizeable trade surplus, selling more products to the world than 
it buys. In 2009, the latest year for which full-year data are reported, the value of exports was 
roughly  $60  billion  compared  with  roughly  $40  billion  of  imports.  Based  on  data  through 
November, exports grew briskly, by about 10 percent, in 2010. 
What  does  Puerto  Rico  export?  Pharmaceuticals  are  by  far  the  island’s  largest  export.  In 
addition, Puerto Rico is a successful exporter of medical equipment, computer and electronic 
products, and electrical equipment. 
The  mainland  is  Puerto  Rico’s  primary  trading  partner,  accounting  for  half  of  the  island’s 
imports and three-quarters of its exports. There are many reasons for this. While Puerto Rico 
interacts with many other economies, for generations the mainland United States and Puerto 
Rico  have  had  a  special  multifaceted  economic  relationship.  One  of  the  most  obvious  of 
these ties is the free flow of goods between the mainland and the island. Another link is our 
common  use  of  the  dollar.  This  means  that  tourists  from  the  mainland  can  visit  without 
worrying  about  changing  currencies. 
long-term 
investments in Puerto Rico without worrying that currency fluctuations against the dollar will 
undermine their competitiveness.  
The island runs a surplus with the mainland that accounts for much of the island’s overall 
surplus. So the signs of a further pickup in economic growth on the mainland bode well for 
the island. 
Puerto Rico’s export markets also extend overseas. Aside from the U.S. mainland, the top 
export  markets  for  the  Island  are  Germany,  Netherlands,  Belgium  and  Spain.  Exports  to 
In  addition,  businesses  can  make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
these four countries combined exceeded $11 billion in 2009 and have grown by more than 
30 percent since 2007.  
The success that Puerto Rico has in selling its goods and services to industrialized countries 
bodes  well  for  the  island’s  future.  As  more  emerging  economies  narrow  the  gap  between 
themselves and the more developed countries, the market for Puerto Rico’s goods could well 
expand  accordingly.  Going  forward,  I  would  not  be  surprised  to  see  Puerto  Rico’s  exports 
rise further as your companies take advantage of the opportunities presented by the rapidly 
emerging economies.  
At your upcoming forum and summit, you’ll learn more about how to develop export markets 
for your products. I applaud your efforts to do so, as an important component of sustaining 
the vigor of the economic recovery in Puerto Rico.  
The long view and the New York Fed’s role  
Although the signs I’ve mentioned suggest that the recession is over, the road to sustained 
economic growth is likely to be challenging in the near term.  
In  its  favor,  Puerto  Rico  has  some  important  intrinsic  advantages.  These  include  natural 
beauty,  a  hospitable  climate  and  unique  status  as  a  major  U.S.  economic  and  population 
center in the Caribbean. Perhaps just as important, the island has a relatively well-educated 
workforce. Research shows quite convincingly that abundant human capital is an important 
ingredient for a thriving economy.  
We at the New York Fed aim to do our part to help sustain growth in the Commonwealth. For 
example, we co-sponsor a financial awareness video competition for college students here 
and  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act  Week  activities  with  the  Puerto  Rico  Bankers 
Association.  And,  as  a  member  of  the  Alliance  for  Economic  and  Financial  Education  we 
promote  economic  and  financial  education  via  teacher  training,  a  high  school  economic 
competition, and a speaker series. The New York Fed also has several ongoing programs of 
technical  assistance  in  Puerto  Rico.  We  partnered  with  other  organizations  throughout  the 
year to help provide technical training for community development professionals. We cover 
the costs of two to three professors who are engaged in macroeconomic and monetary policy 
research to attend our annual symposium on current economic conditions held at the New 
York Fed.  
We also recognize that a healthy banking system and accurate economic statistics are both 
important components of a favorable business climate. To improve our understanding of the 
Puerto Rican economy, the New York Fed joined a group of local businesses to sponsor and 
fund  a  household  survey,  undertaken  by  the  Center  for  the  New  Economy  to  benchmark 
Puerto  Rican  consumer  finances.  To  help  businesses  and  government  in  Puerto  Rico,  we 
have also been providing technical assistance to Puerto Rico’s new Institute for Statistics in 
launching the new monthly manufacturing survey I mentioned earlier. We applaud this and 
other efforts to improve the measurement of economic conditions in Puerto Rico. 
As a financial regulator, the New York Fed works to help the financial system run smoothly 
so that it can support economic growth. We are working hard to prevent the type of financial 
crisis that we recently experienced from recurring in the future, in a way that does not inhibit 
businesses from growing and prospering.  
We are working closely with all of the banking supervisors and other key parties to facilitate 
an effective resolution to the problems facing the island’s banking sector. Last year, some of 
Puerto Rico’s banks were consolidated and many improved their balance sheets by selling 
underperforming  assets.  Both  of  these  steps  are  likely  to  produce  stronger,  healthier 
institutions more able to make the sound lending decisions that support economic growth.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
All of these activities, ranging from effective monetary policy and prudent financial regulation 
to  fostering  economic  literacy  and  measurement,  complement  and  reinforce  each  other  to 
help support a strong economy in Puerto Rico. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the mainland economy experienced a pick-up in activity during the second half of 
2010 that shows signs of continuing in 2011. The recovery in Puerto Rico has taken longer to 
get  off  the  ground,  but  now  shows  signs  of  firming.  On  the  mainland  and  in  Puerto  Rico, 
unemployment remains stubbornly high, but many indicators suggest that conditions are in 
place for stronger employment growth in the coming months.  
With  government  and  business  leaders  like  yourselves  working  together  to  build  a  better 
future for Puerto Rico, I am hopeful that we will soon be able to look back at 2010 and see 
not only the end of the island’s long recession but also the beginning of an era of growth and 
prosperity for Puerto Rico. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
