Daniel Mminele: Forecasts, errors and what we can learn from them 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Daniel  Mminele,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, at the Reuters Economist of the Year Award, Johannesburg, 5 August 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you to Thomson Reuters for inviting me to address you this morning and to celebrate 
with you your achievements in economic forecasting. May I take this opportunity to extend 
my  sincere  congratulations  to  the  winner  of  this  prestigious  award  to  be  handed  out  this 
morning, and also to congratulate all of the nominees present here today. 
I  was  very  tempted  to  start  off  my  remarks  this  morning  by  telling  a  little  joke  about 
economists,  but  decided  against  it,  as  I  have  been  warned  that  an  economist  is  someone 
who did not have enough personality to become an accountant. 
I promise to keep my remarks this morning quite brief. 
Economic forecasting tested during the crisis 
2. 
Thomas Kida1 noted, “...the amount of knowledge we have in a certain area will not help us 
predict what will happen if the events are inherently unpredictable.” 
The recent global financial crisis and recession has proved to be a humbling experience for 
economists,  financial  market  participants,  policy  makers,  regulators  and  many  others  that 
derive their income from economic forecasting, understanding the world economy and that 
which  governs  it.  The  crisis  was  not  foreseen  by  most  forecasters,  although  there  was  a 
minority who had been warning of a pending disaster for some time. The failure to forecast 
the  “Great  Recession”  caused  the  Queen  of  England  herself  to  ask  why  it  had  not  been 
foreseen. The turmoil of recent years has prompted critics to maintain that many economic 
models, and particularly macroeconomic models based on rational expectations, have been 
proven to be fundamentally flawed. 
Much of the criticism directed towards forecasting and macroeconomic analysts has probably 
been misplaced. It has never been so much about economic models being wrong, as it is 
about understanding that all models are limited – by definition – and that models that limit 
certain  types  of  relationships  will  eventually  fail  when  those  relationships  in  the  real  world 
change. 
In  other  words,  the  right  criticism  is  to  say  that  economic  models  constructed  in  particular 
ways  need  to  be  used  and  understood  in  similarly  particular  ways.  A  model  that  does  not 
include household balance sheets and what drives them will not tell you if you will have a 
household debt crisis. By the same token, a model that says that future wage inflation will be 
a perfect function of expected future inflation will always be at odds with reality. Criticising 
economists for thinking that their models replace what actually happens in the real world may 
be satisfying, but it is also off-key. 
By  the  same  token,  placing  complete  faith  in  an  economic  forecast  or  model  is  equally 
unhelpful, as we know that no model can fully capture the complex relationships we find in 
the  real  world.  Therefore  models  should  never  be  used  mechanistically.  Forecast  errors 
                                                 
1  Thomas Kida is a professor at the Isenberg School of Management at the University of Massachusetts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
cannot  tell  us  anything  useful  about  financial  and  economic  panic  and  crashes  unless  the 
models  on  which  they  are  based  account  for  the  build  up  of  imbalances  that  become 
unsustainable.  Clearly,  the  conditions  for  sustainability  also  need  to  be  included.  For 
example, the ability of Greece to manage its current debt load differs depending on how fast 
the Greek economy can grow. 
The mistake was to allow so much of the global community, especially the financial markets 
and  policy  makers,  to  rely  on  economic  analysis  that  placed  little  emphasis  on  structural 
factors  and  balance  sheets  and  which  ignored  the  herd  behaviour  occurring  in  financial 
markets. It was not a model of real estate prices that failed to see the absurdity of ever-rising 
prices in the US housing market, but the assessment of the bull market in property by many, 
often famous, economists. 
So how might we think about dealing with this problem of economic models and forecasting 
that will be by definition insufficient and, in fact, wrong, and the need for robust and useful 
economic analysis both of what models tell us and what they don’t? 
Certainly part of the answer lies in making progress with developing models that are useful in 
the appropriate contexts. For the Reserve Bank, a major step forward in modelling came with 
the  implementation  of  the  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy  framework  in  2000.  More 
accurate modelling and forecasting activities were (and are) required for inflation targeting, 
and the Research Department of the Bank set up a so-called “suite of models”. This ranges 
from  single  equation,  high  frequency  data  models  to  longer-term  structural  multivariate 
models,  and  also  varies  according  to  the  combination  of  economic  theory  and  statistical 
techniques applied.2 
It is useful to supplement the forecasts from structural models with information obtained from 
higher  frequency  models  to  establish  the  starting  point  for  the  forecast  trajectory.  This 
approach allows the forecasters to optimise the positive characteristics of a particular model 
type and use the different approaches to improve the trajectory of the forecast and minimise 
errors. 
The  suite  of  models  approach  can  be  useful  to  obtain  different  forecasts  for  the  same 
variable which can then be pooled together to obtain the final forecast. Models differ in their 
focus  and  consequently  in  their  characteristics  and  transmission  mechanisms.  Different 
outcomes  are  useful  in  gaining  new  perspectives  on  what  is  driving  particular  outcomes. 
There are of course limits to this approach. Too many different model properties make the 
assessment of the transmission mechanisms ambiguous and complicates the interpretation 
of the results. 
The  success  of  any  modelling  and  forecasting  endeavour  should  be  measured  not  by  the 
sophistication or complexity of the techniques used or the accuracy of the data employed, 
but  rather  the  degree  of  forecast  error  minimisation  and  the  quality  of  the  analysis  that  it 
supports. 
More and better information is critical to model building, forecasting and analysis. And here, 
the  Reuters  Survey  provides  a  valuable  service  to  the  modelling  activities  of  the  Reserve 
Bank, and of course other forecasters. It is useful to compare forecasts to shed light on how 
other  participants  view  the  future  and  how  they  quantify  the  most  important  transmission 
channels of the economy. The analysis of surveys over time, moreover, tells us something 
about the nature of shocks hitting the economy, how the economy adjusts to the shocks, and 
the extent of policy reaction expected by the markets. 
                                                 
2  For example, time series models help us forecast high frequency data for a horizon up to 2 quarters. However 
by definition, these models rely solely on past data patterns and are unable to predict turning points. Structural 
models are better suited to forecasting over longer horizons. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  our  recent  discussions  of  the  economy,  considerable  attention  was  devoted  to 
understanding  the  combination  of  inflation,  growth,  and  monetary  policy  reaction  functions 
exhibited in private sector forecasts. Greater uncertainty in the global economic environment 
and newer data from international and domestic sources made it critically important to gather 
more views of conditions in the world and understand how they were being interpreted by the 
markets.  A  levelling-off  of  commodity  prices  and  weaker  economic  growth  in  many 
economies  presented  significant  differences  from  how  we  understood  the  world  even  two 
months ago. 
There have been other changes too, including on the domestic front, such as signs of weaker 
second quarter growth rates. Our task is to try to peer through these various changes, in part 
to  ask  ourselves  hard  questions  about  our  forecasts  and  test  them  against  potential 
scenarios. 
Scenarios,  in  turn,  imply  probabilities  of  events  actually  transpiring,  and  here  our  analysis 
has  had  to  cross  the  boundaries  into  other  fields.  We  noted  for  instance  in  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee Statement our concerns about the debt crises in advanced economies and 
considered in our discussions the possibilities of how this crisis might be resolved. 
This general increase in uncertainty has become a characteristic of the post-recession world, 
and one that appears especially hard to cast off. Uncertainty demands a greater application 
of judgement across a broader range of perspectives than in times when variables move in 
clear directions and risks are low. 
Conclusion 
3. 
These  thoughts  prompt  us  to  recognise  that  flexibility  is  a  key  ingredient  of  useful 
macroeconomic forecasting exercises, even as flexibility may seem to violate the very idea of 
a  model.  This  tension  is  in  fact  quite  important.  The  inflexibility  of  a  model’s  fixed 
relationships help us to assess whether today’s actual outcomes will continue in the future or 
adjust in line with the historical relationships reflected in the model. As real world outcomes 
change, we in turn ask ourselves what is wrong with our model relationships or what other 
conditions have changed to generate outcomes beyond what the model suggests. 
In  short,  the  framework  used  to  produce  forecasts  must  be  dynamic  and  able  to  change 
should  circumstances  require.  One  area  for  future  work  for  us  in  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to 
incorporate  the  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  and  recession  into  how  we  use  our  macro 
econometric and other models. 
The  financial  crisis  that  has  occurred  was  so  unexpected  that  very  few,  if  any,  macro-
econometric models captured the inter-linkages between the real and the financial spheres. 
Beyond  interest  rates,  macro  econometric  models  generally  do  not  include  financial 
transmission mechanisms. Clearly this needs to change, but we also need to recognise that 
even much more extensive coverage will not compensate for intensive regulatory focus on 
financial and asset markets and the balance sheets of institutions operating in them. 
And  from  a  policy-making  perspective,  we  need  to  recognise  that  whatever  progress  we 
make  in  refining  and  calibrating  our  models,  and  achieving  a  higher  level  of  their 
sophistication,  they  will  never  be  able  to  absolve  us  from  our  responsibility  to  ultimately 
exercise judgement in reaching any policy decisions. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
