Loi M Bakani: The LNG project and Papua New Guinea’s economy 
Presentation  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
Consultative Implementation and Monitoring Council (CIMC) Workshop on “The LNG project 
and Papua New Guinea’s economy”, Port Moresby, 31 March 2011. 
 Acknowledgement 
Honourable Ano Pala, Minister for Agriculture and Livestock 
Honourable Mr. Warren Dutton, Chairman of CIMC Agriculture Sectoral Committee 
Mr. Anthony Yauieb, Deputy Secretary, Treasury Department 
Mr. Paul Barker, Director, Institute of National Affairs 
Ms. Marjorie Andrew, Executive Officer, CIMC 
Ms. Laura Bailey, World Bank Country Manager 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  pleased  to  have  been  invited  to  make  a  presentation  at  this  forum.  The  topic  of 
discussion is an important one at this juncture of developments in the country. It is timely to 
discuss  it.  I  take  serious  note  of  the  focus  on  the  implications  on  agriculture  sector  of  the 
LNG project.  
My paper draws on the findings of a study done in 2010 jointly by the Bank of PNG and the 
Monash University (Melbourne) on the impact of the PNG LNG project, as well as the latest 
policy  issues  that  have  emerged  amongst  relevant  Government  bodies  and  authorities, 
including issues raised in the Bank’s Monetary Policy Statement of March 2011 (about which 
I  made  a  breakfast  presentation  this  morning,  hosted  by  the  PNGID,  and  to  be  released 
through the media tomorrow.)  
industries  such  as  hoteling.  There  are  other  sectors  such  as 
Introduction 
During the construction phase of the PNG LNG project, the sectors of the PNG economy that 
supply material inputs and will be involved in activities directly and indirectly with the project 
will  benefit.  These  sectors  include  manufacturing,  building  and  construction,  transportation 
and communications, commerce (wholesale & retail – especially equipments and vehicles) 
and  service 
the 
agriculture/forestry/fisheries that will not benefit directly from the project. The project has the 
potential to significantly raise standards of living in PNG. However, it will generate structural 
adjustment pressures. How the rest of the country, including the agriculture/forestry/fisheries 
sector  where  majority  of  our  people  live,  benefit  will  depend  on:  (i)  macroeconomic 
management  of  the  Government,  specifically  how  the  Government  manages  the  windfall 
revenue  from  the  project  during  the  production  stage;  and  (ii)  monetary  policy  stance  in 
reaction to movements in liquidity, inflation, exchange rates, and interest rates.  
There  is  a  lot  of  hype  about  the  size  of  the  project  and  the  huge  money,  involved  – 
A$12 billion for construction-phase expenditure in 2010–2012 and annual exports averaging 
A$4.0 billion (in 2010 prices) (taken from the study done by BPNG and Monash University, 
2010, based on ExxonMobil funded 2008 ACIL Tasman study and information supplied by 
ExxonMobil in 2010). However, it has to be understood that the bulk of the setup expenditure 
will  be  on  imported  inputs  and  short  term  foreign  labour.  The  joint  paper  by  Monash  and 
BPNG argues that what is important for the PNG economy is the expenditure out of that total 
amount  on  domestic  supplies,  by  firms  households  and  labour,  which  will  total  around 
A$1.8 billion  (K4.5  billion)  over  the  three  years  of  construction  (BPNG  &  Monash,  2010). 
Similarly,  the  project  will  generate  substantial  export  revenue  for  PNG  and  have  an 
enormous effect on Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Again, from the point of view of the PNG 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economy,  this  is  largely  irrelevant.  The  LNG  exports  receipts  will  be  owned  by  overseas 
based entities. What is relevant for PNG is the taxes, dividends and royalties that will accrue 
to PNG Government, and landowners which will be in the range of a low of K2.0 billion a year 
to  a  peak  of  K14.0  billion  a  year  (ibid).  Another  way  of  putting  this  point  is  to  recall  that 
welfare in a country depends on its GNP (a measure of its income), not GDP (a measure of 
quantity of output that takes place within its borders). What matters most after receiving the 
revenue,  is  how  the  Government  manages  it  to  benefit  the  rest  of  the  country,  without 
creating an economic environment in which growth in liquidity of the banking system and in 
inflation do not spiral out of control.  
What Can the Government Do for the LNG Proceeds to Benefit the Agriculture Sector 
and Mitigate the “Dutch Disease” Effect?  
The means through which the LNG project can benefit the rest of the country, including the 
agriculture/forestry/fisheries  sector,  is  the  expenditure  of  the  LNG  induced  Government 
revenue through the National Budget process. But it has to be prudent fiscal management 
with  emphasis  on  development  and  productive  expenditure  through  a  fiscal  strategy  that 
ensures  investment  and  consumption  expenditures  grow  steadily  (conservative  approach) 
over the years of the project life span. The fiscal strategy should not be one where there is 
aggressive  spending  over  and  above  the  revenue  with  the  Government  borrowing  against 
future revenue or one that the Government spends all it gets in a year each year over the life 
span of the LNG project. The prudent conservative spending approach will see some savings 
and accumulation of assets by the Government over time while allowing for welfare of the 
people to improve through improvement of infrastructures of transport, education, health and 
law and order.  
Real exchange rate  
Let me first define a couple of economic terms that matter for the topic of the forum. Real 
exchange rate refers to movements in the nominal exchange rate adjusted for differences in 
the  rate  of  inflation  in  PNG  and  the  rates  of  inflation  in  PNG’s  principal  trading  partners. 
Movements  in  the  real  exchange  rate  facilitate  changes  in  exports  and  imports.  Real 
appreciation  decreases  the  rate  of  growth  of  exports  and  increases  the  rate  of  growth  of 
imports.  Real  depreciation  has  the  opposite  effect.  “Dutch  Disease”  refers  to  an  economic 
condition where a mineral boom leads to an appreciation of the real exchange rate, which in 
turn depresses output in the tradeable sector. The real exchange rate appreciation can occur 
in two ways. First, a surge in export from the mineral sector leads to an appreciation of the 
nominal  exchange  rate,  resulting  in  a  rise  in  the  domestic  prices  of  tradeables  and  a 
reduction  in  exports  of  other  tradeables,  non-tradeables  being  unaffected.  Or  second,  the 
increase in income may lead to an increase in demand for domestic non-traded goods and a 
consequent increase their prices.  
Having given the above definitions, let me now move onto why the concepts matter. In the 
construction  phase  of  the  LNG  project,  real  exchange  rate  appreciation  is  likely  under  all 
three Government fiscal scenarios – conservative, aggressive and passive spending. Then in 
the  production  phase,  the  study  by  BPNG  and  Monash  shows  that  real  exchange  rate 
appreciation  will  be  more  pronounced  under  the  aggressive  spending (over  spending)  and 
passive  (spend  all  as  you  get  it)  scenarios  than  under  a  careful  conservative  spending 
approach. Real exchange rate and inflationary pressures will be significantly lower under the 
conservative spending approach. So the effects of Dutch Disease can be mitigated by careful 
and  prioritized  Government  budget  expenditure.  Thus,  the  importance  of  the  Sovereign 
Wealth  Fund  (SWF).  The  decision  by  the  Government  to  establish  an  SWF  is  therefore 
welcomed.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Sectoral implications of the LNG project 
Construction,  manufacturing,  transportation,  service  oriented  industries  and  commerce 
(wholesale  and  retail)  sectors  will  benefit  directly  or  indirectly  in  the  short  run  through  the 
provision  of  inputs  during  the  construction  phase.  Then  in  the  operational  phase,  sectors 
such as manufacturing will face considerable competition from imports and will be harmed by 
the appreciation of the real exchange rate. Traditional agriculture (food, fruits and vegetable) 
sub-sector will fare well under increased aggregate income and demand.  
The export agriculture sector (coffee, cocoa, palm oil, copra, forestry) will be harmed by the 
real appreciation (Dutch Disease). Our exports will be less competitive and so there will be a 
decline  in  the  export  of  these  commodities.  This  adverse  effect  can  be  more  pronounced 
under  the  aggressive  Government  spending  scenario  because  excessive  Government 
spending will add to the real exchange rate appreciation through increased liquidity and high 
inflation.  This  adverse  effect  can  be  mitigated  or  minimised  through  the  conservative 
Government expenditure approach.  
Apart from a strategic careful and prioritized spending, the Government can also mitigate the 
“Dutch Disease” effect on the tradeable agriculture sector by maintaining and reconstructing 
the  existing  road  network  as  well  as  all  the  social  sector  infrastructure  of  health  and 
education and law and order. This will aid the producers get their produces to buying points 
and  sustain  production  and  export.  In  other  words,  the  resource  curse  scenario  can  be 
addressed through better and improved infrastructure network.  
What Can the bank of PNG Do to Minimize or Mitigate the “Dutch Disease” Effect to 
Assist the Agriculture/Forestry/Fisheries Sector?  
On its part, the Bank of PNG can mitigate or minimize the “Dutch Disease” effect through its 
management of the Kina exchange rate. While the exchange rate regime is a floating one, it 
can use the build-up in international reserves to support the Kina at an exchange rate that is 
favourable for agricultural export growth while not completely going against the market trend, 
under a real exchange rate appreciation scenario. But this will be done in joint consideration 
of the objective of monetary policy, which is price stability. The desired outcome of having 
competitive prices for our agricultural exports through the Central Bank supporting the Kina 
at  a  desired  exchange  rate  will  be  best  achieved  with  the  conservative  fiscal  expenditure 
approach described above, under a close coordination of monetary policy and fiscal policies.  
Apart from the direct influence of exchange rate on the agriculture sector, the Bank considers 
macroeconomic  stability  as  an  important  foundation  for  microeconomic  development  and 
improvement. When there is price stability – entailing stable inflation, stable exchange and 
stable  interest  rates  –  businesses,  the  general  public  and  the  international  community  will 
have confidence in the economy and economic activity can prosper. The Bank plays a major 
role in influencing macroeconomic conditions through its monetary policy and management 
of the exchange rate policy. Given a condition of macroeconomic stability, it is up to the other 
Government agents to do their part to improve things at the micro level.  
Overall macroeconomic management  
During  the  construction  phase  of  the  LNG  project,  the  Government  should  adhere  to  the 
parameters of its annual budgets, and prioritise its expenditure so as not to compete with the 
private sector on the limited resources within the country, especially in areas of construction, 
civil works, earthmoving and other infrastructure developments. It should instead concentrate 
on maintaining existing transportation and social sector infrastructure that have deteriorated 
in many parts of the country, in order to improve health, education, and law and order status. 
The Government should increase capacity of the workforce by providing appropriate training 
in schools and colleges and improve the performance of implementing agencies. This would 
also allow for the utilization of the expertise, physical and human resources that are built up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
by the LNG project development, to be efficiently and productively used as and when they 
are released from the project.  
Over  the  life  span  of  the  LNG  project,  the  Government  should  then  follow  a  strategic 
expenditure plan which relates to its medium term development plans, containing specified 
programs  and  projects  that  aim  to  improve  infrastructure  and  bring  services  to  the  rural 
population. The drawing down of funds from the SWF should tie in with the annual National 
Budgets, which should reflect the year to year programs of the medium term plans so that it 
serves  its  purpose  of  enabling  the  Government  to  better  manage  the  revenue  flows  – 
including dividends, royalties and tax from the LNG project, and expend it on priority areas in 
a  sustainable,  efficient,  and  productive  way,  that  will  benefit  the  great  majority  of  the 
population and care for future generations. 
All these are part of prudent macroeconomic management that will aim to (1) contain inflation 
rate at an acceptable or tolerable level and (2) minimise the effects of “Dutch Disease” on 
industries that will not directly benefit from the LNG project.  
Prudent  Macroeconomic  management  encompassing  what  the  key  Central  Governments 
and the Bank can do as described above has to be accompanied by micro level initiatives 
and programs. This is where the National Agriculture Development Plan and other medium 
term  development  plans  of  the  Government  come  in.  These  plans  must  enable  the 
development of the traditional as well as value-adding industries.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  whole  approach  for  policy  decisions  at  the  macro  and  micro 
levels, and developmental programs and projects in areas that matter for our people, have to 
be done in an integrated and coordinated approach by all responsible agents in line with the 
Government’s  Vision  2050  for  the  country  to  move  towards  realising  the  Vision  2050 
objectives.  
Thank you.  
References 
Dixon, P.B, Kauzi, G. and Rimmer, M.T (2010), Effects on the PNG Economy of a Major LNG 
Project, Economic Papers, Vol. 29, No. 2, June 2010, the Economic Society of Australia.  
BPNG (2011), Monetary Policy Statement – 31st March 2011, BPNG, Port Moresby. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
