Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
Bank of Albania (BoA) Supervisory Council decisions on Monetary Policy, Tirana, 26 January 
2011. 
 In its meeting of 26 January 2011, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed 
and approved the Monetary Policy Report for the second half of 2010.  
Following a thorough analysis of Albania’s latest economic and financial developments and 
discussions on performance outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided 
to keep the key interest rate unchanged at 5.00%. The Council holds that current monetary 
conditions are appropriate for meeting the medium-term inflation target. 
I will proceed with a brief overview of economic developments and key issues discussed at 
today’s meeting that led to this decision.  
 The Albanian economy recorded a positive development during the second half of 2010. The 
economic activity continued to mark growth, while main macroeconomic balances improved 
and  risk  premium  and  interest  rates  in  financial  markets  decreased.  The  economic  growth 
during  2010  relied  mainly  on  foreign  demand  for  Albanian  goods  and  services,  while 
domestic consumption and investments remained at low levels albeit positive developments. 
Inflation  pressures  remain  controlled  as  a  result  of  the  existence  of  free  capacities  in  the 
economy  and  anchored  inflation  expectations.  Rapid  expansion  of  exports  and  moderate 
increase of imports led to improved trade and current account deficits, contributing to foreign 
currency demand and supply balancing and increased exchange rate stability. 
Monetary and fiscal policies have conveyed a careful macroeconomic stimulus. Withdrawal 
of the fiscal stimulus during the second half of the year, led to a more stimulating monetary 
policy, by reducing the key interest rate in July and a fuller introduction of it into the financial 
markets during the following period.  
Financial markets were characterised by an improvement of liquidity indicators and a decline 
in  interest  rates  in  almost  all  financial  instruments.  Furthermore,  a  prudent  fiscal  policy 
rendered budget deficit and public debt in line with 2010 forecasts. 
These developments are expected to be brought forward, in broad terms, in 2011 as well. 
Economic  growth  is  expected  to  remain  comparable  to  levels  of  2010.  However,  it  is 
expected  to  be  driven  by  domestic  demand  to  a  large  extent.  The  banking  system  is  in  a 
much better position compared with two previous years in terms of supporting the increase of 
domestic consumption and investment with funds.  
Moreover,  inflation  pressures  are  forecasted  to  be  under  control,  budget  deficit  and  public 
debt  are  expected  to  be  further  consolidated,  and  external  position  of  the  economy  is 
expected to be more stable. Respecting this picture has important implications, which I will 
address later in more details, for policymakers and economic agents. 
Latest developments in global economy are characterised by continued economic growth in 
most  developed  countries  and  emerging  economies.  In  developed  countries,  economic 
growth  was  lower  as  a  result  of  measures  taken  to  consolidate  public  finances  and 
withdrawal  of  fiscal  stimulus.  On  the  other  hand,  emerging  economies  maintained  higher 
growth rates, expanding their demand for raw materials and consumption goods, thus adding 
global inflation pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Economic  growth  is  expected  to  continue  in  2011,  but  uncertainties  remain  high.  Global 
macroeconomic misbalancing, which appeared in high levels of trade deficit for some of the 
developed countries, may materialise in shocks to main currencies exchange rate and free 
trade exchanges worldwide.  
In  addition,  concerns  over  public  debt  and  fiscal  stability  levels  for  some  of  the  euro  area 
countries  continue  to  affect  the  sensitivity  of  financial  markets  and  their  tolerance  to  risk. 
Regardless of latest growing tendencies, the balance of inflation pressures is considered to 
be  in  check  for  the  current  year  as  well,  as  a  result  of  continued  existence  of  non-utilised 
capacities.  
Keeping  free  movement  of  people  and  capital  at  world  levels,  taking  timely  corrective 
measures on public debt situation, as well as creating effective mechanisms to prevent and 
buffer financial crisis effects at local level, will be important challenges for policymakers. On 
the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  of  main  central  banks  will  continue  to  be  cautious, 
introducing an appropriate monetary stimulus into the economy in order to promote economic 
activity without affecting the actual and projected inflation levels. 
The Albanian economy recorded a positive growth during the third quarter. According to data 
reported from INSTAT, real annual growth of the GDP amounted to 4.9%, that is, higher than 
figures  recorded  during  the  first  two  quarters  of  the  year.  Economic  activity  improvement 
relied mostly on trade, tourism and other services. The industry sector maintained the same 
contribution to the economic growth, while construction sector activities continued to shrink 
for  the  fourth  consecutive  quarter.  Developments  in  demand  components  follow  the 
tendencies  of  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  are  in  line  with  our  previous  assessments. 
Available data suggest that economic growth continued to be stimulated to a large extent by 
foreign demand; meanwhile fiscal consolidation during the second half of the year predictably 
yielded  a  slowing  effect  to  the  economic  activity.  Private  consumption  and  investment 
remained low during the second half as well, despite improvement of financing conditions for 
the  activity.  Private  consumption  continues  to  be  subject  to  a  hesitating  approach  by 
consumers  to  spend  and  a  low  support  by  banks.  Increased  salaries,  employment  and 
remittances in the economy were not fully factorised in optimising individuals for the future, 
as proven by low levels of consumer confidence index for the third quarter of 2010.  
In addition, sluggish consumer demand and non-utilised capacities in the economy did not 
encourage  businesses  for  new  investments.  However,  with  the  improvement  of  financing 
conditions  and  further  increase  of  demand,  contrary  to  the  first  two  quarters,  private 
investments are considered to have given a positive contribution during the third quarter. 
Fiscal policy followed a cautious line during 2010, aiming to keep budget deficit and public 
debt  in  check.  Budget deficit  until November  of  this  year  was  23.1  billion  Lekë, marking  a 
reduction of 64%, year-on-year. Reduction of the budget deficit by 4 percentage points of the 
GDP  during  2010  demonstrated  a  fiscal  consolidation  both  in  public  revenues,  which 
increased by 9.6% until November, and budget spending reduced by 4.8% during the same 
period.  In  particular,  budget  deficit  reduction  and  public  borrowing  control  in  domestic 
financial market contributed to improved banking system liquidity and reduced interest rates 
in  the  financial  market.  Continuation  of  this  tendency  during  2011  would  be  a  welcomed 
development for the Albanian economy. The Bank of Albania deems that the philosophy of 
caution pursued in 2010 in budget expenditures and public borrowing should be present for 
the current year as well. 
Foreign  demand  continued  to  support  economic  growth  even  during  the  third  and  fourth 
quarters. January – November 2010 recorded a narrowing of the trade deficit by about 9.2% 
in annual terms, which came as a result of growth in exports by about 58%. On the other 
hand,  imports  marked  a  more  moderate  growth  –  around  6.4  per  cent  –  during  the  first 
eleven months. Improvement of trade deficit was favoured by an underestimating tendency 
of the exchange rate, moderate growth of domestic demand as well as climate and global 
market structures supporting Albanian exports. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in 
food  products  and  oil  prices 
Nevertheless, contribution of net foreign demand to the economic growth of the third quarter 
is  considered  to  be  lower  compared  with  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Annual  improvement  of 
trade deficit by 10.7% in the third quarter was lower than the one recorded in the first two 
quarters of 2010. Furthermore, trade of goods in the first two months of the fourth quarter 
proves a lower contribution of the external economy for the last quarter of 2010. The growing 
tendency of imports and an expected slowdown of exports growth may halt the process of 
correcting foreign trade balance and reduce its influence on the economic growth for 2011. In 
the aspects of macroeconomic policies, these developments suggest that strong stimulating 
policies for the economy may be buffered by a rapid increase in imports that accompanies 
the increase in domestic demand. In the structural aspect, these developments reiterate the 
need  to  continue  with  structural  reforms,  which  should  orientate  the  Albanian  economy 
towards a more stable development model and a higher competitiveness in global markets. 
Among other things, these reforms, should aim at establishing a favourable climate to attract 
stable capital flows as in foreign direct investments or long-term capital inflow. 
A further increase of aggregate demand enabled the Albanian economy to move closer to its 
producing  potential,  yet 
remaining  clearly  under-utilised.  Consequently,  decreasing 
pressures  on  inflation  continued  to  be  present  even  during  the  second  half  of  the  year. 
Average annual inflation was 3.1% in the first quarter of the year, dropping by 0.4 percentage 
points  from  its  average  level  of  the  third  quarter  and  getting  closer  to  Bank  of  Albania’s 
target. During 2010, inflation was influenced by increased administered prices, rising trend of 
basic  goods  prices, 
international  markets,  and 
underestimating tendencies of the exchange rate.  
Annual  inflation  increase  to  3.4%  in  December  was  due  to  increased  agricultural  products 
prices, reflecting this increase in global markets. Yet, anchored expectations on price stability 
and disinflation pressures by the real economy balanced the action of the above-mentioned 
factors  of  demand  on  inflation,  halting  their  transition  to  second  round  effects  and  stable 
inflation pressures.  
The Bank of Albania considers that the inflation rate is expected to range within our target of 
3 per cent, during the entire year. The increasing effect on the inflation of supply factors is 
balanced by the negative output gap and existence of non-utilised capacities in the economy. 
Controlled inflation pressures and fiscal policy created space for a gradual increase of the 
monetary  stimulus  in  the  economy  during  2010.  The  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania decided to reduce the key interest rate by 00.25 percentage points in July, taking it to 
the lowest historical level of 5.0%. In parallel with this move, the Bank of Albania supplied the 
interbank market with the necessary liquidity for a proper functioning of financial markets.  
In  the  operational  aspect,  a  change  of  form  of  our  objective  in  June  served  to  a  better 
orientation  of  banking  system  refinancing  with  liquidity,  resulting  in  a  liquidity  premium 
reduction  in  the  system  and  a  better  orientation  of  interest  rates  in  the  inter-bank  market. 
Financial markets were more relaxed with their risk premium gradually falling. Interest rate in 
the primary market continued its dropping tendency since a year ago, as a reflection to the 
moderate  demand  of  the  fiscal  sector  for  funding  and  the  good  liquidity  situation  of  the 
banking  system.  Moreover,  the  reduction  of  the  key  rate  was  followed,  to  a  satisfactory 
degree,  by  [falling]  interest  rates  in  deposits  and  loans  in  Lekë,  hence  enabling  a  good 
introduction of monetary policy decisions into the economy.  
Beyond  a  better  transmission  of  monetary  policy  decisions  on  interest  rates  of  financial 
markets  during  the second  half, the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  their  introduction into  the 
real  economy  remains  incomplete.  Referring  to  developments  in  lending  to  the  economy 
during the second half, loans to the private sector, on average, increased with same pace as 
during  the  first  half.  Annual  lending  growth  in  November  amounted  to  10.1%  almost 
commensurate  with  the  level  at  the  end  of  the  first  half.  Slower  increase  of  loans  to  the 
private  sector  gave  a  low  contribution  to  money  supply  expansion  in  the  economy, 
reconfirming  controlled  inflation  pressures  by  the  domestic  economy.  Broad  money 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
M3 growth came close to its historic average during the fourth quarter of the year, marking 
11.9% and mainly in time deposits in the banking system. 
Although banks did not tighten their lending terms and conditions – on the contrary, during 
the  second  half  of  the  year  there  were  signs  of  easing  –  demand  for  bank  lending  by  the 
private  sector  was  low.  This  remains  low  due  to  the  existence  of  negative  output  gap  by 
businesses and the growing consumer tendency to save under a perceived added insecurity 
for the future and a more cautious behaviour towards actual consumption. Reduction of risk 
premia in financial markets, maintaining positive economic growth, employment and salaries, 
as well as a clearer short-term perspective of the economy are expected to contribute to an 
increased  demand  for  bank  loans  in  the  coming  period.  The  banking  system  meets  the 
prerequisites, in terms of liquidity, capitalisation and more favourable financing conditions to 
response to this demand. 
Our  outlook  for  the  future  supports  keeping  a  positive  progress  of  the  economy  for  2011. 
Growing  demand  is  expected  to  be  subject  to  the  comparatively  better  progress  of  the 
domestic  demand  during  this  year.  Private  consumption  and  investments  are  expected  to 
rise  further,  while,  after  the  slowdown  in  2010,  the  fiscal  sector  is  expected  to  contribute 
positively to the economic growth. In spite of this, the growing demand is considered to be 
below  the  potential  of  our  economy  even  for  2011.  This  will  condition  declining  inflation 
pressures  of  the  domestic  economy,  expected  to  balance  the  effect  of  foreign  and 
administered prices increase. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
