Njuguna Ndung’u: Currency Centres in Kenya  
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
Currency Centres in Kenya and the official opening of Meru Currency Centre, Cooperative 
Bank, Meru Branch, 19 August 2011. 
 The  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance,  Hon.  Uhuru  Kenyatta;  The 
Provincial  Commissioner,  Eastern  Province,  Ms.  Claire  Omollo;  The  MP  for  North 
Imenti,  Hon.  Silas  Ruteere;  His  Worship  the  Mayor  of  Meru,  Councillor  Mr.  Mwalimu 
John; The District Commissioner, Imenti North, Mr. David Cherop; The Chief Executive 
Officer,  Co-operative  Bank  Kenya  Limited,  Mr.  Gideon  Muriuki;  The  Chief  Executive, 
Kenya Bankers Association, Mr. Habil Olaka; Commercial Bank Chief Executives and 
their Branch Managers here present; Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am greatly pleased and appreciative once again to witness another milestone achievement 
of  the  collaborative  effort  between  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  the  Kenya  Bankers 
Association,  that  is  ,  the  launching  of  Currency  Centres  concept  in  Kenya  and  the  official 
opening of Meru Currency Centre by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance.  
Honourable  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  for  Finance,  the  banking  sector  has 
undergone major transformation in the last five years in light of changing consumer needs. 
The most notable changes have been the rapid expansion of branch networks, increase in 
client accounts and in the number of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) across the country, 
use  of  agents  and  mobile  phone  infrastructure  by  banks  to  provide  financial  services  and 
increased  outsourcing  of  cash  processing  and  movement  services.  These  developments 
have significantly impacted on currency circulation patterns in the country making it inevitable 
for  the  Central  Bank  and  commercial  banks  to  review  how  these  operations  can  be 
conducted cost effectively.  
Honourable Deputy Prime Minister, the Central Bank of Kenya in conjunction with the Kenya 
Bankers Association embarked on establishing Currency Centres two years ago. This was 
done  as  a  way  of  supporting  commercial  banks  to  efficiently  provide  financial  services  in 
various regions of the country and reduce the distance over which cash is moved between 
one  Central  Bank  Office  and  the  upcountry  branches  of  commercial  banks.  The  main 
objective is to reduce cost of doing business.  
Honourable  Minister,  the  first  Currency  Centre  under  this  initiative  was  established  in 
December 2009 in Nyeri followed by Nakuru Currency Centre in December 2010 and Meru in 
February  2011.  The  three  Currency  Centres  currently  serve  a  total  of  172  commercial 
banks’ branches and account for over 12% of the total currency activities in the country. As 
the Banking Fraternity looks forward, the lessons learnt from these three centres will inform 
policy and strategies for the next phase of this initiative.  
Honourable Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, in finalizing my remarks, allow 
me to express our appreciation to the Government for the continued support to the banking 
sector initiatives. Notable areas of these initiatives are: Mobile Financial Services Platform; 
establishment of Credit Information Sharing Framework, establishment of Agency Banking; 
operation  of  Deposit  Taking  Microfinance  Institutions  and  more  recently,  the  Cheque 
Truncation System. These initiatives have been rolled out under the background support of 
the Government and more specifically the Ministry of Finance. The Central Bank of Kenya in 
collaboration  with  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  will  continue  working  hard  to  make  a 
positive contribution for the prosperity of our country and to make Kenya investors’ financial 
hub of choice.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With these few remarks, it gives me great pleasure to invite the Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister  for  Finance,  Hon.  Uhuru  Kenyatta,  to  address  this  occasion,  officially  launch  the 
Currency Centres Initiative in Kenya and formally open Meru Currency Centre.  
Thank you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
