Andreas Dombret: Financial stability – challenges from a European 
perspective 
Luncheon speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the American Council on Germany in New York, New York, 13 April 2011. 
 Welcome address 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Leaving Frankfurt heading south on the Autobahn, on the right-hand side you suddenly come 
upon  two  old  planes  framing  a  rampant  arch.  Neither  of  the  two  planes  is  a  beauty. 
Nevertheless, the monument is a major attraction. The aircrafts are a Douglas C-47 and a 
Douglas  C-55,  which  were  two  of  the  airplanes  deployed  by  the  United  States  Air  Force 
during the famous airlift of 1948 to 1949. The arch in the middle of the triptych symbolises 
that airlift. To this day, Germany remembers that crucial moment in time. 
A  living  friendship  needs  the  sound  foundation  of  common  values  and  it  also  needs 
institutions  that  cultivate  an  intellectual  and  cultural  exchange.  The  American  Council  on 
Germany plays an important role in bringing together leaders from both our countries. I was 
therefore honored to receive an invitation from you, the American Council on Germany, to 
speak to you today. 
Introduction 
2. 
Let  me  start  by  stating  four  propositions.  With  reference  to  the  title  of  my  speech,  these 
propositions should constitute a current European perspective on financial stability. It goes 
without saying that they are far from being exclusively European. 
My first proposition is that we have been living with the crisis for four years now. It is too 
early to announce the advent of a post-crisis economy or a post-crisis financial system. 
My second proposition is that sovereign risk should be considered the main overarching risk 
to  financial  stability  in  Germany  and  in  Europe  as  a  whole.  Nevertheless,  my  third 
proposition is that the risk outlook for the German banking system has been improving. 
My fourth and final proposition is that financial stability constitutes a long-term strategy for 
forestalling the build-up of cyclical and structural excesses in financial markets. Even when 
acute threats to financial stability may warrant extraordinary measures, policymakers have to 
keep in mind the longer-term costs of prolonged ad hoc measures if they distort incentives 
and undermine market discipline. 
In the fourth year of the crisis 
3. 
Let me expand on my first proposition. We have not left the crisis behind us, although the 
nature of the crisis has obviously changed over the past four years. 
The  crisis  that  erupted  in  2007  had  its  origins  in  a  set  of  problems  that  centered  on  the 
securitization  of  mortgage  loans.  The  weaknesses  which  allowed  the  crisis  to  unfold  were 
made up of very different ingredients. Among these were structural problems in the financial 
sector  such  as  flawed  incentives  and  an  overreliance  on  credit  ratings.  Risk-taking  was 
encouraged  by  a  macroeconomic setting  commonly  referred  to  as  the  “Great  Moderation”. 
This was characterized by imbalances in capital flows and an environment of persistently low 
interest rates. Shortcomings in regulation and supervision also played their part. In the end, 
the crisis appears to have been the outcome of the interplay of all of these factors, although 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
views  may  differ  on  the  relevance  of  every  factor  and  its  contribution  to  the  outbreak  and 
ensuing virulence of the crisis. 
As  far  as  Germany  is  concerned,  our  main  weakness  lay  in  banks  with  inappropriate 
business models. In their search for profitability and in order to save capital, they established 
what are known as structured investment vehicles. It gives no comfort that many banks in 
other countries did the same. These SIVs were short-term funded. And they invested heavily 
in financial products which their management probably did not fully understand. In particular, 
they failed to capture the risk profile of their investments and underestimated their exposure 
to systemic events. 
In  the  second  stage  of  the  crisis,  we  were  faced  with  the  threat  of  a  renewed  Great 
Depression.  Authorities  around  the  world  responded  to  this  in  a  determined  and  bold 
manner. Finally, they succeeded in warding off the risk of a prolonged slump.  
So we haven’t left the crisis behind us yet? With regard to Germany, in fact, it is possible to 
advance three arguments to support that view. 
 
First, in Germany, we can expect our economy’s output to match its pre-crisis level 
again by the end of this year, which is a reflection of the strong ongoing recovery.  
Second, banks have been making progress in cleaning up their balance sheets and 
strengthening  their  capital  buffers.  German  banks  have  access  to  funding  and 
wholesale markets.  
Finally, we can see progress towards an exit from state aid. Banks are giving back 
the  government  guarantees  they  received  at  the  peak  of  the  banking  crisis  for 
issuing state-guaranteed bonds. Last week, Commerzbank even announced that it 
was raising new capital on the market, putting it in a position to substantially reduce 
the capital provided by the German government.  
  Despite  all  the  progress  that  has  been  achieved,  however,  it  does  not  provide  sufficient 
reassurance to believe that the financial system has already overcome the crisis. 
First  of  all,  the  major  central  banks  are  left  with  balance  sheets  that  have  ballooned.  The 
amount  and  the  structure  in  question  differ  in  line  with  the  diverging  strategies  pursued. 
Nevertheless, this applies to all major central banks, including the European Central Bank. 
We  firmly  believe  that  these  inflated  balance  sheets  should  not  belong  to  a  state  of  new 
“normal”. In the long run, the persistent burden of inflated balance sheets might jeopardise 
the credibility of monetary policy. 
This is all the more the case as the independence of central banks and their capacity to act 
appear to be crucial. Last week, the European Central Bank increased its key interest rates, 
ending  the  period  of  almost  two  years  in  which  rates  were  at  an  all-time  low  level.  The 
monetary policy stance remains accommodative. To preserve its contribution to growth and 
employment, it is essential that inflation expectations remain anchored in spite of recent price 
developments. 
It goes without saying that we did not complain about the headline of the Financial Times’ 
article on the rate hike. The article was entitled “ECB becomes Bundesbank”. 
Second,  public  indebtedness  has  reached  critical  levels  in  many  countries,  giving  rise  to 
doubts  about  sustainability.  Public  finances  are  already  facing  huge  challenges  posed  by 
rigid  structural  deficits  and  demographic  developments,  and  the  strains  have  been  further 
aggravated  by  the  transformation  of  private  debt  to  public  debt  in  rescuing  financial 
institutions  and  by  high  expenditures  to  avert  recession.  In  Europe,  we  understand  the 
current debt crisis as the third stage of the crisis.  
Finally, large parts of the financial systems may seem, at a first glance, to be working well 
again.  Nevertheless,  moral  hazard  is  still  prevalent  in  the  markets,  fuelled  by  the  implicit 
assumption  in  the  markets  that  governments  will  rescue  banks,  if  needs  be,  by  spending 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
taxpayers’  money.  And  by  holding  down  interest  rates  and  the  cost  of  carry  central  banks 
may again be encouraging risk-taking that might sooner or later lead to a resurgence of high 
leverage and, with it, new excesses. 
Acknowledging  all  the  progress  that  have  been  made  in  the  global  banking  system, 
especially in raising capital buffers and in sound liquidity management, there is still a long 
way to go in creating proper incentives in the financial sector. In one major respect, Germany 
has become a frontrunner. 
At the beginning of this year, the German government introduced a new resolution scheme 
which facilitates the restructuring of distressed banks at the cost of their owners. 
Sovereign risk 
4. 
I  now  come  to  my  second  proposition.  We  have  to  consider  sovereign  risk  as  the  main 
overarching risk in Germany and Europe as a whole − all the more so, since there is a strong 
link  between  sovereign  risk  and  asset  quality  and  the  funding  risk  of the  banking  systems 
concerned. 
Three weeks ago, the European Council agreed an important and comprehensive package 
of  measures  to  tackle  the  current  European  debt  crisis  and  obviate  future  strains.  The 
package includes several elements. 
The  most  prominent  of  these  measures  is  the  launch  of  a  permanent  Financial  Stability 
Mechanism which will replace the temporary mechanism initiated last year. The permanent 
mechanism, known as the European Stability Mechanism, has major features that safeguard 
effectiveness and prudence. 
 
 
The ESM will have a lending capacity of €500 billion.  
Activating  the  financial  assistance  mechanism  requires  a  unanimous  vote  by  all 
participating member states.  
The granting of any financial assistance will be made subject to strict conditionality.  
A rigorous analysis of public debt sustainability will be conducted.  
When debt is considered to be unsustainable the private sector will be involved in 
restoring the public debt to a sustainable path.  
 It is important to realize that these facilities are bracing Europe even for the eventuality of 
further turmoil. At all events, protecting Portugal is not overstretching the available resources. 
In  addition,  the  euro-area  heads  of  government  agreed  a  so-called  Euro-Plus  Pact.  Under 
the terms of this pact the countries concerned are committed to announce and implement a 
set of actions to improve their competitiveness. In particular, the countries should link the age 
of  retirement  to  demographic  change  and  the  development  of  labor  costs  to  the 
corresponding gains in productivity. Furthermore, a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact 
aims to enhance the surveillance of fiscal policies. 
For observers outside Europe this variety of decisions and instruments may appear puzzling 
or,  at  least,  complex  and  complicated.  But  that  simply  reflects  the  unique  structure  of  the 
European  Union,  which  is  striving  for  comprehensive  economic  and  monetary  integration 
without transforming the political system into some kind of a United States of Europe. In fact, 
the  determined  and  comprehensive  decisions  taken  by  the  European  Council  confirm  the 
Union’s capacity to act. At the same time, they demonstrate the firm conviction that the Euro 
is contributing to our welfare and competitiveness and remains our common currency.  
To put it in a nutshell: Europe has strengthened the governance of the monetary union and 
has  launched  a  permanent  support  facility  without  transforming  the  character  of  the  euro 
area: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 binding the member states by a common monetary policy,  
leaving the countries in charge of sound fiscal and economic policies,  
still retaining the possibility that a country may become insolvent,  
while, at the same time, providing a strict framework that exerts pressure towards 
discipline in order to ensure that every country acts in a way that is consistent with 
the interest of having a stable common currency.  
In Germany, we have also strengthened our internal framework for sound fiscal policy. We 
have introduced a “debt brake” into our constitution. The federal budget is allowed to show 
only a slight structural deficit at all. The budgets of the remaining administrative levels must 
not post any structural deficit. In principle, deficits are allowed only to counteract fluctuations 
of the business cycle and must be balanced over the cycle.  
Recently, public finances have been developing more favorably than was anticipated at the 
height  of  the  crisis.  The  figures  for  2010  have  been  clearly  driven  up  by  the  assistance 
provided  to  financial  institutions.  As  a  result  of  this  effect,  public  debt  at  the  end  of  2010 
posted an increase from 73% to 83% of GDP instead of a decline, as was published by the 
Bundesbank  today.  But  this  additional  debt  has  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  assets 
acquired. Assuming these assets can be realized over time, they will contribute to a future 
decline in public debt. For this year, we think the deficit ratio could potentially drop towards 
2 %  of  GDP.  This  means,  that  public  finances  are  on  track  to  lower  the  debt  level 
considerably  over  the  medium  term.  Facing  the  future  challenges  to  public  finances,  for 
instance those posed by demographic change, it is vital that the German government holds 
the current course of fiscal consolidation. 
Ensuring  the  sustainability  of  sovereign  debt  is  not  a  purely  European  issue.  I  am  closely 
following the ongoing debate in your country on how to reduce fiscal deficits. Bearing in mind 
the recent painful experience of some European countries, I can only subscribe to the view 
that  Janet  Yellen,  Vice  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  put  so 
tellingly. She was talking about the United States, but her words should be read everywhere. 
She said: 
“We should not defer starting a course for fiscal consolidation. (…) The sooner 
we  start  addressing  the  longer-term  budget  problems,  the  less  wrenching  the 
adjustment will have to be and the more control we – rather than market forces or 
international  creditors  –  will  have  over  the  timing,  size,  and  composition  of  the 
necessary adjustments.”1 
5. 
Challenges for the German banking system 
The ongoing crisis has been challenging for the banking system in Germany and Europe as 
a whole. Nevertheless – as stated in my third proposition – the risk outlook for the German 
banking system has been improving. 
Generally,  it  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  German  banking  system  is  dominated  by 
domestic business activity. The share of foreign business, measured by the volume of credit 
granted  to  non-banks,  is  just  under  21%.  In  some  major  segments,  however,  the  German 
banking  system  demonstrates  a  high  degree  of  internationalisation.  This  is  why  the 
challenges for the international financial system are also relevant to us. 
                                                 
1   Janet  L.  Yellen:  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Global  Rebalancing,  Speech  at  the  Committee  for  Economic 
Development 2010 International Counterparts Conference in New York at December 1, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One of the major national and international topics at the moment is refinancing. With regard 
to the composition of the refinancing basis the tendency is for the deposits of non-banks to 
increase.  In  the  German  banking  system,  the  deposits  of  non-banks  as  a  share  of  total 
liabilities have risen from 37% prior to the onset of the crisis to 42% today. In principle, this 
can be seen in a positive light as the deposits of non-banks are comparatively stable. 
However,  market-based  refinancing  –  which  is  still  important  −  continues  to  show  a  very 
short-term bias. This effect has also to be seen in the light of the “two-tier” banking system, in 
which a few banks in Europe still have only limited access to longer-term funding. Given the 
large  refinancing  needs,  banks  run  the  risk  of  coming  into  conflict  with  the  high  level  of 
government  borrowing  needs.  This  poses  a  severe  risk  to  earnings  for  some  banking 
systems, although this is probably not so much the case for Germany as the banks that are 
active in the market do not generally conduct maturity transformation on a large scale.  
A number of German credit institutions still have substantial holdings of problem assets in 
their  books.  The  most  vulnerable  exposure  segments  include  the  financing  of  commercial 
real  estate  and  the  legacy  holdings  of  structured  products.  To  assess  the  situation  in  the 
German  banking  system,  last  year  the  Bundesbank  surveyed  11  large  German  banks  on 
their  financing  of  commercial  real  estate.  The  total  amount  of  credit  they  granted  stood  at 
around €325 billion, some 15% of which was accounted for by properties in the USA and just 
under  9%  by  real  estate  in  the  United  Kingdom.  However,  90%  of  these  loans  are  not  in 
negative equity and roughly 44% have a loan-to-value ratio of 60% or less. 
Since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  spotlight  has  been  on  structured  securities.  The  overall 
volume of these instruments in the portfolios of German banks was contracting sharply. At 
the end of September 2010, the book value of residential mortgage-backed securities stood 
at €74 billion, and for collateralised debt obligations at around €58 billion. Securitised student 
loans accounted for just under €30 billion and collateralised mortgage-backed securities for 
around €22 billion.  
From  these  figures  on  problem  assets  we  can  conclude  that  the  associated  risks  are 
manageable in Germany on the whole. In general, the overall development of credit risk in 
the  German  banking  system  is  still  determined  to  a  great  extent  by  domestic  conditions. 
Therefore,  credit  risk  can  benefit  from  our  strong  economic  upturn  as  well  as  from  the 
stability of the German property market, in which basically no exaggerations have occurred.  
Nevertheless, sectoral weaknesses remain. In particular, within the Landesbank sector some 
banks are in the process of working out a resilient business model. This, in fact, is probably a 
reflection of ample capacities in some banking markets. However, the banks concerned have 
already de-risked and de-leveraged by significantly curtailing their balance sheets. Moreover, 
their owners have injected fresh capital. You may rest assured that banking supervision in 
Germany is closely and prudently monitoring these developments. 
Notwithstanding  that  criticism,  the  Landesbanks  deserve  to  be  treated  fairly  by  all  the 
authorities. Of course, with respect to their capital endowment, all banks have to obey the 
current  regulations,  while,  at  the  same  time,  having  to  decide  on  their  own  responsibility 
about their timetable for a timely adjustment to future regulation. As we see it, it is not the job 
of the authorities to enforce a kind of a fast-track adjustment towards the future rules in the 
current European stress testing. 
Basel  III  introduces  a  definition  of  core  tier  1  capital  from  the  beginning  of  2013  with  an 
additional transitional period up to 2019. Under the upcoming definition, “silent participations” 
will no longer be eligible. Today, silent participations still play an important role in the capital 
endowment  of  some  Landesbanks.  This  is  consistent  with  current  legislation.  Since  the 
timely transition from these silent participations to capital instruments that are commensurate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
with  the  forthcoming  core  tier  1  definition  is  not  at  risk,  the  stress  test  in  this  category 
indicates a problem where none exists. 
6. 
Financial stability as a long-term concept 
I would now like to turn to my final proposition calling for a longer-term orientation in financial 
stability policy. 
In general, financial stability embodies two fundamentally different disciplines. On the short-
term  we  find  some  kind  of  crisis management,  a  discipline  which  occasionally  comes  to  a 
spectacular climax in dramatic weekend meetings in a race to find ad hoc solutions. Such 
“emergency rescue operations” typically aim to buy time for necessary adjustments. 
in 
financial  stability,  which 
To  some  extent,  the  emergency  rescue  approach  stands  in  contrast  to  the  real  sphere  of 
is  essentially  a  strongly  rule-based  discipline. 
activity 
Implementing  sound  structures  constitutes 
financial  stability. 
Unfortunately, there is often a trade-off. Measure which seem necessary in the short run can 
do harm in the longer run. The political authorities and the central banks have to keep the 
inherent longer-term implications and costs in mind. 
long-term  side  of 
the 
Macro-prudential  policies  apply  regulatory  and  supervisory  tools  in  order  to  curb  systemic 
risk and to enhance financial stability. One innovation in the institutional setting in Europe is 
the recently established European  Systemic Risk Board. The ESRB has a broad  mandate 
that charges it with macro-prudential oversight in order to contribute to the prevention or the 
mitigation of systemic risk. The ESRB conducts a thorough analysis of the risks to financial 
stability in the European Union. The ESRB can issue warnings and make recommendations 
to both national authorities and authorities at the European level. While the ESRB does not 
have the power of direct enforcement its warnings initiate a “comply or explain” mechanism. 
Such  communication  tools  which  are  addressed  to  single  authorities  –  in  contrast  to  a 
general advice – will exert heavy pressure. 
7. 
Conclusion 
So, what is the broad picture I would like to present from the current European perspective 
on financial stability? Ultimately, I would like to leave you with three key thoughts.  
First, the Europeans continue to be concerned about the state of financial stability and, in 
particular, the state of public finances. Any complacency was wiped out by the outbreak of 
the debt crisis. Political leaders in Europe know that restoring confidence in public finance is 
crucial for the future of monetary and economic integration. 
Second,  we  are  witnessing  Europeans’  capacity  to  act  with  determined  measures  being 
taken on a variety of issues. Europe has adopted a firm course of consolidation. 
Third,  Germany  is  actively  taking  part  in  the  important  discussion  on  introducing  effective 
macro-prudential  surveillance.  In  many  respects,  global  financial  markets  call  for  close 
political  coordination  on  a  global  scale.  Insofar  as  differences  in  our  respective  financial 
systems mean that the United States and Europe pursue different paths in regulation, it is 
nevertheless vital to monitor experiences abroad closely.  
For example, we at the Bundesbank are monitoring with great interest the approach taken 
with  the  Dodd  Frank  Act  and  its  ensuing  implementation.  I  am  very  happy  that  the 
Bundesbank has maintained a representative office here in New York for nearly 25 years and 
also maintains an active trading desk here. There is certainly no risk of our representative 
running  out  of  work  in  reporting  on  and  informing  us  of  the  latest  developments  in  your 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
country,  while,  at  the  same  time,  explaining  and  conveying  German  and  European 
perspectives. 
Fortunately, the rough winds of the Cold War that made the airlift necessary are gone. But, 
perhaps in a different way, we always need an airlift. In sculpture, the figure of the “Caller” 
can be found in many variations. In Bremen and in Berlin close to the Brandenburg Gate, 
there is one very impressive statue of this kind. In New York too, there are great monuments 
evoking this theme − at Battery Park, for example, where a mariner is calling in the storm. 
For a moment, let’s just imagine that both are calling out to each other. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
