Jürgen Stark: In the aftermath of the global economic crisis – What next? 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the ECONOMIST conference – 15th Roundtable with the Government of Greece, Attica, 
18 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here today. In my introductory remarks I would like to discuss briefly the 
main  underlying  causes  for  the  current  problems  of  some  euro  area  countries.  Such  an 
understanding  of  the  causes  is  essential  in  order  to  develop  strategies  for  “Restoring 
Confidence in the European Economy”, the main topic of this session of the conference. In 
the  remainder  of  my  initial  remarks  I  will  then  outline  the  key  policy  elements  of  such  a 
strategy, both at the national and at the European level.  
The majority of EMU member states is about to overcome the economic consequences of 
the global financial crisis. The economic recovery in the euro area has been sustained and 
has become more broadly based. The economy no longer needs the degree of economic or 
monetary  stimulus  as  adopted  during  the  height  of  the  crisis  in  late  2008  and  early  2009. 
Economic  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011  has  turned  out  significantly  stronger  than 
expected.  Germany,  in  particular,  is  experiencing  high  growth  rates,  falling  unemployment 
and  a  declining  government  deficit.  To  a  great  extent  these  positive  developments  are 
attributable  to  economic  reforms  adopted  in  the  past  which  are  now  taking  effect.  Some 
countries, at the euro area’s periphery, Greece, Ireland and Portugal, find themselves in a 
critical economic situation.  
The origins of the current crisis 
The  current  problems  in  these  countries  have  a  number  of  root  causes  which  have  led  to 
significant  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities.  In  the  years  prior  to  the  recent 
crisis, price and costs developments diverged noticeably within the euro area over extended 
periods  of  time.  The  cumulative  impact  of  those  differences  has  meant  the  gradual  but 
significant erosion of the competitiveness positions in a number of euro area countries.  
The mechanisms underlying these developments have varied between countries but mostly 
have been linked with strong growth in domestic demand, relative to the supply capacity of 
the economy. Demand pressures were often related to overly optimistic expectations about 
future  incomes  and  profits.  That  triggered  high  spending,  reduced  saving  and  excessive 
indebtedness  by  the  private  sector  and  often  increased  risk-taking  by  the  financial  sector. 
This process was often exacerbated by low real interest rates and an insufficiently tight fiscal 
stance.  Even  where  headline  fiscal  numbers  such  as  the  deficit  or  the  debt  ratio  still 
suggested  a  healthy  fiscal  situation,  the  underlying  reality  was  that  government  finances 
were  often  buoyed  artificially  by  cyclically  sensitive  revenues.  With  the  deterioration  of  the 
economic  situation  the  structural  weaknesses  in  the  underlying  fiscal  position  became 
evident culminating in the current sovereign debt crisis in some euro area countries.  
These developments highlight important shortcomings not only at the level of national policy-
making  but  also  with  respect  to  the  institutional  framework  at  the  European  level.  The 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  was  watered  down  in  2005  and  has  been  ineffective  in 
preventing the build-up of significant fiscal imbalances. Peer pressure has not worked and 
the changes in the fiscal rules in 2005 have led to excessive political interference and the 
lack  of  effective  implementation.  Moreover,  the  institutional  framework  so  far  lacks  any 
effective  tools  for  macroeconomic  surveillance  which  could  prevent  the  emergence  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
macroeconomic imbalances. The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines have proven not to be 
an effective tool.  
Before  turning  to  the  necessary  policy  responses  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic policy challenges are not problems which some euro area countries face in 
isolation  but  are  also  evident  in  many  other  advanced  economies  outside  the  euro  area. 
Government deficit and debt levels have reached historically high levels. Concerns about the 
soundness of fiscal policies are a broader phenomenon, as, for example, discussed in IMF 
research and highlighted by the recent lowering of the outlook for the U.S. sovereign debt 
rating. Also issues of competitiveness and external imbalances are global in nature and not 
specific to the euro area. But this is not an excuse for the Europeans not to bring their house 
in order. 
What has to be done? 
A  number  of  policy  implications  for  the  euro  area  follow  from  this  analysis.  The  main 
objective has to be a smooth functioning of EMU which implies that countries follow a path of 
sustainable and balanced growth. The strategy to achieve this consists of two key elements: 
first, to unwind the imbalances that had arisen during the first decade of EMU; and second, 
to ensure an adequate institutional framework and sufficient structural flexibility of individual 
Member States so that the risk of such imbalances occurring again is minimised. 
The first challenge is to restore price and cost competitiveness. In a monetary union such as 
the  euro  area,  with  a  single  currency  and  a  single  monetary  policy,  the  main  adjustment 
mechanism is the competitiveness channel which works via an adjustment in relative prices 
and costs. Over the next few years, the restoration of competitiveness will require significant 
further adjustments in a number of countries which have seen an erosion of competitiveness. 
The  second  key  challenge  at  the  current  juncture  is  that  governments  need  to  return  to 
sustainable  fiscal  positions.  Even  in  the  short-term  fiscal  consolidation  will  help  to  regain 
confidence  and  thus  have  a  positive  impact  on  economic  activity.  This  should  be 
underpinned  by  structural  reforms  to  enhance  the  growth  potential.  For  some  countries 
returning to sustainable fiscal positions requires significant further fiscal consolidation efforts, 
especially in countries with large external deficits and high levels of indebtedness. But this 
call  for  fiscal  discipline applies  more  widely  –  in  all countries  the implementation  of  strong 
fiscal  consolidation  efforts  is  required  and  effective  rules  need  to  be  adopted  that  anchor 
fiscal prudence in overall budgetary decisions in the future.  
Third,  both  competitiveness  and  fiscal  sustainability  should  be  supported  by  higher 
productivity  growth.  That  implies  that  structural  reforms  should  be  targeted  to  remove 
remaining  rigidities  in  the  labour  and  product  markets.  In  recent  years,  the  progress  with 
respect  to  structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  has  overall  clearly  been  disappointing 
and  not  commensurate  with  the  requirements  of  participating  in  a  common  currency  area. 
The Europe 2020 Strategy for jobs and smart, sustainable and inclusive growth may provide 
the  institutional  framework  at  the  European  level  for  ambitious  progress  with  respect  to 
structural reforms.  
These  policy  requirements  gain  particular  urgency  for  those  countries  currently  receiving 
EU/IMF financial assistance. The policy conditionality associated with these programmes has 
been designed to address the main imbalances and vulnerabilities, taking into account the 
specificities  of  the  individual  countries.  Full  compliance  with  the  policy  conditionality  of  the 
assistance  programmes  is  absolutely  essential  to  unwind  existing  imbalances  and  restore 
market confidence. 
Turning  to  the  necessary  policy  response  at  the  European  level,  the  reinforcement  of  the 
fiscal  rules  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  surveillance  framework  for  macroeconomic 
imbalances  are  necessary  elements  in  strengthening  overall  economic  governance  in  the 
euro area. The current proposals are a step in the right direction but so far fail to constitute 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the necessary quantum leap for euro area countries. As to macroeconomic surveillance, it is 
of paramount importance that the procedure has a clear focus on those countries which pose 
the  most  serious  threat  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  EMU.  These  are  –  as  the  present 
experience shows – countries with large and persistent current account deficits, significant 
accumulated  losses  of  competitiveness  and  high  levels  of  private  and  public  sector 
indebtedness.  Moreover,  the  procedures  should  be  quasi-automatic,  limiting  excessive 
political interference in the process. Furthermore, it would be useful to have a more gradual 
application of financial sanctions to provide clear incentives for appropriate macroeconomic 
policies.  
Concluding remarks 
Policy-makers in individual euro area countries have to come to terms with the realities of 
being part of a monetary union and adjust policies accordingly. This means pursuing sound 
and  sustainable  fiscal  policies,  preventing  the  build-up  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
ensuring that the economy has the necessary shock-absorption capacity – and in particular 
flexibility – to ensure a smooth adjustment to country-specific developments. In that respect, 
ambitious and front-loaded structural reforms are essential. The EU 2020 Strategy can play a 
useful role in that respect. Of course, the ultimate responsibility for effective reform lies with 
national  governments  who  have  to  ensure  the  economic  flexibility  and  growth  potential 
necessary  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  being  a  member  of  the  euro  area.  Some  loss  of 
sovereignty is part of the reality of sharing and benefiting from a common currency. If this is 
not acknowledged in time, it may imply an even larger loss of sovereignty at a later stage.  
The ECB considers it fundamental to set up an effective surveillance mechanism in the euro 
area in order to prevent challenges similar to those experienced currently by some euro area 
countries from re-emerging in the future. It is equally important that markets can play their 
disciplinary role in an efficient manner. This requires transparency in the surveillance process 
and the realisation of markets that the no-bail out clause does indeed constitute one of the 
binding constraints of EMU. 
As in the past, the ECB will continue to deliver on its mandate and ensure price stability for 
the euro area over the medium term. This will provide an important anchor of stability to each 
individual  euro  area  country,  an  anchor  which  is  particularly  valuable  for  those  countries 
undergoing  a  difficult  adjustment  process.  Individual  Member  States  will  benefit  from  this 
stability. At the same time, they have the responsibility to ensure the smooth functioning of 
the common currency area. This requires further efforts in all euro area countries to make 
sure that, in terms of monetary policy, one size does indeed fit all.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
