Duvvuri Subbarao: Frontier issues on the global agenda – emerging 
economy perspective 
Commemorative oration by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  60th  anniversary  celebrations  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  Colombo,  29  March, 
2011. 
 First of all, my thanks to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) and to Governor Cabraal for 
inviting  me  to  deliver  this  commemorative  oration  as  part  of  CBSL’s  Diamond  Jubilee 
celebrations. I gather that a number of distinguished people have given orations as part of 
this anniversary series. I am indeed honoured to add my name to that very select list. My 
compliments to the management and staff of CBSL on this happy and historic occasion. 
As institutions, central banks go back several centuries. The first central bank, the Riksbank 
in  Sweden,  was  established  in  1668,  nearly  350  years  ago.  The  Bank  of  England  came 
shortly  thereafter  in  1694.  By  the  turn  of  the  century  in  1900,  there  were  only  18  central 
banks. Today, there are around 180 central banks, a tenfold increase in the last one hundred 
years. 
In relative terms, both the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) are young institutions. RBI was established in 1935, and we celebrated our Platinum 
Jubilee last year. Apart from relative youth, there are several other similarities between our 
two institutions. Both of us have a wider mandate than is typical of central banks. In addition 
to maintaining price stability and macroeconomic stability, we both have responsibilities for 
currency  management,  debt  management  and  external  sector  management.  More 
importantly,  we  also  have  an  obligation  to  calibrate  our  policies  to  promote  the  socio-
economic development of our peoples. And in the wake of the crisis, we face the common 
challenge  of  managing  our  policies,  particularly  preserving  financial  stability,  in  the  face  of 
globalization. 
India and Sri Lanka are not just geographic neighbours; we have deep social, cultural and 
economic links that go back several centuries. And as we navigate an increasingly complex 
world, we face a number of similar opportunities and challenges. We are both fast growing 
emerging  economies;  we  aspire  to  raise  our  growth  rates  to  double  digits,  and  want  to 
efficiently  translate  that  rapid  growth  into  poverty  reduction.  We  also  have  to  manage  our 
“inclusive growth” strategies in the face of globalization. 
Experience shows that globalization offers incredible opportunities but also poses immense 
challenges. If the years before the global financial crisis – the period of the so called “Great 
Moderation”  –  demonstrated  the  benefits  of  globalization,  the  devastating  toll  of  the  crisis 
showed  its  costs.  As  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs),  we  cannot  withdraw  from 
globalization. That is neither feasible nor advisable. We have to confront globalization head 
on,  but  manage  it  in  such  a  way  that  we  exploit  the  opportunities  and  mitigate  its  costs. 
Surely, we have our concerns about the forces of globalization and how they might impact 
us. Many of these issues are on the global agenda that the G-20 is deliberating upon. 
G-20 
I attended a meeting of the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in Paris in 
mid-February 2011. Apart from the specific issues on the agenda, what impresses me about 
the G-20 forum is its group dynamics driven by two underlying convictions. First, that global 
problems cannot be solved without global cooperation and that uncoordinated responses will 
lead  to  worse  outcomes  for  everyone;  and  second,  that  solutions  to  global  problems  are 
sustainable only if they reflect also the EME perspective. I thought the way I can best add 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
value to this series of orations is to focus my remarks on the EME perspective on issues on 
the global agenda. 
Emerging market economies in the global context 
Fifty years from now, when historians look for the defining features of the first decade of the 
21st century, they will probably mark the rise of world-wide terrorism, the deepening of the 
internet culture and the devastating global financial crisis. Whether the emergence of EMEs 
as a group will rank pari passu with those others will depend on what EMEs achieved in the 
last  decade,  but  importantly  also  on  how  they  consolidate  those  gains  in  this  decade  and 
beyond. 
Before  I  go  on  to  specific  issues,  let  me  make  a  brief  comment  on  EMEs  in  the  global 
context. The shift in the global balance of power in favour of EMEs is by now a familiar story. 
Some broad trends will show what a remarkable shift this has been. Setting GDP at 100 in 
the  base  year  of  2000,  the  following  chart  shows  the  aggregate  growth  in  the  decade 
2000-10 (Chart 1)1. Against the aggregate growth of 17 per cent of advanced economies, 
emerging market and developing countries (EMDCs) grew by 82 per cent and BRICs (Brazil, 
Russia, India, China) by a whopping 127 per cent. 
When we look at shares in global GDP, the growing dynamism of EMEs becomes even more 
persuasive. The share of advanced economies in the global GDP dropped from 80 per cent 
in 2000 to 67 per cent in 2010 with a mirror increase in the share of EMDCs (Chart 2). Quite 
expectedly the share of BRICs increased more impressively from 8 per cent to 17 per cent2. 
 
                                                   
1   Disaggregated numbers are in Annex Table - 1. 
2   Disaggregated numbers are at Annex Table - 2. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Chart 2: Share of Global GDP (at current US$ prices) 
(Percentage)
  
By  all  accounts,  the  world  has  recovered  from  the  financial  meltdown  and  the  follow  on 
recession much sooner than we had feared at the depth of the crisis. The recovery is all the 
more remarkable because global income, trade and industrial production fell more sharply in 
the  first  twelve  months  of  this  crisis  than  they  did  in  the  first  twelve  months  of  the  Great 
Depression. In its latest World Economic Outlook (WEO – January 2011), the IMF estimated 
global growth for 2010 of 5.0 per cent; this marks a surprising upward revision from its earlier 
projection  of  4.8  per  cent  made  in  October  2010.  EMEs,  contributing  nearly  half  of  this 
growth, have clearly been the engine of this recovery. EMEs have also been the motive force 
behind the estimated expansion of world trade at 12 per cent in 2010, an impressive reversal 
from shrinkage of 11 per cent in 2009. 
Two FAQs 
This post-crisis scenario, marked by the faster recovery of EMEs, throws up two frequently 
asked questions relating to EMEs in the global context. The first is whether EMEs will be able 
to  sustain  global  growth  at  near  pre-crisis  levels  even  if  advanced  economies  continue  to 
languish. People who put this question, I believe, are doing so as a rhetoric – to encourage 
analytical thinking rather than to solicit an affirmative answer. Sure, multiple growth poles are 
a safety-net for the whole world, but to expect EMEs, by themselves, to lift global growth to 
former levels will be unrealistic. Note that EMDCs account for less than half of world GDP 
even when measured at PPP valuations, and only about a third of the world trade in goods 
and services. 
The second question about EMEs in the global context relates to decoupling. The decoupling 
hypothesis held that even if advanced economies went into a downturn, EMEs would not be 
affected because of their improved macroeconomic management, robust external reserves 
and resilient financial sectors. The crisis failed to validate the decoupling hypothesis as all 
EMEs were affected, admittedly to different extents. What the crisis, in fact, reinforced is that 
the  economic  prospects  of  advanced  economies  and  EMEs  are  interlinked  through  trade, 
finance and confidence channels. 
Even as the decoupling hypothesis gained intellectual credence in the pre-crisis years, it was 
never very persuasive in the face of globalization. In fact, recent research within IMF shows 
that  the  detrended  aggregate  output  growth  of  EMEs  has  strong  association  with  the 
aggregate  output  growth  of  advanced  economies,  and  that  this  “association”  has  in  fact 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to 
improved  policy 
increased  over  time,  evidencing  not  only  that  the  coupling  is  strong  but  that  it  is  getting 
stronger.  Sure,  in  recent  years  EMEs  have  been  less  affected  by  recessions  in  advanced 
economies  owing 
framework,  more  effective  macroeconomic 
management and growing intra-EME trade. But over an entire cycle, the economic prospects 
of EMEs remain firmly coupled with those of advanced economies. 
In an increasingly globalizing world, advanced economies and EMEs are dependent on each 
other, and going forward, both have big challenges in terms of sustaining growth, containing 
inflation  and  reducing  unemployment.  By  far  the  biggest  challenge  for  EMEs  will  be  to 
convert high growth into poverty reduction. Against that backdrop, let me proceed to look at 
some of the issues on the global agenda from the EME perspective. 
Global rebalancing 
The first issue I want to address from the EME perspective is global imbalances. No crisis as 
complex as the one we have gone through has a simple or a single cause. We now have a 
fairly good idea of the multiple causes of the crisis and almost everyone is agreed that one of 
the  root  causes  of  the  crisis  is  the  build  up  of  global  imbalances.  In  as  much  as  global 
imbalances – no matter whether they were caused by a “consumption binge” in advanced 
economies  or  a  “savings  glut”  in  EMEs  –  were  the  root  cause  of  the  crisis,  reducing 
imbalances is a necessary condition for restoring global financial stability. 
The post-crisis debate on global imbalances has three interrelated facets. The first is the role 
of  exchange  rates  in  global  rebalancing.  The  second  relates  to  capital  flows  into  EMEs 
raising  the  familiar  challenge  of  managing  the  impossible  trinity.  And  the  third  facet  is  the 
framework for the adjustment process. Let me turn to these one by one. 
Role of exchange rates 
First,  on  the  role  of  exchange  rates  –  a  prime  lever  for  redressal  of  external  imbalances. 
Global rebalancing will require deficit economies to save more and consume less. They need 
to depend for growth  more on external demand which calls for a real  depreciation of their 
currencies. The surplus economies will need to mirror these efforts – save less and spend 
more,  and  shift  from  external  to  domestic  demand.  They  need  to  let  their  currencies 
appreciate.  The  question  boils  down  to  what  can  surplus  countries  do  domestically  to 
increase  consumption  and  what  can  deficit  countries  do  domestically  to  increase  savings. 
The problem we have is that while the adjustment by deficit and surplus economies has to be 
symmetric, the incentives they face are asymmetric. Managing currency tensions will require 
a shared understanding on keeping exchange rates aligned to economic fundamentals, and 
an agreement that currency interventions should be resorted to not as an instrument of trade 
policy but only to manage disruptions to macroeconomic stability. 
Capital flows 
That takes me to the second facet of global imbalances – return of lumpy and volatile capital 
flows.  Since  capital  flows  have  become  such  an  emotive  topic  around  the  world  in  recent 
months, it is important perhaps to recall a few realities. First, that EMEs do need capital flows 
to augment their investible resources, but such flows should meet two criteria: they should be 
stable and be roughly equal to the economy’s absorptive capacity. The second reality that we 
must  remember  is  that  capital  flows  are  triggered  by  both  pull  and  push  factors.  The  pull 
factors are the promising growth prospects of EMEs, their declining trend rates of inflation, 
capital  account  liberalization  and  improved  governance.  The  push  factors  are  the  easy 
monetary policies of advanced economies which create the capital that flows into the EMEs. 
What  this  says  is  that  international  capital  flows  comprise  a  structural  component  and  a 
cyclical  component.  It  is  the  cyclical  component  that  typically  disrupts  the  macroeconomic 
stability of EMEs. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
That  said,  the  multi-speed  recovery  around  the  world  and  the  consequent  differential  exit 
from  accommodative  monetary  policy  have  triggered  speculative  capital  flows  into  EMEs. 
The most high profile problem thrown up by capital flows, in excess of a country’s absorptive 
capacity, is currency appreciation which erodes export competitiveness. Intervention in the 
forex market to prevent appreciation entails costs. If the resultant liquidity is left unsterilized, 
it fuels inflationary pressures. If the resultant liquidity is sterilized, it puts upward pressure on 
interest rates which, apart from hurting competitiveness, also encourages further flows. 
Currency appreciation is not the only problem arising from the ultra loose monetary policy of 
advanced economies. Speculative flows on the lookout for quick returns can potentially lead 
to  asset  price  build  up.  The  assurance  of  advanced  economies  to  keep  interest  rates 
“exceptionally  low”  for  “an  extended  period”  has  also  possibly  triggered  financialization  of 
commodities  leading  to  a  paradoxical  situation  of  hardening  of  commodity  prices  even  as 
advanced economies continue to face demand recession. EMEs have been hit by hardened 
commodity prices through inflationary pressures, and in the case of net commodity importers, 
also through wider current account deficits. 
EMEs  have  dealt  with  the  problem  of  excess  flows  in  diverse  ways  depending  on  their 
macroeconomic situation. This has broadly taken one of several forms: controlling capital at 
entry,  taxing  it  on  entry  or  intervention  in  the  forex  market.  Such  measures  would  have 
attracted criticism in the past as they went against the broad economic orthodoxy that market 
forces  should  not  be  resisted.  The  crisis  has  changed  the  terms  of  that  debate.  It  is  now 
broadly  accepted  that  there  could  be  circumstances  in  which  capital  controls  can  be  a 
legitimate component of the policy response to surges in capital flows. 
Managing capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem of EMEs. In as much 
as lumpy and volatile flows are a spillover from policy choices of advanced economies, the 
burden of adjustment has to be shared. How this burden has to be measured and shared 
raises both intellectual and practical policy challenges. Our current theory of external sector 
management  draws  from  an  outdated  regime  of  fixed  exchange  rates  and  limited  capital 
flows when the task was largely limited to managing the current account of the balance of 
payments.  What  we  now  need  is  a  theory  that  reflects  the  changed  situation  of  flexible 
exchange rates and large and volatile capital flows. The intellectual challenge is to build such 
a  theory  that  encompasses  both  current  and  capital  accounts  and  one  that  gives  a  better 
understanding  of  what  type  of  capital  controls  work  and  in  what  situations.  What  is  the 
practical challenge? The practical challenge is that once we have such a theory, we need to 
reach  a  shared  understanding  on  two  specific  aspects:  first,  to  what  extent  are  advanced 
economies responsible for the cross border spillover impact of their domestic policies, and 
second, what is the framework of rules that should govern currency interventions in the face 
of volatile capital flows. 
G-20 framework for global growth 
The third facet under global imbalances is happily not actually a problem but an approach to 
a solution. At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, the G-20 committed itself to a new “framework 
of  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth”  as  also  on  a  “Mutual  Assessment  Process” 
(MAP)  to  determine  the  degree  to  which  G-20  macro  policy  actions  are  “collectively 
consistent” when examined together. The framework and its assessment should ensure that 
individual actions of countries add up to a coherent path forward.  
The framework essentially consists of identifying a few indicators and the guidelines against 
which these indicators for each of the countries will be assessed. At the Paris meeting of the 
G-20  in  mid-February,  there  was  an  agreement  on  the  broad  indicators  that  will  aid  us  to 
focus, through an integrated two-step process, on those persistently large imbalances which 
require  policy  action.  It  was  also  agreed  to  decide  on  the  guidelines  for  assessing  the 
indicators by the next meeting of the G-20 scheduled for April 2011.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  G-20  Mutual  Assessment  Process  is  a  potentially  promising  mechanism  to  facilitate 
timely  identification  of  disruptive  imbalances  and  to  ensure  that  preventive  and  corrective 
action is taken in time. Needless to say, global cooperation is vital for the success of MAP.  
Global reserve currency 
The global crisis has revived the familiar concerns about the robustness of the international 
monetary  system,  and  in  particular  about  the  global  reserve  currency  and  the  provision  of 
liquidity  in  times  of  stress.  The  system  we  now  have  is  that  the  US  dollar  is  the  world’s 
reserve currency by virtue of the dominant size of the US economy, its share in global trade 
and the preponderant use of dollar in foreign trade and foreign exchange transactions. And 
as  Barry  Eichengreen  tells  us  in  his  latest  book  on  the  story  of  the  dollar3  ,  the  reserve 
currency status depends also on a host of intangible factors such as strategic and military 
relationships, laws, institutions and incumbency.  
In line with the Triffin paradox, the US has met the obligation of an issuer of reserve currency 
by running fiscal and external deficits while enjoying the “exorbitant privilege” of not having to 
make the necessary adjustment to bridge the deficits. With no pressure to reduce the deficit, 
a  dominant  economy  can  potentially  create  imbalances  at  the  global  level  as  indeed 
happened in the build up to the crisis. An argument can be made that even in the context of a 
single  reserve  currency,  global  imbalances  are  not  inevitable.  The  US  could  not  have  run 
persistent  deficits  had  not  the  EMEs  provided  the  demand  side  impetus  by  accumulating 
reserve assets either for trade advantage or as a measure of self-insurance against external 
shocks.  
The problem with the world having only a single reserve currency came to the fore during the 
crisis  as  many  countries  faced  dollar  liquidity  problems  as  a  consequence  of  swift 
deleveraging  by  foreign  creditors  and  foreign  investors.  Paradoxically,  even  as  the  US 
economy was in a downturn, the dollar strengthened as a result of flight to safety. 
Based  on  the  experience  of  the  crisis,  several  reform  proposals  have  been  put  forward  to 
address  the  problems  arising  from  a  single  reserve  currency.  One  is  to  have  a  menu  of 
alternative reserve currencies. But this cannot happen by fiat. To be a serious contender as 
an alternative, a currency has to fulfill some exacting criteria. It has to be fully convertible and 
its  exchange  rate  should  be  determined  by  market  fundamentals;  it  should  acquire  a 
significant share in world trade; the currency issuing country should have liquid, open and 
large  financial  markets  and  also  the  policy  credibility  to  inspire  the  confidence  of  potential 
investors. In short, the exorbitant privilege of a reserve currency comes with an exorbitant 
responsibility.  
A second solution to a single reserve currency is to develop the SDR as a reserve currency. 
This does not seem to be a feasible option. For the SDR to be an effective reserve currency, 
it has to fulfil several conditions: the SDR has to be accepted as a liability of the IMF, has to 
be automatically acceptable as a medium of payment in cross-border transactions, be freely 
tradeable  and  its  price  has  to  be  determined  by  forces  of  demand  and  supply.  A  third 
suggested solution aims at reducing the need for self-insurance and thereby the dependence 
on a reserve currency by supporting a multilateral option of a prearranged line of credit that 
can be easily and quickly accessed. Such a multilateral option is necessary as a complement 
to self-insurance but it cannot be a substitute; some measure of self-insurance will continue 
to be the first line of defence. 
None of the above solutions fully addresses the problems arising from a single global reserve 
currency.  What  this  underscores  is  that  at  the  global  level  we  need  to  explore  these  and 
                                                 
3   Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System by 
Barry Eichengreen. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
other  options  for  protecting  ourselves  from  the  vulnerabilities  that  we  confront  as  a 
consequence of a single reserve currency.  
Protectionism 
In the post-crisis world, there may not actually be “deglobalization” but the earlier orthodoxy 
that  globalization  is  an  unmixed  blessing  is  being  increasingly  challenged.  The  rationale 
behind globalization was, and hopefully is, that even as advanced countries may see some 
low end jobs being outsourced, they will still benefit from globalization because for every low 
end job gone, another high end job – that is more skill intensive, more productive – will be 
created. If this does not happen rapidly enough or visibly enough, protectionist pressures will 
arise, and rapidly become vociferous and politically compelling.  
Recent international developments mark an “ironic reversal” in the fears about globalization. 
Previously, it was the EMEs which feared that integration into the world economy would lead 
to  welfare  loss  at  home.  Those  fears  have  now  given  way  to  apprehensions  in  advanced 
economies that globalization means losing jobs to cheap labour abroad. 
There  is  concern  in  some  quarters  that  even  as  open  protectionism  has  been  resisted 
relatively well during the current crisis, opaque protectionism has been on the rise. Opaque 
protectionism  takes  the  form  of  resorting  to  measures  such  as  anti-dumping  actions, 
safeguards, preferential treatment of domestic firms in bailout packages and discriminatory 
procurement practices. Experience shows that countries resort to restrictive trade practices in 
areas not covered by multilateral rules or by exploiting the lack of specificity in certain rules. 
To  strengthen  multilateral  trade  discipline,  the  need  for  a  quick  conclusion  of  the  Doha 
Round  can  hardly  be  overemphasized.  In  a  world  with  growing  worries  about  the  debt 
creating stimulus packages, a Doha Round agreement should be welcomed as a non-debt 
creating stimulus to the global economy.  
The most familiar form of protectionism is trade protectionism operationalized through tariffs 
and controls. There can be other forms of protectionism as well. Martin Wolf talks about what 
he calls “macroeconomic protectionism” which is an attempt by a country to shift inadequate 
aggregate demand on to its own output4 The efforts of several countries around the world in 
recent 
is  a  manifestation  of  macroeconomic 
times 
protectionism.  
Another form of protectionism is “financial protectionism”. What is financial protectionism? It 
is  a  situation  where  countries  impose  controls  increasingly  not  on  capital  inflows  but  on 
capital outflows. In a recent op-ed piece in the Financial Times5 , Richard Dobbs and Michael 
Spence argue that “the 30-year era of progressively cheaper capital is nearing an end. The 
global economy will soon have to cope with too little capital, not too much.” Their thesis is 
that even as investment needs of EMEs, especially in infrastructure will grow, global savings 
will not rise in step because of several factors: ageing populations who will spend rather than 
save, increased expenditure on adapting to climate change and large economies like China 
rebalancing towards consumption rather than saving. This will make capital scarcer and raise 
long  term  interest  rates  for  corporates  and  consumers.  The  question  is,  will  the  savings 
constraint  be  so  large  as  to  push  countries  into  restricting  capital  outflows  as  a  defence 
against rising interest rates at home? If yes, we will have to brace for financial protectionism 
in the years ahead. 
to  resist  currency  appreciation 
                                                 
4   Financial Reform: An Emerging Market Perspective by Martin Wolf, at the Korea-FSB Conference on Financial 
Sector Reform, Republic of Korea, September 2–3, 2010. 
5   “The  Era  of  Cheap  Capital  Comes  To  a  Close”  by  Richard  Dobbs  and  Michael  Spence,  Financial  Times, 
February 1, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The  short  point  is  that  in  the  years  ahead,  the  pressures  for  protectionism  will  mount  and 
protectionism will also take new forms. Global welfare will be maximized when collectively we 
resist  short-term  pressures  and  put  our  long-term  interest  ahead  of  narrow  short-term 
advantage. 
Financial sector reforms 
Received  wisdom  today  is  that  financial  deregulation  shares  the  honours  with  global 
imbalances as being the twin villains of the recent crisis. It should not be surprising therefore 
that vigorous reforms in the financial sector are under way. The Basel III package finalized by 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has since been endorsed by the G-20 
at its Seoul Summit last November. Broadly, these reforms will require banks to hold more 
and better quality capital and to carry more liquid assets, limit their leverage and will mandate 
them to build up capital buffers in good times that can be drawn down in periods of stress.  
Another crisis driven initiative has been to expand the erstwhile Financial Stability Forum into 
a  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  by  giving  representation  to  EMEs.  The  FSB  has  been 
working  on  a  number  of  initiatives  including  managing  the  moral  hazard  associated  with 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs)  through  more  stringent  regulatory  and 
supervisory norms, principles to guide compensation of bank managements, a single set of 
accounting standards  and  regulation  of  OTC  derivatives,  credit  rating agencies and  hedge 
funds. There are also several areas where substantial work needs to be done including in 
improving  resolution  regimes  for  cross-border  banks  and  systemically  important  non-bank 
financial  companies,  addressing  the  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system,  and  macro-
prudential surveillance. We also need an approach for extending the prudential norms on the 
lines of Basel III to the shadow financial system which lay at the heart of the recent financial 
crisis. 
The financial sector reform agenda is driven by the need to prevent the type of excesses in 
the financial sectors of the advanced economies that led to the crisis. Even so, EMEs too will 
have  to  fall  in  line  and  implement  these  reforms.  Some  of  these  reforms  entailing  higher 
capital and capital buffers will make the financial sector safer, but they come at a cost and 
pose implementation challenges. Let me expand on this a little. 
Both  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and  the  IIF  have  come  out  with  some 
preliminary  estimate  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  the  Basel  III  package.  The  Basel 
Committee  too  is  carrying  out  an  extensive  impact  assessment  study.  EMEs  will  need  to 
supplement that with their own self-assessments to more accurately determine the impact of 
the new norms on their financial and monetary systems. In all likelihood, EMEs will see the 
cost  of  credit  going  up  at  a  time  of  growing  credit  demand  arising  from  strong  growth, 
structural transformation of the economy and financial deepening. The challenge for EMEs 
will be to balance the tension between implementing Basel III and keeping the cost of credit 
at an affordable level. 
In terms of capital, banks in EMEs typically have higher capital ratios, and can be expected 
to  comfortably  meet  the  higher  Basel  III  capital  requirements.  However,  going  forward,  as 
credit expands and bank balance sheets grow, banks will find it necessary to raise further 
capital to conform to the Basel III requirement. Basel III also poses non-cost challenges. For 
example,  operation  of  countercyclical  buffers  will  need  judgements  to  be  made  on  the 
trajectory  of  the  business  cycle  and  on  the  identification  of  the  inflexion  point.  Wrong 
judgements can entail huge costs in terms of foregone growth.  
Many of these reforms on the anvil, including some elements of the Basel III package, allow 
for  national  differentiation.  Should  EMEs,  keeping  in  view  their  national  circumstances, 
decide  to  deviate  from  any  global  standard  or  norm,  the  challenge  for  them  will  be  to 
communicate the rationale so that the market does not interpret the deviation as regulatory 
looseness. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Realizing  that  the  reform  measures  designed  for  the  financial  systems  of  advanced 
economies will have different implications for EMEs, and that the challenges facing the EMEs 
may be entirely different from those facing the advanced economies, it was decided in the 
Seoul  Summit  of  the  G20  to  work  towards  making  the  financial  regulatory  reforms  better 
reflect the perspective of EMEs. The FSB, the IMF and the World Bank have been tasked 
with working on this agenda and report before the next Summit. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  summarize.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  tried  to  give  you  an  EME  perspective  on 
some of the issues on the global agenda. I started off by giving the big picture – the tectonic 
shift  of  global  economic  power  towards  emerging  economies.  EMEs,  however,  have  not 
completely  decoupled  from  the  advanced  economies;  their  economic  prospects  remain 
linked to the prospects of advanced economies. Even as multiple growth poles are a better 
safety-net for the world, we will be collectively better off if all segments of the world grow at a 
sustainable pace. 
I then went on to the issue of global rebalancing which needs to address three inter-related 
issues:  exchange  rate  flexibility,  capital  controls  and  an  agreement  on  a  framework  for 
strong, sustainable and balanced growth. A prime source of vulnerabilities at the global level 
is the single reserve currency and I emphasized the need for global cooperation in finding a 
viable solution. An important issue on the global agenda is protectionism and I talked about 
why protectionist pressures may arise again and what new forms protectionism might take in 
the  years  ahead.  Finally,  I  gave  a  brief  status  of  the  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  and 
emphasized the need for further work to study the implication of these reforms for EMEs. 
The  common  thread  running  through  all  the  issues  that  I  raised  is  the  need  for  global 
cooperation in solving our most pressing problems of today. The crisis has taught us that no 
country can be an island and that economic and financial disruptions anywhere can cause 
ripples,  if  not  waves,  everywhere.  The  crisis  also  taught  us  that  given  the  deepening 
integration  of  countries  into  the  global  economic  and  financial  system,  uncoordinated 
responses  will  lead  to  worse  outcomes  for  everyone.  The  global  problems  we  are  facing 
today are complex and not amenable to easy solutions. Many of them require significant and 
often painful adjustments at the national level, and in a world divided by nation-states, there 
is  no  natural  constituency  for  the  global  economy.  At  the  same  time,  the  global  crisis  has 
shown that the global economy as an entity is more important than ever. 
The  global  crisis  has  taken  a  devastating  toll  on  global  growth  and  welfare.  In  their 
painstakingly  researched  book,  “This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”, 
Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Carmen  Reinhart  show  how  over  eight  hundred  years,  all  financial 
crises can be traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis 
to the next. Each time, experts have chimed that “this time is different” claiming that the old 
rules do not apply and the new situation is dissimilar to the previous one. It will be too costly 
for the world not to heed this lesson. We should cooperate not only to firmly exit from the 
crisis, but also to ensure that in resolving this crisis, we do not sow the seeds of the next 
crisis. 
Before I finish, I want to compliment CBSL for its significant contribution to the growth and 
development of Sri Lanka. Over the last 60 years, CBSL has acquired a great reputation for 
professionalism,  integrity  and  sense  of  purpose.  Moving  forward,  as  central  banks  of 
emerging  economies,  both  RBI  and  CBSL  have  their  tasks  cut  out  for  them.  We  need  to 
learn  from  the  best  in  the  world,  but  adapt  our  learning  to  the  demands  and  culture  of 
maturing emerging economies. We need to be constantly pushing the envelope, be at the 
frontiers of domain knowledge, oftentimes reinvent it, but all the time remain sensitive to the 
core concerns of an emerging economy. On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I want to 
wish  Governor  Cabraal  and  the  management  and  staff  of  CBSL  all  the  very  best  in  their 
endeavour towards growth and development of Sri Lanka. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
