Mario Draghi: Italy’s path towards stable growth 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Annual Meeting of the Italian Banking Association Rome, 13 July 2011. 
 The crisis and the euro 
Growth prospects and the financial markets are being influenced by the sovereign debt crisis. 
Despite the decisions taken by the Greek Parliament and the Eurogroup, the tensions have 
increased  and  spread,  partly  owing  to  the  inertial  nature  of  processes  of  this  kind.  It  is 
essential that the countries that have agreed an adjustment programme with the European 
Union and the International Monetary Fund continue the considerable efforts they have made 
to date. The European Council has reaffirmed its commitment to the financial stability of the 
euro area. In no country is there an alternative to credible fiscal consolidation, the necessary, 
but not sufficient, condition for strengthening the outlook for growth. 
For years interest rates in the various parts of the euro area did not diverge significantly from 
those obtaining in Germany. For a long time the spreads between sovereign securities and 
German  Bunds  remained  narrow  and  the  interest  rates  charged  by  banks  reflected  the 
credibility of the public securities of the euro-area countries. This is no longer the case: the 
solvency of sovereign states has ceased to be a foregone conclusion but something that has 
to be won in the field with rapid and sustainable growth, which is only possible with sound 
public finances. Interest rates reflect today’s new situation: they are higher for countries with 
low  growth  and  weaker  public  finances.  The  cloak  of  credibility  provided  by  the  stronger 
euro-area  countries  has  been  lifted;  we  must  grow  without  relying  on  its  shelter.  The 
structural reforms invoked for years are now even more crucial. 
On  several  occasions  I  have  noted  that  Europe  reacted  to  the  global  financial  crisis  by 
drawing  on  the  credibility  of  the  ECB  and  the  latter’s  timely  and  innovative  conduct  of 
monetary policy and by equipping itself with a more appropriate set of economic governance 
tools.  We  now  have  a  system  of  autonomous  authorities  for  banking  and  financial 
supervision, a European body to monitor and mitigate systemic risks, and new procedures 
for the coordination of fiscal and structural policies. 
The present crisis is also an opportunity, however, to reflect on the limits of the action taken 
to  date  at  European  level.  A  new  phase  has  begun.  It  has  to  be  recognized  that  in  the 
handling of financial crises recourse has not infrequently been made to partial and temporary 
measures,  thereby  increasing  the  uncertainty  on  financial  markets.  It  is  now  necessary  to 
give certainty to the procedure for handling sovereign crises: by clearly defining the political 
objectives,  the  instruments  and  the  volume  of  resources.  This  is  needed  to  ensure  the 
stability of the area and its currency, and to take full advantage of the strength of its economy 
and monetary and financial situation. 
The Italian economy 
The Italian economy is benefiting from the expansion of world trade. Compared with many 
other  advanced  countries, 
the  advantage  of  a  solid  banking  system.  The 
unemployment  rate  has  been  falling  since  the  autumn.  After  six  months  of  barely  positive 
changes, in the second quarter Italian GDP grew at a rate in line with the euro-area average. 
In the medium term the growth rate of the Italian economy is expected to remain below that 
of  our  main  European  partners.  The  Bank  of  Italy’s  Economic  Bulletin,  to  be  published  on 
Friday, will contain our detailed assessments for 2011–12. 
it  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  tensions  of  the  last  few  days  involving  Italian  government  securities  and  share  prices 
were due in part to the uncertain outlook for the public finances. 
The  budgetary  adjustment  prepared  by  the  Government  is  an  important  step  in  the 
consolidation  of  the  public  finances.  The  measures  before  Parliament  give  impetus  to  the 
process  of  reducing  the  public  debt.  This  year  will  see  a  significant  primary  surplus; 
according  to  European  Commission  estimates,  next  year  it  will  grow  further  and  be  the 
largest in the euro area. Having moved in advance of the normal deadlines, the additional 
measures needed to achieve a balanced budget in 2014 must now be rapidly established. 
This is what the markets are mainly looking at. There is a risk that these measures will distort 
the structure of the adjustment, appropriately based to a large extent on expenditure cuts. 
Unless  other  expenditure  items  are  also  cut,  it  will  not  be  possible,  however,  to  use  the 
power  to  enact  tax  and  welfare  reforms  to  complete  the  adjustment  in  2013–14  without 
raising taxes. 
But,  as  for  the  other  euro-area  countries,  the  consolidation  of  the  public  finances  must  be 
accompanied  by  an  increase  in  our  economy’s  growth  potential  by  the  timely  adoption  of 
effective and credible structural policies, together with consistent behaviour on the part of all 
the key figures in the country’s political and economic life. 
The regulation of international finance 
In  my  latest  Concluding  Remarks  I  referred  to  the  agenda  for  the  coming  months:  after 
establishing  the  requirements  for  capital  and  the  measures  to  be  adopted  with  regard  to 
leverage  and  liquidity,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee,  at  the 
instigation of the G20, are now working on the two main issues that remain to be addressed: 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs)  and  the  shadow  banking  system. 
Proposals will be submitted to the G20 in November. 
With  regard  to  SIFIs,  the  proposals  are  now  broadly  established.  Before  the  end  of  the 
summer there will be a public consultation on the mechanisms for overcoming crises and the 
measures needed to increase SIFIs’ ability to absorb losses. 
Provision  is  made  for  global  SIFIs  to  have  a  larger  capital  endowment  than  other 
intermediaries. The additional buffer for the SIFIs that are identified is to vary between 1 and 
2.5  per  cent  of  their  risk-weighted  assets,  depending  on  their  systemic  importance  as 
measured by an indicator that takes account of their size, complexity, interconnections with 
other  intermediaries,  international  operations  and  specialization  in  certain  fields  of  activity. 
The  augmented  requirement  will  have  to  be  met  with  capital  of  the  highest  quality. 
Implementation will proceed gradually starting in 2016. The new regime will be fully in force 
at the beginning of 2019. 
As for the shadow banking system, the Financial Stability Board has decided to concentrate 
on  highly  leveraged  activities  that  involve  maturity  transformation  or  that  can  give  rise  to 
regulatory arbitrage. Proposals are being prepared. In Italy, financial regulation, which has 
recently  been  strengthened,  already  covers  all  the  financial  institutions  that  deal  with  the 
public. 
A  frequent  topic  concerns  the  effect  of  the  new  international  standards  on  bank-based 
systems,  such  as  Italy’s,  with  a  large  number  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises;  it  is 
rightly noted that banks with basically different balance-sheet structures and equally different 
risks should not be treated in the same way. 
The  risk-weighting  of  banks’  assets  is  crucially  important.  Basel  II  assigned  a  much  lower 
weight  to  purely  financial  activities  than  to  lending,  in  which  Italian  banks  are  specialized. 
This is why Italian banks, when subject to international comparison on the basis of current 
data, appear better capitalized in terms of financial leverage than risk-weighted assets. The 
decision to treat financial assets more favourably was based on the implicit assumption that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  markets  in  which  they  were  traded  would  always  be  liquid.  The  crisis  dramatically 
demonstrated  the  fragility  of  this  assumption  and  the  need  to  rebalance  the  system  of 
weights. 
This is the direction taken with the recent regulatory reforms, against the background of a 
significant overall strengthening of the quality and the quantity of capital. 
Recently, the capital requirements for trading portfolio exposures have been increased and 
the  prudential  treatment  of  the  risks  associated  with  securitizations  and  off-balance-sheet 
vehicles has been tightened. Basel III has increased the stringency of the calculation of the 
capital  requirements  for  counterparty  risk  in  connection  with  derivative  transactions.  The 
whole matter is now undergoing a fundamental revision by the Basel Committee in order to 
eliminate  any  discrimination  of  loans  with  respect  to  trading  assets.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is 
working in the technical fora to proceed in this direction with determination. 
At the same time (it is worth recalling) the new rules confirm the facilitations, already present 
in Basel II and invoked by the Italian supervisory authorities, that, other things being equal, 
allow a lower weighting for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises. 
The Italian banks and the action of the supervisory authorities 
Italian  banks  have  shown,  and  continue  to  show,  an  ability  to  resist  and  react  in  times  of 
difficulty, not only at the height of the financial crisis, when they were saved by a model firmly 
rooted in core banking business, but also in its aftermath, when the crisis gave way to a deep 
recession in all the advanced countries that hit Italy particularly hard because it came after a 
decade of stagnation and was followed by a slower recovery than elsewhere. 
In the three months to May bank lending to households and firms grew at an annualized rate 
of 5.7 per cent, well above the euro-area average of 2.2 per cent. Lending to firms grew by 
6.1 per cent and that to households, driven mainly by loans for house purchases, increased 
by  5.2  per  cent.  The  rapid  expansion  in  lending  to  firms  is  ascribable  to  the  growth  in 
demand, sustained by the need to finance inventories and working capital. 
The  deterioration  in  credit  quality  was  much  less  serious  than  during  the  recession  of  the 
early  1990s,  which  was  not  as  deep.  Although  still  substantial,  the  flow  of  adjusted  bad 
debts,  especially  of  firms,  is  beginning  to  show  signs  of  slowing.  Compared  with  a  year 
earlier, in April there was a decrease in banks’ exposure to borrowers reported for the first 
time with positions classed as bad debts. 
There  has  not  been  a  housing  bubble  in  Italy;  the  banks’  losses  in  this  sector  have  been 
limited on the whole and have not sparked a crisis. The low level of nominal interest rates 
has  helped  to  avoid  a  vicious  circle  in  which  borrowers  with  temporary  liquidity  difficulties 
suddenly become submerged by financial burdens even when the firm’s economic prospects 
are good. 
The  banks  benefited  from  strong  local  roots,  which  ensured  stable  sources  of  funds  and 
underpinned the qualitative assessment of their creditworthiness, and from a fundamentally 
unadventurous corporate culture. 
The test was, and still is, a hard one, though. 
We insisted that the banks strengthen their capital without delay. This was not only because 
they  need  to  move  progressively  into  line  with  the  new  international  standards,  but  also 
because the present situation demands it. They responded without hesitation, giving the lie 
to the sceptics. Their shareholders, including leading institutional investors, understood the 
need for this step. 
Since  the  beginning  of  this  year  the  Italian  banks  have  made  or  approved  huge  capital 
increases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The core tier 1 ratio of the five largest banking groups averaged 7.4 per cent at the end of 
2010; in March it had increased to 7.8 per cent and it is estimated to have risen further still, 
to  8.6  per  cent,  as  a  result  of  subsequent  recapitalizations.  The  banks  have  readied 
themselves in time for the European stress tests, as we asked them to do, and the results 
will be published in a few days’ time. We are confident they will be well above the threshold 
of 5 per cent for the core tier 1 ratio. 
The  capital  strengthening  that  the  Italian  banking  system  needs  to  implement  in  order  to 
meet the new Basel III requirements by 2019, which was estimated at €40 billion in relation 
to June 2010, is now about €20 billion. 
We are making good progress. 
For  the  future,  the  progressive  increase  in  banks’  capital  will  be  essential  to  ensure  the 
growth  of  lending  while  guaranteeing  the  sound  and  prudent  management  of  the  banking 
system.  It  is  very  important  that  the  tax  treatment  of  intermediaries  should  not  discourage 
them from strengthening their capital. 
It was a wise decision to bring bank bond issues scheduled for 2011 forward to the beginning 
of  the  year.  The  volume  of  securities  already  issued  by  the  leading  banks  is  equal  to  the 
entire stock of bonds due for redemption during the year. Despite the sacrifice in terms of 
cost,  both  gross  and  net  bond  funding  has  increased  significantly,  the  former  totalling 
€31 billion  from  July  2010  to  June  2011  whereas  it  was  negative  twelve  months  earlier. 
Overall, deposits and bonds rose by 1.8 per cent in May compared with a year earlier. 
The Bank of Italy continues to call on the banks to maintain balanced liquidity positions. This 
policy  was  introduced  well  before  international  liquidity  standards  were  first  discussed  in 
Basel.  It  has  helped  to  shelter  the  Italian  banking  system  from  the  financial  storm;  it 
continues to be necessary in the face of persistent market instability. Convergence towards 
the  Basel  liquidity  standards,  the  details  of  which  are  not  yet  fully  defined,  will  take  place 
gradually, according to plan. 
In  the  first  quarter  of  2011,  the  profitability  of  the  five  largest  banking  groups  improved 
somewhat with respect to a year earlier. The annualized rate of return on equity rose from 
3.0 to 3.4 per cent. Losses on loans decreased by 12 per cent, but they still absorb almost 
half of the banks’ operating profit. 
The improvement is encouraging; it should continue in the coming months when the recovery 
in lending reflects positively on banks’ earnings. 
However, for the banks to return to satisfactory profitability it is essential that they persist with 
their  efforts  to  reduce  costs.  Some  groups  are  taking  steps  to  rationalize  their  networks; 
these must be pursued with determination. A difficult round of labour negotiations awaits the 
banks,  during  which  they  must  reconcile  the  need  to  reward  the  professionalism  and 
productivity of employees with the impelling need to ensure that the evolution of costs is in 
line with the sector’s economic prospects. 
 There are favourable factors we can rely on to carry forward the consolidation of the public 
finances, overcome the emergency now overshadowing the economic outlook, and set Italy 
on a path towards stable growth. We have the advantage that private sector debt and the 
country’s overall net foreign debt are both limited. Our banks are sound; they have emerged 
unscathed  from  the  financial  crisis  that  shook  large  foreign  institutions.  We  possess 
fundamental resources that have always characterized the Italians: individual initiative, ability 
to innovate, willingness to work. We must believe in our economy’s capacity for growth. We 
must  find  a  common  goal,  above  and  beyond  individual  and  factional  interests.  We  must 
rediscover how to act for the good of all. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
