Joseph S Tracy: The shape of the recovery 
Remarks by Mr Joseph S Tracy, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York,  at  the  Connecticut  Business  and  Industry  Association/MetroHartford  Alliance 
Economic Summit and Outlook 2011, Hartford, Connecticut, 7 January 2011. 
 It is a pleasure to be with you this morning. As the new year begins, it is instructive to look 
back over 2010 to try and discern what the shape of the recovery will look like over 2011. Let 
me note at the outset that my comments are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.  
Just six months ago a topic of keen interest was whether the economy was experiencing a 
temporary  soft  patch  or  was  heading  into  a  double-dip  recession.  Real  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) growth had slowed from 5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2009 to 3.7 percent 
in the first quarter of 2010, and to only 1.7 percent in the second quarter. Soft patches are 
common  in  expansions  but  are  difficult  to  distinguish  from  a  more  serious  decline  in 
momentum. Examples of soft patches include the expansions in 1976 and 2002 (Chart 1). 
Soft  patches  typically  result  when  the  initial  boost  from  inventory  restocking  and  fiscal 
stimulus from government spending fades and must be  replaced by underlying strength in 
the economy. The concern six months ago was that a soft patch – amid an environment with 
little  room  for  conventional  monetary  policy  –  could  be  particularly  risky.  However,  growth 
picked  up  in  the  third  quarter  to  an  estimated  2.6  percent,  and  as  2010  came  to  an  end, 
economists were revising upward their growth forecast for 2011. The risk that the economy 
will enter a double-dip recession now seems quite low. The increased optimism reflects in 
part  the  compromise  on  the  extension  of  the  Bush  tax  rates,  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee’s  decision  to  purchase  up  to  $600  billion  in  Treasury  securities,  and  stronger 
retail sales during the holiday season. 
While there are many factors that will affect the shape of the recovery in 2011, a key factor 
will be the degree of improvement in the labor market. From its peak in December of 2007, 
employment is down by 7.4 million jobs and remains below its level in January 2000. That is, 
the “Great Recession” eliminated an entire decade’s worth of job growth (Chart 2). Improved 
job  growth  is  essential  to  generating  the  increase  in  disposable  income  that  will  support 
continued consumption growth which is so important for overall economic growth. 
Leading  indicators  for  the  labor  market  are  pointing  to  a  likely  pickup  in  the  pace  of 
employment  gains  over  the  course  of  this  year.  Many  new  hires  are  preceded  by  firms 
posting job openings. According to the Labor Department, at the end of October, there were 
3.4 million job openings, up from 2.3 million a year earlier. As conditions in the labor market 
start to improve, workers are more willing to quit a job to search for a better job. While the 
quit rate has been unchanged at 1.5 percent for the past 8 months, quits as a proportion of 
total  separations  increased  to  49  percent  in  October  from  41  percent  a  year  earlier.  Also 
encouraging,  employment  in  Temporary  Help  Services  has  increased  by  494,000  since 
September  2009.  Firms  often  hire  temporary  workers  as  a  precursor  to  adding  permanent 
staff.  Finally,  initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  continue  to  edge  downward, 
indicating that the risk of losing a job is diminishing (Chart 3). 
There are risks associated with every economic forecast. Some risks are to the upside, while 
others are to the downside. An important downside risk for this year is the housing market. 
Recall that the housing market was the epicenter of the financial shock that resulted in the 
Great Recession. Unlike the real economy, which has shown recent signs of strengthening, 
housing markets showed some tentative signs of life early last year that gave way to further 
weakening later in the year (Chart 4). This pattern likely reflected in part the conclusion of tax 
credits supporting housing purchases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Of  particular  note,  house  prices  increased  moderately  early  last  year,  but  resumed  their 
decline as the year came to a close. In October, the CoreLogic national house price index 
was down 3.9 percent from a year earlier (Chart 5). House price declines were reported in all 
but 11 states. House prices in Arizona and Florida, two of the housing boom states, declined 
by  8  percent.  Distressed  sales  as  a  fraction  of  all  repeat-sales  increased  to  more  than 
40 percent  after  having  declined  into  the  low  30s  earlier  in  the  year.  Some  housing 
economists are forecasting house prices to fall by 10 percent or more this year. 
The growing inventory of defaulted mortgages continues to weigh down any recovery in the 
housing market. According to the most recent Mortgage Metric Report by the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision, there were 598,000 newly 
initiated foreclosures in the third quarter of 2010.1 This inflow of new foreclosures exceeded 
the outflow due to completed foreclosures and properties sold through short sales and deeds 
in lieu. As a result, the foreclosure pipeline increased to 1.9 million mortgages – double the 
level from a year earlier (Chart 6). Efforts to modify mortgages have not managed to prevent 
the foreclosure pipeline from increasing. As a consequence, distressed sales are expected to 
grow even further over the coming year. 
The combination of declining house prices and increasing delays in the foreclosure process 
will  put  upward  pressure  on  default  rates  as  well  as  losses  on  defaulted  mortgages. 
CoreLogic  estimates  that  in  the  third  quarter  of  2010  there  were  10.8  million  borrowers  in 
negative  equity  where  the  balance  on  the  mortgage  exceeds  the  current  value  of  the 
property. They estimated that there were an additional 2.4 million borrowers estimated to be 
in  “near  negative  equity”  where  the  borrower  has  less  than  5  percent  equity  remaining. 
Declining house prices will push these near negative equity borrowers into negative equity. 
This  increases  the  risk  that  these  borrowers  will  default  on  their  mortgages  either  out  of 
necessity – say as the result of a job loss – or out of choice, which is called strategic default 
as borrowers determine that there is little economic advantage to keep paying the mortgage. 
Longer  delays  in  the  foreclosure  process  further  increase  the  incentive  for  a  borrower  to 
strategically default by extending the period of time that they can live “rent free” in the house. 
In addition, declining house prices increase the expected losses on those mortgages that do 
default. 
Problems in housing markets can impact economic growth. Housing directly effects growth 
through  incentives  for  builders  to  build  new  houses.  Housing  starts  will  likely  remain 
depressed as long as house prices are declining. Falling house prices can also negatively 
impact consumption growth to the extent that homeowners increase their savings in an effort 
to offset declines in their housing wealth. 
The degree to which housing markets deteriorate over 2011 and the impact that this will have 
on overall growth is hard to predict with any accuracy. The most likely outcome is that the 
economy  will  continue  to  improve  as  the  year  progresses  despite  the  ongoing  drag  from 
housing.  However,  the  protracted  process  of  resolving  the  overhang  of  negative  equity 
resulting  from  the  overvaluation  of  housing  during  the  boom  will  remain  a  headwind 
restraining economic growth for several years to come. 
Let  me  conclude  with  an  observation  regarding  the  housing  outlook  for  Connecticut  as 
compared  with  the  nation.  Connecticut  home  prices  grew  less  than  the  nation  during  the 
housing boom and subsequently declined less during the housing downturn (Chart 7). As a 
                                                 
1  This number is the reported number of newly initiated foreclosures (383,000) adjusted to reflect the coverage 
of the survey (64 percent of the total market). 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
result, the cumulative change in Connecticut house prices since January 2000 is now very 
similar to the nation as a whole. 
 
 
 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    5
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
