Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Innovative financing for transformation 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Langkawi 
International  Dialogue  2011:  Innovative  Financing  for  Transformation,  Putrajaya,  19  June 
2011. 
 The world is transforming. Our motivation for accelerating our own pace of transformation is 
to  ensure  that  we  will  be  able  to  effectively  participate  in  this  new  economic  and  financial 
environment,  and  in  the  process,  maximize  our  potential  performance.  Central  to  this  is 
having a well functioning financial system and the right financial policies. The recent financial 
crisis in the developed world has shown that when things have gone wrong in the financial 
system, the consequences have been catastrophic. Instead of creating wealth – it destroys 
wealth,  instead  of  generating  employment  –  it  results  in  job  losses,  instead  of  facilitating 
economic progress – it derails growth and development. 
It is my great honour and pleasure to speak at this 2011 Langkawi International Dialogue on 
Innovative  Financing 
for  Transformation.  The  overarching  objectives  of  economic 
transformation  is  surely  to  generate  sustainable  and  balanced  growth,  to  improve  living 
standards, to create employment opportunities and to achieve a more inclusive development. 
This  decade  has  however  seen  how  innovative  financing  in  several  of  the  developed 
economies have fuelled excessive levels of leverage that have resulted in deeply indebted 
private and public sectors, which in turn have become highly destabilizing to their financial 
systems and to their economies. The challenge before us is how then should the financial 
system be developed and regulated so that these pitfalls will be avoided while at the same 
time  remaining  dynamic  and  innovative  so  that  we  can  push  our  frontiers  and  gain  the 
progress that we aspire. 
While innovation remains essential to economic progress, it needs to be within the context of 
stronger  governance  and  sound  risk  management  practices.  Positive  innovation  can  make 
enormous  contributions  to  economic  performance.  The  financial  system  has  to  deliver  the 
essential  financial  services  that  would  cater  to  the  financial  needs  of  all  sectors  of  the 
economy – from households, small and medium enterprises, including to micro enterprises 
and  to  the  corporate  sector.  The  financial  system  also  has  to  take  into  account  the 
fundamental  changes  taking  place  in  the  global  economy  and  the  growing  participation  of 
emerging  economies  in  the  global  economy.  As  we  become  more  interlinked,  financial 
systems also need to become more internationalized to facilitate and reinforce this trend. 
The role of the financial system is essentially to effectively intermediate and to meaningfully 
mobilize  funds  including  from  across  borders  to  be  channeled  to  productive  economic 
activity.  Such  intermediation  must  be  firmly  anchored  and  aligned  to  the  objective  of 
generating  sustainable  and  balanced  growth,  raising  the  standards  of  living,  creating 
employment and promoting development. With clarity in the role of the financial system and 
the importance of its link to the economy, the range of the financial solutions offered needs to 
meet these highly differentiated and changing requirements. 
For the households, the financial system provides a means to optimally spread their income 
and  consumption  over  their  life  cycle.  Accumulating  wealth  via  saving,  investment  and 
borrowing in the initial years, and de-accumulating of the wealth during the later years, such 
as  through  pension  products  and  annuity  schemes  during  retirement.  This  is  particularly 
important as a population matures. The absence of these products will impose tremendous 
burdens to the government fiscal position and the overall standards of living. 
The Malaysian experience has been to encourage diversity of financial product offerings to 
ensure that the needs of all segments of the population are met. This includes, from having 
basic  banking  products  at  negligible  cost  for  lower  income  groups,  to  the  wider  range  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
this  by 
savings, investment and protection products for the middle income groups and for the higher 
income groups, wealth management and comprehensive advisory services. 
In  the  area  of  financing,  a  key  priority  for  any  country  is  financing  to  promote  home 
ownership.  This  is  to  meet  an  important  basic  need  of  society  and  to  encourage  wealth 
accumulation  among  households.  Malaysia  approached 
initially  establishing 
Cagamas,  a  national  mortgage  corporation,  which  enables  banks  to  source  long-term 
funding to match long-term housing loans. The national mortgage corporation has continued 
to evolve to promote the secondary market for housing loans via securitization and mitigating 
risks in mortgage financing through the provision of mortgage insurance. A recent innovative 
arrangement introduced this year is the risk-sharing arrangements between the government 
and  banks  to  provide  opportunities  for  the  lower  income  and  younger  segments  of  the 
population to own homes and thus accumulate wealth at an earlier age. 
Another important form of wealth accumulation is the collective investment schemes such as 
unit  trusts.  The  pooling  of  savings  provides  economies  of  scale,  access  to  professional 
investment  managers,  as  well  as  a  diversified  investment  portfolio.  In  Malaysia,  this  was 
initially  promoted  through  the  establishment  of  government  sponsored  national  savings 
scheme (Amanah Saham Nasional). Participation of the average household has now paved 
the  way  for  the  growth  in  the  private  unit  trust  industry.  The  formation  of  such  national 
savings schemes has also contributed to the development of an institutional investor base in 
Malaysia that has been able to mobilize substantial volumes of savings. The mobilization of 
these funds provides the potential for funding of businesses and the corporate sector and for 
project financing including for infrastructure development. 
As SMEs and micro enterprises form the majority of business enterprises in most countries, 
and as they contribute significantly to GDP, employment and wealth creation, efficient access 
to finance is critical. The Malaysian experience to address this has been the establishment of 
the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  to  assist  viable  SMEs  with  inadequate  track  record  to 
access financing by providing guarantees and credit enhancements for SME financing. The 
credit evaluation is carried out by banks, and by the CGC. For countries where SME-credit 
evaluation skills are scarce, the centralisation of expertise using such an arrangement would 
be able to facilitate this as banks build their capacity. There have also been a wide range of 
innovative financial products and services to support this agenda. 
A  highly  successful  programme  in  Malaysia  has  been  the  RM2  billion  SME  Assistance 
Guarantee  Scheme  which  was  established  in  February  2009  to  ensure  that  viable  SMEs 
adversely impacted by the economic slowdown would have continued access to financing. 
Under this scheme, SMEs are able to obtain financing with an 80% guarantee cover provided 
by the Credit Guarantee Corporation. The cost of the guarantee was borne by the Central 
Bank.  This  scheme  has  assisted  about  10,000  SMEs  from  all  sectors  of  the  economy  in 
sustaining their businesses and preserving employment.  
Venture  capital  and  private  equity  funds  are  required  to  provide  early  stage  financing  for 
innovative SMEs. Due to the highly specialised focus of such funds, it is common for fund-of-
funds  to  be  established  as  a  pooling  mechanism  for  the  purpose  of  risk  diversification. 
However,  the  success  of  these  forms  of  financing  depend  very  much  on  the  enabling 
environment in terms of availability of talent as well as deep and relatively well developed 
equity market for early stage investors to “exit”. 
Finally, micro financing is important to provide access to funding for micro enterprises. There 
are now many highly innovative schemes to achieve outreach, including by mobile banking 
and agent banking. Critical to the success of such financing is pricing and accessibility. The 
world has seen different degrees of success of such financing. Critical to their success is the 
enabling  environment  of  which  equal  attention  has  to  be  accorded.  This  includes  the 
institutional arrangements, the business model for such financing, the regulation and policies 
and the supervisory oversight. This will ensure its sustainability as a form of financing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another important segment of businesses is the corporate sector. Established corporates will 
require efficient sources of financing for expansion as well as advisory services to maximise 
enterprise  value.  A  deep  and  liquid  bond  market  with  good  information  flow  and  modern 
infrastructure  will  allow  for  efficient  pricing  of  corporate  issuances  –  from  short  term 
commercial papers to support liquidity and working capital, to longer term bonds for project 
financing. Treasury services are also important to manage the funds of larger corporations to 
achieve  higher  returns  as  well  as  access  to  risk  management  and  hedging  instruments  to 
manage foreign exchange, commodity price and other forms of market risk. 
As  economies  develop,  governments  will  need  to  increasingly  shift  from  being  a  driver  of 
growth towards having a facilitating role and to promote the private sector as the driver of 
growth.  Malaysia  has  leveraged  on  the  comparative  advantage  of  the  public  and  private 
sectors  through  Public  Private  Partnerships  for  infrastructure  projects.  The  objective  is  to 
optimise on the cost efficiency and sustainability of the financing model, so as to enhance the 
financial  viability  of  the  infrastructure  project.  This  is  achieved  as  risks  are  transferred  to 
parties that can best manage those risks. Hence, the public sector can provide the regulatory 
risk  guarantees  and  incentives  to  ensure  adequate  demand,  whilst  the  private  sector  will 
raise financing as well as technical expertise. This model was successfully implemented for 
the  biggest  highway  concessionaire  in  Malaysia.  PLUS  operates  and  maintains  973km  of 
expressways in Peninsular Malaysia, stretching from the border of Thailand to Singapore and 
linking all major cities on the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia.  
Financing for infrastructure development is equally important as this has implications on the 
fiscal position. To structure the most competitive and efficient financing for each stage of the 
infrastructure project schedule, several options can be considered – including direct funding 
from  the  budget,  the  issuance  of  long-term  Government  bonds,  the  issuance  of  long-term 
Government-guaranteed bonds, the securitization of works completed, and the issuance of 
long-term bonds backed by the Government’s undertaking to make deferred payments. The 
actual funding mix adopted needs to be based on the Government’s fiscal position and on 
economic conditions. By adopting a mix of strategies over the overall duration of the project, 
the Government can optimise on the funding costs. 
Another  major  area  of  financing  that  has  been  a  challenge  both  in  the  developed  and 
emerging  economies  is  for  health  care.  The  structure  of  healthcare  provision  requires  a 
balanced  socialised  element  to  avoid  both  the  market  failure  of  a  largely  privately  driven 
system (e.g. as experienced in US) and the inefficiencies of fully public systems (e.g. several 
European countries). Social health insurance schemes based on earnings contributions is a 
means by which such funding sources can become a complementary source of funding to 
public sector. Such an institutional arrangement should provide high quality basic healthcare 
for the population whilst private health insurance can have a complementary role in providing 
higher level care for those that have the means to absorb these costs. 
In  developing  a  financial  sector  that  will  deliver  innovative  financing  for  economic 
transformation  throughout  the  different  phases  of  development  requires  several  supporting 
elements. These include: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Having strong financial institutions that are resilient to withstand the economic cycle; 
Establishment of a credit information system; 
Development of a domestic bond market for financing large investments for both the 
public and private sectors. This includes the necessary infrastructure to facilitate the 
functioning of the bond market; 
Having the talent pool in the financial services industry; 
Financial literacy has to be advanced aggressively; 
Effective  structure  to  ensure  sufficient  supervisory  oversight  to  ensure  soundness 
and stability of the financial system; 
d. 
e. 
f. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
g. 
h. 
Mechanism for resolution of debt problems including for public and private sector; 
Potential to leverage on technology. This in particular enhances distribution channel 
and outreach; 
Consumer protection framework needs to be in place; and 
Surveillance mechanism needs to be in place. 
i. 
j. 
Finally, I would like to discuss the importance of Islamic finance as an important mode for 
financing  economic  transformation.  Islamic  finance  requires  financial  transactions  to  be 
supported by an underlying productive economic activity that will generate legitimate income 
and  wealth.  This  gives  rise  to  a  close  link  between  financial  transactions  and  productive 
flows. Therefore, the growth in Islamic financial assets is generally in line with the growth of 
underlying economic activities, thereby ensuring that the financial system is always grounded 
to the real economy. Other inherent features arising from risk sharing also contribute to the 
stability  and  integrity  of  Islamic  finance.  Thus,  Islamic  finance,  embraced  in  its  entirety,  is 
supportive of sustainable economic growth. 
Islamic finance offers an extensive range of innovative financial products and services from 
consumer financing, asset and wealth management to Islamic insurance and capital markets. 
The  sukuk  market  has  become  a  highly  competitive  fundraising  option  for  large  scale 
projects  and  infrastructure  development.  With  an  annual  growth  rate  of  40  percent,  sukuk 
instruments are fast emerging as an attractive new asset class for investors, while evolving 
to become a preferred financing and capital raising option for issuers. In Malaysia, the sukuk 
market now accounts for more than fifty percent of our bond market, drawing the participation 
of  not  only  our  own  corporates  but  also  a  wide  range  of  international  corporations  and 
multilateral  agencies.  In  Malaysia,  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  operates  in 
parallel  to  the  conventional  financial  system.  This  is  now  internationalized  to  enhance  our 
interlinkages with other emerging economies and traditional markets.  
The emerging economies will be the key drivers of economic transformation over the next 
decades, both within and across borders resulting in a more integrated global economy. It is 
therefore  imperative  that  efforts  are  increased  in  ensuring  collaboration  and  sharing  of 
experience for the common good. The Langkawi International Dialogue continues to be an 
important  platform  for  such  exchanges  and  it  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  have  this 
opportunity to be here today.  
Thank You. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
