Andreas Dombret: Securing financial stability – the contribution of 
economic policy 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at 
the  New  Year’s  Reception  of  Deutsches  Aktieninstitut,  Brussels, 
27 January 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  your  New  Year’s  reception  here  in  Brussels  –  the  capital  of 
Europe.  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  speak  to  you  today.  The  turn  of  the  year  lends  itself  to 
looking back and reflecting on the past year as well as to looking ahead to the new year. In 
this spirit I will start my speech with an overview of the economy in 2010 and the outlook for 
2011 before addressing the issues of financial market regulation and the current debt crisis. I 
consciously  refrain  from  calling  the  current  debt  crisis  “European”  since  the  strong 
accumulation of public debt is far from being a purely European problem – however, being in 
Brussels, I will, of course, conclude with some remarks on the necessary measures in the 
euro area. 
The economy in 2010 and 2011 
2. 
Economically  the  year  2010  brought  a  turn  for  the  better.  The  world  economy  picked  up 
considerably and the German economy in particular made an unexpectedly strong recovery 
from the stresses and strains of the financial crisis. Growth expectations from the beginning 
of 2010 were clearly outperformed during the course of the year. With GDP growth at 3.6%, 
Germany was able to make up a good portion of the 4.7% slump of 2009. In the process, 
Germany  profited  significantly  from  the  rapid  recovery  of  the  global  economy  and  global 
trade.  However,  more  recently,  domestic  demand  –  which  had  already  been  an  important 
stabilising factor at the height of the crisis – has gained momentum as well. The resilience of 
the German economy during the crisis in the face of an extraordinarily severe negative shock 
is,  not  least,  the  reward  of  major  reforms  that  were  undertaken  in  the  first  half  of  the  last 
decade. Particularly the increased flexibility on the labour market helped Germany to come 
through the crisis in an acceptable shape, and not only stabilised private consumption but 
also allowed enterprises a smooth handling of the surprisingly vigorous increase in demand 
in the upturn.  
However,  not  all  countries  of  the  euro  area  have  weathered  the  crisis  so  successfully. 
Indeed, the spectrum of economic performance has been rather mixed. The euro area has 
seen heterogeneity in growth rates before, but now parts are reversed, as Germany currently 
occupies the role of growth motor in the euro area. These differences within the union should 
not  be  dismissed  as  purely  cyclical:  they  are  a  consequence  of  the  structural  adaptation 
crisis affecting several countries of the periphery. When one considers the difficulties these 
countries are currently facing as well as the possible consequences for the euro area as a 
whole,  it  becomes  evident  that  the  outlook  for  2011  and  beyond  depends  on  drawing  the 
correct  conclusions  from  the  crisis  and,  from  there,  taking  the  right  decisions.  The 
expectation at the moment is that the global recovery will continue in 2011, albeit at a slower 
pace than in the past year. Under this assumption, the Bundesbank in its December Monthly 
Report forecast GDP in Germany to grow at a rate of 2% in 2011 and 1.5% the year after. 
This means that the pre-crisis level of production would be reached at the end of 2011, and 
production would be back to full capacity at about the same time. Indicators that have been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
released  since  then  support  the  picture  of  an  ongoing  recovery  and  have  even  tended  to 
surprise to the upside. 
Developments  on  the  capital  markets  during  the  past  year  were  affected  by  the  loss  of 
confidence that emerged during the course of the debt crisis. The initial uncertainty of market 
participants  about  the  economic  course  of  major  industrialised  countries  as  well  as  the 
uncertainty  about  the  capability  of  several  states  to  service  their  huge  accumulated  debt 
manifested themselves in highly volatile stock prices. Even so, financing costs for enterprises 
were  only  moderately  affected.  Compared  to  their  five-year  average,  they  actually 
decreased. Stock market developments, however, were rather diverse among industrialised 
countries. While the Japanese Nikkei ended the year with a loss of 3%, the American S&P 
500  and  the  German  CDAX  recorded  increases  of  13%  and  14%  respectively.  Even  their 
optimism only gained the upper hand during the course of the second half of the year – at the 
same time as the economic outlook brightened. 
Financial market regulation 
3. 
The  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  need  for  stricter  financial  market  regulation, 
especially as the financial sector was at the heart of the crisis. Safeguarding financial stability 
has  therefore  rightly  been  a  top  priority  on  the  policy  agenda.  The  G20  agenda  and  the 
summit in Seoul in November testify to the global dimension of the task of financial market 
regulation. A number of crucial reform measures designed to secure financial stability have 
already  been  approved  or  at  least  got  underway  in  the  past  year.  The  increase  in  capital 
requirements  in  quantity  and  quality,  commonly  termed  “Basel  III”,  is  the  most  prominent 
achievement. The tightened requirements comprise a significant increase in minimum capital 
requirements, which will be introduced in stages over a sufficiently long transition period from 
2013 to 2015, and the introduction of an extra buffer, which will be phased in from 2016 to 
2018.  These  measures  are  intended  to  enable  financial  institutions  to  better  cope  with 
possible  losses  themselves  and  thus  lower  the  probability  of  an  institution  becoming 
insolvent – which can be viewed as a first line of defence. 
Measures that target systemic risk comprise a second line of defence that will come into play 
if the first line is broken and an institution becomes insolvent. In this regard, the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  currently  develops  strong  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  in  the 
interests of financial stability. On a national level, Germany has recently passed a law on the 
restructuring of insolvent financial institutions. This is certainly a welcome step, although, as 
in other areas of regulation, national restructuring mechanisms will only be fully effective if 
they  are  mutually  compatible,  ie  if  the  approach  for  their  implementation  is  internationally 
coordinated. On an institutional level, the European Union recently established the European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – which began work last week – to conduct macroprudential 
analysis and monitoring that aims to detect systemic risks at an early stage.  
Other measures to address systemic risk are currently being developed and will accompany 
us  throughout  2011  as  they  require  either  further  discussion  or  at  least  ratification.  As 
systemic risk is a complex area, the issue requires a multi-faceted approach. This includes 
the  question  of  how  exactly  to  deal  with  institutions  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”  or  the 
improvement of corporate governance, eg via the implementation of the FSB’s international 
compensation standards. Further topics discussed with regard to increasing the transparency 
of  financial  market  operations  are  the  mandatory  registration  of  institutions  that  currently 
operate  in  the  shadow  banking  system  as  well  as  the  standardisation  of  contracts  and 
handling of derivatives. Regulation of the core area of the crisis will keep this year’s agenda 
busy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in 
liabilities 
Public debt crisis 
the  state’s  budget  and  a  significant 
4. 
However, in spite of all the progress that has been made with respect to economic recovery 
and regulatory reform, the year 2010 will be remembered most for the public debt crisis in the 
euro area which marked the beginning of the third phase of the crisis. During the course of 
the financial and economic crisis, many countries had accumulated a large amount of debt 
via guarantees or costly fiscal policy measures that had been implemented to prevent vital 
markets  from  collapsing  during  the  financial  and  economic  turmoil,  in  particular  after  the 
Lehman insolvency. However, this was the case in most member states, and so the reasons 
why  only  some  of  them  suffered  a  serious  loss  of  market  participants’  confidence  in  their 
capacity  to  bear  the  debt  burden  lie  further  in  the  past:  In  these  countries,  fiscal  and 
economic policy omissions in the years before the crisis led to an accumulation of explicit or 
implicit 
loss  of  competitiveness. 
Consequently,  the  driving  forces  behind  the  increase  in  perceived  sovereign  risk  were  not 
speculative forces on the financial markets but poor fundamentals.  
When  the  loss  of  confidence  culminated  for  the  first  time  in  May,  comprehensive  support 
measures for Greece – where the situation was particularly dire – were taken to avoid risks 
for the stability of the euro area as a whole. Financial support was tied to a tough, closely 
monitored adjustment programme aimed at restoring the sustainability of public finances in 
Greece.  In  addition,  a  rescue  scheme  financed  by  the  IMF,  the  European  Union  and  its 
member  states  was set  up  to  deal with  future  intensifications  of  the  crisis.  Again,  financial 
support  is  granted  only  if  a  member  state  undergoes  a  tough  adjustment  programme  that 
secures public solvency. This conditionality is crucial: Financial support can buy some time, 
but confidence in the sustainability of public finances will only return if substantial structural 
improvements  in  the  respective  countries  –  be  it  in  Greece  or  in  Ireland,  which  called  for 
support  from  the  EFSF,  EFSM  and  IMF  in  November  after  the  fiscal  burdens  related  to 
supporting its oversized financial sector became overwhelming. 
For the financial system’s future stability and effectiveness, it is indispensable to ensure that 
confidence  in  the  stability  of  public  finances  remains  intact.  To  achieve  this,  not  only  a 
credible  consolidation  of  public  finances  is  needed  but  also  improvements  in  economic 
governance in EMU that ensure prudent fiscal policies in the medium to long run. Against this 
background, the current discussion about – and even calls for – euro bonds must be viewed 
critically. Euro bonds would render all euro-area countries jointly and severally liable, thereby 
eroding each state’s own fiscal responsibility. The incentive for consolidating public finances 
would be reduced, along with the credibility of and confidence in the state’s ability to service 
its debt – which is certainly the opposite of what is needed. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, although the financial sector has been at the heart of the crisis, the 
third  phase  of  the  current  crisis,  which  emerged  in  2010,  clearly  demonstrated  the 
importance of sound economic and financial policy, as confidence in a state’s solvency also  
plays a substantial role in securing financial stability. For the time being, the euro area has 
the necessary measures to deal with the debt crisis at its disposal. I hope that this speech 
has highlighted the clear necessity of  
 
a  swift  and  ambitious  budgetary  consolidation  in  order  to  restore  confidence  in 
public finances, 
strengthening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  order  to  prevent  states  from 
manoeuvring into destabilising situations that can cause a crisis, 
a  surveillance  and  early  warning  mechanism  in  order  to  have  the  ability  to  take 
counter measures at an early stage if necessary, 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  a crisis resolution mechanism that permits the euro area to deal with a country in 
crisis  without  undermining  the  no-bail-out  principle  and  hence  the  incentives  for 
responsible, stability-oriented fiscal policies, and the necessity of 
implementing  a  national  “debt  brake”  to  keep  budgets  in  balance  once  they  are 
consolidated.  
The  crisis  has  painfully  demonstrated  several  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  system  and 
imperfections  in  our  economic  and  fiscal  policies.  If  we  manage  to  improve  the  regulatory 
framework for the financial system and maintain well-disciplined government budgets, we will 
be in a good position to ensure financial stability in the future.  This is the important task we 
must address in 2011.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  Europe  is  more  than  just  economy  and  currency.  Based  on  its 
tradition, culture and diversity, Europe is currently on its way to a new unity. We are all called 
on  to  help  achieve  this  goal.  There  are  many  problems  lying  ahead  of  us.  However,  with 
courage, openness and honesty we can overcome these problems. 
I  wish  you  personally  health  and  happiness  for  2011  and  I  wish  Europe,  in  particular, 
continuing success. It is worth working for. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
