Fabrizio Saccomanni: The European Union and the global crisis -  
the implications for banks, finance and economic policy 
Remarks by Mr Fabrizio Saccomanni, Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the Federal 
Ministry of Finance, Berlin, 8 February 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Since the crisis that disrupted the world economy in 2007, financial tensions have affected 
the  eurozone  as  well.  Last  year  saw  moments  of  crisis  in  the  sovereign  debt  markets  for 
eurozone  countries  that  threatened  to  compromise  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanisms. In the international and especially the British and American press, economists 
and  financial  analysts  hypothesized  or  predicted  sovereign  defaults,  some  countries’  exit 
from the monetary union, and an end to the euro. Even my old friend Otmar Issing, one of 
the  founding  fathers  of  the  euro,  in  an  article  in  the  Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung  last 
November that had echoes across the globe, warned governments in the eurozone that the 
very survival of the currency was at risk. How have we got to this point? Are the risks for the 
euro really so serious? Can they be mitigated and managed? These are the issues I would 
like  to  address  today.  First,  I  will  recount  the  phases  in  the  crisis,  showing  how,  after 
originating in the United States, its repercussions spread to the European Union. I will also 
describe the situation in Italy, which differs from the other “peripheral” countries in terms of 
the structure of its economy, the solidity of its banking system and the outlook for the public 
finances. Second, I will examine  why Europe  came unprepared to manage a global crisis, 
lacking  the  necessary  tools  and  procedures.  As  has  often  happened  in  the  history  of 
European  integration,  the  crisis  has  spurred  the  EU  to  adopt  a  series  of  measures  to 
strengthen economic governance and crisis management. I conclude by sketching out what I 
consider to be the crucial items on the European agenda if we are to come through the crisis 
and promote sustainable growth in the European Union.   
The global crisis and its impact on the European Union 
2. 
The developments of the financial crisis that struck the world economy in August 2007 are 
familiar enough, so I will just summarize what to my mind are the main repercussions on the 
European  Union.  I  will  argue  that  the  crisis  had  three  distinct  phases,  each  with  distinct 
implications for the various EU countries.  
Phase one. The first phase – that of financial “toxic securities” – began in the United States 
and  spread  to  Europe  through  the  banking  systems  in  which  these  high-yield,  high-risk 
financial instruments accounted for a large share of financial intermediation. The network of 
“vehicles”  created  especially  to  market  these  products  proved  a  particularly  important 
channel.  Over  time,  this  network  had  become  a  veritable  “shadow  banking  system”, 
operating  outside  all  supervisory  control.  As  was  widely  reported,  during  this  phase  many 
banking  crises  required  government  support  measures.  Italy  was  one  of  the  least  affected 
countries, and no Italian bank was placed under public control. The Bank of Italy prevented 
the  creation  of  any  “shadow  banking  system”  in  Italy,  and  banks’  liquidity  positions  were 
monitored  daily.  London’s  much  vaunted  “light  touch”  approach  to  supervision  was  never 
adopted in our country. Government financial support to banks was a mere 1.3 per cent of 
2009 GDP in Italy, as against 51.9 per cent in the UK, 32.2 per cent in Spain, 20.6 per cent in 
Germany,  and  18.4  per  cent  in  France.  Italian  banks’  recourse  to  ECB  refinancing  was 
extremely modest, even at times of acute liquidity shortages in interbank markets. No Italian 
bank is featured in the ECB’s list of “persistent bidders”. A number of lessons for regulation 
and supervision in Europe can be drawn from  this phase of the crisis. First, the rules and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
procedures  of  banking  and  financial  oversight  need  to  be  harmonized  in  order  to  avoid 
disparities in treatment among institutions operating in different countries. Second, we cannot 
permit  substantial  volumes  of  banking  and  financial  business  to  escape  all  prudential 
supervision  through  recourse  to  off-balance-sheet  transactions  and  vehicles.  Finally, 
experience has demonstrated the greater efficiency of systems in which banking supervision 
is entrusted to the central bank. Central banks, in fact, are well placed to detect crises early, 
because they are in direct daily contact with the money markets and the payments system. 
Phase  two.  The  second  phase  of  the  crisis  was  marked  by  the  sharp  slump  in  economic 
activity in 2009. To combat the recession, the ECB adopted a highly expansionary monetary 
policy, and fiscal stimulus was introduced in almost all EU countries. During this period, the 
Italian  economy  was  among  those  hardest  hit.  GDP  fell  by  5  per  cent  in  Italy,  as  against 
4.7 per cent in Germany, 2.5 per cent in France, 3.7 per cent in Spain and 4.9 per cent in the 
UK. The recession was especially hard on the small- and medium-sized enterprises that are 
the backbone of Italy’s industrial sector, with immediate effects on output and employment. 
However,  the  high  public  debt  prevented  us  from  adopting  the  sort  of  economic  stimulus 
measures that other countries did. The only available option was to increase the support to 
unemployed  workers.  Even  so,  unemployment  in  Italy  held  at  about  the  level  recorded  in 
Germany and in France, and well below that in Spain. The lesson of this second phase is the 
extraordinary  success  of  the  economic  policies  adopted,  which  effectively  limited  both  the 
depth  and  the  length  of  the  recession.  There  were  none  of  the  disastrous  consequences 
seen in the Depression of the 1930s, and the recession lasted for just one year. Already in 
2010 the whole of the EU saw a sharp upturn. But it was also plain to see that the recovery 
differed from country to country. Countries with public finances in order and debt at tolerable 
levels were able to react more quickly and effectively to the recessionary trends triggered by 
the  crisis.  Countries  like  Italy,  with  a  large  debt  burden,  had  to  limit  fiscal  stimulus  to  the 
utmost  and  accept  a  slower  pace  of  recovery.  Differences  in  factor  productivity,  export 
competitiveness and labour market flexibility also weighed in. Finally, it was seen how in a 
globalized system the financial markets have little “patience” for expansionary fiscal policies 
that are not accompanied by a specific, credible plan to bring deficit and debt down to levels 
deemed sustainable in the medium term. This kind of “market discipline” does have validity, 
even if excesses were not lacking. The financial operators, analysts and rating agencies that 
in  2008  had  clamoured  for  massive  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  to  combat  the  crisis,  by 
2009 were already voicing worries over the growth in the public debt and calling for an exit 
strategy, warning of serious repercussions on the markets in the event of delay or hesitancy. 
Phase three. The third phase of the crisis, in which the EU still finds itself, began with the 
“discovery” of the critical state of the public finances in Greece in early 2010 and the rapid 
contagion of most of the European sovereign debt market. Despite the vigorous measures 
taken  by  the  ECB,  the  Eurogroup  countries  and  the  EU,  there  were  recurrent  tensions 
throughout  the  year,  fuelled  by  financial speculation  and  rumours  of  default  by  this  or  that 
sovereign debtor, the demise of the euro, or the break up of the EU. Again, the impact of the 
crisis was not uniform. The interest rates on government securities fell in Germany, at times 
to  just  over  2  per  cent,  but  rose  to  record  levels  in  Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland.  Interest 
rates also increased in Spain and Italy, though less sharply. Italy’s spread, which before April 
2010 had been higher than Spain’s, has remained consistently lower since then, confirming 
the market’s positive assessment of Italy’s public finance management in this phase of the 
crisis. In absolute terms, since the beginning of monetary union the rate on ten-year Italian 
government  bonds  has  kept  constantly  between  4  and  5  per  cent,  an  entirely  natural  and 
sustainable level for long-term securities. The market’s assessment also reflects the low level 
of private debt in Italy, the soundness of the banking system, the high level of households’ 
real  and  financial  wealth  and,  finally,  the  size  and  diversification  of  our  manufacturing 
industry, active in all the main sectors. Finally, it takes account of the fact that, based on the 
multi-year  financial  stability  plan  already  approved  by  Parliament,  the  deficit/GDP  ratio 
should drop below 3 per cent in 2012 and draw close to 2 per cent in 2013, on the way to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
achieving  a  balanced  budget  in  the  subsequent  years.  It  would  appear,  in  short,  that  the 
market considers Italy capable of addressing its structural problems.  
It is undoubtedly too soon to draw definitive lessons from this phase of the crisis, which is not 
yet over. But some preliminary observations can still be made. First, the public finances are 
in better shape in the euro area as a whole than in the other major economies, the US and 
Japan. The deficit/GDP ratio for the euro area was 6.3 per cent in 2009 and is forecast to fall 
to 3.9 per cent in 2012. The corresponding figures for the US are 12.9 and 6.7 per cent; for 
Japan, 10.2 and 8.1 per cent. In 2012 public debt in the eurozone is forecast to reach 88 per 
cent of GDP, compared with 103 per cent in the United States and 239 per cent in Japan. So 
we can say that the euro area as a whole does not have the problem of fiscal imbalance. 
Further, the European balance of payments is in equilibrium and the euro, albeit with some 
volatility, has held strong against the other main currencies throughout the crisis. However, it 
must be acknowledged that some euro-area countries do have excessive levels of debt and 
deficit, which if not properly dealt with could pose risks to the stability of the euro area and 
the  euro.  However,  the  experience  of  the  crisis  demonstrated  that  the  EU  lacked  the 
instruments either to prevent or to manage problems of this kind. The eurozone could count 
on the monetary policy of the ECB and the Stability and Growth Pact. The ECB has ensured 
price stability in the medium term and supplied economies with the liquidity needed for the 
functioning of the banking and financial systems, but it cannot shoulder the burden of solving 
problems of public finance without betraying its constitutional mandate. And the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  had  already  been  violated  before  the  crisis  precisely  by  the  large  countries, 
Germany, France and Italy, which instead should have set the example for the rest. Quite 
possibly it is unrealistic to expect the EU to handle the risks of financial globalization armed 
only  with  a  “policy”  –  strong  and  efficient,  but  of  limited  scope  –  and  a  “rule”  –  clear  and 
simple, but which each country is free to interpret as it sees fit. If we want to preserve our 
European  currency,  then,  we  must  expand  the  European  Union’s  economic  policy  arsenal 
and adapt it to the reality of the global economy and finance. All the eurozone countries must 
take  part  in  this  effort,  because  the  creation  of  the  euro  has  brought  benefits  to  each. 
Germany gained a large domestic market free from restrictions and competitive devaluations. 
In  2009,  61  per  cent  of  Germany’s  trade  surplus  came  from  trade  with  the  rest  of  the 
eurozone; and adding the other member countries, the EU provided fully 87 per cent of the 
German  surplus.  When  the  euro  was  created,  Germany  had  an  external  current  account 
deficit  equal  to  1.4  per  cent  of  GDP;  today  it  has  a  surplus  of  5  per  cent.  Meanwhile, 
Germany’s partners benefited from the monetary stability ensured by the euro and lowered 
their interest rates very close to German levels. The “founding pact” underpinning Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  has 
in 
competitiveness, productivity and the public finances persist, it is up to the European Union 
to equip itself with the instruments and procedures to induce its member states to eliminate 
them.  
Before turning to the possible remedies for the Union’s inadequacies, I would like to sketch 
the reasons why the EU was caught unprepared to face the global crisis. 
therefore  been  respected  by  all;  so 
imbalances 
if 
European construction: forever unfinished? 
3. 
It may well be asked whether the founding fathers of the European Community and then of 
Economic and Monetary Union deliberately planned to leave the European construction half-
finished, with an ambitious and absorbing mission but without the means to accomplish it. 
Based  on  the  historical  record,  my  answer  is  no.  From  the  time  of  Jean  Monnet,  Konrad 
Adenauer and Alcide De Gasperi, but also later, with Helmut Kohl, François Mitterrand and 
Altiero  Spinelli,  European  construction  was  always  conceived  as  a  gradual  and  pragmatic 
process aimed at eventually achieving that “ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe” 
envisaged since the Treaty of Rome of 1957. And this vision was shared by the authors of 
the Delors Report, all the governors of the European central banks among them, which in 
1989 set out the stages for realizing the Economic and Monetary Union. On the occasion of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  European  Council  meeting  in  Dublin  in  the  spring  of  1990,  Helmut  Kohl  and  François 
Mitterrand wrote a letter to their colleagues arguing the need to proceed with political union. 
In November 1991, in a speech to the Bundestag, Chancellor Kohl said: “Political union is the 
indispensable counterpart to economic and monetary union. Recent history, and not just that 
of Germany, teaches us that the idea of sustaining economic and monetary union over time 
without political union is a fallacy”. In May 2000 Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer, speaking 
here in Berlin, at Humboldt University, albeit in a personal capacity, lucidly underscored the 
need  to  give  the  EU  the  effective  ability  to  act  by  creating  a  European  Federation,  with  a 
government endowed with executive power and a parliament wielding legislative power. And 
I could cite other European leaders.  
European construction was conceived, then, as a gradual process open to all countries that 
share  its  objectives  and  satisfy  certain  political,  institutional  and  economic  conditions. 
There  was  a  wide  political  consensus  in  Europe  on  the  unwritten  principle  that  the  two 
processes  –  strengthening  the  institutions  of  the  Community  and  enlarging  it  to  new 
members  –  had  to  proceed  in  step.  And  the  two  processes  did  develop  in  parallel,  in  a 
balanced and harmonious manner, at least until the changeover to the single currency, even 
though every phase of enlargement was accompanied by a period of intense debate on the 
Union’s  internal  rules.  This  drew  European  governments’  attention  away  from  the  outside 
world, preventing the EU from playing a significant role on the global political and economic 
scene.  But  after  the  break-up  of  the  Soviet  bloc  and  the  creation  of  the  euro,  this  parallel 
progress  came  to  an  end.  Top  priority  was  assigned  to  enlargement,  with  no  fewer  than 
10 countries,  mostly  central  and  eastern  European,  included  all  at  once  in  2004.  The 
decision had found broad support among governments throughout the EU, albeit not always 
for  the  same  reasons,  but  it  caused  anxiety  and  concern  in  the  population.  Politically,  the 
enlargement meant the end of the historical division of Europe wrought by the Iron Curtain, 
and in this light it was viewed with great favour, especially in Germany but generally in all the 
countries.  In  addition,  enlargement  meant  an  expansion  of  the  internal  market  and, 
potentially,  a  “dilution”  of  the  influence  of  the  eurozone  continental  bloc  of  countries,  a 
prospect that certainly did not displease the United Kingdom. For the population, instead, the 
prospect  of  an  open-ended  Europe  that  might  include  all  the  Balkans  and  even  Turkey 
fuelled fear of mounting immigration that would have shattering effects on the labour market 
and on ethnic and social equilibria. In this context, the effort to strengthen the enlarged EU’s 
capacity for action did not find political support even in founder countries such as France and 
the  Netherlands.  The  outcome,  in  2005,  was  the  failure  of  the  draft  Constitutional  Treaty 
around which a broad consensus had formed in the European Convention. The more modest 
Treaty of Lisbon, approved by the governments of the Union at the end of 2007, when the 
global crisis had already begun, did not enter into force until the end of 2009, when the crisis 
had already unleashed its devastating effects, after a long and difficult process of ratification 
by parliamentary vote and referenda. 
An outside observer might find it incomprehensible that the European Union, for fear of the 
impact of enlargement, deliberately deprived itself of the instruments that would have served 
to  manage  the  problem  better.  Actually,  as  so  many  times  in  the  history  of  European 
integration,  the  crisis  obliged  the  governments  to  reopen  the  “building  site”  of  European 
construction.  In  a  brief  span  of  time  major  reform  projects  have  been  completed  and  new 
initiatives launched that can greatly strengthen the EU’s economic governance. This is not 
the place to go into the details of what is being done in the “building site”. But I would like to 
convey the importance of the changes to the institutional framework. Before the crisis, the 
eurozone’s  sole  instruments  were,  as  I  said,  monetary  policy  and  a  weak  rule,  the  old 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  With  the  reforms  already  decided  or  at  an  advanced  stage  of 
discussion,  the  EU  and  the  eurozone  have  adopted  instruments  for  intervention  in  three 
important  areas:  banking  and  financial  supervision,  economic  and  budgetary  policy 
coordination,  and  crisis  management  mechanisms  and  procedures.  The  first  two  reforms 
should  improve  the  ability  of  the  EU  to  prevent  the  build-up  of  unsustainable  financial 
imbalances, and hence the emergence of crisis situations. The third reform will enable crises 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  be  managed  in  an  orderly  manner  by  facilitating  the  adjustment  of  disequilibria.  Let  us 
briefly see what is involved. 
The reform of the supervisory architecture. Three new independent authorities have been 
instituted, responsible for the microprudential supervision respectively of banking, insurance 
and the financial markets. They began operating on 1 January of this year. Their main task is 
to  make  the  supervisory  rules  uniform  in  the  respective  sectors  and  to  harmonize  the 
supervisory practices of the national authorities, for the coordinated pursuit of their objectives 
of intermediaries’ stability, capital adequacy and liquidity. Specifically, the European Banking 
Authority will also be charged with preparing and conducting a new stress-test of European 
banks after the exercise conducted last July, which was severely criticized by analysts and 
market participants for its leniency and lack of transparency. It is absolutely essential that the 
new  test  adhere  to  internationally  accepted  standards  and  methods,  and  that  markets  be 
promptly  informed  of  the  results;  and  it  is  necessary  that  any  bank  that  fails  to  pass  take 
adequate  measures  to  strengthen  its  capital.  Alongside  the  microprudential  supervisory 
authorities, a macroprudential supervisory body will operate at the ECB to monitor systemic 
risk. The European Systemic Risk Board will analyse the evolution of the credit and financial 
aggregates  to  determine  whether  unsustainable  imbalances  with  systemic  implications  are 
being created. The Board will be empowered to recommend to the competent authorities that 
they  take  the  measures  necessary  to  prevent  “speculative  bubbles”  in  the  financial  and 
property markets. 
Economic policy coordination. The changes in this area, designed by the task force under 
President Van Rompuy, envisage a significant strengthening of budget discipline through a 
reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  a  new  mechanism  of  surveillance  on 
macroeconomic disequilibria and vulnerabilities. The new Stability Pact will stress medium-
term fiscal sustainability and trends in the public debt, imparting operational and quantitative 
content to the Treaty’s debt criterion. Budgetary coordination will begin each year with the 
so-called “European semester”, a simultaneous assessment of both the budgetary measures 
and the structural reforms proposed by the individual member states. The Pact will have both 
a  preventive  and  a  corrective  “arm”,  plus  a  broad  spectrum  of  measures  and  sanctions  to 
apply  progressively  in  each.  The  new  surveillance  procedure  will  stress  macroeconomic 
imbalances and suggest the economic policy measures needed to deal with them; in cases 
of  recurrent  non-compliance,  sanctions  may  be  imposed.  The  legislative  acts  for  the 
institution of these new instruments are still under discussion. It is important, while retaining 
the objectives, to accord greater operational importance to prevention than to inevitably tardy 
corrective  measures.  In  any  case,  it  is  important  that  the  Commission’s  power  to  issue 
warnings and recommendations to divergent countries be applied uniformly and not subject 
to the approval of the Ecofin Council. 
Crisis  management.  Under  the  pressure  of  global  markets,  in  2010  the  European  Union 
created  the  machinery  for  financial  assistance  to  member  states  in  difficulty.  At  the  same 
time, the ECB introduced a plan of market purchases of government securities to ensure the 
proper  functioning  of  the  mechanisms  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  After  bilateral 
interventions for Greece, the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Financial 
Stabilization  Mechanism  became  fully  operational,  with  overall  nominal  capacity  of 
€500 billion.  Naturally,  these  are  mechanisms  for  conditional  support  tied  to  severe 
adjustment plans agreed with IMF, EU, and ECB. The Stability Facility has already made a 
highly  successful  international  bond  issue  to  raise  funds  to  support  Ireland.  These 
instruments will remain in being until 2013, when a new, permanent mechanism is slated for 
creation through a Treaty amendment. The new mechanism will be activated by a procedure 
to  determine  whether  the  applicant  country  is  insolvent.  If  it  is,  it  must  negotiate  a 
restructuring of its debt with private creditors and becomes eligible for financial assistance 
only  if  the  debtor  position  has  been  made  sustainable.  These  changes  move  in  the  right 
direction,  but  so  far  financial  analysts  have  remained  sceptical.  They  maintain  that  the 
Stability  Facility  does  not  have  the  “firepower”  for  peak  needs,  if  the  sovereign  debt  crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
should  spread  to  major  countries  like  Spain  or  Italy.  I  myself  consider  this  scenario  most 
improbable, but I do think it would be good to increase the Facility’s effective size, which is 
certainly smaller than the nominal amount, and above all to enhance its operational potential. 
Conclusion 
4. 
The global crisis, with its repercussions on the European Union, is not yet over. There are 
still strains in the banking systems and the public finances of a number of member states. 
Uncertainty  and  volatility  continue  to  beset  the  financial  markets.  Economic  activity  is 
expanding this year, but growth is expected to slow in 2012 in both Germany and the United 
States. There is no denying that the prime responsibility for putting their public finances and 
banking systems in order rests on the single countries. Italy is fully aware of this necessity 
and  will  do  its  part,  as  it  always  has.  It  is  just  as  obvious,  however,  that  countries  with  a 
common  currency  are  under  a  moral  obligation  to  cooperate  for  the  adjustment  of  the 
imbalances  and  to  prevent  contagion  that  would  destabilize  the  currency.  The  measures 
taken  in  this  regard  have  significantly  enhanced  the  EU’s  capability  for  effective  economic 
governance  even  in  times  of  crisis.  But  the  unique  European  construction  is  still  hard  for 
outsiders to fathom, even those who invest in our financial markets and our currency. So we 
must make a special effort to communicate better, to make our institutions and procedures 
more  transparent,  and  to  put  an  end  to  destabilizing  speculative  attacks.  We  need 
institutional arrangements that are adequate to the economic and financial challenges that 
the  EU  and  the  eurozone  will  face  and  that  do  not  require  periodic  reinterpretation  or 
amendment  of  the  Treaty.  Every  time  the  Union  reopens  Treaty  talks,  as  at  present,  our 
partners  and  the  markets  wonder  whether  we  are  about  to  take  a  step  forward  or  a  step 
back. The time for clarity on the economic governance of the European Union is now. 
Yet 
fiscal  consolidation  alone. 
Consolidation  is  necessary  to  stabilize  the  financial  markets  and  to  leave  more  room  for 
private investment. But we must also undertake a strategy of structural reform to increase the 
European  economy’s  growth  potential,  to  reduce  unemployment,  especially  among  young 
people  and  women,  and  to  correct  the  disparities  within  the  euro  area  in  productivity  and 
competitiveness. These are reforms that can and must be undertaken by all the countries of 
the  Union. This  is  not  the  place  to set  out  the details  of  this  plan,  which  for  that matter  is 
specified both in official EU documents, such as the 2020 strategy, and in private writings.1 
In brief, the need is to complete the internal market through further liberalization in services 
such as mass retailing, transportation, construction, finance and the professions, where the 
EU  lags  behind  its  main  competitors.  Action  is  needed  for  the  full  integration  of  energy 
markets, which are still fragmented at national level and dominated by local monopolies that 
impose  high  costs  on  firms  and  households.  And  as  the  Monti  Report  notes,  we  must 
reinforce  the  physical  infrastructures  needed  to  underpin  a  huge  internal  market:  the 
transport  and  telecommunications  networks,  the  energy  grid  and  the  water  supply  system. 
Experience shows that these processes of liberalization and integration stimulate research 
and innovation, which are the prerequisites for new investment and productivity gains. This 
agenda  is  ambitious,  and  in  some  respects  will  be  unpopular  in  the  short  run.  It  therefore 
requires strong leadership by the main European players. We have already missed a number 
of  good  opportunities  –  Maastricht,  Amsterdam,  Nice,  and  lastly  Lisbon  –  to  rise  to  this 
difficult challenge. 
its  structural  problems  by 
the  Union  cannot  solve 
                                                 
1   M. Monti (2010), “A New Strategy for the Single Market”, Report to the President of the European Commission 
José  Manuel  Barroso,  9  May;  G.  Amato,  R.  Baldwin,  D.  Gros,  S.  Micossi  and  P.C.  Padoan  (2010),  “A 
Renewed Political Deal for Sustainable Growth within the Eurozone and the EU”, CEPS Policy Brief, no. 227, 
30 November, Centre for European Policy Studies, Brussels, and EuropEos, Rome. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Let me conclude these remarks with the words of a dear friend of mine and an unwavering 
champion  of  European  integration  –  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  who  passed  away 
prematurely in December. In a bitter reflection in 2006, after the failure to ratify the European 
Constitutional Treaty, Tommaso called on Europe to exercise “active patience”, admonishing 
us that “completing the construction of a united Europe requires truth and clarity on the basic 
questions, the rejection of ambiguity, convincing arguments why Europe is necessary both to 
the prosperity and security of our member countries and to peace and order in the world.”2 
This admonition has lost none of its relevance. 
                                                
 
2   T. Padoa-Schioppa (2006), Europa, una pazienza attiva – Malinconia e riscatto del Vecchio Continente, Milan, 
Rizzoli. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
