Axel A Weber: Enhancing stability – current issues in financial regulation 
Keynote  speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  
at  the  Frankfurt  Finance  Summit,  “Financial  market  regulation,  supervision  and  the  role  
of  the  central  banks:  uniform  regulation  and  subsidiary  supervision”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
23 March 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. We are now in the 
fourth  year  of  a  crisis  that  originated  in  the  US  housing  market  but  eventually  spread 
throughout the financial system. It led to a worldwide slump in economic activity and, in 2010, 
sparked a serious sovereign debt crisis in some euro-area member countries. This course of 
events  demonstrated  the  global  character  of  the  financial  system  –  crises  are  no  longer  a 
purely national issue – and therefore underscored the need for an internationally coordinated 
reform  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks.  Let  me  very  briefly  discuss  the  issue  of 
globalising regulation and supervision from a European perspective. 
Reforming the regulatory framework 
2. 
The  regulatory  reform  has  three  main  building  blocks:  first,  Basel  III  as  an  enhanced 
regulatory  framework  for  banks.  Second,  new  rules  for  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  (SIFIs)  and,  third,  adequate  regulation  of  the  shadow  banking  sector. The  G20 
endorsed Basel III in November 2010. As regards the other two areas, intensive discussions 
are ongoing, and results should emerge later this year. At a general level, there is no doubt 
that an internationally harmonised approach is necessary in all three areas. Given the global 
nature of the financial system, a fragmented approach would invite regulatory arbitrage and 
thus provoke the renewed build-up of systemic risk in less regulated jurisdictions. 
Nonetheless, uniform international principles have to be adapted to heterogeneous national 
structures.  Specific  national 
takes  better  account  of  national 
particularities,  for  example  in  terms  of  market  structure  or  modes  of  refinancing.  The 
challenge  is  therefore  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  ensuring  a  level  international 
playing field and avoiding a one-size-fits-all approach that places an unnecessarily onerous, 
or even harmful, burden of adjustment on national financial systems. Whether this would be 
the  case  in  the  EU  if  the  Basel  III  framework  is  implemented  through  the  instrument  of  a 
regulation  rather  than  a  directive  is  currently  a  hotly  debated  issue.  For  the  European 
Commission, it would definitely be easier to enforce common standards through a regulation, 
but this approach would leave only very limited leeway for member states to accommodate 
country-level differences or to deal with any unintended consequences that emerge after the 
rules have come into effect. 
legislation 
typically 
Reforming the supervisory framework 
3. 
The reform of supervisory structures involves a similar trade-off, though it is tilted somewhat 
more in favour of national particularities; national supervisors naturally have a more intimate 
knowledge  of  local  financial  institutions  than  supranational  supervisors.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
clear from the experiences of the crisis that financial supervision requires a higher degree of 
international cooperation: firstly because international banks operate and are supervised in 
different  jurisdictions;  and  secondly  because  of  potential  systemic  risks,  which  are 
predominantly a cross-border phenomenon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To  facilitate  the  supervision  of  international  banks,  the  European  System  of  Financial 
Supervisors (ESFS) has been set up. Part of this system is the European Banking Authority 
(EBA),  which  is  responsible  for  supervising  the  banking  sector.  To  allow  for  adequate 
subsidiarity,  the  EBA  follows  a  members-based  approach  where  national  supervisors  are 
members of boards and working groups. 
With regard to systemic risk, establishing international cooperation is particularly important. 
To  strengthen 
traditional 
microprudential approach, the focus of supervision has to be broadened from the level of the 
individual  bank  to  the  systemic  level.  This  can  and  will  be  achieved  by  various  means. 
Institutionally, an important element is the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which has 
been created as part of the ESFS. Its task is to detect systemic risks early on and to issue 
individual member states with warnings and recommendations. Nevertheless, as the ESRB 
has  no  powers  to  enforce  its  recommendations,  it  remains  the  responsibility  of  national 
governments to ensure that recommendations are followed. 
the  macroprudential  approach  which  supplements 
the 
The role of central banks 
4. 
Now,  as  a  last  point,  let  me  say  a  few  words  on  the  role  of  central  banks  in  this  new 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  Naturally,  central  banks  have  a  strong  interest  in 
financial stability, as only a stable financial system allows monetary policy measures to be 
implemented efficiently. At the same time, central banks have great expertise in all matters 
concerning  the  financial  system.  Consequently,  they  already  play,  and  should  continue  to 
play, a prominent role in safeguarding financial stability at the microprudential as well as at 
the macroprudential level. At the microprudential level, central banks in many countries are 
involved  in  the  supervision  of  individual  banks.  In  addition,  they  naturally  analyse 
developments at the macroprudential level extensively and consequently play a major role in 
the  ESRB.  However,  wherever  central  banks  are  involved  in  financial  supervision,  it  is 
imperative  that  this  does  not  compromise  their  independence  and  their  primary  objective, 
which is to maintain price stability. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  has  to  reflect  the  global 
nature  of  the  financial  system.  Nonetheless,  heterogeneous  national  structures  make  it 
imperative  to  maintain  a  certain  degree  of  flexibility  when  reforming  regulation  and 
supervision.  To  strike  the  balance  between  uniformity  and  subsidiarity  is  certainly  a 
formidable challenge but I am confident that we will eventually succeed and create a more 
stable and more resilient financial system. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
