Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Towards a multi-polar currency and reserve 
system 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the High-Level 
Conference on the International Monetary System, Zurich, 10 May 2011. 
 Governor Hildebrand,  
Managing Director Strauss-Kahn, 
Distinguished Speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  co-hosts,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund, for inviting me to speak at this high-level conference. So far in this session, 
we have listened to a number of insightful presentations by well-known speakers. To avoid 
repeating  what  has  been  said,  I  will  try  to  frame  my  talk  from  the  perspective  of  a  small 
emerging market economy. My focus will be on the three problematic issues facing emerging 
market economies and the current international monetary system, and how we may think of 
what needs to be done to put our international monetary system on a more sustainable path. 
Let me start with the first issue. As of now, excess global liquidity generated under 
2. 
the  current  international  monetary  system  is  complicating  the  conduct  of  macroeconomic 
policy in many emerging market economies. Although the expansion of the global economy 
has strengthened in the past few quarters, economic cycles and thus monetary policy stance 
among various regions greatly differ. This has been widely regarded as a key push factor for 
international capital flows into emerging markets. The additional liquidity infused into these 
economies  occurs  at  a  time  when  it  is  necessary  to  withdraw  economic  stimulus  and 
normalize or even tighten monetary policy. This is an example of the inconsistency between 
global liquidity and regional economic cycles.  
The second issue is the current international monetary system which is not aligning 
3. 
with the changing structure of the global economy. As we all know, one outcome from the 
current  crisis  is  the  growing  role  of  emerging  market  economies,  particularly  in  Asia.  This 
multi-polar economic landscape is something for policymakers to consider whether there is a 
need  to  move  to  a  multi-polar  currency  system.  The  end  goal  should  be  to  retain  the 
efficiency of the current system while enhancing its stability going forward. 
The third issue is, despite the shortcomings of the current international monetary 
4.  
system, the international community has not been able to make a transition to an alternative 
system. In practice, it is difficult to identify a currency to compete with the US dollar as there 
are  certain  criteria  to  qualify  as  reserve  currency.  First,  a  reserve-issuing  country  has  to 
illustrate a good track record of prudent macroeconomic policy. Second, such country must 
have an open capital account regime supported by deep and liquid financial markets. Should 
these two criteria are satisfied, such currency has a potential to be widely accepted and used 
in private international transactions. Today, it is difficult to find an alternative currency which 
satisfies these conditions. The loss of economies of scale from using the incumbent currency 
is  another  constraint  preventing  the  move  away  from  the  current  dollar-based  system.  As 
such,  the  dollar  continues  to  dominate  the  international  reserve  system  both  in  terms  of 
reserve assets and international trade and financial settlements. 
5. 
Given these difficulties, the current international monetary system will prevail but it 
may be prone to occasional instability as we have experienced in the past. In the meantime, 
we may still want to consider how to enhance the role of emerging market economies such 
as BRICS in the international monetary system. Such arrangement is arguably an avenue for 
these  emerging  market  economies  to  share  the  privilege  of  reserve-issuing  countries.  It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
would also be a means of increasing the supply of reserve currencies to serve future demand 
for reserves along with the growth of the global economy. 
6. 
To facilitate such diversification process, the BRICS need to also play their part by 
further  opening  the  capital  accounts,  allowing  currency  convertibility  and  deepening  and 
widening  their  financial  markets.  Once  these  conditions  are  achieved,  the  inclusion  in  the 
SDR basket would increase the demand for BRICS currencies. 
7. 
It is important to stress that by adding BRICS to the international system is not a 
panacea. A key concern is the fact that the Triffin dilemma1 could still be problematic. In other 
words, the provision of global liquidity will continue to largely depend on the macroeconomic 
conditions  of  the  reserve-issuing  countries.  As  such,  there  is  a  great  need  for  policy 
coordination  among  them  to  ensure  an  orderly  supply  of  global  liquidity.  In  the  worst-case 
scenario, the multi-polar system could be more unstable especially during crisis periods. This 
is  because  the  reserve  currencies  are  close  substitutes  among  themselves.  As  such, 
deterioration  in  the  financial  position  of  one  reserve-issuing  country  could  lead  to  severe 
capital  flight,  causing  volatility  in  both  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices.  At  this  point,  it  is 
difficult to foresee if the management of global liquidity in the multi-polar system would be 
easier or more difficult than the current system. 
8. 
As the multi-polar system is not immune from capital flow volatility, I would like to 
make  a  brief  comment  on  recent  IMF  framework  on  capital  flow  management  measures. 
While we support the work of the IMF in conducting empirical study on country experiences 
in  managing  surges  of  capital  inflows,  we  do  not  support  any  rules-based  approach  in 
dealing with capital flow issues. Policymakers should be able to respond to such challenge in 
a pragmatic rather than rules-based manner. 
9. 
Let me finish my talk with some comment on the SDR. In theory, there are many 
good reasons to enhance the role of SDR as one of its distinct advantages is the possibility 
of  managing  global  liquidity  without  affecting  the  value  of  currencies  in  the  basket.  In 
addition,  the  basket  also  has  the  diversification  advantage  as  the  system  will  be  less 
exposed to shocks in any of its constituent economies. At this time, it may not be possible to 
move  towards  this  system  as  there  is  not  enough  political  support  and  many  operational 
hurdles remain to be overcome. Nevertheless, it is important for the IMF to continue its work 
on how to broaden the use of SDR in all aspects of an international currency (i.e. store of 
value, medium of exchange and unit of account). 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
10. 
In closing, I would like to stress that the international monetary system is certainly in 
a period of transition. I do not expect a big bang, but a long and gradual process arising from 
macroeconomic  and  structural  adjustments.  Policy  dialogue  and  cooperation  between 
current and prospective reserve-issuing countries will play an important role in ensuring this 
smooth  transition.  As  there  are  so  many  uncertainties  along  the  way,  it  would  take  great 
leadership from some advanced and major emerging market economies to move the world 
forward towards a more stable international monetary system. 
Thank you 
                                                 
1  The Triffin dilemma is the conflict between domestic and international objectives of reserve issuing country. 
This is due to its duty to supply the world with extra currency, which may cause a loss of confidence in its 
currency. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
