Njuguna Ndung’u: Launch of the first and new currency of the Republic 
of South Sudan 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Launch of 
the first and new currency of the Republic of South Sudan, Juba, South Sudan, 18 July 2011. 
 Your Excellency, Salva Kiir, President of the Republic of South Sudan; 
Honourable Minister of Finance of the Republic of South Sudan (ROSS); 
All Honourable Ministers of the ROSS; 
Honourable the Governor of the Bank of South Sudan (BOSS); 
All invited guests; 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure,  honour  and  privilege  to  be  part  of  this  historic  ceremony  of 
launching the first Currency for the newly born Republic of South Sudan. Indeed I wish to 
congratulate the Republic of South Sudan for being able to introduce new Currency hardly 
ten  days  after  the  Country’s  Independence  Day.  This  is  by  all  standards  no  mean 
achievement. 
I watched with great delight the recent celebrations that marked the birth of the Republic of 
South Sudan and consider it a great honour to have been invited to this equally important 
milestone event in the history of this new nation. 
This  event  is  extremely  important  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  as  it  signifies  the  strong 
relationship that the South Sudan has had with the Central Bank of Kenya over the years. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  hosted  his  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Bank  of  South  Sudan 
some years back. This paved the way for the continued friendship the two institutions have 
enjoyed to date. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  also  glad  to  note  that  recent  consultations  have  identified 
additional areas in which technical assistance can be offered to the Bank of South Sudan by 
the Central Bank of Kenya. 
Your Excellency Mr. President, we recognize the enormous but not insurmountable task that 
the Bank of South Sudan has in transforming itself from a Branch to a fully fledged Central 
Bank  and  assure  you  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya’s  commitment  and  support  in  this 
transformation process. 
Coming to the wider network of the Eastern African region, Leap frog with ease for Bank of 
South Sudan: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
With these few remarks, I wish to once again congratulate the Republic of South Sudan and 
the Bank of South Sudan for launching its new Currency. 
Thank you and God bless. 
Payment Systems 
Currency convertibility 
Facilitate trade with the rest of the East African Community Region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
