Jean-Pierre Danthine: Market developments, Swiss monetary policy and 
foreign exchange reserve management 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2011. 
 In my remarks, I would like to examine three topics. First, I will comment on developments in 
the international financial markets. Then I will briefly address the situation in the Swiss franc 
money  market  and  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Finally,  I  will  talk  about  the 
management of the foreign exchange reserves. 
Developments in the international financial markets 
Developments in the international bond, share and foreign exchange markets are mixed and, 
as  before,  characterised  by  relatively  high  volatility.  The  relatively  favourable  global 
economic  developments  and  the  fact  that  the  balance  sheets  and  the  liquidity  situation  of 
corporations  outside  the  financial  industry  are  in  relatively  good  –  in  some  cases  very  
good  –  shape  are  having  a  positive  effect.  By  contrast,  the  balance  sheets  of  many 
governments  reflect  the  consequences  of  crisis  measures  and  increasing  structural  debt 
problems.  Thus,  in  recent  quarters,  the  financial  markets  have  presented  a  mixed  picture. 
Signs of an improvement in the prevailing mood have been followed by setbacks attributable 
to  the  serious  impending  challenges.  At  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis,  these  were 
mainly concentrated in corporations’ balance sheets. Since then, the market has increasingly 
shifted  its  focus  towards  the  risks  associated  with  government  debt.  Such  fundamental 
changes in investor risk assessment influence not just the prices of the affected bonds. They 
also  impact  on  other  investment  categories  and,  therefore,  as  I  will  explain  later,  on  the 
financial markets in general.  
Allow me to begin by addressing the most serious developments. The European sovereign 
debt crisis is far from over. In comparison to last year, it has again worsened. Thus the credit 
risk  premia  of  euro  countries  with  large  debt  burdens  continued  to  rise;  compared  to  the 
previous year’s average value, the risk premia have approximately doubled. That the debt 
problem  in  the  euro  area  has  worsened  is apparent  not  just  on  the  bond  markets.  On  the 
foreign  exchange  market,  the  CHF/EUR  exchange  rate,  in  particular,  reacted  strongly, 
attaining  new  all-time  high  levels.  Since,  at  the  same  time,  the  US  dollar  was  still  tending 
lower, the CHF/USD exchange rate also climbed to extreme levels. The weak dollar has to 
do with doubts about the robustness of the US economy in the wake of diminishing fiscal and 
monetary policy stimuli, as well as worries about US public debt. Since the Swiss franc also 
recorded  historical  exchange  rates  against  other  currencies,  its  value,  on  a  real  and 
trade-weighted basis, is now well above its long-term level.  
Investor  appetite  for  bonds  considered  to  be  secure  helped  to  push  down  capital  market 
yields  on  US,  German  and  Swiss  ten-year  government  bonds  to  the  level  last  recorded  in 
December 2010 of around 3% (US and Germany) and 1.7% (Switzerland). By contrast, the 
risk  premia for  bonds  of  particularly  burdened  euro  economies  –  namely  those  of  Greece, 
Ireland  and  Portugal  –  continued  to  rise.  Overall,  the  risk  premia  of  certain  European 
sovereign borrowers remain very high, and latent threats of contagion continue to exist. 
In the global equity and commodity markets, the mood during recent quarters was cautiously 
positive.  In  the  equity  markets,  the  gratifying  corporate  results  had  a  strongly  supportive 
effect. In the US, for example, around two-thirds of the most important corporations reported 
better  results  than  were  expected  by  the  market.  In  the  commodity  markets,  healthy 
economic conditions – especially in the emerging countries – assisted a continuation of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
upward movement, although here, too, price volatility remained high. However, there were 
also factors weighing on the markets, like the political unrest in North Africa and the Middle 
East, the catastrophe in Japan and, finally, the indications of a global economic slowdown in 
the markets.  
To summarise, the situation in the international financial markets presents a mixed picture, 
despite the fact that economic developments are relatively favourable. This reflects the fact 
that  the  burden  inherited  from  the  economic  and  financial  crisis  continues  to  be  very 
significant.  
Implementation of monetary policy 
The financial crisis was characterised not least by turbulence on the money market. While 
uncertainties  in  the  international  financial  markets  persist,  the  situation  in  the  Swiss  franc 
money market eased last year, and has been very relaxed since the beginning of 2011. The 
Swiss franc money market is still in a position of structural liquidity surplus vis-à-vis the Swiss 
National  Bank  (SNB).  Consequently,  our  focus  is  on  liquidity-absorbing  open  market 
operations. Currently, a large proportion of the surplus Swiss franc liquidity is being absorbed 
through  SNB  Bills  amounting  to  around  CHF 110  billion  and  daily  repo  auctions  (reverse 
repos) of around CHF 25 billion. The volume being absorbed has not been increased over 
recent  months.  Consequently,  the  total  sight  deposits  of  domestic  banks  have,  at 
approximately CHF 25 billion, remained almost unchanged. This is a significantly higher level 
than  before  the  financial  crisis.  It  exceeds  the  minimum  reserve  requirements  many  times 
over. As a consequence, interest rates on the Swiss franc money market are still close to 
zero.  Despite  the  fact  that  interest  rates  are  still  very  low,  the  volume  of  activity  on  the 
secured  Swiss  franc  money  market  remains  at  a  relatively  high  level.  By  contrast,  the 
volumes traded on the unsecured Swiss franc money market are still markedly lower than 
their pre-crisis level. The management of the three-month Libor is, however, not affected by 
this, and can still be guaranteed. 
The management of the foreign exchange reserves  
Allow  me  to  conclude  with  a  few  words  on  the  management  of  our  foreign  exchange 
reserves. 
First, let me stress that the increase in the foreign exchange reserves in 2009 and 2010 was 
a direct consequence of monetary policy measures. It had nothing to do with the pursuit of 
investment goals. With interest rates close to zero, the SNB created additional Swiss franc 
liquidity through foreign exchange market interventions. This prevented the rise in the value 
of  the  Swiss  franc  from  leading  to  what  at  the  time  would  have  been  an  undesirable 
tightening  of  monetary  conditions.  The  foreign  exchange  reserves  therefore  surged  from 
around CHF 50 billion at the end of 2008 to a good CHF 200 billion by the end of 2010. 
A direct consequence of our much larger balance sheet is the increase in the financial risks 
associated  with  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  These  risks  have  materialised  in  the  last 
12 months, and have led to significant losses for the SNB. They hold the potential for further 
losses.  Just  as  the  increase  in  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  was  determined  by  the 
demands of monetary policy under the exceptional circumstances that prevailed in 2009 and 
2010, monetary policy considerations will continue to dictate our actions in the future. This 
means, in particular, that selling our foreign exchange reserves (and buying Swiss francs) is 
not an option at the moment. 
Monetary policy also dictates that our currency risks not be hedged. In effect, hedging the 
exchange  rate  risk  using  derivatives  would  be  equivalent  to  buying  Swiss  francs  against 
foreign  exchange  for  forward  delivery.  The  effect  of  hedging  on  the  market  is  thus 
comparable to the direct sale of foreign currency. The only option for the SNB is therefore to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
diversify its risks as efficiently as possible with a view to limiting the exchange rate, credit 
and  concentration  risks  of  its  foreign  currency  investments.  The  SNB  had  already  begun 
diversifying  its  investments  in  the  late  1990s.  The  SNB  foreign  currency  investments  are 
considerably more diversified than those of many other countries, with many central banks 
investing their foreign exchange reserves mainly in US Treasuries, that is, in public debt titles 
and  in  dollars.  While  the  SNB  also  holds  the  large  majority  of  its  portfolio  in  the  form  of 
government securities, it also currently holds as many as 10% of its reserves in equities and 
5%  in  corporate  bonds.  In  order  to  limit  credit  risk,  the  large  majority  of  our  public  debt 
holdings  have  the  highest  (AAA)  or  second-highest  rating  (AA).  In  effect,  our  current 
allocation corresponds to 86% AAA-rated and 13% AA-rated public debt holdings.  
The  SNB  diversification  strategy  is,  however,  subject  to  limits.  These  spring  from  the 
stringent  requirements  with  regard  to  the  security  and  liquidity  of  the  investments.  Many 
investment markets are too narrow, and do not meet the SNB’s liquidity requirements. The 
SNB’s investment universe – and thus its scope for diversification – is therefore limited. The 
bulk of the worldwide supply of highly rated public debt instruments is denominated in euros 
and US dollars. It is thus due to the instruments available on the market that the largest part 
of  our  foreign  currency  investments  is  in  euros  (55%)  and  in  US  dollars  (25%).  The 
remainder  of  our  investments  is  composed  of  yen  (10%),  Canadian  dollars  (4%),  pounds 
sterling (3%) and other currencies (3%). 
Finally,  taking  a  general  and  somewhat  longer-term  view,  the  following  point  should  be 
noted. The SNB’s currency reserves are made up of foreign currency investments and gold. 
In  a  risk-averse  environment,  losses  tend  to  occur  on  foreign  currency  investments  and 
profits  on  gold,  while  in  a  risk-friendly  environment  the  opposite  is  true.  Consequently, 
diversification of a portfolio to include gold and foreign currency helps to stabilise earnings 
over an entire risk cycle. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
