Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Transformation of the banking business and 
its impact on retail payments – governance, efficiency and integration 
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  for  the  panel  session  at  the  conference  “The  future  of  retail 
payments: opportunities and challenges”, Vienna, 12 May 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Vienna – the town where I studied and where I 
spent a good part of my life. It is also a great pleasure to be here at this conference, which 
has been organised by the two central banks that have shaped my professional career – the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the European Central Bank. And, last but not least, it is 
also  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  chair  the  first  panel  session,  which  brings  together  five 
renowned representatives from the public and private sector. 
From the public sector, I would like to welcome (in alphabetical order) Mr Giovanni Carosio, 
Member of the Governing Board at Banca d’Italia, Ms Feriha Imamović, Vice Governor at the 
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Ms Júlia Király, Deputy Governor at Magyar 
Nemzeti Bank. From the private sector, I am pleased to welcome Mr Rainer Hauser, Member 
of  the  Management  Board  at  UniCredit  Bank  Austria,  and  Mr  Bertrand  Lavayssière, 
Managing  Director  at  Capgemini.  I  hope  we  will  have  an  interesting  discussion,  and  I  am 
looking forward to hearing your views on our discussion topic. 
The theme of this panel session is the transformation of the banking business and its impact 
on  retail  payments.  Let  me  start  my  introduction  with  the  observation  that  almost  as  we 
speak, Vienna is celebrating the Wiener Festwochen, a festival of music and the performing 
arts.  It  will  feature  41  productions  from  23  countries  –  an  impressive  demonstration  of  the 
internationalisation and universality of art. 
As is the case for art, the banking business has become more and more international. This is 
demonstrated  by  the  increase  in  foreign  assets  and  liabilities  in  banks’  balance  sheets.  In 
Europe, the internationalisation has been driven to some extent – but not exclusively – by the 
economic and monetary integration of the EU. Advances in information technology have also 
contributed substantially in enabling banks to offer financial services not only at national level 
but to foreign businesses and individuals, too. 
The  expansion  of  the  potential  customer  base  has  opened  possibilities  for  synergy  effects 
and  efficiency  gains.  It  has  also  made  those  banks  that  succeeded  in  creating  an 
international  customer  base  less  vulnerable  to  local  shocks.  However,  the  success  of  the 
internationalisation  of  the  banking  business  also  depends  on  a  number  of  factors  such  as 
legal  certainty,  technical  standardisation,  sound  governance  and,  last  but  not  least,  a 
readiness to discard some national models and habits. 
In the area of retail payments, the groundwork necessary to enable European integration has 
been largely done. The Directive on Payment Services (PSD) and the Regulation on cross-
border payments provide the legal basis for the provision of pan-European payment services. 
The payments industry – represented by the European Payments Council (EPC) – provided 
technical  standardisation  by  developing  payment  schemes  and  frameworks,  although 
standardisation  in  the  area  of  cards  still  needs  to  be  further  pursued.  The  European 
Payments Council also provided the governance structure for the design and implementation 
process of the payment schemes and frameworks. 
It is at the final stage, at the point of migration to the payment schemes and frameworks, that 
the  integration  process  has  stalled.  SEPA  migration  as  a  self-regulatory  process  has  not 
achieved  the  required  results.  The  banking  industry’s  self-imposed  deadline  of  December 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2010 for SEPA instruments to be in general use has not been met. It would be simplistic to 
only blame the banking industry for this. As we all know, it takes two to tango, and migration 
can only succeed if the supply and demand sides share the same aims. Thus, one of the 
lessons  learned  is  that  the  involvement  of  the  demand  side  in  the  governance  of  the 
integration process is necessary to facilitate migration. 
Last but not least, the integration process at European level requires a readiness to discard 
some national models and habits. Probably this is the most difficult part of the transformation 
of the retail payments market. The media in some countries report that bank customers cling 
to familiar national payment instruments and national account numbers, which they are loath 
to  change.  However,  if  change  is  made  mandatory,  as  was  the  case  with  the  cash 
changeover to the euro, the process is often even faster than necessary. And when it comes 
to adopting new technological devices – the mobile phone, MP3 players, tablet PCs – people 
embrace them quickly. Thus, I expect that the adoption of the proposal for a SEPA migration 
end date will finally unlock the potential for integration and efficiency gains in the European 
retail payments market. 
In the conference on retail payments’ integration and innovation held at the ECB two years 
ago, we established that despite the financial crisis, the retail payments business has been 
resilient,  providing  reliable  and  regular  revenues.  Before  the  crisis,  the  fact  that  the  retail 
payments business is a substantial source of revenue in banking, accounting for up to 25% 
of  total  bank  revenues,  was  often  neglected.  Now,  the  observation  that  banks  with  a 
balanced business model have been in a better position to cope with the crisis has led to a 
better recognition of the importance of retail banking and retail payments. 
Still, despite their resilience and stable nature, retail payments revenues cannot be taken for 
granted.  They  are  under  pressure  from  different  directions:  increasing  competition, 
substantial investment needs to keep up with customer demands and technological progress, 
and a more decisive stance on the part of competition authorities. With regard to the pricing 
of payment products, payment service providers have to face the paradox that on the one 
hand, they are being pressurised to ensure more price transparency, and on the other, direct 
pricing would probably result in an increase in pricing that would neither be accepted by the 
customers nor by the regulators. 
The financial crisis has not only led to a better recognition of the importance of retail banking 
and  retail  payments:  it  has  also  sharpened  the  focus  on  banking  governance.  In  recent 
years,  many  banks  were  giving  increasing  priority  to  the  interests  of  the  shareholders. 
Consequently, it can be argued that the interests of the clients, and thereby of society as a 
whole, slipped too much into the background. In short, the public service function of banks, 
which is particularly relevant in the field of payments and loans, has been neglected.  
Now, it is time for me to hand over to the panellists. I am interested to hear your views on the 
key  issues  relating  to  the  transformation  process  of  the  banking  business,  in  particular  as 
regards retail payments. What are the prerequisites for and barriers to successful integration 
in the field of retail banking and payments? What does an efficient retail payments market 
look like? Which governance models are appropriate to steer the retail payments market? 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
