José De Gregorio: Adjustment in the global economy 
Keynote address by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the 2011 
Institute of International Finance (IIF) Latin American Economic Forum, Calgary, 27 March 
2011. 
 I am grateful to Luis Oscar Herrera, Enrique Orellana and Tatiana Vargas for valuable comments. 
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak at this 2011 IIF Latin American Economic 
Forum. The last few years have been the most challenging for economic policy around the 
world  in  many  decades.  From  an  unprecedented  inflationary  shock  in  2007–08,  the  global 
economy  went  through  a  financial  crisis  and  a  recession  in  2008–09,  of  a  scale  not  seen 
since  the  Great  Depression.  Now,  we  are  experiencing  a  process  of  recovery  with  strong 
inflationary pressures and tensions in the world economy as a result of asymmetries in this 
process.  The  purpose  of  my  talk  today  will  be  the  global  adjustment,  how  it  has  been 
proceeding and what the current challenges for policymaking are, with special focus on the 
asymmetries and their implications for economic policy. 
The uneven recovery 
The  world  economy  is  growing  unevenly  and  subject  to  many  tensions.  Most  advanced 
economies are recovering from the crisis, but they still have high rates of unemployment and 
excess  capacity,  and  this  is  expected  to  last  for  some  time.  Although  there  are  signs  of 
improvements  in  the  recovery,  many  economies  are  still  in  a  weak  financial  position,  and 
domestic  demand  is  expected  to  grow  at  low  rates  for  some  time.  After  years  of  financial 
excesses,  households  in  many  countries,  particularly  in  the  U.S.,  have  accumulated 
excessive debt.  
Many  advanced  economies  also  have  weak  fiscal  positions,  due  to  fiscal  expansions 
implemented to contain the recession, measures to support the banking sector, or simply the 
fiscal profligacy that took place prior to the crisis. In particular, the level of government debt 
in  some  European  countries  will  require  a  significant  and protracted  fiscal  consolidation  to 
avoid  insolvency.  Therefore,  the  deleveraging  process  of  households  and  governments 
implies that domestic demand is unlikely to be an engine of growth. As a consequence of this 
scenario, the inflationary pressures will be relatively contained. The rise in commodity prices 
is  having  effects  on  headline  inflation,  but  the  propagation  to  other  prices  will  be  limited 
because  of  a  negative  output  gap.  This  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  situation  in  emerging 
market economies (EMEs). Accordingly, monetary policy in advanced economies will remain 
expansionary,  and  despite  some  tightening  in  the  near  future,  they  will  still  have  lower 
interest rates than those in EMEs, and which will be well below what used to be considered a 
neutral stance. 
In contrast, EMEs have been growing strongly, and after suffering moderately from the global 
crisis,  many  have  already  reached  levels  of  full  capacity,  and  some  of  them  may  even  be 
overheating  (Figure  1).  At  a  global  level,  the  buoyancy  of  EMEs  has  resulted  in  higher 
commodity  prices,  which  coupled  with  some  specific  factors,  such  as  weather  problems 
impacting  agricultural  production  and  tensions  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa,  have 
pushed food prices to record highs and oil prices to very high levels as well. This price shock, 
coupled with strong domestic activity, results in inflationary pressures that must be contained 
with tighter monetary policy. Contrary to the situation in advanced economies, international 
price  (supply)  shocks  find  fertile  territory  to  propagate  to  wages  or  other  prices  when  the 
economy is in a strong cyclical position. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  uneven  recovery  of  the  world  economy  is  resulting  in  an  uneven  monetary  policy 
landscape (Figure 2), which strengthens currencies in EMEs and induces capital inflows to 
these countries. Free trade and export-led growth have been a successful growth strategy in 
developing  countries,  which  see  the  strengthening  of  their  currencies  as  a  threat  to  this 
strategy. Consequently, many countries have been trying to fight the appreciation via capital 
controls and exchange rate intervention. 
China and the U.S. deserve special mention, as they are at the center of the tensions of the 
adjustment.  China  has  been  the  growth  engine  of  the  world,  and  it  would  not  be  an 
exaggeration to call it the “grower of last resort” for the global economy. They have decided 
to appreciate gradually, much more slowly than most EMEs and commodity exporters. Since 
December  2009,  the  yuan  has  appreciated  almost  four  percent,  while  this  figure  is  much 
closer to ten percent for most EMEs. The comparison is even more dramatic when looking at 
a longer period of time. This has been achieved through massive reserve accumulation and 
limited financial integration. However, for measures in the foreign exchange market to have 
real effects – that is, on the real exchange rate, which is the relevant variable from the point 
of view of competitiveness – these measures need to have some support from the real side 
of the economy. In the case of China, this is a very high savings rate. China saves about half 
of its GDP and the resulting current account surplus sustains a depreciated real exchange 
rate. Otherwise, attempts to maintain a depreciated nominal exchange rate sooner or later 
lead  to  inflation,  which  is  the  way  to  achieve  relative  price  adjustment  when  the  nominal 
exchange rate is not allowed to adjust. 
The  U.S.,  in  turn,  is  undertaking  an  extraordinary  monetary  expansion.  Beyond  having 
reached  the  zero  lower  bound  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  unconventional  measures  are 
adding  additional  monetary  stimulus.  In  particular,  the  massive  purchase  of  securities 
implemented  in  the  so-called  QE2  program.  This  explains  why  the  dollar  has  reached  its 
lowest  level  in  several  decades  (Figure  3),  but  this  is  not  only  the  result  of  expansionary 
monetary policy, but also of the lack of domestic demand and of the external imbalances. 
Global  rebalancing  of  the  world  economy  needs  countries  in  a  strong  cyclical  position  to 
direct  domestic  demand  to  imports,  while  countries  with  insufficient  domestic  demand  to 
increase exports. Exchange rate adjustment should facilitate this process. Therefore, a faster 
appreciation of the yuan would relieve some appreciatory pressures in other EMEs, making 
the  adjustment  more  balanced.  But,  for  this  to  be  achieved  on  a  sustained  basis,  it  is  not 
enough to let the exchange rate adjust. Structural reforms will also be required to achieve a 
sustainable  and  efficient  reduction  of  China’s  savings  rate.  On  the  other  hand,  a  rise  in 
advanced economies’ interest rates, in particular in the U.S., would also alleviate currency 
tensions. However, the main responsibility for policymakers is to secure sustainable growth 
in  their  home  economies  that  favors  their  citizens,  and  we  all  have  to  deal  with  the 
repercussions of those actions. 
The response in emerging market economies 
Emerging  market  economies  have  been  facing  two  challenges  as  a  consequence  of  this 
global  environment.  First,  exchange  rate  appreciation  and  a  resumption  of  capital  inflows, 
and  second,  inflationary  pressures.  Sometimes,  these  two  challenges  may  lead  to 
inconsistencies in macroeconomic management. However, it is important to highlight that in 
small open economies any attempt to persistently manage an exchange rate away from its 
fundamentals,  in  particular  at  an  overvalued  level,  may  end  up  leading  to  inflation.  If  the 
adjustment does not come from a change in the value of the currency, it will happen through 
inflation. This is the reason why it is an illusion to think that central banks can control both the 
exchange  rate  and  the  inflation  rate.  However,  there  are  options  available  to  transitorily 
reduce  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  while  monetary  policy  continues  to  focus  on  price 
stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework,  a  first  implication  regarding  exchange  rate 
fluctuations is that monetary policy would tend to lean against the wind. Indeed, a persistent 
exchange  rate  appreciation  would  have  disinflationary  effects  and  would  induce  a  looser 
monetary  policy  than  the  one  that  would  prevail  with  a  more  depreciated  exchange  rate 
(everything else constant). However, in the current juncture, this effect does not prevent the 
need  to  tighten  monetary  policy,  given  strong  growth  in  EMEs  and  inflationary  pressures 
coming from commodity prices. 
A second option to mitigate currency appreciation is exchange rate intervention. In order to 
keep control on the interest rate, this intervention must be sterilized. Of course it has lower 
effects  than  when  the  monetary  impact  is  not  sterilized,  but  it  is  consistent  with  inflation 
stabilization. In Chile, since 2008 we have intervened twice, and we have implemented it in a 
pre-announced way, with a known schedule for intervention and sterilization, so it does not 
interfere with monetary policymaking. The rationale for the intervention was twofold. On the 
one hand, to accumulate reserves, strengthening our international liquidity position, and on 
the  other  hand,  to  provide  some  transitory  relief  to  sectors  that  need  to  undergo  an 
adjustment due to current international conditions.  
A more debated tool is the use of capital controls. This is particularly important for countries 
that are going through a period of important net capital inflows, which is not the case of Chile. 
Capital controls are part of the central bank’s toolkit in EMEs. However, their effectiveness is 
still a matter of discussion, and instead of discussing this evidence I would like to point to 
distortions that they may bring about. First, they may redirect capital inflows from controlled 
segments of the financial system to uncontrolled ones, fostering the shadow banking system. 
And second, they may generate discriminations in the corporate sector as some firms may 
have  access  to  foreign  financing  free  of  controls,  while  other  firms,  especially  small  and 
medium sized enterprises, have to seek financing from more expensive domestic sources. 
Capital  controls  are  not  only  a  macro 
tool,  but  have  recently  been  considered 
“macroprudential”  measures  as  well.  Their  purpose  is  to  avoid  the  building  up  of  financial 
vulnerabilities, in particular currency and maturity mismatches. But, this can also be achieved 
with regulation directly introduced to prevent these mismatches and through appropriate risk 
management. Finally, given some recent calls for the use of capital controls in EMEs, there is 
a collective action problem. As one country imposes capital controls, it pushes international 
financial  flows  elsewhere,  inducing  others  to  impose  capital  controls,  and  so  on.  Now 
assume that all countries are able to impose capital controls so that at the margin, there are 
no  changes  in  net  capital  flows.  Then  the  global  adjustment  would  not  take  place,  EMEs 
would  grow  beyond  their  potential,  generating  inflation,  while  weak  economies  would  be 
trapped with low demand growth. EMEs can still try to temper capital inflows transitorily, but 
to completely avoid them would be unfeasible and inefficient.  
Concluding remarks 
Despite all the current tensions, the global economy is adjusting. Exchange rates of EMEs 
and  commodity  exporters  have  been  strengthening  –  albeit  at  different  speeds  as  some 
economies try to smooth the adjustment – and the global recovery is taking place (Figure 4). 
Fortunately, trade restrictions, which represent the biggest threat to the global recovery, have 
not been implemented. 
In recent weeks we have witnessed increased tensions in the world, such as the turmoil in 
the Middle East and North Africa and the natural and nuclear disasters in Japan. We need to 
play close attention to these developments, but they should not change the perspectives of 
the dual-speed recovery in the world economy. 
As discussed above, the policy decisions in large countries have repercussions on the rest of 
the world. However, the main role for policymakers is to secure recovery and to create the 
basis  for  sustainable  growth,  which  requires  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
measures  in  the  U.S.,  such  as  QE2,  are  trying  to  do  just  that.  Beyond  our  professional 
assessment, a successful recovery in the U.S. is good for the world economy. By the same 
token, Chinese authorities have decided on a gradual path of adjustment to secure enough 
growth for all the social and economic needs they face. From a macroeconomic standpoint, 
their  policy  of  exchange  rate  management  is  something  many  EMEs  have  tried  several 
times, and although I am a firm believer that exchange rate flexibility is crucial for small open 
economies, it is of course not the general rule and is not be to be applied in all cases and 
under all circumstances, especially for large low-income economies. Overall, the world needs 
a sustained recovery in the U.S. and growth in China. 
The same is valid for EMEs. We need to contribute to the global adjustment, but our main 
concern must be the welfare of our citizens. Containing the current inflationary pressures is 
essential to allow for sustainable growth. Delaying monetary policy adjustment may result in 
more severe adjustments in the future. Also, rebuilding fiscal buffers is important in order to 
have  a  more  balanced  recovery  and  to  be  better  prepared  to  conduct  macroeconomic 
policies.  Some  days  ago,  the  Chilean  government  announced  a  timely  and  relevant  fiscal 
tightening that should contribute to the moderation of aggregate demand. 
The world is not going through a currency war; neither are EMEs being flooded by liquidity 
from advanced economies. But, in EMEs, there are many tensions and challenges that we 
must  deal  with  appropriately  in  order  to  build  more  resilient  economies  and  take  full 
advantage  of  the  great  progress  achieved  during  recent  years  in  terms  of  macroeconomic 
and  financial  stability.  These  are  the  main  contributions  central  banks  can  make  to  their 
countries. 
 
 
Figure 1
(annualized quarterly change, percent)
15
15
World output (1)
Output gap (3)
4
4
10
5
0
-5
-10
10
5
0
-5
2
0
-2
-4
-10
-6
2
0
-2
-4
-6
05 06 07 08 09 10
Emerging economies (2)
Developed economies
00 02 04 06 08 10
Developed economies
Emerging Asia
Latin America
(1) PPP-weighted regions. (2) The fourth quarter is an estimate. (3) Gap obtained with the HP filter,
except in advanced economies, where OECD estimates were used. 
Sources: Central Bank of Chile based on data from Bloomberg, Consensus Forecasts, OECD, and the
statistics offices of each country.
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2
Monetary policy rates around the world (1)
(percent)
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
06
07
Chile
08
09
Developed econ. (2)
10
Emerging eco. (3)
11
(1) Corresponds to a simple average of the reference rates for each group of countries. (2) Includes
Euro area, Japan, United Kingdom, and United States. (3) Includes Brazil, Czech Republic, China,
Colombia, Hungary, South Korea, Mexico, Peru, Poland, and South Africa.
Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bloomberg.
 
 
Figure 3
U.S multilateral nominal exchange rate (*) 
(index, March 1973=100) 
160
160
140
120
100
80
60
73
79
85
91
97
03
09
(*) An increase indicates a depreciation of the dollar against main trading partners. 
Sources: Bloomberg and U.S. Federal Reserve.
140
120
100
80
60
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure 4
Real exchange rate (1)
(index; 2005=100)
120
110
100
90
80
70
06
07
Latin America (2)
Emerging Europe (4)
United States
08
09
120
110
100
90
80
70
10
11
Emerging Asia (3)
Commodity exporters (5)
(1) Correspond a simple average of the real exchange rate for each group of countries. An increase
indicates depreciation. (2) Includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico. (3) Includes China, Hong
Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,South Korea, and Thailand. (4) Includes Hungary, Poland, Czech Republic,
and Russia. (5) Includes Australia, Canada and New Zealand.
Source: BIS.
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
