Rundheersing Bheenick: The new system for clearing cheques in 
Mauritius 
Remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Pre-Launch 
Event of the Cheque Truncation System, Port-Louis, 22 July 2011. 
 I  am  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  Pre-Launch  Event  of  the  Cheque  Truncation 
System (CTS). We are today launching an awareness campaign on the new modern system 
for clearing of cheques, the CTS, which will soon be implemented in our country. 
The setting up of the CTS is a significant milestone in the Mauritian banking sector. It is the 
fruit  of  a  very  close  collaboration  between  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  (BOM)  and  the  Mauritius 
Bankers Association (MBA). I am very happy to have around me the Acting Chairman and 
the  CEO  of  the  MBA,  as  well  as  the  CEOs  of  banks.  As  you  may  be  aware,  as  per  the 
provisions of the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004, the organization of the clearing house is done 
in conjunction with banks. So this is a BOM/MBA event. 
The Port Louis Clearing House 
Following the enactment of the Bank of Mauritius Act 1966, at the suggestion of the Bank of 
Mauritius, the Mauritius Bankers’ Association established, on 19th August 1968, a Mauritius 
Clearing House for the five banks which constituted the banking industry of the country at the 
time. The meeting place was the Bank of Mauritius. Later it became the Port-Louis Clearing 
House.  Over  the  years,  the  Port-Louis  Clearing  House  went  through  a  process  of 
modernization. First the cheques were standardised with the introduction of the Magnetic Ink 
Character Recognition (MICR) technology. Concurrently, information regarding clearing and 
settlement  of  cheques  started  being  exchanged  through  the  Mauritius  Automated  Clearing 
and  Settlement  System  (MACSS).  Nonetheless,  the  Port-Louis  Automated  Clearing  House 
(PLACH), as it was renamed, continues to function on a manual mode, with the exchange of 
physical cheques. The CTS will do away with this manual process which, as you will see, is 
quite tedious. Let me briefly explain the process. 
The clearing process 
Cheques deposited by clients are collected from all bank branches (215) and transported to 
the respective head office. There, the cheques are sorted according to the respective banks, 
bundled together and transported to the PLACH twice a day, at 10.00hrs and 15.00hrs. The 
PLACH, a room of around 20 square metres is situated on the premises of the Bank – at 
times  there  can  be  around  20  people  in  a  room  of  this  size.  There,  the  cheques  are 
exchanged among the banks and the representative of each bank transports back his bank’s 
cheques to the head office where the verification of the cheques is carried out manually. The 
cheques  that  are  in  order  are  honoured,  those  that  are  not,  are  returned  at  the  second 
clearing on the next day. The resources mobilized by the cheque clearing process total some 
300  persons  putting  in some  325  person-hours  on  a  daily basis,  including  the transport  of 
cheques from the respective banks to the PLACH, and back. 
This process has been going on for the last 44 years. In 1968, the Mauritius Clearing House 
was processing an average of 2,000 cheques daily; today the number has multiplied tenfold. 
It  is  high  time  to  move  to  a  more  modern  system.  The  CTS  will  reduce  work  time  and 
manpower and bring efficiency in the entire banking system. It will benefit customers who will 
find the waiting time to get access to their funds (float time) cut down from an average of two 
to five days to one to two days. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With the CTS, we will align ourselves with countries like Singapore, India and Malaysia. In 
sub-Saharan Africa, we are among the pioneers of the system. The implementation of the 
CTS constitutes a key element of our Financial Sector Development Plan. 
The CTS 
In the CTS, the physical cheque which enters the banking system for clearing is processed 
from  this  point  onwards  by  the  digital  image  of  the  cheque  –  there  will  no  longer  be  an 
exchange of physical cheques, as is currently the case. 
The CTS project is part of the Bank’s strategy of modernising the Payment and Settlement 
System. As you are aware, the management of the Payments and Settlement System is part 
of the functions of the Bank. The Bank with our commercial bank partners are endeavoring to 
make the system more efficient and reliable. 
The process of modernization started in 2000 with the implementation of the MACSS based 
on  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  principles  for  large-value  transactions.  Then,  came  the 
automation  of  the  Port-Louis  Clearing  House  which  I  mentioned  earlier.  Other  important 
milestones  were  the  legal  amendments  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  and  the  Bills  of 
Exchange Act to pave the way for the introduction of an electronic clearing system. 
Work  on  the  CTS  project  itself  started  in  2005  under  Mr  B  R  Gujadhur,  then  First  Deputy 
Governor of the Bank. The banking community has been closely associated with the project 
right from day one. In 2007, there was an exploratory mission to Hong Kong and Singapore, 
which was headed by the present First Deputy Governor of the Bank. The CEO of MBA also 
formed part of the delegation as did banking industry representatives. Unfortunately, we ran 
into  some  administrative  hurdles  on  the  way,  and  the  project  found  itself  delayed 
considerably. 
The CTS, which we are preparing to launch, is only the initial phase. In fact, more advanced 
systems of cheque truncation cater for image capture directly at Points of Sale (POS) and 
ATM’s – as is the case in India for example. As we implement other stages of the CTS, bank 
customers will not have to go to their banks; truncation will be done at the POS. We are also 
launching the Bulk Clearing System (BCS) which is a missing block in the Mauritian payment 
system. The BCS will cater for high-volume, low-value transactions such as salary payments, 
standing orders and direct debits. In the next phase, we envisage the implementation of a 
national switch to cater for card and POS transactions. 
The need for the CTS 
The  cheque  is  currently  the  most  visible  and  most  widely-used  instrument  of  payment  in 
Mauritius. Currently it represents around 20 per cent of all non-cash transactions. In spite of 
several modes of electronic payment that banks have put at the disposal of their clients, an 
average of 21,000 cheques pass through the PLACH each day, for an amount of almost a 
billion rupees – representing 20 per cent of total MACSS transactions. If we take into account 
the  number  of  intra-bank  cheques,  the  daily  volume  of  cheques  approximate  50,000  for  a 
value exceeding 2.6 billion rupees. These are serious numbers! 
Over the past five years, the volume of cheques handled by the PLACH has remained in the 
range of 5.2 million to 5.4 million annually, with the aggregate value constantly on the rise. 
We had to find a way to cope with this avalanche of cheques. 
Cheques, as debit instruments, come with an intrinsic settlement risk. A large proportion of 
unpaid cheques in the payment system may lead to systemic risk. It is our responsibility to 
ensure  that  such  risks  are  well-contained  in  the  interest  of  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. To further this objective, the new system will identify high-value cheques for which 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
there will be a fast track settlement. A system whereby clearing is done electronically with the 
use of digital images and the MICR Code will contribute significantly to reduce those risks. 
Awareness campaign 
This Pre-Launch Event will kick start the Cheque Truncation Awareness Campaign. I set up 
a Committee, chaired by the Deputy Governors and comprising representatives of the Bank 
and  commercial  banks,  to  drive  the  awareness  campaign.  I  thank  all  members  of  the 
Committee for their dedication and commitment. The campaign which starts today will span 
over the next four weeks. 
Public awareness will be created through distribution of brochures (in French and in English); 
posters  will  be  affixed  in  public  places  such  as  the  Post  Office,  Mauritius  Telecom,  CWA, 
supermarkets etc. There will be press adverts and radio and TV spots in the following two 
weeks. We hope to have a dedicated programme on Cheque Truncation on MBC TV. We 
want to reach every household and sensitise every cheque user. There will be help desks 
both at the Bank and at individual banks, including branches of banks. Information will also 
be  available  on  the  Bank’s  website  as  well  as  on  the  website  of  individual  banks.  We  will 
have on our website a list of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). We count on you, ladies 
and gentlemen of the press, to help us in this campaign. 
What will change with the new system? 
The process of clearing will not change, except that the exchange of physical cheques will be 
eliminated and replaced by the digital images of the cheques. These digital images will be 
transmitted  electronically  by  the  presenting  bank  to  the  paying  bank  through  the  Clearing 
House. 
There will be no change for the consumer. It is in the internal plumbing of the system, in the 
invisible  parts,  that  the  change  will  happen.  Clearing  will  be  done  from  an  IT-enabled 
platform; powerful servers linking all the banks will take over the process. 
The long and tedious manual handling of cheques will be replaced by a system that will not 
only reduce the float time before funds become available, but will contribute to combat fraud 
and forgery, and in the final analysis bring more efficiency to the entire banking system.  
The costs of implementing this system will be borne by the Bank and the Mauritius Bankers 
Association. There will be no additional costs to the consumer. 
Responsibilities of the drawer and user of cheques 
The new system will require that the drawer pays more attention when he draws cheques. 
He or she will have to adhere to certain norms. 
Some people still use the old format of cheques instead of the standardized cheques with the 
MICR code. We would strongly advise the public to ensure that they use the standardized 
cheques  –  after  the  31st  December  2011,  the  old  format  of  cheques  will  no  longer  be 
accepted by the system but will have to be cleared manually. 
The system will keep track of people who make it a habit of drawing cheques with insufficient 
funds (chèques sans provision). This will help banks in drawing out the profile of their clients 
from their payment pattern. 
You will find more details on the differences between the present and the new systems in the 
brochures. 
It was my singular privilege to have welcomed you this afternoon, not just on behalf of the 
Bank of Mauritius but on behalf of the whole banking sector. The Cheque Truncation Project 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
is  one  of  a  kind  where  both  regulator  and  regulatees  are  united  in  a  common  resolve  to 
modernize the Payment and Settlement system in Mauritius. The implementation of the CTS 
has only been possible with the active collaboration of the banking industry. I am therefore 
grateful to the MBA and all its members for the support they have given us throughout this 
process. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
