Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Reform of the financial sector 
Opening remarks by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
Third  Conference  on 
the 
25th Anniversary of Expansión, organised by Expansión and KPMG, Madrid, 13 May 2011. 
financial  sector  on 
the  occasion  of 
the  reform  of 
the 
 Let me first thank Expansión and KPMG for kindly inviting me to take part in this forum on the 
reform of the financial sector. 
Financial system reform is under worldwide scrutiny by multilateral agencies, governments, 
central banks, supervisors and even public opinion. Their interest is understandable, as the 
unprecedentedly acute economic crisis in recent years did indeed originate in the financial 
system. The concern to identify the errors that led us to crisis and, above all, to prevent it 
recurring is therefore not surprising.  
The response to the crisis is largely taking shape in the international arena, given that the 
main factors at its root have a global reach. Also, many of the measures needed to prevent 
its recurrence can only be implemented if they are tackled in a coordinated fashion by the 
main world economies. 
In recent years we have also witnessed changes in world economic governance of a speed 
and on a scale that would have been inconceivable a short time ago. Good examples of this 
are  the  work  by  the  G-20,  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the 
strengthening  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  changes  in  the 
governance structure of the BIS and the IMF. 
Highly significant progress is being made in international financial regulation, including most 
notably the regulatory reform of capital and liquidity (known as Basel III), which will come into 
force in 2013. Both the reforms already approved and those still under discussion within the 
FSB are geared to countering the problems identified as lying at the root of the recent crisis. 
Examples here are the measures aimed at smoothing the cyclical fluctuations inherent in the 
banking system, namely procyclicality, at restricting high-risk activities, at mitigating systemic 
risks  (in  particular  those  arising  from  the  so-called  systemic  financial  institutions)  and  at 
setting in place more rigorous and effective supervision.  
To this must be added the efforts made in Europe, both in terms of governance and crisis 
management in the EU, and of the revision of financial system regulation and surveillance 
arrangements.  In  this  respect,  a  new  supervisory  structure  has  been  set  up  in  the  EU, 
namely the European Systemic Risk Board, which will be entrusted with the surveillance of 
risks to financial stability. It will be  joined by three supervisory agencies covering banking, 
markets and insurance, which should contribute to providing for much more fluid and efficient 
coordination among national supervisors. 
But  apart  from  this  progress  on  the  international  and  European  levels,  the  crisis  has  also 
required  national  governments  to  come  up  with  energetic  responses  at  home.  This  is 
because  not  all  economies  faced  the  onset  of  this  crisis  with  the  same  macroeconomic 
imbalances or the same weaknesses in their banking systems or supervisory arrangements.  
From the start of the crisis, governments in some of the biggest economies were, in addition 
to compensating for the effects of the tightening – and even closing down – of certain funding 
markets,  obliged  to  support  some  of  their  major  banks  with  public  funds.  Fortunately,  the 
more  strictly  regulated  and  supervised  Spanish  banking  system  withstood  reasonably  well 
this first wave of the crisis. But that does not mean we were immune to it. The crisis entailed 
an abrupt decline in world growth and gave rise to major problems on international funding 
markets which significantly affected the Spanish economy in general, and its banking system 
in particular.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  the  long  upturn  prior  to  the  crisis,  the  Spanish  economy  had  built  up  significant 
imbalances,  such  as  the  external  deficit,  the  increase  in  private  debt  and  the  excessive 
expansion  of  the  real  estate  sector.  In  parallel,  weaknesses  had  been  incubating  in  the 
banking  industry,  especially  in  parts  of  the  savings  bank  sector.  Such  weaknesses  arose 
from the rapid growth in credit, the high exposure to the real estate development sector and 
the  increase  in  capacity,  which  grew  so  as  to  adapt  to  what  were  unsustainable  rates  of 
expansion. The global crisis broke at a time when the adjustment of the imbalances had just 
begun, and it contributed to exacerbating their significance. 
The  measures  adopted  in  the  Spanish  banking  sector  have  been  specifically  aimed  at 
countering the weaknesses incubated during the expansionary phase. Undoubtedly, the key 
challenge has been the restructuring of savings banks, undertaken with the support of the 
Fund  for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the  Banking  Sector  (FROB).  The  45  pre-existing 
savings  banks  have  since  seen  their  number  reduced  by  two-thirds,  in  a  consolidation 
process that has affected 95% of the sector’s total assets. This has enabled excess capacity 
in both networks and central services to be cut; it corrects the excessive fragmentation of the 
sector,  which  hitherto  comprised  a  large  number  of  institutions  whose  small  size  curtailed 
future  prospects;  and  it  allows  advantage  to  be  taken  of  the  resources  and  management 
capacity of those savings banks which, on the basis of their greater soundness, have led the 
various integration processes. 
Other  far-reaching  measures  have  been  brought  to  bear  in  this  restructuring  process.  For 
instance, there is the reform of the savings bank regulatory framework, which is allowing for 
their  conversion  into  institutions  more  subject  to  market  discipline  and  better  prepared  to 
meet  the  requirements  of  the  new  international  regulatory  framework.  And  we  have  the 
tightening of provisioning arrangements, which has entailed stricter requirements in respect 
of asset valuation criteria. I would also like to highlight the efforts to reinforce transparency, 
through  the  disclosure  of  exhaustive  information  on  all  Spanish  institutions’  exposure  to 
assets considered doubtful. 
The latest measure of significance was the approval in Parliament of a Royal Decree-Law 
(RDL), whose aim was to dispel doubts about our banking system. These doubts emerged 
essentially  as  a  result  of  the  contagion  of  the  mistrust  stemming  from  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis  in  certain  euro  area  countries.  Three  months  later,  this  RDL  may  be  said  to  have 
contributed significantly to allaying fears about the soundness of our banking sector and to 
substantially  speeding  through  the  restructuring  of  our  savings  banks.  The  RDL  reinforces 
the solvency of all Spanish institutions, requiring of them a core capital ratio of at least 8%, 
with a further 2% required for unlisted banks and those more reliant on wholesale markets, 
which are those in which the main doubts were concentrated. The RDL also stipulates that 
institutions receiving public aid should pursue their financial activity through a bank, which 
will  better  enable  them  to  obtain  funds  on  markets  and  will  contribute  to  enhancing  their 
transparency in the face of investors. 
The process laid down in the RDL is unfolding as scheduled. All institutions that have applied 
for aid from the FROB have sent their recapitalisation plans to the Banco de España, and the 
work  on  the  valuation  of  these  institutions,  which  will  be  set  by  independent  experts,  is 
already under way. Of the 13 institutions or groups of institutions that need to reinforce their 
capital,  the  four  banks  will  fund  themselves  on  the  market,  while  the  savings  banks  have 
submitted  various  strategies,  which  initially  or  ultimately  include  the  possibility  of  obtaining 
the necessary funds from the FROB, which acts as a backstop that assures the markets that 
all Spanish institutions will have a core capital ratio of at least 8%. 
Now,  how  and  when  Parliament  has  decreed,  the  final  steps  to  conclude  this  far-reaching 
financial restructuring process must be taken. 
In  sum,  Spain  may  be  said  to  have  taken  what  are  to  all  intents  and  purposes  historic 
measures to leave its banking system in a position to meet solvent demand for credit when 
such  demand  picks  up.  Recovery  should  come  about  sooner  if  the  pertinent  reforms  are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
adopted to lift the obstacles to job creation and to allow our massive jobless figures to begin 
to be reduced. 
I  shall  close  here,  since  today  you  are  going  to  have  the  good  fortune  to  listen  to  Jean-
Claude Trichet, who will surely offer you a much fuller perspective on the response to the 
international and European financial crisis. It has been a pleasure and a privilege for me to 
cooperate  with  him  as  a  member  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  over  the  past  five  years, 
during times of great complexity for monetary policy and financial stability in the euro area. 
In this period I have seen at first hand Jean-Claude’s personal and professional qualities. He 
has  shown  he  has  the  right  blend  of  firmness  and  pragmatism  required  to  take  difficult 
decisions  at  the  worst  junctures  of  the  crisis.  And  he  also  possesses  the  leadership  and 
communication skills needed to convey a long-term vision of the European project and the 
central role that the ECB plays here. 
During  Jean-Claude  Trichet’s  presidency,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  displayed  the 
resolve needed to deploy all the instruments available to the common monetary policy and to 
take  timely  decisions  that  help  ensure  the  goal  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  is 
achieved.  Since  the  creation  of  the  ECB,  average  inflation  has  stood  just  below  2%  and 
inflation expectations have held stable. 
The extraordinary scale of the financial crisis has put to the test the responsiveness of the 
Eurosystem in general, and of Jean-Claude Trichet in particular. Since the start of the crisis a 
series of bold and well-directed decisions have been adopted. And these have contributed 
notably to restoring the monetary policy transmission mechanism, which had been seriously 
damaged,  and  to  preventing  an  unprecedented  collapse  of  the  financial  system  with 
incalculable consequences. 
With  the  perspective  that  the  passage  of  time  accords,  history  will  acknowledge  Jean-
Claude’s leadership and his ability to maintain the appropriate degree of flexibility needed to 
respond to the crisis. These qualities were key to ensuring that the ECB and the Eurosystem 
were  up  to  the  task,  contributing  decisively,  through  the  discharge  of  the  responsibilities 
legally entrusted to each, to maintaining financial stability across the euro area. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
