Hidetoshi Kamezaki: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan 
Speech by Mr Hidetoshi Kamezaki, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Mie, 27 July 2011. 
 The Bank of Japan’s measures following the Great East Japan Earthquake  
I.  
Let  me  start  by  introducing  the  measures  implemented  by  the  Bank  thus  far  following  the 
Great East Japan Earthquake, whose magnitude and effects were unprecedented.  
At 3:00 p.m. on March 11, 2011, right after the earthquake struck at 2:46 p.m., the Bank set 
up a disaster management team at its Head Office in Tokyo, headed by Governor Masaaki 
Shirakawa, and implemented the following measures.  
First,  immediately  after  the  earthquake,  the  Bank  worked  to  maintain  the  financial 
intermediation function and secure the smooth settlement of funds. Specifically, to cope with 
demand  for  cash  in  disaster  areas  to  the  maximum  degree,  it  provided  cash  to  financial 
institutions in disaster areas as necessary, not only on business days but also on weekends 
and holidays. Moreover, on March 11, the Governor of the Bank, jointly with the Minister of 
State for Financial Services, released a document regarding financial measures to respond 
to  the  disaster  triggered  by  the  earthquake,  requesting  that  financial  institutions  take 
appropriate  measures  to  accommodate  the  needs  of  those  affected  by  the  disaster  –  for 
example,  by  permitting  the  withdrawal  of  deposits  in  cases  where  depositors  had  lost 
passbooks or seals. Furthermore, the Bank, in cooperation with relevant parties, maintained 
the stable functioning of Japan’s core payment and settlement systems, such as the Bank of 
Japan Financial Network System, or the BOJ-NET, even after the earthquake. It also worked 
hard to provide cash to the disaster areas by taking actions such as establishing a temporary 
teller window in Morioka City, Iwate Prefecture, for the exchange of damaged banknotes and 
coins. The total amount of cash exchanged since the earthquake at the Bank’s windows in 
the  affected  Tohoku  region,  including  the  temporary  one  in  Morioka  City,  amounted  to 
3.06 billion yen, through July 22. This greatly exceeds the amount exchanged at the Bank’s 
Kobe  Branch  during  the  six  months  following  the  Great  Hanshin-Awaji  Earthquake,  which 
was about 0.8 billion yen.  
Second, the Bank sought to prevent an excessive increase in risk aversion from emerging in 
financial markets or other areas of financial and economic activity. To this end, it provided 
ample  funds  to  meet  demand  in  financial  markets  for  several  successive  days  after  the 
earthquake, and worked to ensure stability in the markets by maintaining confidence on the 
funding front. As a result, the outstanding balance of financial institutions’ current accounts at 
the Bank temporarily marked a historical high of 42.6 trillion yen, far exceeding that observed 
during the periods following the Lehman shock and when the Bank implemented quantitative 
easing. In addition, the Bank shortened to one day the two-day Monetary Policy Meeting that 
was initially scheduled to be held on March 14 and 15, completing it on March 14. At this 
meeting, with a view to preventing any deterioration in business sentiment or heightening of 
risk aversion in financial markets from adversely affecting economic activity, the Bank further 
enhanced monetary easing by increasing the amount of the Asset Purchase Program, mainly 
of the purchases of risk assets by about 5 trillion yen, under the comprehensive monetary 
easing framework. I will discuss the details of this framework later.  
Third, the Bank worked to ensure calm in markets at home and abroad by providing accurate 
information. Specifically, immediately after the earthquake, it expanded the communications 
offered  on  its  web  site,  setting  up  a  section  in  both  Japanese  and  English  devoted  to  the 
earthquake  and  releasing  a  continuous  stream  of  information  regarding  its  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
continuity situation. In addition, on various occasions such as at international conferences, in 
speeches given at home and abroad, and at press conferences, the Bank emphasized the 
continuing  robustness  of  Japan’s  financial  markets  as  well  as  its  financial  and  settlement 
systems.  
And fourth, the Bank introduced the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions 
in disaster areas, with a view to supporting their initial efforts to meet demand for funds for 
restoration  and  rebuilding.  Through  this  operation,  the  Bank  extends  loans  to  financial 
institutions  with  business  offices  in  the  disaster  areas  –  even  to  small  local  financial 
cooperatives that do not hold current accounts at the Bank through the central organization 
of each type of financial cooperatives – at the low interest rate of 0.1 percent per annum. The 
total amount of loans is 1 trillion yen with the maximum amount of loans to each counterparty 
set at 150 billion yen, and the deadline for eligible counterparties’ new loan applications is 
October 31, 2011. With a view to securing sufficient financing capacity at financial institutions 
in  disaster  areas,  the  Bank  also  expanded  the  range  of  eligible  collateral  to  include  BBB-
rated  corporate  bonds  as  well  as  bills  and  loans  on  deeds  where  debtor  companies  are 
classified  as  “normal”  borrowers  in  the  self-assessment  by  financial  institutions  in  disaster 
areas. It conducted the funds-supplying operation three times, with the total amount of loans 
to date reaching 332 billion yen.  
II. 
Economic activity and prices  
Overseas economies  
A. 
Next, I will talk about the current economic situation. Overseas economies achieved robust 
growth from around 2005 onward, led by improved productivity in many economies, owing to 
the advance of globalization and increased participation of emerging economies in the global 
market.  During  this  time,  however,  various  countries  experienced  economic  imbalances, 
such  as  the  housing  bubble  in  the  United  States  and  the  investment  bubble  in  some 
peripheral  European  countries  that  resulted  from  the  stable  currencies  and  lower  interest 
rates following the European monetary unification. These imbalances gradually emerged as 
the financial market turmoil in the United States and Europe, triggered by the drop in U.S. 
housing prices. The turmoil grew into a global financial crisis after the Lehman shock in the 
autumn  of  2008.  The  interaction  between  the  financial  market  turmoil  and  economic 
deterioration  led  to  the  crisis  of  a  sharp  downturn  in  the  global  economy.  In  response, 
countries  around  the  world  adopted  large-scale  monetary  and  fiscal  measures,  and  as  a 
result, the global economy started to pick up around spring 2009. Consequently, the global 
economy  as  a  whole  is  on  a  recovery  path,  although  there  is  a  divergence  between  the 
performance of slowly recovering industrialized countries and rapidly growing emerging and 
commodity-exporting economies.  
At present, the pace of recovery is slowing. The U.S. economy is being weighed down by 
damaged balance sheets among households in particular, due to the bursting of the housing 
bubble, and also by the effects of the disaster in Japan and high crude oil prices. In Europe 
as a whole, the pace of recovery remains moderate: while the German economy is robust, 
the economies of some peripheral countries with troubled fiscal conditions, such as Greece, 
are  faltering.  In  contrast,  rapid  growth  continues  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  such  as  China  and  Brazil.  In  some  countries,  however,  there  are  signs  of 
economic  slowdowns  due  to  monetary  tightening  aimed  to  counter  inflationary  pressures, 
and production has been sluggish due to supply shortages of parts following the earthquake 
in  Japan.  As  for  the  outlook,  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  stay on  a  recovery  trend; 
however, the degree of uncertainty remains high because of risk factors such as a further 
deterioration in the fiscal conditions in some peripheral European countries, an overheating 
of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  a  surge  in  international  commodity 
prices.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Japanese economy  
B. 
The  growth  in  the  Japanese  economy  also  declined,  falling  steeply  in  response  to  the 
Lehman shock, after experiencing the longest period of economic expansion since the end of 
World War II. Thereafter, the economy continued to recover, after leveling out around spring 
2009,  due  to  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  and  government  measures  such  as  the 
subsidies  for  purchasers  of  environmentally  friendly  cars  and  the  eco-point  system  for 
electrical  appliances.  However,  when  the  earthquake  struck  Japan,  the  economy  again 
suffered a steep decline.  
The  economic  downturn  observed  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  was  due  to  the 
sudden  drop  in  domestic  and  external  demand,  reflecting  a  sharp  financial  contraction: 
triggered  by  the  failure,  the  financial  system  and  economic  activity  faced  a  spiral  of 
deterioration,  mainly  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  as  a  result  of  stagnant  economic 
activity that reflected the difficulty in issuing CP and corporate bonds as well as the cautious 
lending attitudes of banks, which led to public concern over financial markets and financial 
institutions  in  general.  The  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the  United  States  and  Europe 
spread  to  markets  all  over  the  world,  including  Japan.  In  such  a  situation,  production  and 
inventory adjustments took place worldwide, and the level of production dropped particularly 
sharply  in  Japan  due  to  the  fact  that  the  high-tech  manufacturing  industries  –  including 
automobiles,  electrical machinery,  and  general  machinery,  which  were  particularly  affected 
by the downturn in worldwide demand – had a large share in its production. The economic 
downturn following the earthquake, on the other hand, was due to (1) direct physical damage 
in  the  disaster  areas,  (2)  indirect  damage  due  to  a  shortage  of  parts,  (3)  supply-side 
constraints such as the difficulty in producing and selling goods due to electricity shortages, 
and (4) a deterioration in household and business sentiment caused by concern about the 
future  and  voluntary  restraint  in  consumer  spending.  It  should  be  noted  that,  unlike  the 
economic  downturn  observed  after  the  Lehman  shock,  external  demand  was  not  much 
affected.  Therefore,  the  economy  picked  up  sooner  than  expected  with  the  easing  of  the 
supply-side  constraints  due  to  the  progress  in  the  restoration  of  facilities  and  efforts  to 
conserve electricity. At present, exports have started to increase. Domestic private demand 
has also begun to pick up, with some improvement in household and business sentiment.  
The Japanese economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path from the latter half 
of this fiscal year as production regains traction with further easing of supply-side constraints, 
backed  by an  increase  in  exports reflecting  the  recovery  in  overseas economies and  by  a 
rise  in  rebuilding  demand.  In  the  longer  run,  however,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the 
downside  risks  to  economic  activity.  In  the  short  run,  the  restoration  of  supply  chains  is 
making steady progress and there is an increasing probability that the degree of constraints 
on  economic  activity  due  to  electricity  shortages  this  summer  will  be  less  significant  than 
anticipated,  although  some  concerns  remain.  On  the  other  hand,  uncertainty  is  also 
increasing somewhat regarding overseas economies, and therefore the current risks to the 
Japanese economy are shifting from the supply side to the demand side. In addition, from a 
relatively  long-term  perspective,  uncertainty  about  electric  power  supply  is  increasing 
somewhat,  reflecting  the  issues  regarding  the  resumption  of  operations  at  nuclear  power 
plants following regular inspections. Considering factors such as the appreciation of the yen, 
high corporate tax rates, and delays in the negotiation of free trade agreements (FTAs) and 
economic  partnership  agreements  (EPAs),  manufacturers  already  regard  Japan  as  a 
somewhat unfavorable place to locate their production sites. It is my great concern that the 
shift of Japanese firms’ production sites to overseas might accelerate if anxiety about electric 
power supply lingers.  
Price developments  
C. 
Next,  I  will  move  on  to  price  developments.  International  commodity  prices  had  been 
increasing on the back of high growth in emerging economies. They have declined slightly of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
late due to the instability in global financial markets, but are still hovering at high levels. As a 
result, import prices in Japan and the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI), which 
measures fluctuations in prices of goods traded between firms in Japan, have also been at 
high levels.  
Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items 
excluding  fresh  food,  or  the  core  CPI  –  which  measures  the  prices  of  goods  and  services 
purchased by households – had been in negative territory for about two years since March 
2009 but turned positive in April 2011 against the background of the increase in international 
commodity  prices  and  the  narrowing  of  the  negative  output  gap.  In  sum,  the  Japanese 
economy continues to be headed in the direction of overcoming deflation.  
As for the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI is expected to be slightly 
positive,  reflecting  the  rise  in  international  commodity  prices  and  the  narrowing  of  the 
negative  output  gap.  However,  this  outlook  is  attended  by  a  range  of  risks,  examples  of 
which include a substantial rise in international commodity prices, a delay in the narrowing of 
the negative output gap due to slower-than-expected growth of the Japanese economy, and 
a  decline  in  the  public’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  reflecting  their 
pessimistic outlook for the economy.  
As you may know, the base year for the CPI will be revised in August 2011, and it is highly 
likely that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI on the basis of the new base year will 
be lower than that on the basis of the current base year. Of course, such statistical revisions 
leave  economic  activity  unaffected,  and  it  seems  certain  that  the  Japanese  economy  is 
headed in the direction of overcoming deflation.  
Outlook for economic activity and prices  
D. 
The outlook I just presented is my own personal assessment. Let me now turn to the Outlook 
for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  known  as  the  Outlook  Report,  which  the  Bank  releases 
semiannually in April and October. The Outlook Report presents the Policy Board members’ 
assessments  of  economic  activity  and  prices  based  on  the  forecasts.  In  addition  to  the 
semiannual Outlook Report, the Bank releases interim assessments in July and January that 
present the Bank’s revised forecasts.  
In the most recent forecasts, released on July 12, 2011, Policy Board members considered it 
most likely that real GDP in fiscal 2011 would grow by only 0.4 percent on a year-on-year 
basis,  reflecting  the  effects  of  the  disaster,  but  by  2.9  percent  in  fiscal  2012  due  to  an 
expected  increase  in  demand  for  rebuilding.  The  year-on-year  change  in  the  core  CPI  is 
projected  to  be  0.7  percent  in  both  fiscal  2011  and  fiscal  2012,  reflecting  an  increase  in 
materials prices and the narrowing of the negative output gap. It should be noted, however, 
that these figures do not incorporate possible effects of the base year revision for the CPI in 
August 2011.1  
Policy Board members make their forecasts in terms of a range of values rather than a point 
estimate, and they then attach a probability of realization to each of the values. The collective 
view  of  the  Policy  Board  has  been  that  risks  are  tilted  to  the  downside  for  real  GDP  on  a 
year-on-year  basis,  whereas  those  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  are 
balanced on the whole.  
Measures taken by the bank  
III. 
Next, I will outline the policy measures taken by the Bank.  
                                                 
1   The figures referred to in this paragraph are the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Measures to address the Lehman shock  
A. 
The Lehman shock in autumn 2008 had caused a sharp contraction in the financial markets 
around the world. In order to address this situation, the Bank, just after the crisis occurred, 
successively  conducted  same-day  funds-supplying  operations  and  introduced  U.S.  dollar 
funds-supplying operations. In addition to reducing the target level of the policy interest rate, 
the  Bank  introduced  a  series  of  measures  such  as  the  complementary  deposit  facility, 
outright  purchases  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds,  the  easing  of  the  rating  requirement  for 
corporate debt to be accepted as eligible collateral, the special funds-supplying operation to 
facilitate  corporate  financing,  and  acceptance  of  bonds  issued  by  foreign  governments  as 
eligible  collateral,  based  on  the  recognition  that  market  conditions  had  deteriorated  further 
and a negative feedback loop between financial and economic activity had emerged with a 
tightening  of  overall  corporate  financing  conditions.  Moreover,  the  Bank  introduced 
temporary measures to secure the stability of the financial system, including the purchase of 
stocks held by financial institutions to help them reduce the market risk associated with stock 
holdings and the provision of subordinated loans to banks to help them maintain sufficient 
capital bases. The Bank gradually brought some of these temporary measures to an end as 
financial markets regained stability.  
B. 
Recent conduct of monetary policy toward a sustainable growth path with 
price stability  
Although  financial  markets  regained  their  stability,  the  Bank,  with  a  view  to  overcoming 
deflation  and  returning  the  Japanese  economy  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price 
stability, continues to conduct various measures.  
Pursuing powerful monetary easing  
1. 
First, the Bank aims to pursue powerful monetary easing through the implementation of the 
comprehensive monetary easing policy decided in October 2010. As the first measure for this 
policy,  the  Bank  set  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  target  at  “around  0  to 
0.1 percent.”  It  clarified  that  the  policy  interest  rate  is  virtually  zero.  As  for  the  second 
measure, the Bank clarified the policy time horizon of the virtually zero interest rate policy – 
specifically,  it  will  maintain  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  until  it  judges  that  price 
stability  is  in  sight,  on  condition  that  an  examination  of  risk  factors,  including  the 
accumulation of financial imbalances, reveals no problems – and it has been working to help 
stabilize  longer-term  interest  rates.  Price  stability  here  is  defined  on  the  basis  of  the 
“understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”  (hereinafter,  the  “understanding”) 
announced by the Bank and refers to the level of inflation that each Policy Board member 
understands, when conducting monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over 
the  medium  to  long  term,  with  each  Policy  Board  member’s  “understanding”  falling  in  a 
positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  and  the  midpoints  of  most  Policy  Board  members’ 
“understanding”  being  around  1  percent.  As  the  third  measure  of  the  comprehensive 
monetary  easing  policy,  the  Bank  established  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  to  purchase 
various  financial  assets,  such  as  government  securities,  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-
traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  as  well  as  to 
conduct fixed-rate funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral whereby funds with a 
maturity of three or six months are provided at an interest rate of 0.1 percent. The aim of this 
measure is to create additional monetary easing effects by encouraging a decline in longer-
term  interest  rates  and  a  reduction  in  various  risk  premiums,  while  in  the  money  market, 
where the Bank conducts daily operations as the central bank of Japan, there remains little 
room for further declines in most short-term interest rates. The Bank’s purchase of ETFs and 
J-REITs,  which  are  assets  with  relatively  high  risks,  will  act  as  a  catalyst  for  market 
participants  to  take  a  more  active  investment  stance,  thereby  helping  to  smooth  the 
intermediation  of  risk  money  and  further  improve  firms’  funding  conditions.  At  its 
establishment, the Asset Purchase Program was to be worth about 35 trillion yen, but as I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
stated  earlier,  the  Bank  increased  the  amount  to  about  40  trillion  yen  just  after  the 
earthquake.  
Ensuring financial market stability 
2. 
In order to fully ensure financial market stability, the Bank has been implementing a variety of 
measures including the utilization of various funds-supplying operations. As I stated earlier, 
when uncertainty began to spread in the financial markets just after the earthquake, the Bank 
provided ample funds to the markets, the total amount of which represented a historical high. 
The Bank has also taken measures to provide financial institutions with the confidence that 
they  can  obtain  sufficient  funds  whenever  necessary.  For  example,  temporary  measures 
introduced in response to the financial crisis that continue today include the complementary 
deposit facility, the acceptance of foreign government bonds as eligible collateral, and U.S. 
dollar funds-supplying operations. These measures aim to forestall a return of instability in 
financial markets.  
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth  
3. 
Moreover, in order to strengthen the foundations for economic growth, the Bank has been 
implementing a measure through which it provides long-term funds at a low interest rate to 
financial  institutions  in  accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment. 
Currently,  financial  markets  have  abundant  funds,  but  recent  growth  is  sluggish  and 
deflationary pressure remains strong as economic entities such as firms and households are 
skeptical  about  future  growth  and  unwilling  to  undertake  forward-looking  spending.  To 
address  this  problem,  the  Bank  has  made  more  funds  available  for  financial  institutions  to 
utilize in new areas of growth, in order to raise growth expectations.  
Many  financial  institutions  nationwide  have  shown  an  interest  in  the  measure  since  it  was 
implemented  in  June  2010.  There  were  153  financial  institutions  granted  approval  to 
participate in the new loan disbursement in June 2011, and loans were actually disbursed to 
126 of them. Areas eligible for investments and loans range, for example, from environment 
and  energy  business,  medical  and  nursing  care  business,  development  of  social 
infrastructure, and regional revitalization business to business deployment in Asian countries. 
The  measure  has  been  producing  positive  effects  as  a  catalyst  –  its  intended  purpose  – 
since,  although  the  maximum  duration  of  loans  provided  under  the  measure  is four  years, 
more  than  70  percent  of  actual  individual  investments  and  loans  exceed  this  period. 
Moreover,  following  the  introduction  of  the  measure,  financial  institutions  have  been 
establishing new dedicated funds and lending schemes, and some of them in certain cases 
have set a higher ceiling on the total amount of investments and loans than the 150 billion 
yen  ceiling  for  the  total  amount  of  loans  that  they  could  obtain  from  the  Bank.  The  total 
amount of loans disbursed through the four loan disbursements conducted so far has almost 
reached  the  maximum  amount  of  loans  allowed  under  this  measure  (3  trillion  yen),  with  a 
year left before the deadline for new applications for loans.  
The Bank decided to enhance the measure with a view to supporting financial institutions’ 
efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth through the use of a wider range of 
financial techniques. More specifically, in order to support emerging and small firms in their 
efforts to solve the problems they face – risk money and a lack of real estate collateral – the 
Bank provides funds to financial institutions that undertake equity investments and offer the 
so-called asset-based lending, or ABL, to firms with growth opportunities. The Bank hopes 
that  this  enhancement  will  stimulate  further  use  of  financial  techniques  that  have  yet  to 
achieve a sufficient level of familiarity, and thereby lead to the nurturing of firms with growth 
opportunities.  If  this  is  accomplished,  the  Bank  believes  that  Japan’s  growth  potential  will 
increase  and  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  find  and  support  promising  firms  will  be 
improved.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Revitalizing the Japanese economy 
IV. 
I  will  now  take  a  look  at  the  Japanese  economy  from  a  longer-term  perspective.  Although 
Japan has undergone various phases of economic cycles since the bursting of the economic 
bubble  in  the  early  1990s,  growth  on  average  has  been  poor.  The  past  20  years  or  so  of 
weak  growth  and  deflation  have  been  dubbed  the  “two  lost  decades.”  The  devastating 
earthquake that hit Japan on March 11 this year has further aggravated the situation. In order 
for  the  economy  to  emerge  from  the  current  slow  growth  and  regain  its  strength,  it  is 
necessary to introduce drastic measures designed not only for the reconstruction of disaster-
stricken northeastern regions but also for revitalization of the Japanese economy as a whole.  
in 
the 
total  population.  And 
the  working-age  population 
Causes of the low growth in the Japanese economy  
A. 
Before moving on to the topic of revitalizing the Japanese economy, I will first touch upon the 
causes of the high growth experienced after World War II and ensuing period of low growth. 
Three factors combined to create a favorable environment for the postwar rapid growth. First, 
Japan was in a position to take advantage of being a latecomer, learning from the growth 
process of advanced economies such as the United States and Europe. Second, the rise in 
the  working-age  population  meant  an  increase  in  the  population  bonus,  that  is,  the  high 
share  of 
third,  Japanese 
manufactured goods enjoyed a superior competitive edge in the absence of rivals outside the 
United States and Europe. During this period of soaring growth, Japan’s economic model – 
based  on  government  industrial  policy,  the  main  bank  system,  the  seniority  system,  and 
lifetime employment – functioned successfully.  
By  about  1970,  however,  Japan  had  more  or  less  caught  up  with  the  United  States  and 
Europe. Around this period, the population bonus started to fade. Furthermore, the outbreak 
of the oil crisis and rapid appreciation of the yen put a brake on the high-speed economic 
growth.  The  continued  upward  trend  in  the  working-age  population  and  the  absence  of 
competitors  in  the  production  of  manufactured  goods  enabled  the  Japanese  economy  to 
grow  steadily.  However,  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  intensified  as  the  increased 
presence of Japan in international markets gave rise to heated trade friction while the Plaza 
Accord  in  1985  led  to  an  appreciating  yen.  In  order  to  counter  the  downward  pressure, 
measures were taken to expand domestic demand, which eventually led to the emergence of 
the economic bubble in the second half of the 1980s.  
The bubble burst in the early 1990s. Low growth and deflation continues to this day in spite 
of repeated measures and monetary easing to stimulate the economy. A recovery appeared 
to be hampered by adjustments involving the “legacies of the past” – that is, the excessive 
level of debt, production capacity, and employment coupled with the large housing loans held 
by households and the massive amount of nonperforming loans held by financial institutions. 
The situation, however, remained unchanged even though the balance-sheet problems had 
more  or  less  been  resolved  by  around  2000.  The  reasons  for  the  low  growth  must  lie 
elsewhere, and I believe that it must be the critical changes that occurred during this period – 
namely, the decrease in the working-age population, which peaked in 1995, and the rise of 
emerging countries as rival producers of manufactured goods.  
Overcoming low growth and deflation 
B. 
I have already pointed to the gradual loss of the favorable environment as the cause of the 
downward trend in the growth potential of the Japanese economy since the end of the high-
growth  period.  The  favorable  environment  consisted  of  three  factors:  the  easily  attained 
latecomer  advantage;  the  increase  in  the  working-age  population;  and  the  absence  of 
competitors in the production of manufactured goods. Regaining this environment might put 
Japan back on a fast growth path. Such an attempt would be impossible, however, as the 
world has changed profoundly and the need has arisen to build a new growth model suitable 
for the new environment.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the 
from 
long  gained 
latecomer  advantage 
in  acquiring  manufacturing 
Japan  had 
technologies, and it became one of the world’s major exporting countries; however, there is 
still  much  more  to  learn  from  other  countries,  particularly  regarding  enhancement  of  the 
standard of living. The United Kingdom, Germany, and Australia have overcome long-term 
economic  stagnation  by  implementing  a  range  of  social  and  economic  reforms,  while 
Scandinavian countries have achieved a high level of satisfaction among their citizens as a 
result  of  their  comprehensive  welfare  systems,  supported  by  high  taxes.  The  Asian  NIEs 
have improved their standards of living by achieving high economic growth through market 
competition. There is no shortage of lessons to learn from abroad to establish a new growth 
model and improve the standard of living.  
Institutional  reforms  and  revisions  are  required  in  order  to  increase  the  working-age 
population,  to  raise  the  birth  rate  and  put  a  brake  on  the  population  decrease.  This 
undoubtedly is the correct approach, but it takes time to produce results. The measures to 
expand  the  working-age  population  in  the  short  term  and  boost  Japan’s  growth  potential 
should  include:  raising  the  labor  force  participation  rate  of  women  and  the  elderly  by 
establishing incentives as well as providing job training; and introducing an orderly system for 
foreign workforce employment. In the meantime, given that the aging of society is bound to 
progress for some time, it is necessary to deregulate the medical and nursing care sectors 
and  proceed  with  reforms,  to  facilitate  their  development  into  sizable  industries  led  by 
domestic demand.  
In order to emerge victorious from the fierce competition in global markets, Japan needs to 
further enhance the added value of products with a high competitive advantage. However, it 
is equally important to venture into new areas by making use of existing technologies. For 
example, as indicated by the classic adage that says necessity is the mother of invention, the 
electricity  shortages  facing  Japan  have  provided  a  good  opportunity  in  that  they  have 
heightened  the  need  to  further  improve  the  efficient  use  of  electricity  –  an  area  in  which 
Japan already excels out of sheer necessity. In addition, the experience gained by dealing 
with  the  aftermath  of  the  accident  at  the  nuclear  power  plant  in  Fukushima  Prefecture 
indicates that robotics technology, in which Japan enjoys a high degree of competitiveness, 
could be developed further for more practical use. In order to encourage firms to carry out 
such undertakings, outdated regulations must be eased. Furthermore, as preconditions for 
global competition on an equal footing, Japan needs to improve its competitive environment 
by, for example, concluding more FTAs and EPAs. To this end, it is necessary to improve the 
competitiveness  of  primary  industry  by  increasing  productivity  to  achieve  both  the 
development of that industry and growth of the overall economy. In this context, the March 
earthquake has provided an occasion for primary industry and local governments to review 
their  management  strategies  and  decide  whether  to  expand  or  streamline  them  in 
accordance with the situation in each region.  
I would also like to say that it is important to reform the social security systems and to work 
on  fiscal  consolidation,  since  public  concerns  over  the  future  of  the  pension  system  and 
public finances hamper economic growth by creating a strong incentive to save, rather than 
spend. Weak economic growth has made firms, individuals, and the government reluctant to 
take  on  new,  risky  challenges  and  push  ahead  with  painful  reforms,  and  has  made  the 
economy  heavily  dependent  on  fiscal  spending  for  a  prolonged  period.  As  a  result, 
government  debt  has  ballooned,  and  Japan  is  thus  in  no  position  to  merely  sit  back  and 
observe the sovereign debt problems in some peripheral European countries. Although trust 
in  the  government’s  conduct  of  fiscal  policy  has  been  maintained  so  far,  it  could  crumble 
without warning and when least expected. Therefore, the burning issue to be tackled is the 
creation  and  implementation  of  a  roadmap  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  an  effort  to  maintain 
trust both at home and abroad.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Measures taken by the bank 
C. 
The  Bank  continues  to  consistently  make  contributions  as  the  central  bank  in  order  to 
overcome deflation and return the Japanese economy to a sustainable growth path with price 
stability.  The  Bank’s  efforts  through  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  also  aim  to  facilitate 
economic  revitalization.  The  Bank  must  always  be  ready  to  proactively  implement  the 
necessary policies to achieve its objectives. Going forward, the Bank should continue to be 
proactive  and  do  its  utmost  to  bring  the  Japanese  economy  back  to  a  sustainable  growth 
path with price stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
