Thomas M Hoenig: Monetary policy and shifting economic risks 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the London School of Economics, London, 30 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
The past three year period has been a great challenge to policymakers worldwide, including 
central  bankers.  Unprecedented  steps  have  been  taken  to  restore  stability  to  the  world 
economy and, just as importantly, to assure a sustained recovery. I certainly support these 
goals. While I argued for handling the largest financial institutions differently than was done, I 
supported  the  Federal  Reserve’s  massive  liquidity  injections  designed  to  staunch  the 
financial crisis. After all, central banks exist in part for just that purpose. However, when the 
crisis is past, it is incumbent upon central banks to return to another of their responsibilities: 
creating  conditions  for  a  sustained  economic  recovery  that  requires  looking  beyond  short-
term goals to long-term consequences.  
For more than a year, I have advocated, not for a tight U.S. monetary policy, but for one that 
would begin unwinding those policies put in place during the crisis. In January 2010, as the 
recovery  entered  its  third  quarter,  I  expressed  the  view  that  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee should modify its rate guarantee to the market. That is, while agreeing that policy 
should  remain  accommodative,  I  voted  against  promising  “exceptionally  low  rates  for  an 
extended period.” As the recovery continued into the spring, I judged that the Federal Reserve 
should  gradually  shrink  its  enlarged  balance  sheet  with  minimal  market  disruption  by 
disposing of mortgage-backed securities that were trading in the market at a premium. Thus, I 
voted  against  replacing  maturing  MBSs  with  similar  or  other  securities.  Finally,  in  the  fall,  I 
questioned the long-term benefits of further easing monetary policy during a recovery – and I 
voted against QE2.  
Today, my view has not changed. The FOMC should gradually allow its $3 trillion balance 
sheet to shrink toward its pre-crisis level of $1 trillion. It should move the U.S. federal funds 
rate  off  of  zero  and  toward  1  percent  within  a  fairly  short  period  of  time.  Then,  after 
evaluating the effects of those actions, it should be prepared to move the funds rate further 
toward a level that could be reasonably judged as closer to normal and sustainable.  
I  recognize  that  these  actions  are  not  simple  to  implement.  They  would  impact  different 
economic sectors differently and to varying degrees. They involve tradeoffs in their effects 
and  uncertainty  about  the  short-term  reactions  of  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy. 
However, they are not unreasonable or radical or inconsistent with our experience in dealing 
with  past  crises.  They  are  focused  on  the  longer  run  –  reflecting  a  sharp  awareness  that 
policy geared too long toward extensive accommodation undermines market discipline and 
encourages  speculative  activities.  Put  another  way,  these  actions  reflect  the  view  that  the 
longer  exceptionally  accommodative  monetary  policies  remain  in  place,  the  greater  the 
danger that resources will be misallocated within and across world economies.  
Given the wide differences in views around these issues, I want to take time this evening to 
share  my  perspective  on  U.S.  monetary  policy  choices  and  their  effects  on  economic  and 
financial outcomes.  
Recovery is under way 
The financial crisis is over, and the U.S. economy is recovering. GDP growth in the United 
States  averaged  3.0  percent  from  the  third  quarter  of  2009  through  the  fourth  quarter  of 
2010.  And  it  is  worth  noting  that  for  the  same  period,  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
estimates  that  global  GDP  growth  averaged  4.9  percent.  Also,  the  United  States  added 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
1.5 million  jobs  into  the  private  sector  over  the  one-year  period  ending  in  February  of  this 
year. Other parts of the world, especially Asia, have experienced particularly strong growth. 
While parts of Europe and the U.K. have grown less robustly, the fact remains that the U.S. 
and much of the world is experiencing sustained economic growth.  
With the United States and many world economies experiencing such growth and with the 
U.S. financial crisis over, I would expect to see a change in policy in which stimulus put in 
place at the height of the crisis would be throttled back. However, this change in policy is on 
hold in the United States. The reason for the delay is the existence of significant productive 
capacity that remains unused in many of the developed nations. While the U.S. economy has 
clearly strengthened, it has not yet returned to pre-crisis output and employment levels. Its 
unemployment  rate,  for  example,  remains  near  9  percent.  In  the  U.K.,  unemployment 
remains near 8 percent. Thus for many the issue of policy turns on one’s confidence in the 
long run economic trends and the degree of monetary accommodation needed to ensure that 
those trends continue.  
Shifting economic risks 
The monetary policy being implemented currently within the United States and much of the 
world  is  more  accommodative  now  than  at  the  height  of  the  crisis.  Policy  interest  rates 
remain  zero,  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  continues  to  expand  even  as  the 
economy  improves.  With  these  actions,  the  FOMC’s  objectives  have  shifted  from  that  of 
containing  a  global  crisis  to  that  of  more  quickly  accelerating  economic  growth.  Its 
components focus on raising inflation expectations, increasing asset values and pushing up 
growth  in  aggregate  demand,  and,  as  stated  in  its  September  2010  press  release, 
employment. While I agree these are worthy goals, I am concerned that maintaining a crisis-
oriented  policy  as  the  tool  to  achieve  them  significantly  changes  the  economic  risks.  Past 
success in pursuing this form of policy is mixed at best.  
Central banks and the long run 
A Swiss central banker once advised me that the duty of a central banker is to take care of 
the  long  run  so  the  short  run  can  take  care  of  itself.  In  the  United  States,  this  simple 
expression  has  been  codified  in  its  laws.  The  Federal  Reserve  Act  requires  that,  “The  … 
Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long-run growth of the monetary and credit 
aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long-run potential to increase production, so 
as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate 
long-term interest rates.”  
These  mandates  recognize  that  the  factors  of  production  come  together  in  a  systematic 
fashion  across  economies,  sectors  within  economies  and  resource  availability  to  create 
growth. The process is not simple nor does it occur quickly – which is the purpose of putting 
policy in the context of the long run. It is within this context that policy should acknowledge 
the improving economic trends and begin to withdraw some degree of accommodation. If this 
is not done, then the risk of introducing new imbalances and long-term inflationary pressures 
into an already fragile recovery increase significantly.  
Short-run actions have consequences 
In the spring of 2003 there was worldwide concern that the U.S. economy was falling into a 
“Japanese-like”  malaise;  the  recovery  was  stalling,  deflation  was  likely  to  occur  and 
unemployment  was  too  high.  This  was  the  prevailing  view  despite  the  fact  that  the  U.S. 
economy was growing at a 3.2 percent annual rate and the global economy’s average growth 
was nearly 3.6 percent. In addition, the fed funds policy rate was 1 ¼ percent. Although most 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
knew  that  such  a  low  rate  would  support  an  expanding  economy,  in  June  2003  it  was 
lowered further to 1 percent and was left at that rate for nearly a year, as insurance.  
Following this action, the United States and the world began an extended credit expansion 
and  housing  boom.  From  July  2003  to  July  2006,  the  monetary  base  in  the  United  States 
increased  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  4.9  percent,  credit  increased  at  an  annual  rate  of 
9 percent, and housing prices increased at an annual rate of about 14 percent. The long-term 
consequences of that policy are now well known. The United States and the world have just 
suffered one of the worst recessions in decades.  
The  crisis  has  sometimes  been  described  as  a  “perfect  storm”  of  unfortunate  events  that 
somehow came together and systematically undermined the financial system. Such events 
included,  for  example,  weak  supervision  and  a  misguided  national  housing  policy.  While 
these factors certainly contributed to the severity of the crisis, monetary policy cannot escape 
its role as a primary contributing factor.  
In reviewing data from this and earlier economic crises, the fact is that extended periods of 
accommodative  policies  are  almost  inevitably  followed  by  some  combination  of  ballooning 
asset  prices  and  increasing  inflation.  I  recently  compared  the  movement  of  real  policy 
interest rates and inflation for four countries: the United States, the U.K., Germany and Korea 
from  1960  to  the  present  (Chart  1).  The  relationship  between  negative  rates  and  high 
inflation  is  unmistakable.  Also,  the  relationship  between  negative  rates  and  housing  price 
busts in advanced economies since 1970 is instructive. In this instance, nearly 50 percent of 
the housing price busts were preceded by negative real policy rates in the years before the 
busts (Chart 2). If a housing bust is thought of as a tail-risk event, these percentages are too 
high. Thus, it is also worth noting that as of this month, the U.S. real federal funds rate has 
been negative for 11 quarters.  
These relationships, of course, must be tested more vigorously before final conclusions are 
drawn; but the data are strongly suggestive and the findings consistent with those of scholars 
such  as  Allan  Meltzer.  Extended  periods  of  accommodative  policy,  pursued  to  enhance 
short-term economic growth, are often highly disruptive in their economic effects. After the 
easing actions of 2003, unemployment declined from 6.3 percent in June 2003 to 5 percent 
two years later and to 4.6 percent the following year. However, by late 2009, following the 
worst of the credit crisis, the unemployment rate was more than 10 percent.  
The future 
As  in  2003,  concerns  were  voiced  this  past  year  that  the  U.S.  economy  was  facing  the 
prospect of deflation, slow growth  and high unemployment. This was the case despite the 
many actions world economies had taken to remedy the crisis and stimulate growth. For me, 
it was difficult to conclude that more monetary expansion would assure a sustained recovery, 
and while there may be events that may slow economic growth, those events are related to 
other real factors.  
As the United States continues to ease policy into its recovery, once again there are signs 
that  the  world  is  building  new  economic  imbalances  and  inflationary  impulses.  I  would 
suggest also that the longer policy remains as it is, the greater the likelihood these pressures 
will build and ultimately undermine world growth. In the United States, for example, with very 
low  interest  rates,  we  are  beginning  to  see  some  assets  accelerating  in  price.  Agricultural 
land prices, for example, are increasing at double-digit rates. High-yield securities in financial 
markets are demanding price premiums beyond what some would judge reasonable relative 
to risk. Why? To quote a market participant, “What are my choices?”  
The world for some time now has been experiencing rapidly rising commodity prices. While 
some of the increase may reflect global supply and demand conditions, at least some of the 
increase is driven by highly accommodative monetary policies in the United States and other 
economies.  And,  more  recently,  in  the  United  States  there  is  evidence  of  accelerating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
increases in core prices. Over the past four months, core PCE inflation in the United States 
has increased from a modest rate of 0.7 percent to a rate of 1.5 percent. I understand the 
U.K. also is experiencing rising prices. While no one can say with certainty whether this will 
continue, evidence is mounting that it might.  
I  conclude  my  remarks  this  evening  with  the  following  observation.  I  tracked  the  average 
growth  of  money  and  the  price  levels  in  the  United  States  from  the  19th  century  to  the 
present  (Chart  3).  It  should  surprise  no  one  that  there  is  a  striking  parallel  between  the 
long-run  growth  of  money  and  the  growth  in  the  price-level  index.  From  the  end  of  World 
War II alone, the price index has increased by a factor of ten. With such a track record, it is 
hard to accept that deflation should be the world’s dominant concern.  
Conclusion 
Central  bankers  must  look  to  the  long  run.  If  current  policy  remains  in  place,  we  almost 
certainly will stimulate the growth of asset values and inflation. This may temporarily increase 
GDP  and  employment,  but  in  the  long  run,  we  risk  instability,  damaging  inflation  and  lost 
jobs, which is a dear price for middle and lower income citizens to pay. 
However,  the  long  run  is  not  yet  here.  We  have  opportunities  to  assure  greater  long-term 
stability.  Moving  policy  from  highly  accommodative  to  merely  accommodative  would  be  a 
step in the right direction. In this way, we can achieve a better long-run outcome than if we 
delay normalization. 
 
 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
