Philip Lowe: Inflation – the recent past and the future  
Keynote address by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to BankSA “Trends” Business Luncheon, Adelaide, 24 June 2011. 
 I would like to thank Patrick D’Arcy, Hugo Gerard, Christie Lewis and Shalini Shan for assistance in preparing this 
talk.  
Good afternoon. I would like to thank BankSA for the invitation to speak in Adelaide today. It 
is a pleasure to be here.  
The topic that I would like to talk about this afternoon is inflation, which ties in very nicely with 
the main theme of BankSA’s quarterly bulletin which is being released today. First, I will talk 
in some detail about the distinct cycle in underlying inflation that we have seen in Australia 
over the past six years or so. After that, I will discuss the lessons that we might take from this 
cycle, as well as the broader lessons we have learnt from the past two decades of inflation 
targeting in Australia.  
The Recent Cycle in Inflation 
I  would  like  to  start  with  the  cycle  in  underlying  inflation  that  began  in  the  mid  2000s 
(Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
 Across a range of measures, this cycle has been the most pronounced since the introduction 
of  inflation  targeting  in  the  early  1990s.  Between  2005  and  September  2008,  underlying 
inflation  rose  by  more  than  2  percentage  points  from  around  2½ per  cent  to  just  above 
4½ per cent. Then, since late 2008, underlying inflation has steadily declined to be around 
2¼ per cent over the year to March 2011.  
As the RBA discussed in the latest Statement on Monetary Policy, this decline in underlying 
inflation looks to have now run its course and a gradual rise is expected over the next couple 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of years. Given this, it is timely to look back and to review what caused the recent cycle and 
what lessons it holds for our understanding of the inflation process.  
Before  doing  this  it  is  worth  noting  that  a  cycle  in  headline  CPI  inflation  is  less  obvious 
(Graph  2).  This  largely  reflects  the  quarter-to-quarter  volatility  in  the  prices  of  fuel  and 
fruit & vegetables.  This  volatility  has  been  especially  pronounced  over  recent  years,  partly 
because of the effects of Cyclones Larry and Yasi on banana prices.1 This volatility is also 
one reason that we often use the various underlying measures when assessing the ongoing 
inflation pressures in the economy.  
Graph 2 
 At a general level, the fact that underlying inflation picked up between 2005 and 2008, and 
then subsequently declined, is hardly surprising. In the period immediately prior to the North 
Atlantic financial crisis, global commodity prices were rising strongly, the unemployment rate 
in  Australia  had  fallen  to  its  lowest  level  in  more  than  three  decades  and  there  was 
considerable  pressure  on  capacity  in  the  economy.  The  result  was  a  pick-up  in  inflation. 
Then  when  the  slowdown  occurred,  pressures  on  capacity  eased  and  global  commodity 
prices fell. Again, not surprisingly, the result was a moderation in inflation.  
What did, however, surprise us somewhat was the amplitude and the timing of this cycle in 
inflation. Within the RBA, the staff run a number of standard “workhorse” models based on 
historical  relationships  to  help  explain  and  forecast  inflation.2  While  these  models  are  all 
consistent with a pick-up, and then moderation, in inflation, they have difficulty explaining the 
amplitude of the recent cycle. This is obvious from Graph 3 which shows the average fitted 
values of four of these models, along with the trimmed mean measure of underlying inflation. 
In  mid  2008,  for  example,  underlying  inflation  was  around  ¾  of  a  percentage  point  higher 
than can be explained by the average of these models, and none of the models can explain 
                                                 
1  There has also been considerable volatility in the price of financial services due to the effect of the financial 
crisis.  
2  For  a  discussion  of  these  models  see  Norman  D  and  A  Richards  (2010),  “Modelling  Inflation  in  Australia”, 
Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No 2010-03.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
why  underlying  inflation  reached  over  4½  per  cent.  In  contrast,  during  the  period  2005  to 
2007, inflation was mostly lower than can be explained by these models.  
Graph 3 
 The general picture that one gets from this analysis is that underlying inflation in Australia 
was  slower  to  pick  up  than  suggested  by  the  historical  relationships,  but  when  it  did 
eventually pick up, it did so more quickly, and by a larger amount, than suggested by these 
relationships.  
When we look closely at the details of the CPI, it is clear that this pattern is largely accounted 
for by the prices of services. This can be seen in Graph 4 which shows the inflation rate for 
manufactured goods in the CPI separately from that for non-manufactured items. Over the 
past decade, movements in the prices of manufactured goods are reasonably well explained 
by import prices, the exchange rate and labour costs. In comparison, over this period, the 
historical  relationships  do  less  well  in  explaining  the  inflation  rate  for  non-manufactured 
items; the models over-predicted inflation in the middle years of the decade and then later 
under-predicted inflation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Graph 4 
 This overall pattern of surprisingly stable inflation for a few years and then a sharp pick-up is 
evident in the RBA’s own inflation forecasts over this period. In late 2006 and early 2007, the 
outcomes for underlying inflation were surprisingly well contained. At the time, we and others 
wondered whether something had changed significantly in the inflation process. But not long 
after  that,  the  inflation  outcomes  were  turning  out  to  be  considerably  higher  than  we  had 
expected. In fact, the difference between the RBA’s 18-month-ahead forecast for underlying 
inflation and the actual outcome over the year to September 2008 was the largest over the 
inflation-targeting period.  
In  trying  to  understand  this  experience,  there  are  three  specific  issues  that  I  would  like  to 
touch on: the evolution of unit labour costs; the impact of housing-related costs on the CPI; 
and the role of international factors.  
Unit labour costs 
In  the  long  run,  movements  in  unit  labour  costs  –  i.e.  average  labour  costs  per  unit  of 
output – have an important bearing on the rate of inflation. Over the inflation-targeting period, 
unit  labour  costs  have  increased  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  2.6 per  cent  and  the  CPI 
inflation rate has averaged 2.7 per cent.3 The fact that these two numbers are so close to 
one  another  is  no  accident.  If  the  profit  share  is  to  remain  relatively  steady  over  time, 
average growth in unit labour costs needs to be consistent with inflation target.  
Of course, in the short run, the link between unit labour costs and inflation is not nearly as 
tight. In the recent cycle, growth in unit labour costs picked up in 2004 and remained high 
until late 2008 (Graph 5). This was the result of both faster growth in average labour costs 
and slower growth in productivity.  
                                                 
3  This calculation excludes the estimated effects of the introduction of the GST on the price level, as well as 
interest charges which were included in the CPI prior to September 1998.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 5 
 The pick-up in labour costs in the middle years of the 2000s is evident in a wide range of 
measures. Not only was there a lift in annual wage increases as the labour market tightened, 
but  there  were  reports  of  many  firms  upgrading  positions  in  an  effort  to  retain  and  attract 
staff, with the upgraded positions attracting higher rates of pay. Some firms also increased 
the bonuses and other benefits paid to their staff.  
This increase in labour costs coincided with a period of slower growth in labour productivity. 
Since  2005,  estimated  labour  productivity  growth  has  averaged  less  than  ½ per  cent  per 
year,  compared  with  average  growth  of  2 per cent  over  the  1990s.  The  reasons  for  this 
slowdown are not fully understood, although it may partly be a result of the high commodity 
prices  that  have  allowed  lower  quality  and/or  more  costly  mines  to  be  developed.  In  any 
case, productivity growth will need to pick up again if our living standards are to improve at 
the  rate  we  have  become  accustomed  to  over  the  past  two  decades.  This  is  a  major 
challenge facing both the private and public sectors.  
Looking back to the recent cycle in inflation, it is clear that developments in unit labour costs 
had a significant role, both in contributing to the increase in inflation and then to its decline. 
But they provide only a partial explanation, and alone cannot explain why inflation picked up 
so  sharply  in  2007  after  having  been  stable  over  the  preceding  few  years.  One  possible 
explanation for this pattern is that there is some threshold in capacity utilisation which when 
crossed  causes  inflation  to  increase  very  quickly.  An  alternative  explanation  is  that  the 
short-run dynamics of underlying inflation were influenced by other factors during this period. 
It  is  difficult  to  formally  test  these  two  explanations,  but  other  factors  do  appear  to  have 
played  a  significant  role.  Of  these,  developments  in  housing  costs  were  perhaps the  most 
important.  
Housing cost inflation 
Currently,  housing-related  costs  –  including  rents,  utilities  and  the  cost  of  building  new 
dwellings – account for around 20 per cent of the CPI, the largest share of any single group. 
Broadly speaking, the housing component of the CPI shows the same general pattern as that 
in underlying inflation, although the recent moderation is less pronounced (Graph 6).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 6 
 A couple of factors are important in explaining this general pattern.  
The first is that the large run-up in Australian house prices that was driven by the adjustment 
to low inflation ended in late 2003. When the housing boom came to an end, building cost 
inflation  came  down  and  growth  in  rents  was  subdued  for  a  few  years.  These  outcomes 
helped hold down overall inflation rates during this period. But by 2007, the cycle had again 
turned, with building costs rising more quickly and growth in rents accelerating. This faster 
growth in rents reflected the changing balance of demand and supply in the rental market, 
with strong population growth coinciding with relatively slow expansion of supply.  
The  second  factor  has  been  utilities  prices.  During  the  middle  years  of  the  2000s  utilities 
prices were increasing at an average rate of 4 per cent, which was slightly lower than that in 
the  previous  few  years.  Then  from  2007,  utilities  price  inflation  accelerated  sharply.  The 
proximate cause was the regulatory decisions allowing double-digit price increases, partly to 
help fund infrastructure investment, particularly for the distribution of electricity. But a deeper 
cause was the low levels of investment in previous years, which meant that the capacity of 
the system to distribute electricity had not kept pace with the growth in demand, particularly 
during hot weather.4  
While  these  developments  in  rents  and  utilities  do  help  explain  the  particular  dynamics  of 
inflation over the recent cycle, they also demonstrate that when the economy is operating up 
against supply constraints, all sorts of prices – and not just the price of labour – start rising 
more quickly.  
International factors 
The third issue that I would like to touch on is the role of international factors.  
Looking  at  headline  inflation  rates  across  countries  over  recent  years,  there  is  a  deal  of 
similarity  in the  movements  (Graph  7).  Many  countries  in both  Asia  and  the  North  Atlantic 
experienced increases in headline inflation rates in 2007 and 2008 and many experienced 
                                                 
4  For  further  details,  see  Plumb  M  and  K  Davis  (2010),  “Developments  in  Utilities  Prices”,  RBA  Bulletin, 
December, pp 9–18.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
declines  in  late  2008  and  in  2009.  This  co-movement  partly  reflects  the  large  changes  in 
global commodity prices over recent years. When global oil prices went up, they boosted the 
CPI in almost all countries, and when they went down during the financial crisis, they led to 
CPI inflation falling almost everywhere. Movements in food prices had a similar global effect.  
Graph 7 
 In terms of underlying inflation, we also see some co-movement across countries over recent 
years, although somewhat less than in headline inflation (Graph 8). When underlying inflation 
in Australia was rising, so too were equivalent measures of underlying inflation in the United 
States,  as  were  exclusion-based  measures  of  core  inflation  in  most  Asian  countries.5 
Similarly,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  fell  almost  everywhere  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
financial  crisis,  although  there  has  been  more  dispersion  recently.  These  common 
movements  reflect  the  correlation  in  the  business  cycle  across  countries,  as  well  as  the 
flow-on effects of the large changes in global commodity prices to the prices of a wide range 
of final goods and services.  
                                                 
5  Trimmed mean measures of underlying inflation are not available for most countries in Asia.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Graph 8 
 Movements in the exchange rate have also influenced inflation outcomes over recent years. 
In particular, the trend appreciation of the Australian dollar from 2002 has helped hold down 
the  prices  of  many  imported  manufactured  goods.  For  example,  the  price  index  for 
household  electrical  appliances  is  8 per  cent  lower  than  it  was  nine  years  ago.  Over  this 
same period, clothing prices have fallen 10 per cent, the price of shoes by 13 per cent and 
the price of manchester by 24 per cent. These are all large price declines.  
Around  the  trend  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  there  have,  however,  been  significant 
swings. In particular, the large depreciation of the currency as a result of the financial crisis 
saw the prices of many manufactured goods increase in 2009. These increases slowed the 
moderation  in  underlying  inflation  during  this  period.  More  recently,  the  subsequent 
appreciation of the currency has led to quite large falls in the prices of many manufactured 
goods. Overall though, these swings in the exchange rate have played only a relatively minor 
role in explaining the recent cycle in underlying inflation which has been primarily driven by 
domestic factors.  
Some Lessons 
So to summarise, an important lesson from this recent experience is that inflation responds 
to the changing pressures on capacity in the economy. When demand is high relative to the 
economy’s  capacity  to  produce  goods  and  services,  the  cost  of  labour  and  raw  materials 
tend to rise and firms’ mark-ups tend to increase. Conversely, when demand is low relative to 
the economy’s capacity to produce goods and services, these pressures ease and inflation 
tends to fall.  
It is also clear that the dynamics of the recent cycle in inflation were influenced by capacity 
pressures  in  the  housing  market  and  by  developments  in  utilities  prices.  They  were  also 
influenced  by  capacity  pressures  in  the  global  markets  for  commodities.  But  these  factors 
alone fall well short of fully explaining the cycle, with the upward pressure on prices in 2008 
being very widespread. At that time, around three-quarters of the 90 individual items in the 
CPI were increasing at faster than their average rate of the previous two decades (Graph 9). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Similarly, the deceleration of inflation since September 2008 has been widespread, with the 
prices of relatively few items currently increasing at faster than their average rate.  
Graph 9 
 Looking at the experience over the past six years as a whole, it is clear that the protracted 
period of above-average growth in unit labour costs did eventually lead to higher inflation and 
this  was  compounded  by  a  variety  of  other  capacity  pressures  in  the  economy. 
Subsequently, the slowing in unit labour costs during the downturn and the easing of these 
other capacity pressures saw inflation moderate significantly.  
But looking beyond this recent cycle, the past 20 years carry a broader and more important 
lesson.  And  that  is  the  economy  works  better  with  low  and  stable  inflation,  and  that  the 
monetary policy framework matters.  
In the 1970s and 1980s we saw the consequences of high inflation rates. Inflation eroded the 
value  of  people’s  hard-earned  savings.  It  made  long-term  planning  difficult.  It  added  to 
uncertainty.  It  distorted  investment  decisions.  And  as  the  late  1980s  showed  it  made 
leveraged  asset  purchases  an  easier  path  to  wealth  than  hard  work.  The  end  result  was 
slower growth and greater economic volatility.  
High  inflation  also  meant  high  interest  rates.  In  the  1980s,  the  inflation  rate  averaged 
8 per cent,  and  the  mortgage  rate  averaged  13 per  cent  and  peaked  at  17 per  cent.  In 
contrast, since 1993 inflation has averaged just a little above 2½ per cent and the mortgage 
rate has averaged 7½ per cent. And the volatility of both inflation and interest rates has also 
been lower under the inflation targeting regime. The clear lesson here is that changes in the 
average inflation rate ultimately lead to changes in average interest rates, including those on 
mortgages.  
Today,  most  people  take  low  inflation  as  a  given,  as  a  permanent  part  of  our  economic 
landscape. Inflation expectations are well anchored and the possibility of a rapid increase in 
the general price level is not something that most people worry about. This is how it should 
be.  There  are  enough  uncertainties  in  today’s  world,  without  adding  uncertainty  about  the 
average rate of inflation to the list.  
For all these reasons, there is broad community acceptance that the main contribution that 
the  Reserve  Bank  can  make  to  strong  sustainable  growth  in  the  Australian  economy  is  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
maintain low and stable inflation. In concrete terms, our objective is to keep the average rate 
of inflation over time somewhere between 2 and 3 per cent. We have achieved this over the 
past  two  decades,  and  this  has  been  one  of  the  key  building  blocks  for  Australia’s  strong 
economic performance.  
Importantly,  we  have  had  from  the  start  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime  focusing  on 
medium-term  outcomes,  which  is  what  ultimately  matters  to  both  households  and 
businesses.  Under  this  framework,  inflation  has  been  both  below,  and  above,  the  
2–3 per cent  range.  The  framework  allows  us  to  respond  to  one-off  events  and  to  large 
changes in world relative prices in a way that promotes economic stability and the framework 
has been important in anchoring inflation expectations.  
Looking ahead, as the Bank has discussed recently, the current environment is a particularly 
challenging one. In the central scenario, we are looking at a significant boom in investment in 
the resources sector at a time when the overall economy has relatively little spare capacity. 
While conditions are very strong in parts of the economy, other parts are finding things very 
difficult  because  of  either  the  high  exchange  rate  or  the  ongoing  restraint  in  household 
spending  and  borrowing.  And  to  add  to  the  complications,  global  commodity  prices  are 
undergoing  a  structural  shift  as  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  in  Asia  enter  the  global 
economy.  
It is not easy to navigate our way through this difficult environment. The new realities of the 
global economy have improved Australia’s medium-term prospects. At the same time though, 
they  are  causing  considerable  structural  change  in  the  economy  which  is  leading  to 
difficulties in a number of areas. As Australia takes advantage of its new opportunities and 
manages the process of structural change the task for the RBA is to keep inflation low and 
stable.  By  doing  this,  we  can  help  promote  sustainable  growth  in  jobs  and  as  well  as 
economic  and  financial  stability.  Over  the  past  20 years,  low  inflation  has  been  a  key 
ingredient to Australia’s economic success and maintaining that record will help us meet the 
challenges that lie ahead.  
Thank you.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
