Masaaki Shirakawa: Toward a revitalization of Japan’s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, 7 February 2011. 
I. 
Introduction 
 I  am  privileged  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  before  the  distinguished  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Japan today. The topic I would like to talk about is the revitalization 
of Japan’s economy, focusing on the current state of the economy, the challenges it faces, 
and the efforts necessary to address such challenges. 
If  one  looks  back  at  the  history  of  any  country’s  economy,  one  will  find  times  full  of 
confidence and enthusiasm, and times where such confidence and enthusiasm were lacking. 
The  1980s  were  a  time  when  the  strength  of  Japan’s  economy  attracted  attention  from 
around the world. However, starting in the 1990s, and especially from the latter half of the 
1990s onward, Japan’s economic conditions deteriorated due to the collapse of the bubble 
economy  and  the  subsequent  financial  crisis.  The  expression  that  came  to  represent  the 
state of Japan’s economy was the “lost decade,” which is commonly used both at home and 
abroad. I suppose that anyone might lose heart if hearing such an expression often enough. 
As  you  may  know  from  experience  in  your  own  country,  people  tend  to  become  overly 
optimistic or overly pessimistic, depending on the perceived economic performance relative 
to other countries. 
Assessing the economy of one’s own country through comparisons with other countries has 
both its advantages and disadvantages. An advantage is that it provides an opportunity to 
understand one’s own country in a more objective way. A disadvantage is that there are risks 
of becoming overly optimistic or overly pessimistic, depending on the economic situation at 
the time. If comparisons are made only superficially, this may lead to a wrong assessment 
and result in the wrong policy measures or the wrong corporate strategies. At any rate, even 
in a time when globalization is advancing in leaps and bounds, mutual understanding across 
borders is not easy. For that very reason, I imagine that the work of foreign correspondents 
such as yourselves is challenging and exciting. 
As  a  central  bank  governor,  I  myself  have  many  opportunities  to  exchange  views with  the 
overseas media and policy authorities abroad. On these occasions, I get asked a great many 
questions about Japan’s economy. Here are the questions I am most frequently asked. First, 
why Japan’s economy has lost its vitality. This is in fact the starting point for the subsequent 
questions.  The  second  question  is  why  deflation  has  continued  for  a  prolonged  period. 
Discussions on the severe economic conditions then lead to the third question: are Japan’s 
public finances sustainable? In this context, I am often asked why, despite the deterioration 
in the fiscal balance, yields on Japanese government bonds (JGBs) have been stable at low 
levels.  Finally,  a  fourth  question  I  am  often  asked  is  whether  Japan’s  economy  can  really 
regain its vitality. 
It is an undeniable fact that Japan’s economy faces many challenges. However, I believe that 
Japan’s  economy  can  most  definitely  regain  its  vitality.  Needless  to  say,  we  have  to  work 
hard to achieve this. Obviously, the right prescriptions are also essential. To this end, it is 
necessary to have an accurate understanding of both the strengths and the weaknesses of 
Japan’s economy. I am looking forward to exchanging views with you on this point later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The current state of Japan’s economy 
II. 
I  will  start  with  short-term  developments  in  economic  activity  in  Japan.  Japan’s  Economy 
contracted  severely  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  but  then  started  to  improve 
around  spring  2009.  It  continued  doing  so  until  the  summer  of  2010,  mainly  due  to  the 
increase  in  exports  and  production  brought  about  by  faster  growth  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  as  well  as  policy  measures  to  promote  the  sale  of 
environment-friendly  durable  consumer  goods.  The  improvement  seems  to  have  paused 
from the fall of 2010, but recent data suggest that Japan’s economy looks like it is about to 
emerge from that pause. If we compare these short-term developments in Japan’s economy 
with those in other advanced countries, Japan is not doing badly.1 For example, according to 
the latest projections by the International Monetary Fund, Japan’s Economy was expected to 
grow by 4.3 percent in 2010, the highest rate of growth among the G-7 countries (Chart 1). 
Moreover,  the  unemployment  rate  in  Japan,  although  higher  than  before  the  failure  of 
Lehman Brothers, is at 4.9 percent, which is far below the roughly 10 percent in the United 
States and the euro area (Chart 2). Of course, the current level of economic activity is still 
below that before the global financial crisis and therefore not satisfactory. However, this is a 
problem  common  to  many  advanced  economies.  With  regard  to  the  degree  of  financial 
system stability, Japan is the most stable. Thus, as far as short-term economic and financial 
developments  are  concerned,  Japan’s  situation  is  by  no  means  worse  than  that  of  other 
advanced economies. 
Despite all this, why are pessimistic views on Japan’s economy so widespread? Clearly, the 
main reason is the downward trend in Japan’s economic growth.  
Why Japan’s economy has lost its vitality 
Let me now explore the first question I mentioned earlier, that is, why Japan’s economy has 
lost its vitality. From around 1955 to 1970, Japan continued to achieve high-speed growth, 
registering annual rates of growth around 10 percent, which is similar to China’s growth since 
1990. Subsequently, Japan’s economic growth rate declined gradually. Yet, in the 1980s, the 
average  annual  growth  rate  was  still  around  4.5  percent,  greatly  exceeding  that  of  other 
advanced economies. However, in the 1990s, Japan’s annual growth rate fell substantially, 
dropping to around 1.5 percent, and in the 2000s, the economy grew at barely 1 percent per 
year on average, although the latter is partly due to the economic plunge triggered by the 
failure of Lehman Brothers (Chart 3). 
The  long-term  trend  of  the  economic  growth  rate  is  determined  by  two  factors:  the rate  of 
growth in the number of workers and the rate of growth in GDP per worker, or productivity 
(Chart 4). Among these, the main factor behind the decline in the growth rate in the 1990s 
was the decline in productivity growth. The first reason for this decline in productivity growth 
is the burst of the bubble economy. Many firms had to focus on resolving the so-called “three 
excesses”  –  in  production  capacity,  employment,  and  debt  –  built  up  during  the  bubble 
period, and as a result, Japan’s growth rate declined. The second reason, overlapping with 
the  first  in  some  respects,  is  that  Japanese  firms  were  slow  to  respond  to  the  significant 
changes in the global economic environment. Specifically, following the fall of the Berlin Wall 
in 1989, the globalization of the market economy proceeded at a rapid pace and the world 
entered an era of “mega competition.” However, Japanese firms were not able to sufficiently 
adapt  to  this  changing  environment.  Looking  back,  during  the  high-speed  growth  era, 
Japanese  firms  were  able  to  grow  rapidly  thanks  to  a  favorable  environment  such  as  an 
                                                 
1   For  a  comparison  between  Japan’s  experience  after  the  burst  of  the  bubble  and  the  U.S.  and  European 
experience in the recent financial crisis, see Shirakawa, Masaaki, “Uniqueness or Similarity? – Japan’s Post-
Bubble  Experience  in  Monetary  Policy  Studies  –  ,”  Keynote  Address  at  the  Second  IJCB  Fall  Conference 
hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, September 16, 2010 (available at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2010/ko1009c.htm). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
abundant supply of labor and the expansion of the domestic market as a result of population 
increases, as well as the absence of rivals from less industrialized countries. The business 
model developed in this environment at the time was based on long-term, stable business 
relationships and put emphasis on mass production and the sale of low-priced, high-quality 
products for the domestic market and advanced economies. The model was suitable for the 
business  environment  during  the  high-speed  growth  era,  but  because  it  had  been  so 
successful,  many  Japanese  firms  were  slow  to  adapt  the  model  when  faced  with  the 
emergence of new markets and competitors in the 1990s. 
In the 2000s, partly because the effects of the burst of the bubble had gradually subsided, 
productivity  growth  stopped  declining  and  Japan’s  productivity  growth  rate  today  in  fact 
remains among the highest among advanced countries (Chart 5). However, the rapid aging 
of the population, at a pace that has no precedence around the world, started to significantly 
affect economic growth. Specifically, the working-age population – which makes up the core 
group  in  production  as  well  as  consumption  and  the  payment  of  taxes  –  peaked  around 
1995. It then started to decline, with the pace of decrease accelerating since the turn of the 
millennium  (Chart  6).  These  trends  reduce  the  growth  in  the  labor  force  and  weigh  on 
economic  growth  from  the  supply  side.  At  the  same  time,  population  aging  also  affects 
economic growth from the demand side. The shrinking of the working-age population, which 
accounts  for  the  bulk  of  consumption,  will  decrease  the  size  of  the  domestic  market. 
Moreover, consumption by the working-age generation is likely to be further constrained by 
the  growing  burden  of  supporting  the  elderly.  Of  course,  the  growing  number  of  elderly 
means that demand for such services as health care and nursing can be expected to rise. 
However,  if  the  supply  capacity  to  meet  such  growing  demand  remains  constrained, 
domestic  demand  as  a  whole  will  likely  be  sluggish.  Another  subtle  consequence  of 
demographic  trends  that  cannot  be  ignored  is  that  the  aging  of  the  electorate  may  affect 
economic policy choices which in turn may have a negative impact on economic growth.  
Why deflation has continued for a prolonged period 
Next, I will discuss the second question, namely why deflation has continued for a prolonged 
period. Although Japan’s deflation is quite mild when compared with oft-quoted episodes of 
deflation such as that in the 1930s, this is a question that has attracted a lot of attention. The 
direct cause of deflation is the slack in the economy (Chart 7). I therefore attribute the most 
recent  price  declines  to  the  global  plunge  in  demand  following  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers.  However,  the  prolonged,  albeit  moderate,  deflation  since  the  end  of  the  1990s 
cannot be explained only by short-term and cyclical factors. A more fundamental cause is the 
long-term  downtrend  in  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  When  the  growth  rate 
continues to decline for a protracted period, people’s expectations for future income growth 
are  reduced  and  firms  and  households  restrain  their  spending.  As  a  result,  downward 
pressure on prices continues (Chart 8). 
It  is  sometimes  said  that  deflation  will  be  solved  only  if  the  central  bank  provides  liquidity 
more aggressively. Provision of ample liquidity is important, of course, but this alone does 
not solve the problem of deflation. In the United States, the Federal Reserve has expanded 
its balance sheet by a factor of 2.5 since the second half of 2008, but the inflation rate has 
continued to decline (Chart 9). Thus, to overcome deflation in Japan, two things – consistent 
monetary  easing  and  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  –  are 
essential. 
Why yields on JGBs have been stable at low levels 
The third question in relation to the severe economic conditions in Japan is why yields on 
Japanese government bonds (JGBs) have been stable at low levels despite the deterioration 
in  the  fiscal  balance  (Chart  10).  In  fact,  the  average  yield  on  10-year  JGBs  since  the 
beginning of 2000 has been around 1.4 percent, an extremely low level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Long-term  interest  rates  are  influenced  by  three  factors:  the  expected  growth  rate,  the 
expected  inflation  rate,  and  the  risk  premium  associated  with  holding  government  bonds. 
Accordingly, one possible explanation for the low and stable long-term interest rates is that it 
reflects  the  market’s  view  that,  for  the  time  being,  Japan’s  economy  will  continue  to  grow 
slowly and have low inflation. 
However,  this  explanation  alone  is  not  sufficient.  Given  continued  large  fiscal  deficits,  if 
doubts about fiscal sustainability were to spread and investors were to become concerned 
about the risks associated with holding JGBs, long-term interest rates would rise. So far this 
has  not  happened,  however.  In  this  context,  it  is  often  pointed  out  that  JGBs  are  largely 
absorbed  by  domestic  private  savings,  which  contributes  to  the  low  and  stable  long-term 
interest  rates.  However,  as  history  shows,  no  country  can  continue  to  run  fiscal  deficits 
forever. Viewed from this perspective, it appears that the reason why interest rates in Japan 
have remained stable is that market participants believe that Japan ultimately has a strong 
will to work on mid- to long-term fiscal consolidation through, for example, reform of the tax 
and social security systems. And if I may add one more thing, I think another major reason is 
that the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy has been clearly focused on achieving 
sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  To  put  it  the  other  way  around,  Japan  should 
appreciate and make every effort to maintain the confidence shown by markets while working 
on mid- to long-term fiscal consolidation. 
Efforts needed to address Japan’s economic problems 
III. 
Next, let me turn to the fourth question, namely whether Japan’s economy can really regain 
its vitality. I mentioned earlier my belief that Japan’s economy can regain its vitality. At the 
same time, however, this of course cannot be achieved without any effort. The road toward 
Japan’s economic revitalization starts from a clear identification of the root cause of Japan’s 
economic  problems.  Understanding  that  this  is  the  downtrend  in  the  growth  potential,  it  is 
necessary to work on specific solutions. 
In this context, some argue that the first thing to do is to overcome deflation. Needless to 
say,  overcoming  deflation  is  a  major  issue  for  Japan’s  economy.  In  some  instances,  price 
increases may of course precede an acceleration in growth, but this is typically only the case 
when inflation is pushed up as a result of price increases in international commodities such 
as natural resources, fuel, and food. However, such developments would entail a worsening 
of the terms of trade and hence a fall in real purchasing power. People would not welcome 
such  price  rises.  The  relationship  between  economic  activity  and  prices  in  the  past  shows 
that prices increase as growth accelerates and hence the output gap narrows. This is how 
the  economy  usually  works.  Thus,  Japan’s  moderate  deflation  is  a  manifestation  of  the 
fundamental problem of the long-term downtrend in the growth potential of the economy. 
I  would  now  like  to  discuss  efforts  in  three  areas  that  I  think  are  particularly  important  for 
raising the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
The  first  concerns  effort  to  tackle  rapid  population  aging.  Based  on  current  demographic 
trends, the pace of decline in the working-age population will accelerate in the future. For this 
reason, society as a whole needs to create a working environment that promotes an increase 
in labor market participation, especially by the elderly and women. In this context, I would like 
to  note  that  female  labor  market  participation  in  Japan  remains  low  in  international 
comparison (Chart 11). 
Second,  it  is  necessary  to  raise  productivity  growth  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  this 
regard, Japanese firms have been diligent, of course. Typical examples are production and 
inventory  management 
just-in-time  systems  as  well  as  kaizen  (continuous 
improvement),  a  term  that  has  made  it  into  English.  Following  the  burst  of  the  bubble, 
Japanese firms have also been working on reducing labor costs. For individual firms, efforts 
to pursue operational efficiency are certainly important. However, in a world of increasingly 
through 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fierce global competition, these efforts alone do not lead to an improvement in productivity. 
The  reason  why  Japan’s  walkman  once  dominated  markets  around  the  world  is  that,  in 
addition  to  high  product  quality,  it  offered  a  new  lifestyle,  allowing  users  across  all  age 
groups to listen to music outside the home. Taking this as an example, Japanese firms need 
to make greater efforts not only to improve the functionality and quality of products from the 
perspective  of  monozukuri,  a  Japanese  expression  for  “creating  substance,”  but  also  to 
provide  new  value  from  the  perspective  of  shikake  zukuri,  or  going  beyond  developing  a 
product to create an environment that the product can thrive in.2 Thus, what is needed is for 
firms to make greater efforts to tap latent consumer demand and create new added value. At 
the same time, in terms of improving productivity in the economy as a whole, efforts at the 
micro-level alone are not sufficient. What is also crucial is to enhance the metabolism of the 
economy as a whole, that is, not to impede the smooth transfer of production resources such 
as capital and labor from areas of shrinking demand to areas of growing demand. 
Moreover, it is vital to make efforts to actively capture demand in overseas markets that are 
enjoying high growth, and many firms have recently been striving for tapping such demand, 
especially in Asian markets (Chart 12). In these markets, and especially in China, demand 
for consumer goods is growing exponentially with the expansion of the middle class. At the 
same  time,  while  enjoying  high  growth,  these  countries  suffer  from  problems  such  as 
pollution  and  urban  overpopulation,  which  Japan  once  experienced.  In  these  areas,  there 
also exist great opportunities for Japanese firms to take advantage of their skills and know-
how  acquired  over  many  years.  In  order  to  actually  capture  such  overseas  demand,  it  is 
necessary to arrange an open trade system. The Japanese government announced last year 
that it would accelerate the negotiation of free trade agreements and economic partnership 
agreements.  Developments  in  discussions  on  these  agreements  are  of  key  importance  for 
increasing  the  productivity  of  Japan’s  economy.  The  government  needs  to  play  its  part  
–  through  deregulation,  tax  reform,  and  the  opening  of  markets  –  to  provide  a  business 
environment that helps to increase productivity. 
Third, efforts to improve the fiscal balance are also necessary. The deterioration in the fiscal 
situation reduces expectations for future income growth, especially among the working-age 
generation, and restrains spending by this generation. Moreover, as seen in the sovereign 
debt  problems  in  European  peripheral  countries  since  last  year,  once  confidence  in  fiscal 
sustainability erodes, this will result in an adverse feedback loop among fiscal conditions, the 
financial system, and the real economy, with negative consequences for economic activity. 
An improvement in the fiscal balance is not something that can be achieved through inflation. 
It  is  true  that  if  prices  rise,  tax  revenues  may  increase.  At  the  same  time,  however, 
expenditures,  such  as  those  on  social  security  and  public  works,  would  also  increase.  If 
future inflation is factored into long-term interest rates, the burden of interest payments on 
government  bonds  would  also  rise.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  fully  recognize  that  an 
improvement  in  the  fiscal  balance  cannot  be  achieved  without  efforts  to  both  reduce 
expenditures and increase revenues in real terms (Chart 13). 
Recognizing the need for reform and Japan’s economic strengths 
IV. 
I  talked  at  length  about  efforts  that  are  needed  to  raise  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s 
economy. Unfortunately, however, such efforts have not made sufficient progress. One of the 
reasons  is  that  the  need  for  reform  cannot  be  immediately  felt.  This  reflects  the  fact  that 
although  the  growth  potential  is  declining,  Japan’s  economy  stands  on  relatively  firm 
                                                 
2  
Ikujiro Nonaka and Akira Katsumi, in their book, The Art of Innovation (Innovation no sahou, 2007, available 
only in Japanese), argue that manufacturing today should not be a mere monozukuri that can be measured in 
terms of quantity, but kotozukuri, or event making, that is, the creation of products that tell a certain story with 
which purchasers can identify and in which they find value. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
foundations. For example, because Japan’s domestic market is relatively large, firms have 
been able to make some profit, even if their business focuses only on the domestic market. 
With regard to the fiscal problem, long-term interest rates have not been rising, the yen has 
not  depreciated,  and  there  has  been  no  capital  flight.  In  fact,  even  though  the  recession 
following the failure of Lehman Brothers was more severe in Japan than in the United States 
and Europe, in the foreign exchange markets, demand for the yen has actually increased, as 
it  is  viewed  as  a  safe-haven  currency.  This  is attributable to  the  fact  that  Japan  has  been 
running a large current account surplus and is the biggest creditor nation in the world, so that 
Japan  is  perceived  as  among  the  most  robust  countries  in  the  world  in  terms  of  foreign 
currency funding. 
Be that as it may, given that the decline in the growth rate is a problem that has plagued 
Japan for a long period, a tremendous amount of human energy is needed to reverse this 
trend. What concerns me in this regard is that Japanese society is losing a healthy sense of 
optimism. Just as excessive optimism can generate an asset bubble, excessive pessimism 
can  depress  the  economy.  What  is  necessary  is  a  strong  will  for  reform  and  overcoming 
excessive pessimism. We should keep in mind that Japan’s economy and society still have 
many strengths. 
The  first  strength  is  that  Japan  is  in  Asia,  which  is  the  very  center  of  global  growth.  For 
example,  looking  at  trade  developments  with  China,  which  is  now  Japan’s  largest  trading 
partner, Japan’s exports to China have grown 4.7-fold since 2000, while imports from China 
have grown 2.7-fold. Moreover, Japan’s direct investment position in China has expanded by 
a factor of more than 5 (Chart 14). Meanwhile, the number of visitors to Japan from Asian 
countries  has  doubled  in  the  past  10  years,  to  about  7  million,  accounting  for  nearly 
80 percent of all visitors. In the future, visitors from Asia are likely to increase further as their 
living standards improve. This is also expected to provide a significant boost to the various 
regions in Japan. 
Japan’s second strength is its high level of technological capabilities. Japan’s technological 
capabilities are particularly high in environmental and energy-related fields, and the energy 
efficiency of Japan’s economy is second to none (Chart 15). Given global trends such as the 
substantial increase in demand for infrastructure in emerging economies, the shift to a low-
carbon  society,  and  the  growing  role  of  environmental  protection,  the  need  for  Japan’s 
advanced  technologies  in  such  areas  is  bound  to  rise  in  the  future.  In  fact,  there  are  a 
considerable number of Japanese firms that have gained a substantial global market share 
by  making  use  of  advanced  technologies  in  electricity  generation  and  storage  or  water 
purification and desalination. Moreover, in a recent new trend, electric power companies and 
local governments, exploiting their ability to provide efficient and reliable service, have shown 
great eagerness to enter overseas markets in the area of urban infrastructure development, 
such as the distribution of electricity and water. 
A third strength – although it is difficult to find the right word – is what may be called the “soft 
power” of Japanese society.3 I am sure you yourself, as a foreign correspondent in Japan, 
have  probably  experienced  how  safe  Japan  is,  as  demonstrated  by  the  great  number  of 
vending machines, how reliable business operations are, as epitomized by the bullet train, 
which  is  always  on  time,  or  how  courteous  the  service  is  one  receives  in  retail  stores.  It 
seems to me that soft power, such as safety and trust, is becoming an increasingly important 
asset in a globalized economy. 
Earlier, I mentioned that the rapid aging of the population is weighing on Japan’s economy. 
On the other hand, population aging, that is, an increase in longevity, should also generate 
an increase in demand in areas such as health care and nursing, tourism and leisure. For 
                                                 
3   This term was first used by Joseph S. Nye, Jr., who focused on the role of the culture or values of a country in 
the area of international politics and calls this soft power as opposed to hard power such as military power. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
example,  the  turnover  of  fitness  clubs  has  increased  by  nearly  40  percent  in  the  past  ten 
years, reflecting the increase in health consciousness due to population aging. At the same 
time, in areas that are regulated, such as health care and nursing care, supply capacity is 
insufficient and there is a mismatch of demand and supply. In these areas, there seems to be 
ample room for tapping potential demand in the domestic market. Japan is the country in the 
world  where  the  problem  of  aging  and  population  decline  is  the  most  acute,  but  other 
countries  in  Asia  will  face  the  same  challenges  in  the  not-so-distant  future  (Chart  16). 
Looking back, the rapid development of energy-efficient technology in Japan was triggered 
by major challenges, namely serious pollution and the rise in oil prices. The population aging 
Japan is now experiencing also represents a major challenge. At the same time, however, if 
Japan  applies  its  technological  capabilities,  as  epitomized  by  its  robots,  as  well  as  its  soft 
power,  this  challenge  can  give  rise  to  new  business  models  such  as  in  the  provision  of 
personalized nursing care services and therefore also presents great business opportunities 
for Japanese firms. 
The Bank of Japan’s policy response 
V. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  briefly  explain  the  policy  responses  the  Bank  of  Japan  has 
implemented in order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable 
growth path with price stability. To start with, the Bank is pursuing powerful monetary easing, 
so-called “comprehensive monetary easing.” The overnight call rate is virtually zero percent, 
the  lowest  in  the  world,  and  the  Bank  has  committed  itself  to  continuing  the  virtually  zero 
interest rate policy until it judges, on the basis of the “understanding of medium- to long-term 
price stability,” that price stability is in sight. Moreover, although extraordinary for a central 
bank, the Bank last autumn started purchasing risk assets such as exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
In addition, to strengthen the growth potential, the Bank has also introduced a new program. 
Through this program, it provides long-term funds with JGBs and other assets as collateral at 
a low interest rate, to support financial institutions’ own initiatives in lending and investing in 
new growth areas. The Bank strongly hopes that the program, by acting as a “catalyst,” will 
prompt vigorous efforts by financial institutions and firms. 
In  many  respects,  Japan  has  been  the  first  among  major  economies  to  experience 
challenges such as balance sheet adjustments, a financial system crisis or rapid population 
aging.  On  the  monetary  policy  front,  many  central  banks  in  advanced  countries  have  now 
adopted  policy  measures  such  as  a  zero-interest  rate  policy,  quantitative  easing,  or  credit 
easing.  However,  at  the  time,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  the  “forerunner”  in  implementing  these 
policies,  needed  to  devise  such  policies  on  its  own.  I  feel  that  such  creativity  and 
innovativeness by the Bank deserves more recognition. Nonetheless, the Bank will continue 
to  consistently  make  contributions  as  the  central  bank  toward  the  crucial  objective  of 
achieving a revitalization of Japan’s economy. 
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
Today, I have talked about the challenges facing Japan’s economy and efforts needed for 
economic revitalization. Looking back at modern economic history, there are many countries 
that achieved economic revitalization once they earnestly addressed severe challenges that 
were initially seen as difficult to resolve. To give an example of another advanced economy, 
the United States, from the second half of the 1970s to the 1980s, faced the challenge of a 
decline  in  the  international  competitiveness  of  its  manufacturing  industries,  which  had 
enjoyed  an  overwhelming  advantage.  Another  example  is  Korea.  Its  strong  manufacturing 
sector is currently attracting attention, but only about a decade ago it found itself in distress 
in the face of a serious currency crisis. Korea took a hard look at the causes of the crisis and 
reformed its economic structures to prevent such a crisis from recurring. Such efforts have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
led today’s rapid progress. These examples suggest that history is a constant process of the 
rise and conquest of new challenges. Japan’s Economy is not an exception. Each time a new 
challenge  arose,  Japan  overcame  it  through  painstaking  efforts  and  a  strong  sense  of 
urgency. I think that once people share a will for reform, they can press ahead with tackling 
the critical issues Japan’s economy faces. 
In Japan, 2011 is the year of the rabbit. In our country, a rabbit running up a hill symbolizes a 
situation where things are progressing smoothly. And in the West, it is the rabbit that brings 
Easter eggs, which are a symbol of rebirth. For my part, I strongly hope that this year will be 
a year of revitalization for Japan’s economy. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
  14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
