Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Promoting the takaful industry in Malaysia  
Speech by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
at the Launch of ING Public Takaful Ehsan, Kuala Lumpur, 5 April 2011. 
 It is my pleasure to be here with you this morning for the official launch of ING Public Takaful 
Ehsan.  Indeed,  this  momentous  occasion,  which  also  celebrates  an  alliance  between  ING 
Management  Holdings  (M)  Sdn  Bhd,  Public  Bank  Bhd  and  Public  Islamic  Bank  Berhad, 
signifies  yet  another  milestone  in  our  continuous  endeavour  to  provide  sufficient  financial 
safety net for the general population and at the same time, promote the development of a 
progressive  takaful  industry,  that  is  agile,  dynamic  and  able  to  adapt  to  the  increasingly 
challenging environment.  
In 2009, Bank Negara Malaysia unveiled the plan to issue 2 new family takaful licences as 
part of the initiative to increase the penetration rate of insurance and takaful as well as to 
further liberalise the financial sector. Despite the prevailing tough global economic conditions 
and  uncertainties  in  the  international  financial  environment  back  then,  an  overwhelmingly 
strong  number  of  applications  were  subsequently  received,  which  led  to  the  issuance  of 
4 family takaful licences instead of 2 as originally planned. This speaks volume of the interest 
and confidence of leading market players in the growth prospects of the takaful industry in 
Malaysia.  
For more than 2 decades, the takaful industry has been blessed with tremendous growth and 
strong  performance.  The  industry  experienced  a  compound  average  growth  rate  of 
27 percent in terms of net contributions between 2005–2010, with family takaful driving the 
growth  at  28  percent  for  the  same  period,  to  dominate  more  than  80  percent  of  the  total 
takaful market in 2010. The strong growth momentum is expected to continue, underpinned 
by the rising affluence of Malaysian amidst strong economic fundamentals. Given the large 
untapped market that still exists with only 54 percent of the population having a life insurance 
or family takaful policy, the takaful industry is poised to benefit in the years ahead. 
Today’s launch is thus an important step in our overall strategy to further elevate the growth 
and  development  of  the  takaful  industry.  ING  Public  Takaful  Ehsan  is  the  3rd  licensee  to 
launch out of the 4 family takaful licences awarded recently, making up to a total of 11 takaful 
players  now  operating  in  Malaysia.  The  initiative  for  strengthening  competition  in  takaful 
industry  is  premised  on  our  quest  to  unlock  the  enormous  growth  potential  that  lie  ahead. 
There are 3 dimensions from which strong opportunities for growth can be harnessed in the 
takaful industry.  
First,  is  the  opportunity  to  penetrate  the  remaining  underserved  areas  in  family 
takaful. One such area is medical and health, which in 2010 constitutes only 9 percent of 
new  family  takaful  business.  Going  forward,  there  is  certainly  a  need  for  greater  role  by 
takaful  in  supporting  sustainable  management  of  healthcare  and  retirement  needs  of 
individuals  to  effectively  address  the  emerging  challenges  associated  with  demographic 
changes with rising healthcare expenditure. As the Malaysian society transitions to a more 
ageing population as typically seen in developed economies, there is room to harness the 
appeal  of  family  takaful  as  a  tool  for  long-term  savings  and  investment,  whilst  protecting 
against financial vulnerabilities arising from critical illness, death, disability or unemployment, 
or providing for children’s education. With growing awareness on individual responsibility in 
financial planning among Malaysians catalysing demand for savings and investment-driven 
products,  this  positive  trend  will  translate  itself  into  an  impetus  for  strong  growth  in 
endowment family takaful products. 
The second dimension of growth opportunities for the takaful industry is to be seized 
from the transformation of Malaysia as a high income economy. In advancing towards 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
this transformation, the Malaysian economy is to undergo significant structural shift into new 
areas  of  growth  and  comparative  advantage.  With  Islamic  finance  specifically  identified  as 
one  of  new  growth  areas  under  this  envisioned  new  economic  model,  the  takaful  industry 
stands  to  gain  from  the  march  towards  socio-economic  transformation  by  seizing  the 
opportunity  to  grow  business  beyond  the  more  traditional  business  lines.  This  entails 
broadening  product  offerings  to  higher  value-added  activities  and  capturing  the  growing 
demand for more customised, niche and sophisticated product range, including investment-
linked  and  wealth-management  products,  among  the  more  affluent  customer  base.  At  the 
other  end  of  product  spectrum,  equal,  if  not  more,  emphasis  needs  to  be  given  by  the 
industry in extending coverage to low-income individuals via microtakaful. There is little doubt 
that  the  ability  and  commitment  of  takaful  industry  to  deliver  such  value  proposition  that 
allows for the benefits of growth and development to be experienced across all communities 
will resonate strongly with the values espoused by takaful. This in turn could go a long way 
towards elevating the importance of takaful in the eyes of the public and further widening the 
industry’s growth prospect. With this aim in mind, it is critical for industry players to leverage 
on  the  readily  available  channels  to  reach  to  the  masses  and  employ  agents  and 
bancatakaful to the fullest to maximise its potential. 
The third dimension of growth which is integral to the nation’s high income agenda 
relates  to  the  opportunities  to  be  harnessed  under  the  initiative  to  consolidate 
Malaysia’s  position  as  an  international  Islamic  financial  centre  (MIFC).  As  industry  is 
well aware, the MIFC initiative seeks to enhance the international dimension of Malaysia’s 
Islamic finance. The prospect is most compelling for the takaful industry. Malaysia is already 
at the forefront in the development of takaful, particularly family takaful, compared to other 
market.  Building  on  our  strengths,  experience  and  achievements,  the  Malaysian  takaful 
industry with the highest number of takaful and retakaful operators, is well-positioned to seize 
the  enormous  opportunity  to  export  takaful  benefits  to  the  estimated  1.5  billion  Muslims 
around the world whom are currently underserved by the insurance industry. This presents a 
huge window of opportunity for our takaful operators to accelerate their regional and global 
orientation  and  move  up  the  global  value  chains.  It  is  therefore  important  for  strategic 
international partners such as ING to explore all possible avenues to elevate the business 
potential of takaful internationally.  
A  critical  factor  that  will  determine  the  success  in  taking  the  industry  to  the  next  level  of 
development  is  the  existence  of  players  with  the  right  quality  and  calibre,  as  well  their 
readiness in terms of capacity and capability to formulate and execute successful strategies 
in 
rapidly  evolving  environment, 
responsiveness  to  consumer  needs  is  a  crucial  test  that  defines  success.  The  takaful 
industry  in  Malaysia  has  never  been  about  Shariah  conformity  being  its  only  value 
proposition.  With  consumers  becoming  increasingly  discerning  and  the  market  being  more 
competitive, factors such as innovative product design, price competitiveness, transparency 
and service quality have all been important determinants in winning and securing customer 
loyalty. The ability of takaful operators to deliver such value propositions has been, and will 
continue to be, amongst the key success factors to successfully position takaful in Malaysia 
to  appeal  to  both  muslim  and  non-muslims,  whether  corporates  or  individuals.  It  is  our 
earnest  aspiration  that  the  entry  of  ING  Public  Takaful  Ehsan  will  further  add  to  the 
dynamism and vigour of the takaful industry. With this strategic alliance between 2 financial 
groups  of  such  calibre,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  looks  forward  to  strong  management 
stewardship, innovative product offerings, wide distribution channels, operational and service 
excellence as well as breakthrough business strategies that are well-matched by robust risk 
management capabilities. I am confident that ING Public Takaful Ehsan will benefit greatly 
from the synergies and complementary strengths of its shareholders, by drawing upon the 
combined  wealth  of  market  experience,  technical  underwriting  expertise,  multi-channel 
distribution network and infrastructure, to successfully make its mark as one of the leading 
takaful operator, both domestically and on the global front.  
to  new  market  opportunities. 
response 
this 
In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  pursuit  to  seize  the  growing  business  opportunities  in  the  increasingly  competitive 
environment, building a pool of highly skilled and knowledgeable workforce must remain a 
strategic priority for takaful operators. As a knowledge-intensive industry, human capital can 
indeed be a potent weapon of competitive advantage for the industry. As the industry seeks 
to  achieve  a  higher  level  of  competitiveness,  increased  product  complexity,  business 
sophistication,  service  excellence  and  the  global  nature  of  competition  are  all  demanding 
greater  depth  and  breadth  of  leadership,  knowledge,  competence  and  skills  of  industry 
professionals.  Adding  to  the  demands  for  increased  organisational  capabilities  is  the 
changing  regulatory  landscape  towards  risk-based  capital,  soon-to-be  implemented  for  the 
Malaysian  takaful  industry,  which  places  greater  prominence  on  strong  risk  management 
culture.  I  must  also  stress  on  the  distinctive  human  capital  requirements  for  the  takaful 
industry – with respect to the need to ensure that the industry workforce possesses the right 
blend  of  technical  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  Shariah.  Several  centres  of 
excellence for advanced education and training in Islamic finance such as the International 
Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF)  and  industry’s  own  Islamic  Banking  and 
Finance  Institute  Malaysia  (IBFIM)  are  currently  tasked  with  this  pivotal  role  of  enhancing 
takaful  expertise  through  dedicated  takaful  modules  and  training  programmes.  Going 
forward,  continuing  support  and  stronger  commitment  of  takaful  operators  to  develop  and 
enhance the pool of talents will be crucial in determining the extent of future progress and 
achievement. 
Whilst the need to develop technical skills is paramount, emphasis must also continually be 
given to the adoption of the highest level of professionalism and good market conduct. This 
is an area of particular importance for takaful intermediaries, marketing and servicing front 
liners representing the face and image of the industry. It involves educating consumers on 
the  key  attributes  of  takaful,  having  great  reverence  for  and  understanding  of  consumer 
needs,  ensuring  that  consumers  are  suitably  advised  in  the  marketing  process  to  make 
informed decisions as well as treating consumers fairly. It needs no convincing that such high 
standard of market conduct is essential in maintaining public confidence, the lack of which 
will  undoubtedly  compromise  industry’s  reputation.  Equally  important  is  the  imperative  to 
ensure that Shariah compliance remains at the heart of governance and business operation. 
This  calls  for  accountability  on  the  part  of  takaful  operators  to  institute  robust  shariah 
governance  framework  within  their  organisation.  The  enhanced  Shariah  governance 
framework  issued  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  for  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry 
recently aims to achieve this objective. It is envisaged that the enhancements made to the 
framework will lead to improved oversight, authority and accountability of key Shariah organs 
and  greater  Shariah  observance  through  an  end-to-end  Shariah  control  mechanisms, 
thereby  strengthening  the  overall  shariah  governance  processes  within  Islamic  financial 
institutions. Through  its effective  implementation,  the  framework  lays  the  foundation  for  an 
Islamic  financial  institution  to  align  Shariah  with  the  organisation’s  strategic  orientation,  in 
guiding Shariah compliance as an embedded culture within the organisation, beyond merely 
product design function to all other aspects of its day-to-day business operation. Given that 
effective  shariah  compliance  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  aims  and  objectives  of  an  Islamic 
financial  institution,  takaful  operators  will  find  that  such  an  approach  that  optimises  and 
harnesses the strength of Shariah will manifest itself as a source of competitive edge for their 
organisation,  whilst  contributing  immensely  towards  preserving  the  integrity  of  the  Islamic 
financial services industry.  
With our steadfast commitment to continually enhancing the dynamism and competitiveness 
of  the  takaful  industry  in  Malaysia,  I  am  confident  that  the  takaful  industry  is  on-track  for 
quantum leap performance in this next phase of growth and development. On this note, it is 
my great pleasure to congratulate ING Public Takaful Ehsan on its successful launch. I wish 
ING Public Takaful Ehsan every success in its endeavors and look forward to its meaningful 
contribution in driving the takaful industry and Islamic finance in Malaysia forward.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
