Stefan Ingves: Coming stronger out of a crisis – lessons from Sweden  
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Brussels Economic 
Forum, Brussels, 18 May 2011. 
 “If in debt, you are not free.” This expression was widely used by Göran Persson, Sweden’s 
former prime minister, to explain the need for the extensive fiscal consolidation process that 
Sweden underwent after the crisis in the 1990s.1 In 1997, a three-year nominal expenditure 
ceiling was introduced. This was an important step towards increasing budgetary discipline 
and strengthening the long-term perspective of the budget process. In addition, as part of this 
fiscal  consolidation  process,  a  new  fiscal  policy  framework  that  included  a  budget  surplus 
target  of  1  per  cent  over  the  business  cycle  was  introduced  in  the  year  2000.  With  these 
instruments in place the debt to GDP ratio fell from 56 per cent in the year 2000 to 35 per 
cent today. 
Recent  developments  in  many  European  countries  remind  us  of  Göran  Persson’s  words: 
small, open economies are vulnerable to crises of confidence when financial markets are in 
turmoil.  They  need  to  stand  on  very  solid  economic  foundations  and  be  supported  by  a 
credible and sound fiscal-policy framework. Sweden was lucky enough to be in this position 
when the recent crisis struck.  
This was indeed fortunate as the crisis had a major impact on the Swedish economy. GDP 
fell by more than 5 per cent in 2009 – the largest fall since the 1930s. However, the fact that 
Sweden was relatively well equipped to confront the crisis, in combination with other factors, 
contributed  to  a  rapid  recovery  of  the  Swedish  economy.  During  2010,  GDP  increased  by 
more than 5 per cent. Thus the increase was as large as the decrease had been the year 
before.  And  some  of  the  reasons  behind  the  pronounced  decline  also  explain  the  rapid 
recovery. I will cover this in the first part of the speech.  
But Sweden was also lucky that the crisis did not have more severe consequences. As in 
many  other  countries,  the  crisis  exposed  vulnerabilities  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework  for  financial  stability.  The  key  conclusions  we  draw  are  not  unique  for  Sweden 
and I will spend the rest of the speech outlining these issues and what we are doing to deal 
with them.  
Why were both the recession and the recovery more pronounced in Sweden than in 
the rest of the world? 
Sweden  is  indeed  a  small,  open  economy!  Our  exports  and  imports  are  approximately 
50 and 40 per cent of GDP respectively. This is the main reason why the Swedish economy 
was hit so badly during the recent international recession, as global trade collapsed. While 
exports in the euro area and the United States fell by approximately the same amount as in 
Sweden,  our  higher  export  share  meant  a  larger  impact  on  the  economy.  Later  this 
vulnerability became a boon for Sweden, as the strong upturn in global trade after the crisis 
benefited Sweden more than many other countries due to its high export share.  
But the recovery was not only led by exports. As I said initially, Sweden was well prepared to 
confront  the  crisis  as  public  finances  were  strong,  unlike  much  of  the  euro  area  and  the 
United States. In both these regions the budget deficit averaged 2 per cent of GDP in the 
                                                 
1   For a more detailed discussion of the Swedish fiscal consolidation see Göran Persson (1996), “The Swedish 
Experience in Reducing Budget Deficits and Debt”, Economic Review, First Quarter 1996, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
10 years leading up to the recent crisis, while Sweden had, on average, a surplus of over 
1 per cent; in line with the surplus target I mentioned previously. Strong public finances limit 
the  need  for  fiscal  restraint  during  and  after  a  crisis.  While  in  other  countries  the  fiscal 
stimulus needed during the crisis was widespread, in Sweden the fiscal stimulus was more 
targeted to the labour market and to those sectors that were more strongly hit. In addition to 
this, Sweden has had a high level of household saving and a relatively strong increase in 
disposable incomes in recent years. This combination has also enabled a high rate of growth 
in private consumption during and after the crisis. All these preconditions were weaker in the 
United States and the euro area. 
Lastly,  Sweden  does  not  have  the  major  structural  problems  that  have  arisen  in  the 
economies of those countries hit by a “boom-bust” cycle on the housing market – problems 
that  have  been  reflected  in  a  substantial  weakening  of  public  finances.  House  prices 
recovered after a slight turndown in connection with the crisis and are now at a higher level 
than  before  the  crisis  began.  While  we  continue  to  follow  developments  in  the  Swedish 
housing market, structural factors, such as a low level of construction and traditionally low 
levels of credit losses on Swedish mortgages, reduce the likelihood of major price falls in the 
near future.  
What have we learnt from the crisis? 
It  would  be  wrong  to  focus  solely  on  the  factors  that  explain  Sweden’s  relatively  strong 
recovery. There were also a number of vulnerabilities in the Swedish institutional set up and 
banking system which threatened to increase the severity and length of the downturn.  
The major Swedish banks are heavily reliant on international funding and liquidity in these 
markets  fell  sharply  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  To  protect  the  banking 
system, the Riksbank provided general liquidity assistance in the form of loans in SEK and 
USD at long maturities. This liquidity assistance was substantial: it peaked at around 15 per 
cent  of  GDP  and  lasted  for  over  two  years.  Some  Swedish  banks  were  also  exposed  to 
significant risks through their operations in the Baltic countries. When the financial crisis hit 
Europe, GDP in the Baltic region fell sharply as foreign investors withdrew and demand for 
exports fell. And even if the global financial crisis had not arrived when it did, a combination 
of  lax  fiscal  policies  and  rapid  growth  in  wages  and  lending  in  the  Baltics  meant  that  the 
economies were overheating and were not on a sustainable path.  
In addition, global financial inter-linkages produced serious negative externalities for Sweden 
and many other countries. This was a situation we had not encountered before. 
To some extent, the reliance on international funding markets and exposure to the rapidly-
expanding Baltic region were vulnerabilities that could have been identified before the crisis. 
It  is  now  clear  that  in  the  past  financial  regulation  and  supervision  did  not  function 
satisfactorily in Sweden and in many other countries.  
Macro-prudential policy is needed 
Prior to the crisis, financial regulation focused excessively on individual institutions under the 
erroneous  assumption  that  the  system  would  remain  stable  as  long  as  the  individual 
institutions were stable. Consequently, processes that create risks on the system-wide level 
were ignored. One important lesson from the global crisis is that we need to include more 
explicit systemic-risk preventive regulations, or macro-prudential regulation, in the regulatory 
framework. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and the Financial Stability Oversight 
Council  in  the  United  States  are  leading  the  development  of  formalized  macro-prudential 
policy  arrangements.  Many  other  countries,  Sweden  included,  are  thinking  seriously  about 
how to implement and conduct macro-prudential policy in their jurisdictions. Macro-prudential 
policy needs to be operational soon, but some difficult hurdles remain to be overcome. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
An  important  challenge  for  the  design  of  a  new  regulatory  framework  will  lie  in  finding  an 
appropriate balance: on the one hand, the regulations will need to be sufficient to effectively 
reduce  the risk  of  financial  crisis; on  the  other  hand  they  should  not  be  so  stringent  as  to 
impose unnecessary costs on the financial sector. It is a matter of finding just the right level 
of regulation. 
Handling the interactions between monetary policy and macro-prudential policy poses further 
challenges.  During  the  recent  financial  crisis,  we  observed  the  difficulties  of  conducting 
monetary policy in a non-stable financial environment. Interest rate signals from the central 
banks were sometimes dwarfed by contradictory events in the markets. Conversely, financial 
stability is dependent on smooth and predictable monetary policy. Thus, policy makers must 
always keep in mind that the increased use of regulatory tools will inevitably affect monetary 
policy in different ways. Regulations will affect the interest rates that firms and households 
meet  and  this  is  something  that  the  central  bank  needs  to  take  into  consideration  when 
setting the policy rate – in much the same way as monetary policy has to take into account 
changes in interest-rate spreads due to changes in financial conditions. 
A  key  element  in  handling  the  interactions  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential 
policy will be putting an appropriate governance structure in place. How should we structure 
the decision-making process in order to take account of the nexus between monetary policy 
and financial stability? It seems clear that the central bank should have some role in setting 
macro-prudential policy but that precise role may differ depending on the regulatory structure 
preferred by different countries. For example, responsibility for macro-prudential policy could 
be given to a committee in which a representative from the central bank would sit (like in the 
United States) or it could be given to the central bank (like in the UK). And central banks can 
adopt different internal governance approaches: some have a separate board for monetary 
policy; others also have a separate board for financial stability. Most central banks have the 
same board for both, but may have separate Deputy Governors responsible for each of the 
two strands. 
What matters, as I see it, is that “the buck stops somewhere”. There must be a decision at 
some  high  managerial  level  which  balances  the  interests  of  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability as well as other central bank responsibilities. The organisation and processes of the 
central  bank  must  also  be  structured  so  that  there  are  analytical  tools  and  resources 
available  to  help  policy  makers  take  a  balanced  view  in  their  decisions  concerning  both 
monetary  and  financial  stability  policy  objectives.  For  instance,  there  should  be  inter-
departmental working groups.  
It  is  also important  to  remember  that  systemic  risks can  quickly  spread  between  countries 
and  reducing  the  build-up  or  impact  of  such  risks  will  require  coordinated  international 
actions.  Therefore,  international  governance  arrangements  also  matter  because  they 
influence how macro-prudential policies interact across national borders. This matters a lot, 
not least in the Baltic region. In Europe, the ESRB will play an important role in identifying 
European system-wide  risks and recommending policy responses, which will help manage 
cross-border issues.  
Sound crisis resolution systems also needed 
Effective  macro-prudential  policy  would  provide  a  line  of  defence  against  the  build-up  of 
systemic risks but it is unrealistic to expect it to prevent all serious financial disruptions in the 
future. It is therefore important to supplement macro-prudential policy with other measures to 
lessen  the  impact  of  financial  instability  when  it  occurs.  This  includes  special  resolution 
regimes for financial institutions which alter normal insolvency rules so that priority is given to 
reducing the negative externalities created when financial institutions fail. In many countries 
these regimes were completely absent or insufficient to deal with the magnitude and nature 
of institutions that failed in this crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Despite the lessons from the crisis of the early 1990s, Sweden failed to create permanent 
resolution powers and so was unprepared in this respect when the recent crisis hit.2 The lack 
of a legal framework meant that the authorities lacked the legal power and useful guidance 
on how to deal with failing banks. As a result, the Swedish government quickly passed the 
Government  Support  to  Credit  Institutions  Act  in  October  2008,  which  gives  the  Swedish 
National Debt Office powers to intervene if a failing bank poses a serious threat to financial 
stability. We were fortunate that we could draw on people with experience from the 1990’s 
crisis to help draft the legislation so quickly.  
However, the increasing globalization of the financial system means that crisis management 
is more difficult today than it was at the beginning of the 1990s. As financial institutions and 
groups have become more internationally active, they are increasingly difficult to resolve as 
authorities from multiple countries must cooperate on tricky issues like burden sharing and 
national insolvency / resolution laws can clash.  
Fortunately,  there  is  currently  a  considerable  push  by  international  bodies  such  as  the 
Financial Stability Board and the European Commission to design resolution tools (such as 
bail-in tools) and to develop guidelines or principles for national resolution regimes and for 
handling the failure of cross-border financial institutions. This work should help reduce the 
cross-border issues by making national resolution regimes more compatible. It is important 
that these regimes are well designed and properly implemented as we should not remain in a 
situation in which certain financial institutions or banking sectors are reliant on taxpayer bail-
outs  to  survive.  Removing  (or  reducing)  the  implicit  government  guarantee  for  these 
institutions  reduces  the  impact  and  probability  of  financial  crises  and  avoids  an  unwanted 
transfer of funds from taxpayers to bank creditors. In addition, this will help reduce the feed-
back loops between the banking sector and the public sector. These loops arise when risks 
in  the  financial  sector  are  resolved  using  public  funds,  weakening  the  fiscal  budget  which 
can, in turn, increase risks in the financial sector.  
The way forward 
As I said, these are key lessons for Sweden and the international community more generally 
and, as a result, there has been a significant amount of work by authorities and academics 
on  the  issues  since  the  crisis  began.  The  Riksbank  is  involved  in  this  work  through  its 
engagement in the national and international debates and proposals on possible reforms to 
the  financial  system  and  through  its  own  work  on  possible  measures.  For  example,  the 
Riksbank recently published an inquiry into risks on the Swedish housing market, including 
the  risks  associated  with  rising  house  prices  and  increasing  household  indebtedness  and 
possible measures to address these risks. 
The new capital adequacy and liquidity rules included in Basel III form a major element of the 
international  response  to  the  crisis.  The  new  regulations  are  welcomed  by  the  Riksbank. 
Basel III will introduce a counter-cyclical capital buffer which will form a part of the macro-
prudential  toolkit  and  entail  higher  minimum  capital  requirements  which  will  improve  the 
ability  of  authorities  to  resolve  failing  banks  effectively.  Finansinspektionen  (Swedish  FSA) 
recently  announced  that  the  major  Swedish  banks  should  prepare  for  their  capital 
requirements to rise to the levels proposed in Basel III within the next few years, ahead of the 
international schedule for implementing Basel III. And I think that we should consider going 
further than Basel III in other ways in order to reflect the specific vulnerabilities and risks that 
exist  in  Sweden,  for  example  by  introducing  liquidity  requirements  with  specific  rules  for 
matching  maturities  per  currency.  This  also  seems  to  be  the  Swedish  Government’s  view. 
According to the Fiscal Spring Policy Bill of 2011, the government’s intention is – while the 
                                                 
2  For a more detailed discussion of the lessons of the Swedish crisis, see Stefan Ingves and Göran Lind (2008), 
“Stockholm’s solutions”, Finance & Development, IMF, December 2008. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
transition  rules  for  Basel  II  still  applies  –  to  try  different  ways  of  strengthening  the  capital 
adequacy rules for systemically important banks beyond what will be required when Basel III 
is implemented.  
In  addition,  the  Swedish  government  recently  established  a  Financial  Crisis  Committee  to 
review  the  current  regulatory  framework  and  the  handling  of  the  recent  crisis.  It  will  also 
propose  changes  that  would  reduce  the  likelihood  of  future  financial  crises,  by  using 
preventive measures, and allow them to be resolved in an efficient manner. This will be a 
wide-ranging review that will consider the issues I have briefly mentioned in this speech, as 
well  as  many  other  issues.  It  is  an  important  step  towards  ensuring  that  we  have  the 
appropriate  institutional  set-up  in  place  to  handle  internal  and  external  threats  to  financial 
stability in the future. 
Concluding remarks 
The Riksbank was formed in 1668 and in the nearly 350 years since then has seen many 
crises of many different shapes and sizes. I have experienced some (but not all!) of them. 
And in its time the Riksbank will have seen many different reforms and changes in response 
to the various crises. It seems extremely unlikely that we will be able to achieve what has 
eluded my predecessors in the Riksbank; namely, introducing changes that will eradicate all 
crises from our future. But it is still worth remembering the words of George Santayana, that 
“those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it”.  
Ultimately,  in  the  long-run,  we  may  be  condemned  to  repeat  the  past,  but  we  can  put 
structures in place that make the repetition less frequent and less costly. Institutions have a 
longer  memory  than  individuals,  so  an  important  element  of  the  current  reforms  to  the 
regulatory structure and financial system is to create frameworks to ensure that the mistakes 
made in the run-up to this crisis are not forgotten and repeated once the key actors in this 
crisis are gone. In this context, three factors are key: fiscal sustainability, stable prices and 
sound financial stability policies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
