Njuguna Ndung’u: Improving access to financial services in Kenya 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
Airtel Money Transfer Service, Nairobi, 10 August 2011. 
 Hon. Samuel Poghisio, Minister for Information and Communications;  
Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information and Communications;  
Mr. Charles Njoroge, Director General, Communications Commission of Kenya;  
N. Arjun, Airtel Chief Projects and Transformation Officer, Airtel Africa;  
Rene Meza, Managing Director, Airtel Kenya;  
Distinguished Guests:  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  during  this 
historic  launch  of  Airtel  Money  Transfer  Service  brand  into  the  Kenyan  Financial  Sector 
following  the  successful  application  early  this  year  by  Airtel  to  re-brand  and  re-launch  the 
service and subsequent approval by the Central Bank of Kenya.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: I am informed that the key objective of Airtel Money Brand in line 
with this launch is twofold: First, to provide a convenient, affordable, and easily accessible 
money  transfer  service  to  Kenyans  of  all  walks  of  life  and  second,  to  provide  the  banked 
members  of  the  society  with  a  convenient  way  to  access  and  transact  funds  held  in  their 
bank  accounts.  This  objective  is  in  tandem  with  the  Central  Bank  policy  on  adoption  of 
innovative  technological  platforms  to  scale  up  access  to  financial  services.  In  fact,  Mobile 
Phone  Financial  services  have  in  particular  presented  Kenya  with  an  opportunity  to 
significantly upscale access to financial services cost effectively. It has also shown there is a 
market and everyone now wants a slice of it.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Kenyan Mobile Phone Financial Services story has become a 
much  acclaimed  global  case  study.  To  date,  over  17.8  million  Kenyans  transfer  over 
Ksh.3.1 billion  to  each  other  daily  with  over  1.1  million  transactions.  In  particular,  and  in 
terms of registered users and agents’ base, I am informed that Airtel controls 18 percent of 
the registered users and 25 percent of agents. Further, I wish to commend Airtel for planning 
to  carry  out  an  extensive  awareness  campaign  immediately  after  this  launch  in  order  to 
stimulate  the  uptake  of  the  service  in  addition  to  the  recent  extensive  country  wide  agent 
recruitment exercise by the company. It is my firm belief that this will positively impact on the 
visibility  of  the  Airtel  Brand  in  the  market.  In  fact,  there  are  so  many  areas  not  yet  fully 
covered out there to be served, go for them and increase the share of the population using 
mobile phone financial services.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Effective  and  better  regulation  requires  prudential  guidelines  to 
provide  guidance  in  all  policy  and  oversight  activities  of  Payment  System  Operators  and 
Regulators. In this regard, I am gland to inform you that the Bank early this year released 
draft  regulations  whose  objective  is  to  ensure  that  E-Money  Issuers  and  Payment  Service 
Providers conduct their businesses prudently and in accordance with the provisions of the 
relevant legal provisions including the Banking Act, Central Bank of Kenya Act, the Proceeds 
of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act, the Companies Act, the Microfinance Act, and the 
SACCO Societies Act.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  public  policy  objective  of  Central  Bank  in  the  National 
Payments Systems is to ensure safety, efficiency and effectiveness of the payment system 
as a whole. In this regard, please allow me to point out that with increased use of mobile 
phone  money  transfer  services  by  the  wider  general  public,  inherent  system-wide 
implications are bound to arise and therefore it is prudent for all stakeholders to ensure;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    That appropriate measures are put in place to safeguard the integrity of the systems 
at all times in order to protect customers against risks such as frauds, loss of money 
and loss of privacy.  
That the system will provide adequate measures to guard against money laundering 
among others.  
That  the  system  is  capable  of  mitigating  the  risks  of  access  by  non-authorized 
persons such as hackers and others.  
We  have  operating  platforms  within  reach  and  disaster  recovery  sites  in  secure 
locations and tested at all times.  
Ladies and gentlemen: In conclusion, I wish to thank Airtel and its Management team for the 
important role it is playing in the economy. With these few remarks I wish to declare Airtel 
Money Transfer Service Brand officially launched.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
