Erkki Liikanen: Economic and Monetary Union – lessons from the recent 
crisis 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the European Economics 
and Financial Centre (EEFC), Distinguished Speakers Seminar, London, 16 June 2011. 
 It is a special pleasure for me to speak here in London and I thank professor Scobie for the 
kind invitation. 
The Bank of Finland has had close contacts with the City for a very long time. Actually, we 
should now be celebrating 150 years of that relationship, since it was in 1861 when the Bank 
of  Finland  first  opened  correspondent  accounts  with  the  London  bank,  N.M.  Rothschild 
& Sons. 
A  very  special  relationship  exists  also  between  the  national  central  banks  of  the  two 
countries, the Bank of Finland and the Bank of England. This was recently highlighted by the 
Governor, Mervyn King, when he spoke at the 200th anniversary conference of the Bank of 
Finland in Helsinki last month (yes, the Bank of Finland turns 200 this year). I was impressed 
to hear that Governor King had actually gone through the Old Lady’s archives and had found 
some interesting evidence of how close the relationship between the two central banks was 
already in the 1920’s and 1930’s. That was the time when Risto Ryti, a well known anglophile 
was Governor of the Bank of Finland. Governor Ryti travelled regularly to London and got to 
know well his British counterpart, the famous Montagu Norman. 
A  particularly  vivid  example  of  Governor  King’s  findings  is  a  letter  from  Governor  Ryti  to 
Cameron  Cobbold,  then  a  Bank  official  and  later  Governor,  dated  18th  June  1935,  which 
discussed  the  forthcoming  visit  of  Cobbold  and  another  official,  Humphrey  Mynors,  to 
Finland. 
Ryti  wrote:  “I  shall  have  great  pleasure  in  receiving  you  and  Mr  Mynors  at  the  Bank  of 
Finland at which I shall arrive on 4 July at 11:00 a.m. from the countryside, where I will be 
spending  my  summer  holidays  at  that  time.  Permit  me  to  invite  you  and  Mr  Mynors  to  a 
luncheon at the Bank after your arrival. I propose that we, after having discussed matters of 
mutual  interest,  start  for  a  little  trip  to  some  nice  places  in  South  Finland,  where  I  shall 
arrange  for  fishing  possibilities  or  other  summer  enjoyment  in  which  you  and  Mr  Mynors 
might be interested”. On the letter is a handwritten comment by Mr Cobbold to Mr Mynors 
“this sounds like real central banking cooperation! What are your summer sports?” To which 
Mr Mynors responds by saying “Does this mean bringing a mosquito net?” 
At  the  time  of  that  innocent  letter,  the  world  was  gradually  recovering  from  the  Great 
Depression, the worst financial disaster of the century. That recovery was undermined by a 
surge of global protectionism and growing political instability in Europe towards the end of 
the  1930’s.  The  fledgling  attempts  at  international  economic  policy  cooperation  under  the 
League of Nations and the new Bank for International Settlements were not effective enough 
to solve those problems. 
Much has changed since that letter was written 76 years ago. However, we are once again 
recovering  from  a  global  economic  and  financial  crisis.  This  time,  economic  cooperation, 
especially  between  central  banks,  enabled  us  to  prevent  the  crisis  from  developing  into  a 
spiral of deflation and depression. However, as all of you know, the situation continues to be 
difficult and even precarious. The foundation for a sustainable recovery is far from ready and 
much more needs to be done. 
My topic today is the economy of the euro area. I propose to discuss the current state of the 
EMU and its challenges and prospects. I will approach my topic from the perspective of a 
central  banker.  Thus  I  will  start  with  monetary  policy  –  the  very  core  of  the  central  bank’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
responsibility – and move then on to broader issues of financial markets and budgetary and 
economic policy. 
Monetary policy evaluation 
By what measure should we judge the performance of the EMU? When the monetary union 
was designed, the most important  concern was how to ensure the stability of the value of 
money. The stability of the Deutsche mark and the monetary policy of the Bundesbank were 
important role-models in the construction of the whole euro area, and even for central banks 
elsewhere. 
There  was  a  strong  consensus  that  the  common  currency  should  be  as  stable  as  the 
Deutsche mark had been. At the time when the Maastricht Treaty was signed in February 
1992,  the  signatories  knew  that  the  German  inflation  rate  over  the  previous  10  years  had 
been  2.4  %  per  annum  on  average.  This  admirable  stability  was  desired  for  the  whole 
monetary union. 
How  have  we  done  in  this  respect?  The  ECB  adopted  a  target  for  price  stability:  inflation 
should be less than but close to 2 % in the medium term. This objective has been achieved. 
As Mr. Trichet has been able to note, during the twelve years of EMU, the average inflation 
rate in the euro area has been 1.97 % per annum. So, judging by the primary objective, we 
can say that the common currency has not disappointed the expectations of 1992. 
It must be emphasized that price stability has also been maintained relatively well during the 
recent  financial crisis.  In  the  early phase  of  the  crisis,  there  was  an  imminent  danger  of a 
financial collapse and ensuing deflation. 
To keep the monetary situation under control, the ECB complemented its interest rate policy 
with a variety of unconventional or non-standard measures. These improved the liquidity of 
the banking system and the bond markets. The measures included, among other things, the 
much discussed bond purchases under the so-called Securities Market Programme. 
These actions should be judged by the results. The euro has remained strong, the financial 
meltdown  has  been  avoided,  and  inflation  expectations  have  remained  consistent  with  the 
ECB’s price stability objective. 
So, the crisis of the last years has not been a crisis of the euro as a currency. The currency 
has  remained  stable,  and  also  strong  in  the  international  context.  This  achievement  is 
remarkable, but it does not mean that there is cause for complacency. 
Present challenges to monetary policy 
In the area of monetary policy, our fundamental task is to ensure that euro area citizens and 
the economy can put their trust in the euro, also in the future. In this task, there are two major 
challenges. 
The first challenge is the worldwide rapid increase in prices of raw materials and energy. This 
is quickly reflected in the inflation statistics, and monetary policy cannot do very much to stop 
it.  But  what  monetary  policy  must  do  is  to  ensure  that  the  cost  impulses  from  the  raw 
materials prices do not trigger second-round effects in domestic costs. 
In  order  to  avoid  second-round  effects,  it  is  crucial  to  keep  inflation  expectations  well 
anchored  to  the  ECB’s  price  stability  objective.  This  is  all  about  trust.  ECB  policy  and  the 
supporting communications must inspire public trust in price stability. 
The more firmly the inflation expectations can be stabilized, the better monetary policy can 
support recovery of the euro area economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Communications  are  really  effective  only  if  monetary  policy  lives  up  to  its  commitment  to 
price  stability.  And  this  is  why  the  independence  of  the  ECB  is  important.  Central  bank 
independence  was  the  key  to  the  success  of  the  Bundesbank,  it  has  been  the  key  to  the 
success of the ECB, and it must be the key to future success. 
The second and more acute challenge to the EMU is economic divergence across the euro 
area.  Some  countries  are  now  growing  well  and  moving  towards  a  satisfactory  economic 
equilibrium. In others, the economic situation is still very fragile and shows little, if any, signs 
of improvement. 
In this respect, the situation is clearly more difficult now than it was during the first ten years 
of the euro. 
In  a  sense  of  course,  economic  divergence  among  the  euro  area  countries  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  ECB.  Monetary  policy  is  formulated  for  the  whole  area  of  331  million  people. 
And they all equally deserve price stability, which it is the task of the ECB. 
However,  the  problem  of  growing  economic  divergence  is  very  serious  for  the  EMU  as  a 
whole and therefore, it is a matter of concern also for the ECB. The monetary union can work 
well  only  if  there  is  sufficient  convergence  in  economic  policy  and  economic  performance 
across the euro area countries. 
The financial system 
Let me now turn from monetary policy to the financial system: that is, to banks and financial 
markets. 
The good health of the banking system is an important condition for sustainable economic 
recovery. This is the case throughout the world, also for the euro area. Perhaps this task is 
especially  urgent  for  the  euro  area,  because  uncertainty  regarding  the  health  of  banks 
aggravates the negative effects of economic imbalances and divergence in the area. 
A  clear  strengthening  of  the  banks’  capital  base  is  long  overdue.  This  should  be  the  task 
primarily of the shareholders of the weaker banks, who should refrain from taking dividends 
or  should  inject  more  capital  if  needed.  In  some  cases,  government  investment  in  bank 
equity may also be necessary. 
Coming from Finland, I understand very well the political problems involved in cleaning up 
the banking system. In the 1990’s, after the Finnish banking crisis, the Finnish government 
had to support an asset management company that handled the banks’ problem assets, in 
amounts that at one point reached about 10 per cent of GDP. Most of this money was later 
recovered, but in the meantime taxpayers were furious. The public frustration with the costs 
of the banking crisis has not been forgotten in my country. 
Despite the short-term discomfort it entails, the resolution of banking problems is necessary 
for  us  to  move  forward  to  a  lasting  recovery.  On  the  one  hand,  the  recapitalization  of  the 
weaker  but  viable  banks  is  necessary  to  restore  confidence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  well-
managed closure of unprofitable banks is necessary, so that they do not distort the market 
for the viable banks. 
Another challenge is to improve banking practices and banking culture. Reform of banking 
regulation is part of this change. Apart from stricter capital requirements, the new regulatory 
framework  will  also  gradually  develop  stricter  standards  for  bank  liquidity.  The  risks  of 
making long-term commitments with excessively volatile funding have been amply revealed 
during the recent crisis. 
I regard improved regulation as an absolute necessity after the experiences of the last four 
years. At the same time, we must acknowledge that regulation alone is not enough. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Therefore,  what  the  ongoing  reforms  really  aim  for  is  a  change  in  the  culture  of  banking. 
Banking must renounce the excessive adventurism of the last decade and develop a stability 
culture of its own, so that citizens will once more see banking as an engine of solid economic 
progress rather than a conduit for short-term speculation. 
Macroprudential policy 
One of the key lessons of the latest global financial crisis is that central banks – and other 
authorities  –  need  to  pay  much  more  attention  to  financial  stability  and  macroprudential 
oversight.  New  institutions  in  which  central  banks  play  a  key  role  have  been  created  to 
identify systemic risks and to take appropriate action. Examples of such institutes include the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  in  the  EU,  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC) 
within  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  in  the 
United States. 
Macroprudential policy is still in its formative phase. But it is clear that new tools need to be 
developed in order to complement the more traditional instruments of monetary policy. These 
tools will pertain to capital standards, lending practices, and liquidity management of credit 
institutions.  And  the  tools  must  work  in  relation  to  the  changing  financial  market  situation, 
preventing the development of excessive systemic risks and contagion. 
The  recent  financial  crisis  painfully  showed  how  quickly  financial  crises  can  spread  over 
national borders in a world of integrated financial markets and systems. Because of the ever-
deepening  financial  integration,  financial  cycles  are  likely  to  be  highly  correlated  across 
countries also in the future. 
In  such  a  world,  a  successful  macroprudential  policy  in  any  country  entails  positive 
externalities in the form of reduced financial risks in other countries. Conversely, erring on 
the side of inaction produces negative externalities to other countries, as financial problems 
will spread across national and currency borders. 
I argue that in the absence of effective international coordination, national policymakers are 
likely  to  fail  to  internalize  these  positive  externalities.  This  could  lead  to  national 
macroprudential  policies  that  are  overly  passive  and  dangerously  weak  at  preventing  the 
future global financial crises. 
Let me elaborate a bit on this idea. 
Consider a strong upturn of an international financial cycle, during which asset prices climb 
rapidly,  leverage  increases  excessively  and  prices  of  risk  decline  simultaneously  in  many 
countries  with  interconnected  financial  markets.  This  scenario  of  course  resembles  the 
developments in the years preceding the latest global financial crisis. To prevent these risks 
from  materializing 
their 
macroprudential policies and possibly other economic policies. 
Now,  consider  the  decision-making  problem  of  a  macroprudential  authority  or  body  in  an 
individual country. This authority may find it difficult to tighten the national macroprudential 
policy for two reasons. 
First, there is the well known problem of “taking the punch bowl away in the middle of the 
party”.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  this  political  difficulty  is  likely  to  be  even  worse  in  the 
macroprudential context than in terms of monetary policy: there is at least some constituency 
that dislikes inflation, but probably none that dislikes the intoxicating feeling of getting richer 
as asset prices climb higher. 
Second,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  a  country  that  tightens  its  macroprudential  policies  in 
isolation  would  internalize  only  a  part  of  the  financial  stability  benefits  of  macroprudential 
tightening while bearing all the perceived costs in terms of a loss of competitiveness for its 
financial industry. This may lead to a first-mover disadvantage problem, where no country is 
into  a  systemic  crisis,  national  authorities  should 
tighten 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
these  disincentives 
willing to be the first to tighten its macroprudential policy unless it knows that other countries 
are committed to doing the same. 
Unless  properly  addressed, 
to  pursuance  of  active  national 
macroprudential  policies  may  lead  to  a  bad  equilibrium,  where  global  macroprudential 
policies  become  stuck  in  an  overly  passive  stance.  This  implies  that  the  identification  of 
effective  macroprudential  instruments  –  which  in  itself  is  a  formidable  task  –  does  not 
guarantee that these instruments will be used efficiently. 
What can we do to avoid this bad equilibrium? I have three suggestions. 
First, to relieve the extensive political pressure not to take action, we should try our best to 
develop and improve rules-based macroprudential policy. Instruments such as dynamic loan 
loss provisions used in Spain and the capital conservation buffer of the Basel III framework, 
could  work  as  automatic  stabilisers  that  do  not  require  continuous  discretionary  policy 
decisions. The countercyclical capital buffer requirement included in the Basel III framework 
also includes a rules-based element, as national authorities are advised to use an indicator 
developed by the Basel Committee as a benchmark in their national buffer decisions. 
Economists at the Bank of Finland have done some preliminary analysis on the feasibility of 
rules-based loan-to-value requirements. I urge the research community to intensify its efforts 
to develop simple and robust rules-based macroprudential instruments. 
Second,  national  macroprudential  authorities  need  sufficiently 
robust  mandates, 
independence  and  legitimacy  to  make  their  discretionary  macroprudential  policy  decisions. 
Efficient  macroprudential  actions  will  be  highly  unpopular.  The  costs  of  these  actions  are 
immediate whereas their benefits become visible only over periods of years. The weaker the 
macroprudential authorities, the more likely they are to bow to intense political pressure not 
to intervene when systemic risks are mounting. 
Third,  we  need  adequate  international  coordination  of  national  macroprudential  policies.  In 
the  EU,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  should  take  this  coordinating  role.  We  must 
remember that all EU countries are part of it; Governors are voting members and supervisors 
are present at the meetings. 
Without  doubt,  this  is  a  difficult  task.  The  ESRB  has  to  strike  the  right  balance  between 
directing its recommendations on macroprudential policies to individual authorities or making 
collective recommendations to a larger group of authorities. Individual recommendations may 
be  more  effective  in  alleviating  the  first-mover  coordination  problem  but  may,  at  worst,  be 
regarded by national authorities as accusations that they have failed to do their job properly. 
In  such  a  case,  their  response  may  be  defensive  rather  than  constructive.  Collective 
recommendations,  in  turn,  would  largely  remove  the  stigma  related  to  individually  targeted 
recommendations but may be blunter and hence less appropriate to deal with more localized 
problems. 
Finding a workable solution to this trade-off will be one the key challenges for the ESRB in 
the coming years. 
Government finances and economic policy 
Finally, let me turn to an even broader category of the current challenges, the challenges to 
economic policy. 
When the monetary union was planned in Europe, there was much debate about the degree 
of economic convergence between countries that is necessary for forming a monetary union. 
Some  people  thought  that  a  high  degree  of  economic  convergence  was  a  necessary 
precondition, whereas others argued that membership in a monetary union and the necessity 
to hold on to it would perforce bring about the necessary adjustments and convergence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Because  of  the  insistence  of  Germany  and  others,  emphasis  was  placed  on  economic 
convergence when the monetary union was established: reasonable entry criteria were set 
for  membership  in  the  union,  and  members’  behaviour  was  regulated  by  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. 
Now we know that this emphasis on convergence did not carry enough force. Shaken by the 
steep recession of 2008, several countries got unexpectedly to the danger zone. Now, we 
need even tighter economic convergence, and we need better economic governance within 
the EMU. The “Euro Plus” pact recently signed by the European Council is a step in the right 
direction. 
The challenges which the economic crisis poses to economic policy in the EMU are twofold. 
First, the government finances of the problem countries must be stabilized. This takes tough 
measures,  –  expenditure  control,  tax  increases,  and  sales  of  government  assets  –  and  it 
takes some time. 
Second, we need a tighter convergence of competitiveness of the member countries of the 
EMU. The convergence of competitiveness is needed to get the problem countries to grow 
again, and to return their finances to a clearly sustainable trajectory. 
As  regards  stabilization  of  the  problem  countries,  it  has  been  necessary  to  support  their 
stabilization programmes via temporary financing from the other partner countries, and from 
the IMF. I believe this support has been necessary in order to buy time for adjustment, and to 
avoid a very risky illiquidity situation, with the possibility of contagion. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  understand  that  this  financing  is  only  temporary. 
Moreover, these loans can only be made under strict conditionality, most importantly in the 
context  of  an  adjustment  programme  which  will  restore  market  confidence  in  the  medium 
term. 
We must strengthen economic governance mechanisms in the euro area to minimize the risk 
of additional crises in government finances in the future. I especially welcome the initiative on 
fiscal norms. These nationally implemented norms could help “internalize” the fiscal discipline 
in each country and render the matter less of an issue of EU policing of the countries’ current 
fiscal actions. 
In  the  Finnish  case,  for  example,  we  have  good  experiences  with  medium-term  budgetary 
frameworks. This system has made it easier to follow a planned fiscal policy and resist one-
off pressures for increasing government spending. And even the Finnish system of budgetary 
frameworks can and should be developed further, of course. 
I should add at this point that I do not see the financial support arrangements for Greece, 
Ireland, of Portugal as steps leading to a “transfer union”. Transfer union would mean one-
way subsidies from some governments to cover other governemts’ deficits. This would not be 
consistent with the underlying principles of the EU. 
As Mr. Trichet has put it, “it is fully recognised that this economic union must be one where 
countries that wisely follow a virtuous economic path are rewarded, and those that pursue 
unsustainable policies have to internalize the costs of their actions.” I fully endorse this view. 
Politics 
We have now moved well into the area of politics. Let me say a few more words about my 
own  country  in  this  context.  Finland  was  in  the  political  spotlight  recently.  This  happened 
because the financial support to Portugal became a focus of the electoral campaign during 
the parliamentary elections in April. Parties sensed – or feared – that voters would not easily 
accept  continued  support  operations  to  stabilize  the  finances  of  the  weaker  euro  area 
countries,  and  the  issue  became  heated.  There  were  even  worries  that  Finland  would 
prevent EU support for Portugal. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This happened although the euro has enjoyed relatively strong support in Finland. According 
to the Eurobarometer survey conducted last November, 78% of Finns supported the common 
currency and less than 20% were negative about it. And of course, Finns have been much 
more positive about the euro than the other Scandinavian nations, for instance. 
For Finland, joining the monetary union meant two things: a seat at the table where decisions 
are made, and the promise of more stable money. We wanted to avoid a repetition of the 
traumatic  currency  and  banking  crisis  of  the  1990’s.  We  put  our  trust  in  the  euro  as  a 
guarantor of monetary stability. 
After the fiscal crisis erupted a year ago in Greece, when support had to be provided to that 
country and to other countries in difficulty, there was a sense of disillusionment in Finland. 
People remembered how Finland exerted a huge effort to put its own house in order after the 
economic  crisis  of  the  early  1990’s,  and  then  qualified  for  monetary  union.  Having  gone 
through that, many people ask, why should we now support others who apparently have not 
followed  the  commonly  agreed  rules?  And  what  was  the  responsibility  of  banks  and  other 
investors who had carelessly underestimated the risks involved in lending to these countries? 
We  may  understand  the  reasons  for  such  frustration.  But  I  for  one  do  not  accept  any 
narrowly nationalistic or anti-EU undertones which sometimes accompany the expressions of 
that  frustration.  Responsible  politicians  in  every  European  country  should  use  their 
leadership to ensure that the idea of constructive participation prevails over the temptations 
of the nationalistic approach. Political fragmentation would weaken the prospects of recovery 
and would make it considerably more difficult to solve the challenges to the economic and 
monetary union. 
Concluding comments 
I want to conclude with some remarks about the outlook for the euro area. The beginning of 
this  year  was  encouraging  in  terms  of  the  average  growth.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate, 
2.5 per cent, was the highest we have seen since the onset of the last recession. However, 
this positive early phase of the year was dimmed by the fact that growth differentials between 
countries continued to be large and that inflation exceeded our expectations. 
Looking  ahead,  I  expect  the  recovery  to  continue.  Still,  there  are  many  reasons  why 
uncertainties  to  the  economic  outlook  are  larger  than  usual.  According  to  the  eurosystem 
staff projections published a week ago, GDP growth in 2011 should be in the range 1.5 to 
2.3 per cent. That is a wide range. Next year’s forecast range is even wider, between 0.6 and 
2.8 per cent. 
Part  of  the  uncertainty  regarding  growth  prospects  emanates  from  the  global  economic 
situation.  The  growth  of  the  world  economy  shows  continuing  momentum  and  appears 
increasingly self-sustained. This helps euro area exports and is of course a positive factor. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  global  expansion  of  demand  is  largely  based  in  the  emerging 
economies, many of which are running at full capacity and facing the risk of overheating. This 
fact makes the situation somewhat precarious, and a more balanced growth pattern in the 
world economy would clearly be better for stability. 
The very rapid growth in the emerging economies is also one of the causes of high energy 
prices. The high cost of energy and raw materials hurts euro area recovery by eating into real 
incomes and thus weighs down private consumption. In that way, the energy-intensive nature 
of present global growth is a risk for the euro area. 
Mostly because of energy, inflation in the euro area is projected to stay above the 2 per cent 
threshold in 2011. The range in the Eurosystem staff projections was 2.5 to 2.7 per cent. For 
2012,  inflationary  pressures  are  projected  to  weaken.  Ultimately,  it  is  the  responsibility  of 
monetary policy to ensure that this moderation will take place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The higher-than-expected consumer price inflation poses further risks to growth as well. One 
of them relates to the danger of wage inflation. Presently, the euro area recovery is driven 
mainly  by  exports  and  private  investment.  However,  if  energy  prices  are  transmitted  into 
higher wage demands, then profitability and competitiveness of the euro area economy will 
weaken, and this would hurt both exports and investment. 
In addition to the global factors, internal tensions within the euro area economy continue to 
be  a  major  source  of  uncertainty  for  growth.  In  the  current  situation,  disruptions  to  the 
workings  of  financial  markets  might  easily  spill  over  to  the  real  economy,  depressing  the 
demand for goods and services, and so damaging banks and hurting government budgets. 
Even more than usually, growth in the euro area cannot now be taken for granted. It is highly 
conditional on the success of economic policy, in bringing about a more balanced economic 
landscape within the EMU. The policy agenda which I have reviewed in this talk is a large 
one. It is also a difficult agenda, not least because it must be realized in a cooperative effort 
by the EU and euro area governments. 
While policy makers and market observers are well aware of the difficulties, I think that they 
are also aware of what is at stake. Therefore, I am confident that the challenges now facing 
the EMU will be successfully tackled and a foundation will be gradually laid for sustainable 
growth in Europe. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
