Jürgen Stark: The future of the international monetary system – Lessons 
from 1971 for Europe and the world in light of past and present 
experience 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
for  the  Golden  Series  on  World  Money,  organised  by  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial 
Institutions Forum, London, 11 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  talk  in  front  of  this  distinguished  audience  about  the  future  of  the 
international monetary system and I would like to thank OMFIF for inviting me to its Golden 
Series on World Money.  
As  you  know,  this  lecture  series  takes  place  against  the  background  of  the  fortieth 
anniversary of the closing of the gold window, also dubbed the “Nixon shock”, which marked 
the end of the Bretton Woods system. Let me however also recall another anniversary which 
is less well known. It was today, on the 11th of May, of 1998 that the first euro coins were 
minted.  This,  in  some  way,  marked  the  beginning  of  the  euro  as  “real”  money  that  would 
circulate among by now 330 million European citizens. And no doubt, the single currency is 
and will in the future remain a guarantee of stability and prosperity in Europe. 
But  before  I  turn  to  the  future  of  the  international  monetary  system,  let  me  look  back  in 
history  and  briefly  sketch  the  evolution  –  and  trace  out  some  constant  elements  –  of  the 
international monetary system since the gold standard. 
 Let  me  anticipate  my  conclusions  already  now:  The  history  of  the  international  monetary 
system is marked by repeated – and often failed – attempts to establish fixed exchange rate 
regimes, in one way or another. The reason is that the underlying belief that freely floating 
exchange  rates  are  unambiguously  an  obstacle  to  international  trade  and  domestic 
macroeconomic stability is based on a fundamental confusion. 
It is true that, in Europe, we are witnessing that economies at a similar stage of development, 
with a high degree of real and financial integration and largely synchronised business cycles 
greatly benefit from a common currency under a common monetary policy and in a common 
market.  At  the  global  level,  however,  where  the  degree  of  convergence,  integration  and 
synchronisation is far less pronounced, countries at very different stages of development and 
with very different growth models stand to benefit instead from the corrective mechanism that 
fluctuating  exchange  rates  constitute.  Fixing  exchange  rates  at  the  global  level,  to  the 
contrary, has rarely benefited the global economy.  
In  fact,  domestic  policy  objectives  have  too  often  proved  to  be  incompatible  with  fixed 
exchange rate regimes. At the same time, domestic macro policies have too often conflicted 
with  the  objective  of  external  stability.  The  result  has  been  the  periodic  emergence  of 
domestic and external imbalances, which not infrequently unwound in a disruptive manner. 
Let me give you just a few examples. 
A first period that characterises the evolution of the international monetary system is that of 
the classical gold standard from the second half of the 19th century to the outbreak of World 
War  I.  At  first  sight,  this  appears  to  have  been  a  period  of  considerable  stability  and 
prosperity. Countries enjoyed low average long-term inflation and steady growth of economic 
activity. Exchange rates were fixed via parities to gold and the money supply was thus tied to 
gold  reserves.  Therefore,  any  balance  of  payments  disequilibria  would  trigger  changes  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
monetary conditions and thus external balance was easily restored through the adjustment of 
prices  and  production.  The  drawback  of  this  mechanism,  however,  was  that  it  induced 
significant  volatility  within  the  domestic  economy,  as  prices  and  production  fluctuated 
considerably  in  the  shorter  term.  Thus  the  gold  standard,  while  delivering  external  and 
internal balance over the long run, came with substantial welfare costs in the short run.  
In order to accommodate adverse shocks, some countries in exceptional periods temporarily 
abandoned  the  gold  standard  but  subsequently  resumed  convertibility.  This  was  also  the 
case during World War I. The attempt, however, to return to a gold standard after the war 
ultimately failed. States had allowed for massive inflation given the need to finance the war, 
but  then  reintroduced  gold  parities  partly  at  pre-war  rates.  This  led  to  substantial 
misalignment  of  exchange  rates.  In  addition,  the  process  of  democratisation  made  it 
increasingly difficult for the authorities to subordinate domestic policies to the stability of the 
exchange  rate.  Thus,  the  interwar  gold  bullion  standard  suffered  from  a  structural  lack  of 
credibility and trust in the sustainability of the fixed exchange rate regimes that were in place. 
Eventually, the international monetary system collapsed, triggering competitive devaluations, 
barriers to international trade and capital controls in the midst of the Great Depression. 
The Bretton Woods agreement that framed the international monetary order after World War 
II  was  influenced  by  these  failures  and  therefore  included  some  corrective  elements: 
Exchange rates could be adjusted where needed and capital controls would limit speculative 
flows. At the same time, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was established in order to 
finance  exceptional  balance  of  payments  needs.  Nevertheless,  it  was  a  system  of  fixed 
exchange  rates,  with  the  dollar  as  the  vehicle  currency,  which  in  turn  was  convertible  into 
gold at a fixed rate. Thus, the Bretton Woods system, too, was a gold standard and ultimately 
suffered from the same weaknesses: domestic policy objectives were incompatible with the 
objective of fixed exchange rates.  
After a considerable period of prosperity that came with the economic rebuilding after World 
War  II  –  which  was  beyond  question  bolstered  by  the  Bretton  Woods  system  itself  – 
expansionary economic policies in the core of the system led to inflationary pressures and 
rising doubts about the dollar’s convertibility. It was only by moving to flexible exchange rates 
that some countries were able to avoid the “Great Inflation” that shook the United States and 
that was exported to numerous other countries which pegged to the dollar. 
The monetary order after Bretton Woods was however not a system of fully flexible exchange 
rates either. Within Western Europe, a system of soft pegs was introduced that marked a first 
step  in  a  long  process  of  convergence  which  led  to  the  creation  of  European  Monetary 
Union.  Many  emerging  economies,  instead,  continued  to  peg  their  exchange  rates  to  the 
dollar. For some countries, these pegs over  time led to substantially overvalued exchange 
rates and massive indebtedness, often culminating in devastating currency crises, such as 
the Mexican “tequila crisis” or the Asian crisis of 1997. 
Ironically,  it  was  the  susceptibility  to  currency  crises  that  encouraged  many  emerging 
economies to continue pegging their currencies to the dollar, though this time at undervalued 
exchange rates. The emerging system of what some observers conceptualized as “Bretton 
Woods II” was again misperceived as a period of unambiguous stability and prosperity. The 
world economy grew by on average almost five percent a year. This was accompanied by an 
unprecedented  wave  of  financial  globalisation.  In  the  five  years  up  to  2007,  prior  to  the 
eruption  of  the  first  financial  market  turbulences,  global  foreign  assets  and  liabilities  grew 
more  than  half  to  over  340  percent  of  world  GDP,  and  gross  financial  flows  grew  even 
threefold.  To  put  this  into  perspective,  global  trade  flows  over  that  period  increased  at  a 
much slower pace, from around 25 percent of world GDP in 2002 to roughly 30 percent of 
world GDP in 2007. 
The micro and macro factors behind this recent wave of financial globalisation are by now 
well  known.  At  the  micro  level,  asymmetries  in  financial  development  facilitated  the 
emergence  of  large  uni-directional  financial  flows  from  emerging  economies  to  the  core  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the global financial system. At the macro level, large domestic imbalances were externalised 
to  the  global  economy.  Emerging  surplus  economies  relied  on  an  excessively  export-led 
growth model. This necessitated artificially undervalued exchange rates which were pegged 
to the dollar by means of massive accumulation of reserves. On the flip side, deficit countries 
relied  on  large  capital  inflows  to  finance  excess  domestic  consumption  and  provide  the 
overleveraged  financial  system  with  liquidity.  Thus,  imbalanced  domestic  growth  in  both 
deficit and surplus countries and distorted global trade and financial flows were symbiotically 
linked through fixed exchange rates, which constituted a major vulnerability of the system: 
the  absence  of  a  corrective  mechanism  that  would  prevent  the  collapse  we  ultimately 
witnessed. 
 Let me stress right away that we are far from being safe of a repetition of the past unless we 
take our lessons seriously.  
It is true that during the crisis the “ingredients” of the recent wave of financial globalisation 
that I described before seemed to disappear. Home bias increased sharply as risk aversion 
rose and global markets experienced an extraordinary retrenchment of capital flows. At the 
same  time,  global  trade  collapsed,  oil  prices  fell  sharply,  and  some  emerging  economies 
encountered substantial pressure on foreign reserves. 
However, this unwinding was largely cyclical and the structural forces at the micro and macro 
level are still in place. The resumption in global growth and trade, rebounding oil prices, the 
recovery of global equity markets and the impact of fiscal stimulus are increasingly being felt. 
At  the  same  time,  the  sustainable  rebalancing  of  demand  and  supply  remains  a  key  and 
unresolved issue in major advanced and emerging economies. This is all the more the case 
as some surplus economies continue to accumulate large excess reserves while maintaining 
fixed exchange rate regimes which – as I have argued – were at the core of many crises in 
the past, including the most recent one. 
Projections  by  the  IMF  actually  show  that  we  are  currently  already  past  the  low  point  of 
external  imbalances,  both  in  terms  of  the  US  current  account  deficit  and  the  surpluses  of 
major  emerging  economies.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  of  emerging  economies  are 
currently  already  above  their  peak  levels  prior  to  mid-September  2008  when  the  turmoil 
erupted into a full-blown crisis. According to the IMF, around half of all emerging economies 
hold  reserves  above  any  measures  of  optimality  which  could  be  defined  as  self-insurance 
against possible shocks. This creates an immense economic cost not only for the global but 
also for domestic economies. 
At the global level, the accumulation of sizeable stocks of foreign exchange reserves results 
in a gigantic misallocation of capital flows by the public sectors of reserve accumulators, with 
capital flowing “uphill” to advanced economies instead of “downhill” to emerging economies 
as  economic  theory  would  predict.  The  cost  of  the  resulting  distortions  of  exchange  rate 
configurations,  global  liquidity  conditions  and  asset  prices  but  also  international  trade  is 
difficult to quantify but in all likelihood sizeable. 
At  the  domestic  level,  the  cost  of  reserve  accumulation  is  unlikely  to  be  less  significant. 
Simple  back-of-the-envelope  calculations  would  narrowly  focus  on  the  sterilization  cost  of 
central bank intervention in foreign exchange markets. In the case of China, for instance, this 
cost is usually put at around 1 percent of annual GDP. Much more importantly, however, the 
primacy of exchange rate policy hinders the effective use of monetary policy in response to 
macroeconomic  shocks  and  is  therefore  a  source  of  significant  volatility  in  the  economy. 
Speculative  capital  inflows  need  to  be  absorbed  and  thus  reinforce  the  need  for  reserve 
accumulation. This, in turn, further restricts the room for manoeuvre, for instance in response 
to  the  import  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  build-up  of  asset  price  bubbles.  As  a 
consequence,  national  wealth  is  increasingly  badly  diversified  and  returns  to  foreign 
exchange  reserves  and  income  on  foreign  assets  become  less  and  less  attractive.  At  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
same  time,  domestic  financial  markets  are  penalised,  as  the  concomitant  restrictions 
imposed by the central bank hinder financial development and lead to financial repression. 
This has adverse implications for the distribution of income and the development of the non-
tradable sectors with negative consequences for employment and consumption growth. 
 But what is then the cure to the disease of excessive reserve accumulation? The debate in 
this  respect  is  currently  very  much  embedded  in  the  more  general  discussion  on  how  to 
improve  the  resilience  of  the  international  monetary  system.  In  essence,  this  discussion 
focuses  on greater  multilateral  cooperation,  including  a  further  strengthening  of  the  role  of 
the  IMF.  This  implies  reinforcing  the  Fund’s  lending  role,  also  through  enhanced 
collaboration  with  regional  pools,  in  order  to  reduce  the  need  for  precautionary  reserve 
accumulation, examining and monitoring capital flows and global liquidity conditions, as well 
as considering a more prominent role for Special Drawing Rights (SDRs). 
While I will not elaborate on each of these initiatives in all detail, I would like to argue that in 
pursuing  our  goals  we  have  to  make  sure  that  we  do  not  indiscriminately  buy  insurance 
against future crises. We also have to carefully consider the cost of insurance. In particular, 
we have to weigh this cost against that of making an effort to invest in pre-empting the failure 
of the system in the very first place.  
The SDR, for instance, is not a cure-all for the international monetary system. The crux of the 
system  is  not  the  international  use  of  national  currencies,  but  the  myopic  use  of  domestic 
policies  for  achieving  short-term  gain  at  the  cost  of  long-run  pain.  Assigning  a  more 
prominent role to the SDR by increasing allocations would hence by no means prevent the 
build-up  of  excessive  reserves  in  countries  which  accumulate  them  for  reasons  beyond 
precautionary motives.  
It is not clear either to what extent enhanced access to IMF lending reduces the incentives 
for  the  accumulation  of  large  excess  reserves.  In  fact,  the  IMF  has  already  modified  its 
lending toolkit and multiplied its resources. A Flexible Credit Line was introduced, as well as 
a  Precautionary  Credit  Line  for  countries  which  do  not  meet  the  high  qualification 
requirements  for  the  former.  In  the  absence  of  a  counterfactual  it  is  impossible  to  give  a 
reliable estimate of the impact of these measures on global reserve accumulation. Looking at 
the data, however, I dare speculate that if anything the impact has been very limited. 
And  also  where  the  insurance  motive  of  reserve  accumulation  prevails,  it  is  not  clear  that 
enhanced  access  to  IMF  lending  and  regional  pools,  SDR  allocations,  or  other  forms  of 
global  liquidity  provision  could  reduce  the  stigma  attached  to  such  external  financing  and 
thus avoid the further build-up of precautionary reserves.  
The  cost  of  these  insurance  policies,  on  the  other  hand,  can  be  substantial.  Large-scale 
“issuance” of SDRs could interfere with the implementation of monetary policy. Together with 
badly designed multilateral coordination on global liquidity conditions these could undermine 
central banks´ authority as the ultimate provider of liquidity and thus dangerously impinge on 
central bank independence across the globe.  
At the same time, any schemes of cross-border liquidity provision at the global or regional 
level need to involve central banks, because only these can provide the needed amounts of 
liquidity. But central banks cannot commit to providing funds indiscriminately without setting 
incentives  for  moral  hazard.  Resorting  to  the  IMF  and  regional  pools  does  not  solve  this 
problem, and the parallelism of global and regional pools further increases the complexity of 
the issue.  
Initiatives to improve the global financial safety net should therefore concentrate on helping 
countries  with  sound  fundamentals  that  are  hit  by  financial  market  disruptions  from 
exogenous  shocks.  Home-made  crises  resulting  from  domestic  imbalances  should  be 
tackled differently and always involving strong conditionality. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The guiding principle should therefore be to limit incentives for moral hazard. At the same 
time, it must be clear that only sustainable domestic policies can guarantee stability on the 
external side. Hence, as reserve accumulation beyond insurance cannot be compensated for 
by  creating  more  insurance  devices,  the  key  to  limiting  the  accumulation  to  what  makes 
economic sense lies in removing the distortions in the domestic economy that cause excess 
accumulation.  
While  the  ultimate  aim  is  of  course  achieving  greater  flexibility  of  the  exchange  rate,  an 
abrupt  move  to  fully  floating  exchange  rates  would  be  disruptive  as  it  would  most  likely 
trigger large speculative inflows with the risk of over-borrowing, asset price bubbles, and an 
overheating of the economy.  
The  key  is  that  the  exchange  rate  reform  and  capital  account  liberalisation  have  to  be 
accompanied by domestic reforms that aim at improving and ensuring the proper functioning 
of  domestic  financial  markets,  reducing  the  excessive  reliance  on  external  demand,  and 
strengthening  domestic  demand.  Hence,  any  exchange  rate  reform  needs  to  be  carefully 
phased in. First countries should develop and liberalise the domestic financial system, while 
at  the  same  time  strengthening  its  prudential  framework.  In  a  second  step,  the  currency 
needs  to  be  made  convertible.  Finally,  the  current  and  financial  accounts  need  to  be 
gradually  opened  and  the  exchange  rate  needs  to  be  gradually  made  flexible.  A  new, 
credible,  equilibrium  level  of  the  exchange  rate  would  emerge  and  would  discourage 
speculative  capital  inflows.  Even  if  foreign  exchange  markets  were  liberalised,  capital 
controls  could  for  some  time  prevent  an  abrupt  adjustment  of  the  exchange  rate  and 
discourage  inflows  of  hot  money.  Thus,  the  cure  to  the  disease  of  excessive  reserve 
accumulation lies in reforming the domestic financial system and allowing for a strengthening 
of domestic demand. 
 One of the most significant innovations in the international monetary system, in this respect, 
has been the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth, launched at the 
Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009. Its aim is precisely to ensure the mutual compatibility 
of domestic policies and to monitor the progress of needed domestic structural reforms. G20 
members review each others’ policy actions and frameworks in order to grasp the combined 
effect of policies on the global economy. The G20 then explores the scope for improving the 
global  outcome  by  defining  the  necessary  policy  measures  to  make  adjustments  where 
possible.  
In order to monitor the progress made with regards to external balance G20 Ministers and 
Governors had already in February in Paris agreed on a set of indicators that aim to identify 
G20  members  with  persistently  large  imbalances  within  the  context  of  the  Mutual 
Assessment  Process  of  the  G20  Framework.  These  indicators  include:  public  and  private 
savings  and  debt,  as  well  as  the  external  balance  composed  of  the  trade  balance,  the 
income  balance  and  the  balance  on  current  transfers.  In  April,  Finance  Ministers  and 
Governors  in  Washington  agreed  on  quantitative  guidelines  against which  these  indicators 
would  be  assessed  so  as  to  identify  members  with  large  and  persistent  imbalances  that 
would be analysed in a second step in-depth assessment. 
The  process  is  still  insufficiently  advanced  to  judge  its  contribution  to  more  effective 
surveillance. In my view, for the process to be successful certain conditions will have to be 
met:  
First,  only  a  limited  number  of  economies  should  move  into  the  second  step  in-depth 
assessment.  This  would  ensure  that  resources  are  efficiently  allocated  and  efforts  are 
concentrated on the most relevant and pressing cases.  
Second, exchange rate factors and in particular the issue of the exchange rate regime will be 
critical  in  the  second  step  in-depth  assessment.  This,  naturally,  would  also  include  an 
assessment  of  reserve  accumulation.  Only  if  the  root  causes  behind  excessive  external 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
imbalances are frankly and openly identified and discussed, it will be possible to remove the 
underlying distortions in the domestic economy.  
Finally,  cyclical  factors  should  be  given  due  consideration  in  the  assessment  process  to 
ensure that the imbalances identified are those that can be expected to either persist or re-
emerge in the coming years if current policy frameworks are not adjusted accordingly.  
 Let  me  in  concluding  reiterate  that  in  the  absence  of  determined  action  imbalances  are 
almost certain to persist. These, as I have just argued, are the outcome of currently still not 
sufficiently  sustainably  framed  policies.  This,  in  turn,  reflects  a  lack  of  progress  at  the 
domestic level, rather than a failure of the system itself. 
As I have said, the international monetary system after Bretton Woods was characterised by 
flexible exchange rates between the most important currency blocs. The system only moved 
into disequilibrium as a result of the growing economic weight of emerging economies that 
have kept their exchange rates at artificially low levels via massive accumulation of reserves. 
At the same time, expansionary economic policies in some advanced economies, on account 
of the massive capital inflows from emerging economies, were the flip-side to the build-up of 
imbalances. 
The  window  of  opportunity  to  change  the  relevant  policy  frameworks  is  closing  quickly  as 
global growth is resuming and the cyclical determinants that led to the temporary unwinding 
of  imbalances  disappear.  In  addition,  with  the  two-speed  recovery  and  different  cyclical 
positions, political interests have started to diverge again between the major currency blocs. 
The  corrective  mechanism  hence  needs  to  be  restored.  Greater  flexibility  in  the  exchange 
rates of major emerging economies is in this respect a fundamental precondition for a stable 
international monetary system. At the same time, macroeconomic policies should avoid the 
externalisation  of  domestic  imbalances  to  the global  economy.  Hence,  the  restoration  of  a 
stable  international  monetary  system  based  on  flexible  exchange  rates  requires  a 
fundamental  change  in  economic  mind-set  across  the  global  economy,  rather  sooner  than 
later. 
Let  me  thus  close  citing  from  the  foreword  of  John  Maynard  Keynes’  Tract  on  Monetary 
Reform which represents a fervent argument for targeting domestic stability even at the cost 
of fluctuating exchange rates: “Nowhere do conservative notions consider themselves more 
in place than in currency; yet nowhere is the need of innovation more urgent.” Against these 
lines, written in 1923, my remarks today may not have been overly innovative, but I would 
say  innovative  enough  for  an  alleged  conservative.  On  that  note,  I sincerely  thank you  for 
your attention! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
