Thomas J Jordan: Approaching the finishing line – the too big to fail 
project in Switzerland 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  J  Jordan,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking  Studies,  Geneva, 
17 May 2011. 
I would like to thank Dr. Claudia Strub and Till Ebner for their valuable support in drafting this speech. 
 Introduction 
Eighteen  months  ago,  we  here  in  Switzerland  tackled  a  major  challenge:  the  search  for  a 
solution to what is known as the “too big to fail” problem in the current financial system. “Too 
big to fail” means that the state has no choice but to rescue a company because its demise 
would seriously affect the entire economy. In good Swiss tradition, a broad-based committee 
of experts1 presented the Federal Council with a proposal supported by all involved parties 
and  the  implementation  of  which  would  significantly  alleviate  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem. 
This proposal was, in essence, approved by the Federal Council and has been put before 
Parliament in the form of a draft law. 
At this point, I should like to deliver an important message. The package of TBTF – too big to 
fail – measures is not intended to hurt the big banks or the banking sector in Switzerland. 
Rather, it aims to protect state and taxpayer from incurring an unwanted and unacceptable 
risk, while also creating the necessary framework conditions for the banking sector to be able 
to develop sustainably and successfully over the long term.  
The decision is now up to the politicians. In the coming weeks and months, Parliament will 
decide  whether  the  proposed  measures  will  actually  be  implemented.  The  final,  decisive 
phase of the project is thus underway – we are approaching the finish line! 
In the Swiss system of direct democracy, the electorate essentially also has the final word in 
the legislative process. It is therefore important to ensure that the public clearly understands 
such  a  complex  topic  as  the  regulation  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  The 
SNB has the statutory mandate to contribute to the stability of the financial system. It thus 
played a significant role in drafting the solution put before the Federal Council. Allow me to 
explain the considerations behind the proposed legislation. 
The cost of financial crises 
The  latest  crisis  highlighted  the  fact  that  big,  globally  interconnected  financial  institutions 
present a particularly large risk to an economy. If they fail, systemically important functions 
vital  to  the  smooth  running  of  the  economy  –  such  as  the  lending  business  or  executing 
payment systems – can no longer be carried out. It is for this reason that an economy cannot 
afford to allow such an institution to fail. In a crisis, the state – in other words the taxpayer – 
has no choice but to rescue the bank. Big banks of this kind therefore possess an implicit 
state guarantee and benefit from artificially low borrowing costs. From an economic point of 
view,  this  equates  to  a  state  subsidy.  This  is not  in  line with  the  basic  principles  of  a  free 
market economy. (cf. chart 1) 
                                                 
1   The  commission  of  experts  was  composed  of  members  of  the  Federal  Department  of  Finance,  the  SNB, 
FINMA, representatives of the private sector and academics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This problem is particularly acute in our country, with its two very big banks. Although they 
have reduced their balance sheets significantly since 2008, the balance sheet totals of both 
big banks still amount to around four times the gross domestic product. Even though this is 
only a rough yardstick, it nevertheless gives an indication of the risk to an economy. As the 
crisis  has  demonstrated  to  us,  this  risk  can  have  dramatic  consequences  if  it  turns  into 
reality. The cost to the state of rescuing a TBTF bank may be enormous. In extreme cases, 
the state may even need to ask for international help, which can would greatly jeopardise a 
country’s independence. (cf. charts 2 and 3) 
In order to massively reduce the likelihood of this nightmare scenario suddenly coming true, 
we must put our financial system back on a more stable footing. There is no doubt that this is 
in  the  interest  of  Switzerland  as  a  whole.  Indeed,  having  enough  capital  and  hence  being 
considered robust is – undoubtedly – also in the interest of the banks themselves. Although 
we dealt with the crisis competently – here, I am referring to the successful bail-out of UBS in 
autumn 2008 – there is unfortunately no guarantee that our country will come off so lightly in 
future crises. 
improve 
The Swiss TBTF proposal 
As  the  above  remarks  make  clear:  big,  interconnected  financial  institutions  can destabilise 
the financial system and an entire economy, with dramatic consequences. How can they be 
made more secure? And how can the problem of the implicit state guarantee be reduced? 
The package put together by the Federal Council in Switzerland is precisely targeted at these 
two questions.2  
A  central  component  of  the  Swiss  approach  is  that  systemically  important  banks  should 
markedly 
liquidity  positions,  both  qualitatively  and 
quantitatively,  and  reduce  their  risk  exposure  to  other  banks.3  This  will  make  systemically 
important  banks  more  stable  in  future  and  reduce  the  likelihood  of  them  running  into 
difficulties. Furthermore, organisational measures aim to ensure that systemically important 
functions can continue to be performed during a crisis, while simultaneously liquidating the 
big bank in an orderly manner. This reduces the need for state intervention. 
These  measures  may  have  different  starting  points  and  goals,  but  they  all  harmonise  with 
each other. If the provisions for improving stability do not suffice and a crisis occurs anyway, 
the mechanisms that guarantee the continuation of systemically important functions will kick 
in.4 In their entirety, these measures help to ensure that the banks are again able to bear 
more of their risks themselves. 
their  capital  base  and 
What are the objections to the package of measures? 
So why are there still objections to the Swiss package of measures from various quarters, if 
the advantages are so obvious? Do these measures have any harmful consequences?  
                                                 
2   The  proposal  of  the  committee  of  experts  and  the  message  of  the  Federal  Council  can  be  downloaded  at 
www.efd.admin.ch. 
3   The new capital adequacy regulations for systemically important banks are to apply to risk-weighted capital 
and to the leverage ratio. Furthermore, they are designed to be progressive. In other words, the bigger the 
bank,  the  higher  the  requirement.  Given  the  current  size  of  Switzerland’s  two  big  banks,  the  requirement 
would be 19% total capital of the risk-weighted assets, of which 9% can be held in convertible capital (cocos) 
and 10% must be held in common equity. 
If common equity falls below the threshold of 5%, the cocos will be converted and the emergency planning for 
separating the systemically important functions from the rest of the bank will be initiated.  
4  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Objections and doubts before the introduction of new regulations or laws are part and parcel 
of a thriving democracy. Before implementation, we can never know with absolute certainty 
how our economy or society will react to changed framework conditions – there is therefore 
always an element of doubt. For instance, one objection to the package of measures is that 
the cost of taking such drastic action to achieve the transition to a more stable system would 
be too high. In addition, doubts have also been expressed concerning the rapid pace and the 
impact  of  the  proposed  reforms.  Although  we  can  understand  such  criticisms,  the  SNB 
believes them to be exaggerated and largely unfounded. Allow me to explain. 
I would like to begin by making three general preliminary observations. Firstly, regulation is 
never  free  of  charge  for  every  participant.  However,  analysis  of  the  possible  costs  of 
regulation  must  always  differentiate  between  the  private  and  the  social  costs:  in  practice, 
regulation is bound to lead to additional costs for those regulated. This is part of the plan and 
makes  economic  sense  provided  that  these  additional  costs  are  smaller  than  the  benefits 
that regulation brings to the entire economy. If regulation leads to the elimination or reduction 
of market distortions – such as subsidies, for example – then an economically more efficient 
result is obtained.  
Secondly,  regulation  can  be  formulated  in  a  more  or  less  cost-efficient  manner.  Particular 
attention was paid to this element in Switzerland. For instance, the additional capital required 
here by systemically important banks can largely be held in the form of more cost-efficient 
convertible  capital.  Other,  far  more  drastic  measures,  such  as  a  strict  ban  on  certain 
business activities or the introduction of a bank tax – as discussed in other countries – were 
firmly rejected, partly for cost reasons.  
Thirdly, the proposed measures are by no means excessive in scope – on the contrary: the 
increase  in  capital  would  reduce  the  big  banks’  ratio  of  debt,  which  currently  stands  at 
approximately 98%, by only three percentage points: around 95% of the balance sheet total 
could continue to be financed by borrowed capital! Besides, the Federal Council’s proposal 
merely  implies  a  return  to  a  level  of  capital  that  the  big  banks  exceeded  up  until  1996 
(cf. chart 4). 
Ladies and gentlemen, let us now take a closer look at the potential negative consequences 
of the proposed regulation of the big banks.  
Will stricter regulations push up borrowing costs within Switzerland? 
Firstly,  there  are  fears  that  stricter  capital  adequacy  requirements  could  lead  to  higher 
financing costs for the banks. It is argued that this would above all lead to more expensive 
credit  for  companies  and  households.  Lending  would  then  decline,  acting  as  a  brake  on 
Swiss economic growth.  
According  to  economic  theory,  the  one  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  other,  since  an 
increase in capital should not have any effect on a bank’s overall financing costs.5 Owing in 
part  to  the  preferential  tax  treatment  of  borrowed  funds,  the  Modigliani-Miller  theorem 
referred  to  here,  cannot  be  applied  directly  in practice,  which  means  that  overall  financing 
costs would rise if capital increases. However, this is exactly what the proposed measures on 
convertible capital take into account. They create better conditions, so that capital structure 
will have less influence on a bank’s financing costs. 
Independently of this finding, it is argued that the reduction of the state subsidy – which is 
one aim of the new regulation – will lead to an increase in lending rates for clients. There are 
various  arguments  against  this.  On  the  one  hand,  structural  factors  within  Switzerland’s 
banking sector limit the big banks’ scope for setting prices even today: There is a sufficient 
                                                 
5   Cf.  Modigliani,  F.  and  Miller,  M.  H.,  1958.  The  Cost  of  Capital,  Corporation  Finance  and  the  Theory  of 
Investment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
number of domestic lending providers in the market, which keeps margins relatively low. On 
the other hand, the reduction in the subsidy will tend to lead to even more competition. The 
current disadvantage suffered by other banks active in the domestic market is lessened – the 
package of measures thus levels the playing field in the Swiss customer business segment. 
In this environment, an  increase in lending rates by the big banks would lead to a  loss of 
market share. A reduction in the subsidy is therefore more likely to manifest itself in lower 
returns  on  equity  or  lower  compensation  for  the  bank  management  than  in  higher  lending 
rates. 
Empirically, there is no connection between the capital ratio and the credit volume, either. In 
the  phase  of  debt-financed  balance  sheet  ballooning  seen  between  1995  and  2007,  the 
amount of credit available did not rise accordingly, nor did it decline in the following period 
when debts were being cleared. This observation is even more striking, given that, in autumn 
2008, the regulatory authorities stated that as of 2013 both big banks will have to have twice 
as  much  capital  as  the  Basel  II  minimum  international  standard  specifies:  According  to 
current findings, the capital adequacy rules did not have a negative impact on lending levels 
nor did they increase lending rates (cf. charts 5 and 6).6  
With a view to other possible economic repercussions of tighter regulation of the big banks, 
the question also arises as to whether and to what extent employment and value creation in 
Switzerland are at all affected. A glance at the statistics covering the period when UBS and 
CS saw their balance sheets expanding between 1995 and 2007 shows, among other things, 
that there is no clear-cut positive connection between the size of a balance sheet, on the one 
hand, and jobs and contribution to value creation at these banks in Switzerland, on the other. 
This  implies  that  reducing  the  balance  sheet  as  a  result  of  stricter  regulation  would  not 
necessarily have negative consequences in these respects (cf. chart 7). 
To conclude, it appears that there are no theoretical or empirical grounds to indicate that the 
Swiss economy will be adversely affected by the proposed regulation. Even though, in the 
short  term,  the  transitional  phase  would  generate  some  costs  for  those  regulated,  this  is 
clearly outweighed by the long-term advantages.  
Is international competitiveness being weakened? 
The  second  concern  expressed  is  that  tougher  banking  regulation  would  have  negative 
repercussions  for  the  Swiss  financial  centre  if  it  is  stricter  or  too  strict  compared  with  other 
countries  in  relative  terms.  Critics  say  that  this  would  be  a  disadvantage  in  international 
competition, with far-reaching consequences such as a weakening – or even redimensioning – 
of  the  Swiss  financial  centre.  They  claim  that  customer  assets  and  international  companies 
would move abroad, since the Swiss financial centre would no longer offer a comprehensive 
range of banking services. Switzerland would therefore lose jobs and create less added value, 
they believe. 
Key factors for international competitiveness 
One significant aspect of the discussion about the repercussions of regulatory differences is 
that other factors are at least as decisive for the international competitiveness of the Swiss 
banks.  These  include  favourable  tax  conditions,  political  and  economic  stability,  a  high 
degree of legal certainty, excellent asset management expertise and high standards in the 
banking business generally. Overall, this “Swissness” represents a crucial success factor for 
the banks when it comes to competing internationally with other financial centres. 
                                                 
6   Nor  is  there  a  connection,  empirically  speaking,  with  passing  on  the  banks’  financing  costs  to  customers: 
during  the  phase  when  the  banks  were  constantly  reducing  their  capital  ratios,  the  spread  between  the 
borrowing rate and the lending rate did not narrow (Cf. Kugler, 2011. Presentation in Vienna). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Secondly, we should bear in mind that a country-specific difference in banking regulation is 
nothing new. Even before the financial crisis began in 2007, both the Swiss big banks were 
subject to stricter regulations in terms of capital requirements than their competitors in many 
other countries. As already mentioned, FINMA ruled, in autumn 2008, that as of 2013, both 
big banks will have to hold double the amount of capital specified in international minimum 
standards. The current “Swiss finish” therefore calls for an extra 100%! 
However,  these  regulatory  differences  do  not  seem  to  have  harmed  the  Swiss  financial 
centre  in  the  past.  On  the  contrary,  Switzerland’s  banks  have  always  had  a  tradition  of  a 
“Swiss  finish”.  Stability  is  one  of  the  Swiss  financial  centre’s  clear  competitive  advantages 
and  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  attracting  customer  assets  and  companies  to 
Switzerland.  
A consideration of regulatory differences in their entirety 
Let us now take a closer look at the possible regulatory differences in connection with current 
trends in Switzerland and other countries. How significant are these differences? 
First  of  all:  the  thrust  of  international  capital  regulation  is  the  same  everywhere  –  more 
capital,  stricter  risk  weighting  and  systemic  importance  to  be  taken  into  account  when 
deciding  how  rigorous  the  regulation  should  be.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  have  stipulated  that  banks  of  international 
systemic importance should hold a substantial capital surcharge in relation to risk-weighted 
assets, which is over and above the Basel III standards.7 However, this additional amount 
does  not  take  national  systemic  importance  into  account.  Each  country,  therefore,  must 
henceforth  decide  individually  on  an  appropriate  additional  amount  based  on  the  risk.  For 
example, even if the international capital surcharge was set at a low level of 1%, the “Swiss 
finish” would result in only 25% more common equity (cf. chart 8).8  
Unlike in the case of risk-weighted capital regulation, however, Switzerland does not play a 
pioneering role as regards the absolute indebtedness (leverage ratio) of banks. The United 
States  and  Canada,  for  example,  both  introduced  a  leverage  ratio  some  time  ago.  These 
countries are therefore stricter than Switzerland regarding leverage ratio. 
Furthermore, one thing is often overlooked in the current debate: banking regulation is by no 
means restricted to capital adequacy requirements. On an international comparison, it is the 
overall package of measures proposed for the regulation of (systemically important) banks 
that  is  decisive.  In  the US,  for  example,  the  Dodd-Frank Act9  severely  restricts  proprietary 
trading by banks that accept deposits. Sweden, for example, introduced a tax on systemically 
important banks. A variety of other proposals, such as the establishment of a permanent bail-
out fund or new regulations on the organisational structures of banks, are being planned in 
the EU (cf. chart 9).10 
When  comparing  regulatory  packages  at  international  level,  it  is  therefore  important  not  to 
look  at  capital  adequacy  requirements  in  isolation.  Additional  measures  with  far-reaching 
effects on economic freedom can have grave unintended consequences. They therefore end 
In the form of minimum common equity. 
                                                 
7  
8   10% common equity (Swiss proposal) vs. 7% common equity plus 1% systemic capital surcharge (Basel III). 
9   The financial market regulation reform package was passed in the US in summer 2010. 
10   The European Commission proposes that a permanent European bank bail-out fund should be set up starting 
in  2013.  Furthermore,  the  EU  have  called  for  size  restrictions  on  banks  in  receipt  of  state  aid  (ING  and 
Commerzbank) and divestitures (ING had to sell ING Direct USA). Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of 
Scotland are also expected to shrink their balance sheets. In the United Kingdom, the Independent Banking 
Commission (the equivalent of the Swiss TBTF commission of experts) proposed high capital requirements 
alongside  structural  changes.  Universal  banks  therefore  have  to  separate  out  their  UK  retail  business  (no 
subsidiarity as in Federal Council proposal). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
up costing considerably more than measures that create targeted incentives to allow market 
discipline to operate again. 
To  sum  up,  an  analysis  of  international  differences  in  regulation  shows  that,  in  the  past, 
stricter capital regulation was in fact a competitive advantage rather than a disadvantage for 
Swiss banks. Furthermore, a look at the various regulatory packages in their entirety shows 
that  the  future  requirements  for  internationally  active,  systemically  important  financial 
institutions will be designed differently at global level. Ultimately, however, they will differ in 
rigour  only  as  far  as  the  respective  national  regulators  deem  necessary  in  response  to 
country-specific risks. 
Is the Swiss package of measures being introduced too quickly? 
A  third  objection  concerns  the  pace  of  the  regulatory  reforms.  Compared  with  other 
countries, the implementation of the Swiss package of measures is regarded as too hasty in 
some quarters. One concern is that significant aspects have not been properly considered 
when  drafting  the  package,  with  the  ultimate  consequence  that  the  TBTF  problem  is  not 
tackled effectively. 
First  of  all,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  latest  crisis  reached  its  peak  some  three 
years ago. It is therefore entirely inappropriate to refer to the Federal Council’s proposal as 
hasty. 
On  the  contrary,  the  committee  of  experts  worked  intensively  on  drawing  up  a  proposal 
supported  by  all  groups  involved.  The  administration  conducted  a  thorough  analysis  and 
carried out an extensive consultative process. The Federal Council has thus been able to put 
forward a sophisticated package of measures. This method of proceeding is in keeping with 
the Swiss tradition of taking the necessary action while avoiding snap decisions. However, 
actually  implementing  these  rules  will  take  some  time.  Because  of  the  pressing  need  for 
reform in Switzerland, it is not practicable to wait for the international bodies to complete their 
work in this area. It would make much more sense to implement the best possible measures 
within  a  suitable  time  frame,  in  order  to  achieve  a  significant  reduction  in  the  risk  to  our 
country as early as possible. 
I  consider  that  the  best  possible  measures  are  those  which  take  account  of  the  specific 
characteristics  and  risks  inherent  in  our  banking  structure  and  have  a  high  impact  without 
incurring  too  high  a  cost.  The  package  now  before  Parliament  fulfils these  criteria.  On  the 
one hand, the proposed measures are rigorously based on tried-and-tested approaches and 
instruments11  which  have  been  in  existence  in  all  developed  countries  for  decades  and 
whose effectiveness cannot be doubted. On the other hand, measures with great potential 
for unintended consequences have been decisively rejected by the committee of experts and 
the Federal Council, and not included in the package. 
Conclusion 
I am now drawing to the end of my remarks. 
The  failure  of  a  big  bank  would  have  enormous  and  incalculable  negative  implications  for 
Switzerland – not least because a state bail-out would be unavoidable. This risk is no longer 
acceptable. That is why strenuous efforts have been made over the past eighteen months to 
find a solution to the “too big to fail” problem. The Federal Council has recently presented a 
carefully thought out, balanced package of measures for Parliament’s consideration.  
                                                 
11   Regulations on capital, liquidity and risk concentration. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Implementing  these  measures  in  full  will  make  an  effective  contribution  to  significantly 
reducing the problem in Switzerland. This package considerably lessens the probability of a 
big bank crisis and the ensuing need for state support in such a crisis – which would create 
an intolerable strain in terms of regulatory and fiscal policy – and at the same time restores 
market discipline.  
We  need  to  be  aware  that  regulation  is  never  implemented  without  some  cost  to  those 
regulated.  However,  fears  about  the  extent  of  the  potential  repercussions  are  in  my  view 
unfounded, not least because consideration has been given to the costs involved during the 
drafting of the new rules. In particular, the newly introduced convertible capital will contribute 
to  limiting  the  costs  of  stricter  capital  adequacy  requirements.  What  is  more,  the 
organisational measures do not constitute excessive interference with the freedom of scope 
and  responsibility  enjoyed  by  a  bank’s  management.  Measures  of  this  kind  can  only  be 
subsidiary in nature. This means that the regulatory objective is not exceeded. 
The increased stability brought about by this package will help not only Switzerland but also 
our entire financial centre to emerge from the latest crisis significantly stronger than before. 
What  happened  to  UBS  may  not  happen  again.  The  proposed  amendments  to  the 
regulations  will  also  soon  create  legal  certainty  for  the  banks  and  allow  them  to  plan 
concretely, while at the same time promoting the reasonable, long-term development of the 
financial centre. There is no doubt about the positive long-term consequences for the entire 
Swiss economy in terms of income and employment. 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
