Petar Goshev: Overview of the Macedonian economy 
Address by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at the farewell reception, Skopje, 16 May 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Your Excellences, dear friends! 
I am immensely grateful that you are here tonight, at the end of my seven-year responsibility 
and seven-year pleasure to govern this exceptionally important institution. 
I would also like to express my gratitude to those who gave me this opportunity to cope with 
an  assignment  which  is  incredibly  challenging  and  highly  responsible  for  every  macro 
economist – to govern a central bank – a bank of the banks, bank of the state, a regulator 
and a supervisor of money deposit institutions and an entity responsible for the functioning of 
the payment systems. 
I  would  also  like  to  thank  all  those  who  have  cooperated  with  us  all  these  seven  years  – 
cooperation that have positive effects, directly or indirectly, on the conduct of my tasks and 
the overall legal term at the National Bank. 
I particularly express my gratitude to the Bank’s staff, the banks’ managers and shareholders 
who were the first to experience the effects of our decisions, to the media which facilitated 
the necessary two-way interaction with the public, to the government authorities with whom 
we  necessarily  cooperate,  to  the  international  financial  organizations,  particularly  the  IMF, 
the  World  Bank  and  the  EU  Delegation,  with  whom  we  have  exceptionally  useful 
cooperation, to the business community, which, with some exceptions, showed high positive 
sensibility and understanding for the National Bank policy, to the diplomatic representatives 
in the country who, in their distinctive way, often expressed their support and understanding 
for the work of the National Bank. I also thank all the critics of the decisions we have made 
all  these  seven  years  who,  regardless  of  their  opinions,  made  us  more  cautious  in  the 
decision  making  process  and  helped  expand  the  knowledge  of  the  market  participants, 
including  the  households,  on  the  National  Bank  activities  and  on  the  importance  of  its 
decisions for the everyday life. 
I  know  well  that  these  special  occasions  are  not  suitable  for  longer  speeches  on  our 
accomplishments.  Actually,  we  were  doing  that  regularly  through  the  monthly  reports, 
quarterly  and  annual  reports,  regular  press  releases  of  the  sessions,  through  press 
conferences and the NBRM website which is becoming richer and better from day to day. In 
2006,  as  most  of  you  well  know,  we  issued  a  monograph  on  the  sixty  years  of  central 
banking operations in Macedonia, and today we have made presentation of the report on the 
NBRM operations in the last seven years, discussing, on about 400 pages, its main activities 
and  accomplishments.  These  two  books  are,  de  facto,  a  first  attempt  for  aggregate 
presentation  of  the  historical  course  of  the  central  banking  in  Macedonia,  since  the  World 
War  II.  I  think  that  this  will  help  the  students,  the  monetary  policy  analysts,  teachers  and 
professors engaged in this issue, and certainly many others in the financial sector. Tonight 
you can see the hard copies in Macedonian and in English, and the electronic version of the 
second book, the seven-year report where we extensively discuss the period that ends these 
days. 
Nevertheless, I assume that tonight many of you would like to ask to what extent am I (or are 
we)  satisfied  of  what  we  have  achieved,  and,  what  would  I,  in  few  words,  highlight  as  the 
most important? If there is such question, I would briefly say the following: 
All decisions in the last seven years were made by the National Bank, with zero influence 
from  the  outside,  regardless  of  the  verbal  suggestions  and  insistence  coming  from  well 
known addresses. The decisions, which usually pass through internal professional filtrations, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We  maintained  a  stable  exchange  rate  level,  without  registering  misalignment 
and are made by the Governor and the NBRM Council, are within exclusive responsibility of 
those  two  bodies,  and  since  the  Governor  is  also  a  President  (with  the  new  law,  a 
Chairperson)  of  the  Council,  I  also  consider  these  decisions,  particularly  if  there  were  bad 
ones, as my personal responsibility. 
I actually want to say that the statutory independence of the NBRM over the last seven years 
was completely preserved. This should remain in the future. The central bank independence 
is crucial to the macroeconomic stability and very important to the financial system stability. 
With such position, I consider that we successfully pursued all assignments entrusted by the 
law: 
(1) 
We  preserved  low  and  stable  inflation  as  a  primary  objective  of  the  central  bank. 
The seven-year average (2004–2011, April) equals 2.2%. I know what some may think of the 
so called “tolerant” or “useful” level of inflation. I leave it to them to “reconcile” their “tolerant” 
level of inflation and de facto fixed rate. In case they again oppose to the existing regime of 
exchange  rate,  to  have  even  higher  inflation,  we  will  be  decent  enough  to  seek  for  an 
elementary analysis of its usefulness, i.e. of the advantages of such alternative. 
(2) 
between its level and the economic fundaments. 
In  2004,  the  foreign  reserves  stood  at  Euro 717 million,  and  in  2011 (April)  they 
(3) 
climbed to Euro 1 872 million, which is by 2.6 times more, and always ample to respond to 
the occasional imbalances in the foreign exchange market. 
(4) 
The  crucial  question  would  be:  Was  the  banking  system  making  enough  credits 
i.e. was the National Bank disabling the “smooth” lending to the private sector, or was it the 
opposite? The figures speak for themselves! In the seven-year period from 1997 to 2003, the 
average  annual  credit  growth  equaled  11.6%  and  in  the  seven-year  period  from  2004  to 
2010,  it  equaled  23.1%,  which  is  by  two  times  faster.  The  comparison  between  the  credit 
growth and the GDP growth shows that in the 2004–2010 period, the nominal credit growth 
was by 3.12 times faster relative to the nominal GDP growth, while the credit real growth was 
by 5.7 times higher relative to the real GDP growth. Should this difference be even greater? 
(5) 
during the Great Recession. 
 
The solvency remained high. The capital adequacy ratio was preserved to a 
very good level of 16.4%. The liquidity, after the worrying downward trend (2007, 2008 and 
early 2009), was reestablished, thanks to the undertaken measures, to a very solid level. In 
March 2009, the liquid assets constituted 20.2% of the total assets, and in December 2010 it 
made up 30.7%. The household deposit-liquid asset coverage ratio increased from 44.6% to 
61.9%. The quality of credit portfolio improved substantially. 
 
In  the  seven-year  period  from  1997  to  2003,  the  average  share  of 
nonperforming credits in the total credits equaled 19.2%, and in the period from 2004 to 2010 
it reduced to 10.8%. At the end of 2010, it equaled 9%, which is an improvement of more 
than twice. 
 
The average share of credits in the three riskiest categories (C, D and E) in 
iii. 
the  banks’  own  funds  reduced  from  54%  (1997–2003)  to  22%  (2004–2010),  which  is  an 
improvement of 2.4 times. These achievements result from the improved bank governance 
and the advanced NBRM supervision based on the improving regulation. 
 
In  the  1997  to  2003  period,  the  credit  interest  rate,  on  average  for  all 
maturities, equaled 18.6%, and 10.8% in the last seven years (2004–2010). Presently, the 
average interest rate on new credits equals 8.1% (for Denar credits), which is a decrease of 
more than twice. 
The  banking  system  also  improved  substantially.  It  remained  undamaged  even 
iv. 
ii. 
i. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Back in 2004, we started analyzing the financial system stability, six years before it 
(6) 
became our second objective, defined by the new NBRM Law. This is the fifth subsequent 
year that we develop and publish an annual financial stability report. 
(7) 
We  significantly  advanced  the  Bank’s  institutional  capacity.  We  adopted  new 
models, methodologies, analytical techniques, econometric analyses. The number of training 
courses for the staff, especially abroad, increases year after year. We dramatically improved 
the  staff  educational  structure.  In  2004,  44%  of  the  total  staff  number  were  university 
graduates. Today, this percentage is 63%, which is by 81 persons more, with the total staff 
number being increased by roughly twenty, and the workload being significantly enhanced. In 
2004, there were only 20 masters of science and one philosophy doctor, and presently, there 
are 46 masters of science and 7 philosophy doctors. 
Distinguished, 
When you summarize a stage which is over, you either ask yourself or other ask you what 
were the most exciting or most critical moments? First, the economy is a permanent intrigue, 
a  constant  unknown  variable  in  an  open  equation  for  which  you  constantly  seek  for  a 
solution.  From  this  viewpoint,  each  single  day  and  year  is  a  real  excitement  for  the 
professional analysts and a field that you never stop plowing. However, on this occasion, I 
would highlight three moments: 
The first one happened at the beginning of my term. Stories were told about the devaluation 
of Denar, the abandonment of the stable exchange rate policy, on the usefulness of higher 
inflation. Professors were making statements that inflation ranging from 8 to 10% would be 
useful. Even, in the Macedonian Academy of Science and Arts (MANU) there was a debate 
on this issue, making points that very high percentages of inflation would, allegedly, be very 
useful.  The  trade  deficit  was  high  as  usual,  the  current  account  deficit  was  also  high.  We 
intervened with foreign reserves to calm down the market, and consequently, their level went 
down. The IMF’s Chief of Mission at that time asked me to meet “in six eyes”: mine two and 
their four. He suggested a devaluation of at least 20%. I told him that I will answer tomorrow. 
The  next  day  I  told  him  that  we  will  discuss  again  in  autumn  during  his  next  visit.  The 
situation  calmed  during  the  summer.  We  started  purchasing  foreign  currency,  and  the 
favorable situation continued. Nobody ever opened this issue again. They gave up. 
The  second  moment  was  the  closing  of  Makedonska  Banka  and  forcing  few  other 
shareholders to abandon the banking business. It was a very erratic experience. They played 
extremely  unfairly.  They  were  developing  and  managed  to  develop  dirty  plots.  They  also 
threatened.  They  made  a  mistake.  The  decisions  we  believed  in  were  unchangeable.  We 
cleaned  the  banking  sector  from  shareholders  who  were  not  eligible,  on  any  ground.  We 
fixed several weak points in the system thanks to our decisiveness and integrity. And, as to 
the organizers of dirty campaigns, you know the information. 
The third, extremely dramatic moment was the end of 2008 and the first half of 2009: the 
global  recession.  In  that  period  we  spent  500  millions  of  Euros  defending  the  exchange 
rate – one third of their total level. We had to try our hardest, otherwise we were about to 
face an economic disaster. We were criticized for undertaking measures contrary to those 
undertaken  by  developed  economies.  They  failed  to  see  that  such  comparisons  will  not 
wash.  They  failed  to  see  the  nature  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  and  that  changing  such 
concept could only make greater damage. We endured. The situation consolidated. The data 
on credit growth, which, even back than, was not within the negative zone, unlike most of the 
European countries, and the banking sector stability justified our beliefs. 
Certainly, there are other sensitive situations. They will maybe take their turn on some other 
occasion. Not now during the pre-election period! 
Dear all, 
As I already said, the economy is an open equation with constant unknown variables. The 
financial  crisis  and  economic  recession  denied  many  lessons  developed  to  the  level  of  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
dogma. The central banks started a new post-recession period. They will have to take care 
more  of  the  financial  stability,  because  it  turned  that  the  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to 
ensure financial stability. 
It raises many new issues that will not be discussed now. I am convinced, however, that this 
institution becomes more capable to face all challenges. 
I  wish  that  Dimitar  and  all  staff  members  achieve  better  results  and  certainly,  a  personal 
happiness. 
I would like, once again, to thank you for being here tonight, for the cooperation we had, for 
each word of kindness that we exchanged and for everything that could join us in the future. I 
also wish you professional satisfaction and personal happiness. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
