Ignazio Visco: Pension systems in the midst of the demographic 
transition – the way forward 
Dinner  talk  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  and  Member  of  the  Governing 
Board  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  to  the  International  Pension  Workshop,  jointly  organized  by 
Netspar and CeRP, Moncalieri, 16–17 June 2011. 
I would like to thank Giuseppe Grande for useful discussions and help. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  today,  and  to  have  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some 
thoughts on the global outlook for pension systems. This international pension workshop – 
jointly organized by Netspar and CeRP – has put together an impressive list of contributions 
in the fields of pension economics and pension finance. The papers explore key issues that 
are at the forefront of the current policy debate. 
This evening, I would like to offer  a few thoughts on three topics: (i) The state of pension 
systems  in  the  midst  of  the  demographic  transition;  (ii)  the  to-do  list  for  governments  and 
industry participants ; and (iii) the long-term effectiveness of funded private schemes, with a 
focus on the crucial role played by strong and sustainable growth and the need to develop 
well-functioning annuity markets for the pension payout. 
The challenges facing pension systems 
I. 
Considering the current conditions of pension systems, it seems to me that the adjustment of 
pay-as-you-go  schemes  to  the  demographic  transition  is  far  from  completed,  because: 
(1) population  ageing  will  continue;  (2)  most  advanced  economies  will  require  robust  fiscal 
consolidation measures; (3) in many of our countries the economic outlook will be weak for 
some time to come. 
First,  the  ageing  process  is  going  on,  and  dependency  ratios  continue  to  rise.  Life 
expectancy will lengthen in the coming decades. According to the UN Population Division’s 
projections, in  the  OECD  countries  between  2010  and  2050  life  expectancy  at  age  65  will 
increase by 3.1 years for men and 3.6 years for women.  
A second driver of change in pay-as-you-go arrangements is fiscal consolidation. One of the 
main legacies of the global financial crisis is the unprecedented size of fiscal deficits in many 
advanced  economies.  This  has  led  several  governments  to  phase  in  fiscal  consolidation 
programmes over the short and medium term. At this stage, fiscal consolidation programmes 
are  fairly  well-defined,  for  example,  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  euro  area,  though  still 
somewhat hazy in the United States and Japan. Cuts in pension outlays (e.g., increase in 
retirement  age,  reduced  benefits  and  restrictions  on  early  retirement  schemes)  have  been 
announced by a number of countries, as these measures are important for longer-term fiscal 
sustainability. Ageing will also affect fiscal sustainability through rising health and long-term 
care expenditures, something that is coming to be realized with a lag compared to pension 
expenditures. 
The third factor is the weak macroeconomic environment, because lower wages and fewer 
jobs shrink the revenues from pension contributions. The recovery from the Great Recession 
is expected to gain momentum only slowly and continues to be unstable, as indicated by the 
latest  downward  revisions  of  growth  prospects  for  the  United  States.  The  recovery  is  also 
unbalanced:  the  advanced  economies  lag  behind  the  emerging-market  economies;  global 
imbalances  do  not  appear  to  be  on  the  way  of  being  reduced;  in  several  countries 
households are highly indebted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Nor  is  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  world  economy  much  brighter.  In  advanced 
economies public debt is high. The pressure of emerging market economies on energy and 
commodity markets creates upward risks for inflation. Labour market conditions are expected 
to improve only slowly and there is a concern that structural unemployment might increase. 
Geopolitical risks could remain high. 
If  the  public  pension  sector  is  not  yet  out  of  the  woods,  defined-benefit  (DB)  pension 
schemes  are  in  no  better  shape.  The  demographic  trends  and  the  weak  macroeconomic 
environment have had severe repercussions on them too. What’s more, DB plans have been 
put  under  pressure  by  the  huge  correction  in  asset  prices triggered  by  the  global  financial 
crisis.  The impact  of  the  plunge  in share  price indices  in  2008  has  been  magnified  by  the 
sharp decline in the yields on benchmark government bonds, which provide the backbone of 
the discount factors used to value future liabilities. As a result, since 2008 the funding gaps 
of DB plans have widened significantly across the board. According to OECD estimates, for 
more  than  2,000  publicly  traded  companies  headquartered  in  15  countries,  the  median 
underfunding rate worsened from about one eighth in 2007 to one fourth in 2009. Since the 
autumn  of  2010  the  situation  is  likely  to  have  improved  but  only  slightly,  owing  to  the  low 
level of interest rates. 
Particular concerns have been raised about the sustainability of DB pension plans for public 
sector  workers.  There  is  evidence  that  in  a  number  of  advanced  countries  these  plans 
produce potentially large net unfunded liabilities. In the public sector, pension promises tend 
to be relatively generous (sometimes to make up for lower current earnings relative to the 
private  sector);  in  some  countries,  they  are  also  partially  funded  or  paid  out  directly  from 
government revenues, or their valuation and disclosure may lack transparency. 
Because  of  these  trends,  retirement-income  systems  have  continued  to  shift  from  public 
pay-as-you-go schemes and DB plans to defined-contribution (DC) pension schemes. In the 
United States, for example, over the last decade the percentage of workers participating in 
DB  plans  has  declined  further  from  36  to  30  percent,  while  that  of  DC  plan  members  has 
increased from 50 to 54 percent. 
The rising importance of DC arrangements implies that investment risks and longevity risk 
are increasingly borne by individual workers. Over the last decade, however, financial market 
returns have been disappointing, and the global financial crisis of 2007–09 has dealt a blow 
to  the  balances  accumulated  by  many  workers  on  their  DC  pension  schemes.  Especially 
hard hit were senior members nearing retirement. But the risk that DC schemes will deliver 
low  income  replacement  rates  is  very  serious  also  for  young  members.  The  disappointing 
performance  of  DC  schemes  over  the  last  decade  is  likely  to  have  sapped  employees’ 
confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  financial  markets  to  provide  adequate  and  secure  returns. 
Where  membership  is  not  compulsory,  this  may  affect  employees’  propensity  to  join  DC 
pension  schemes  and  pay  pension  contributions.  The  risk  that  DC  schemes  will  provide  a 
low  pension  income  compounds  the  reduction  in  the  coverage  of  public  pensions.  The 
possibility of policy reversals cannot be overlooked either. In this regard, it is telling that in 
some  countries  the  choice  of  mandatory  contribution  to  funded  DC  pension  schemes  has 
been called into question. 
What to do 
II. 
I  now  turn  to  some  well-known  policy  responses  to  these  challenges.  While  there  is,  I 
believe,  wide  consensus  among  academic  experts  and  practitioners  on  the  need  for  such 
responses, they are obviously demanding for policymakers. But it must be clear that delay in 
design and implementation could be very costly for our societies. 
First and foremost, people have to be encouraged to work longer. Living longer is certainly a 
positive development, especially if we are in good health (and this should not be taken for 
granted). But we need to have the resources to enjoy our longer lives, which means incomes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  jobs.  There  is  no  question,  then,  that  a  return  to  what  the  G-20  defines  as  “strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth” is the fundamental objective of economic policy. This will 
help  in  furnishing  the  accumulation  of  funds  necessary  for  retirement,  but  there  is  little 
question that the retirement age also has to go up.  
Statutory pension ages have started to rise in a number of countries. However, according to 
the OECD, in all but five member countries the projected gains in life expectancy over the 
next  four  decades  will  outstrip  the  prospective  increases  in  retirement  age.  To  insure  the 
financial  sustainability  of  pay-as-you-go  schemes,  possible  measures  include  raising  the 
retirement age, introducing incentives for later retirement, cutting benefits and indexing them 
to  life  expectancy  (as  it  has  been  done,  for  example,  in  the  notional  defined  contribution 
systems).  It  could  also  be  helpful  to  allow  senior  workers  to  combine  work  with  pension 
income. In this regard, it is worth recalling that there is no evidence that employment of older 
workers reduces the number of jobs available to young people. 
Second, for DC pension schemes to deliver on their promises, in my view there are three top 
priorities: 
a) 
DC plan members must be aware of the likely degree of coverage provided by their 
retirement  scheme.  This  is  a  crucial  condition  to  persuade  workers  to  increase 
retirement  saving  and  to  help  them  set  target  replacement  rates  for  their 
accumulation plan. Clear information on the expected replacement rates and their 
likely decline under adverse investment scenarios must be provided. 
Total  costs  to  plan  members  must  be  reduced.  As  has  been  emphasized,  among 
others, by the Turner Report in the middle of last decade and, more recently, by the 
Squam  Lake  Working  Group  on  Financial  Regulation,  charges  may  have  a  major 
impact on the final balance accruing to plan members over an extended period of 
time.  Costs  can  be  reduced  not  only  by  increasing  the  volume  of  assets  under 
management,  with  consequent  economies  of  scale,  but  also  by  stimulating 
competition among pension schemes. This may call for various measures, including 
educating consumers about the effects of charges on pension fund returns; assuring 
transparency and comparability of charges between schemes; easing the portability 
of  employer  contributions  between  schemes;  and  intensifying  competition  among 
the financial institutions that manage pension funds. 
Sound default options should be designed. While the regulation of DC plans has to 
take into account the characteristics of the national pension system as a whole (for 
example, what share of pension income is provided by DC plans), a good practice 
would be to make enrolment in DC plans automatic but subject to an opt-out clause. 
Moreover,  the  default  plan  must  be  carefully  designed.  In  order  to  encourage 
workers to join (or not to opt out), the default contribution rate could be rather low 
initially and rise gradually over time. Furthermore, the default DC plan should have 
low  fees  and  diversified  investment  objectives,  in  order  to  ensure  a  fair  balance 
between security and yield in investing retirement saving in financial instruments. 
b) 
c) 
These considerations also make it clear that the performance of DC pension schemes may 
be  affected  by  workers’  degree  of  financial  literacy,  as  has  been  highlighted  by  advanced 
scientific  research.  As  was  pointed  out  in  the  2005  G10  report  on  Ageing  and  Pension 
System Reform, one of the policy challenges is to develop financial education programmes 
that “can help consumers avoid abuse and fraud, improve their investment choices, and raise 
their  contributions  to  private  pension  plans”.  Retirement-saving  literacy  programmes 
addressed to the labour force are thus important, although obviously they must go hand-in-
hand with stronger consumer protection. 
But developing a sound, robust DC pillar is not enough to ensure that the retirement income 
provided  by  private  pensions  is  adequate.  In  pure  DC  plans,  members  remain  exposed  to 
extreme  financial  market  risks,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  recent  financial  crisis.  This  is  a 
serious risk, especially for workers nearing retirement, who may not be able or willing to wait 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
for  a  full  recovery  in  financial  markets.  Moreover,  severe  financial  turmoil  is  typically 
associated with weak labour markets and older job seekers who have trouble finding work 
may  end  up  retiring  earlier  than  expected  (rather  than  delaying  retirement),  with  lower 
pension incomes. The importance of extreme (financial and counterparty) risks in long-term 
financial  contracts  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  in  a  number  of  countries  guarantee 
arrangements are in place to protect benefits against the insolvency of the DB plan sponsor; 
for a worker, moving from a DB plan to a DC plan implies abandoning dual protection (the 
sponsor’s capital and the guarantee arrangement) in favour of no protection at all. This may 
call for some kind of return guarantee to DC plan members during the accumulation phase.  
Available  examples  include  both  absolute  return  guarantees  (as  in  Japan  or  in  some  US 
states),  in  which  the  guaranteed  return  is  set  against  a  pre-specified  return,  and  relative 
guarantees (as in Chile and Denmark), where the return is tied to some industry average or 
market benchmark. There is evidence that only guarantee schemes in which the minimum 
return is set at a very low or negligible rate, such as return of principal, can surely withstand 
adverse financial market conditions. This is consistent with the findings of our own research 
conducted  at  the  Bank  of  Italy,  which  suggests  that  in  order  for  the  guaranteed  return 
insurance scheme to be cost-effective, credible, and robust to moral hazard, the guarantee 
should be provided by the government and funded by properly risk-based premia. 
Another important challenge faced by pension systems is given by the  changing nature of 
labour markets. Job mobility and flexibility may hinder the accumulation of retirement wealth. 
Pension  schemes  should  allow  for  the  fact  that  workers  may  change  jobs  and  employers 
more frequently than in the past, and we should also think about ways to promote the cross-
border portability of pension rights. Issues such as vesting periods and (implicit or explicit) 
penalty fees should be regulated and would be important to prevent any kind of predatory 
practice on retirement savings. 
Finally,  the  pension  fund  industry  may  benefit  greatly  from  the  development  of  retirement 
schemes  in  emerging-market  economies,  as  these  economies  will  also  face  more  or  less 
rapid population ageing in the coming decades, with pension systems still to be developed 
especially  in  their  fully-funded  dimension.  With  the  current  pace  of  increase  in  living 
standards  and  the  emergence  of  a  sizable  middle  class,  the  vast  potential  demand  for 
retirement  saving  vehicles  in  these  economies  would  allow  the  global  financial  industry  to 
generate important economies of scale and scope. At the same time, given the sheer size of 
the  potential  saving  pools,  competition  among  financial  institutions  should  be  adequately 
promoted and the risk of an excessive concentration of market shares properly countered. 
Ensuring the long-term effectiveness of funded pension schemes 
III. 
But there are also two other factors which in the future will considerably affect the ability of 
funded pension schemes to meet their goal of providing pensioners with adequate retirement 
income.  The  first  is  the  crucial  importance  of  robust  economic  growth.  The  second  is  the 
design of the decumulation phase. 
Both  funded  and  unfunded  pension  arrangements  ultimately  rely  upon  the  ability  of  the 
economic  system  to  create  jobs  and  allocate  resources  to  the  most  profitable  investment 
opportunities. Economic growth is therefore the fundamental determinant of the sustainability 
and  adequacy  of  any  retirement  system.  However,  as  was  highlighted  in  the  IMF’s  recent 
World Economic Outlook of the IMF, in the advanced economies potential output threatens to 
remain  considerably  below  pre-crisis  trends,  unless  financial  and  structural  policies  are 
significantly  strengthened.  Partly  as  a  result  of  lower  potential  growth  in  the  advanced 
countries, the weight of emerging market economies on world output is expected to increase 
steadily over the coming decades. In particular, Asia is expected to have a great potential for 
growth. According to recent projections by the Asian Development Bank, between 2010 and 
2050 its weight will rise from about a quarter of global output in 2010 to at least a third in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2050 under a pessimistic scenario, and to half if the current trend of sustained convergence 
were to continue over the next forty years. 
If  financial  markets  are  well-developed,  funded  schemes  make  it  possible  for  retirement 
wealth to expand at the same pace as that of the world economy. In order to do so, over the 
next  few  decades  the  asset  allocation  of  funded  pension  schemes  will  have  to  gradually 
change  its  geographical  scope,  in  order  to  reflect  the  rising  weight  of  Asian  and  Latin 
American countries. 
It is important to observe that it is not a matter of keeping investment returns afloat by taking 
more risks. A reckless chase after high-yield assets around the world would be useless if not 
counterproductive.  Retirement  saving  has  to  be  directed  towards  those  business  activities 
that may put the world economy on a path of strong and sustainable growth. This raises a 
number of important issues for the global financial markets. 
On  the  demand  side,  pension  schemes’  trustees  and  asset  managers  will  have  to  devote 
more  resources  to  the  analysis  of  emerging  market  economies  and  the  contribution  of 
emerging  market  bonds  and  equities.  Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  the  geographical 
composition of portfolios will become a key driver of the asset allocation, DC plan members 
will also have to improve their understanding of new investment opportunities. Regulation, at 
both  the  national  and  international  level,  will  have  to  respond  to  the  changing  needs  of 
institutional investors. We have to ensure that both individual and institutional investors are 
accountable for their actions. 
As for the supply side of financial markets, the challenges that we face may even be more 
demanding. First, if we want to ensure that financial markets keep track of the expansion of 
Asian and other rising economies, emerging market companies with good fundamentals and 
growth opportunities must have access to bond and equity markets. If the financial markets 
of  the  emerging  market  economies  had  limited  capacity  to  absorb  foreign  resources,  then 
capital inflows might fuel asset bubbles and even be counterproductive to economic growth 
in  those  economies.  Second,  while  policies  and  practices  may  differ  across  countries 
depending on institutional and economic factors, there should be no uncertainty about some 
key  policy  areas,  such  as  the  governance  of  corporations,  the  legal  and  regulatory 
framework, 
financial 
infrastructures  of  both  advanced  and  emerging  economies  should  be  integrated  into  the 
global financial system, open to foreign players, and compliant with international standards of 
transparency. 
The last key priority is the need to develop well-functioning annuity markets. In a few years’ 
time the number of pensioners for whom payout instruments will provide a significant fraction 
of retirement income is bound to increase, both in the advanced economies and in emerging 
and developing economies. At the moment, annuity markets around the world are rather thin, 
except in a handful of countries in which private pensions are more highly developed (such 
as  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Switzerland,  Chile  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  the  United  States). 
Moreover,  the  payout  phase  arrangements  differ  markedly  across  countries,  in  terms  of 
government intervention (through regulation and taxation), instruments and providers. 
Policy  action  in  this  field  should  target  two  broad  objectives:  the  choice  of  the  payout 
instruments and their costs. The first goal is to develop products that better protect against 
the  risks  that  materialize  during  the  decumulation  phase,  namely  inflation,  longevity  and 
financial market risk. We have to think about how to achieve an inflation-protected stream of 
income for life after retirement, also taking into account the possibility that people in old age 
– while spending on health-care services – might increasingly be able to combine work and 
pension  income.  On  this  issue,  as  has  been  repeatedly  observed,  an  adequate  supply  of 
government  inflation-linked  and  ultra-long-term  bonds  is  an  essential  tool  to  help  financial 
institutions  to  offer  inflation-linked  annuities  or  other  instruments  that  serve  pensioners’ 
needs.  Governments  should  also  consider  issuing  longevity  bonds,  or  providing  financial 
institutions with guarantees against extreme (financial or longevity) risks. 
the  enforceability  of  contracts,  and 
tax  burdens.  Finally, 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  second  broad  policy  goal  would  be  to  reduce  the  price  of  annuities  and  similar 
instruments.  In  this  regard,  a  main  policy  tool  is  the  timely  release  of  accurate  mortality 
tables,  both  for  the  total  population  and  for  different  subgroups  in  the  population. 
Improvements in mortality tables would help reduce adverse selection costs and lower the 
premium 
transparency  and 
comparability is another useful option, as it would be to promote competition among annuity 
providers. 
longevity  risk.  Fostering 
the  aggregate 
instrument 
for 
Conclusions 
IV. 
The adjustment of pension systems to the demographic transition is a complex process that 
needs  close  monitoring  and  that  will  continue  to  unfold  for  a  number  of  years  to  come. 
Doubts about the viability of public pay-as-you-go arrangements and defined-benefit pension 
schemes  persist.  More  importantly,  there  are  growing  concerns  over  the  ability  of 
defined-contribution pension schemes to provide adequate income. Some of the issues that 
we are dealing with now were identified by pension experts and policymakers half a decade 
ago or more, but so far they have been addressed only in part. At the same time, new issues 
have come to the fore. I am convinced that the evidence that we have gathered so far on 
ongoing  trends,  industry  practices  and  policies  –  corroborated  by  the  findings  of  the  most 
dependable  scientific  literature  –  provide  clear  guidelines  on  how  to  ensure  that  pension 
systems will fulfil their mission of giving workers a decent standard of living in retirement. 
Members  of  DC  pension  schemes  must  get  sound  information  on  their  likely  retirement 
income. The default options of DC plans have to be carefully designed. As the first waves of 
baby-boomers  approach  retirement,  it  is  urgent  to  develop  the  markets  for  payout 
instruments.  We  have  to  promote  competition  among  the  providers  of  funded  pension 
schemes and annuities. We have to be aware that market-based arrangements may not be 
able  to  cope  with  extreme  financial  or  longevity  risks.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  the  global 
pension  fund  industry  will  increasingly  shift  towards  the  Asian  and  other  emerging-market 
economies, both in terms of asset allocation and business opportunities. 
To conclude, one of my favourite quotes on longevity risk is Lorenzo the Magnificent’s rhyme 
of more than 500 years ago: “Youth is sweet and well / But doth speed away / Let who will be 
gay / To-morrow, none can tell” [trans. by Lorna de’ Lucchi, 1922]. In our world of increasing 
longevity  and  population  ageing,  we  face  the  risk  that  expectations  of  limited  economic 
growth  (and  the  associated  liquidity  constraints)  may  reduce  the  propensity  to  save  for 
retirement  and  make  Lorenzo’s  hyperbolic  discounting  an  appealing  though  illusionary 
alternative.  But  in  order  not  to  be  obliged  to  pay  extremely  high  costs  in  the  future  we  – 
individuals,  market  participants,  policymakers  –  must  shun  any  such  illusion.  There  is  no 
alternative  to  fostering  economic  growth  by  structural  policies,  maintaining  incentives  for 
retirement  saving,  facilitating  the  supply  of  long-term  and  indexed  financial  instruments, 
properly  designing  and  protecting  the  pay-out  phase,  and  upgrading  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
