Mark Carney: Opening statement for appearance before the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Finance 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 19 August 2011. 
Thank you for this opportunity to appear here today. 
 Recent economic and financial developments 
In recent weeks, several downside risks to the Bank’s July  Monetary Policy Report (MPR) 
projection have been realised. The European sovereign crisis has intensified, the U.S. credit 
rating has been downgraded, and a broad range of data has signalled slower global growth. 
The United States is in the midst of the weakest recovery since the Great Depression. This is 
not a surprise as history teaches that recessions involving financial crises tend to be more 
severe and have recoveries that take twice as long. Recent benchmark revisions show that 
the  U.S.  recession  was  even  deeper  and  the  recovery  from  the  trough  has  been  even 
shallower than previously reported. 
The Bank expects that American household spending will remain subdued in the face of high 
personal  debt  burdens,  large  declines  in  wealth  and  tough  labour  market  conditions.  In 
addition, fiscal stimulus in the United States will soon turn to fiscal drag. 
For well over a year, the Bank has been concerned about the prospects for resolving internal 
tensions within the Euro area. Some of these concerns are now being realised as acute fiscal 
and  financial  strains  in  Europe  have  triggered  a  generalized  retrenchment  from  risk-taking 
and could yet prompt more severe dislocations in global funding markets. 
In response to uncertainties in Europe and the evidence of slowing global growth, equity and 
commodity  prices  have  fallen  significantly,  and  financial  market  volatility  has  increased 
markedly. The spillovers to Canadian financial markets have been less pronounced but are 
still  notable.  Importantly,  Canadian  financial  stocks  have  considerably  outperformed  their 
peers in the United States, the United Kingdom and Europe and our core funding markets 
have  remained  orderly.  This  will  help  ensure  an  appropriate  flow  of  credit  to  Canadian 
households and businesses. 
Recent events serve as a reminder that in a world awash with debt, repairing the balance 
sheets  of  banks,  households  and  countries  will  take  years.  As  a  consequence,  the  pace, 
pattern and variability of global economic growth is changing, and Canada must adapt. 
In  short,  the  considerable  external  headwinds  that  the  Bank  has  long  identified  are  now 
blowing  harder.  For  Canadian  producers,  the  persistent  strength  of  the  Canadian  dollar  is 
compounding  the  sluggishness  of  U.S.  demand.  Largely  reflecting  such  external  factors, 
recent  Canadian  data  has  been  consistent  with  minimal  to  slightly  negative  growth  in  the 
second  quarter.  At  the  same  time,  labour  market  developments  and  business  investment 
intentions suggest continued strength in our domestic economy. 
The Bank continues to expect that growth will accelerate in the second half of the year, led 
by  business  investment  and  household  expenditures.  Ongoing  strength  in  major  emerging 
markets  should  also  help  maintain  commodity  prices  at  relatively  high  levels.  However, 
relative to our prior expectations, we expect somewhat weaker economic momentum globally 
and,  as  a  result,  in  Canada,  with  attendant  consequences  for  resource  utilization  and 
inflationary pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Policy considerations  
Since the crisis began, the broad economic strategy has been to grow domestic demand in 
the face of these considerable external headwinds and to encourage Canadian businesses 
to retool and reorient to the new global economy. 
In  response  to  the  sharp,  synchronous  global  recession,  the  Bank  lowered  our  target  rate 
rapidly  to  its  lowest  possible  level.  We  almost  doubled  our  balance  sheet  to  provide  the 
financial  sector  with  exceptional  liquidity.  And  we  gave  exceptional  guidance  on  the  likely 
path of our target rate, through our conditional commitment. 
In  tandem,  federal  and  provincial  fiscal  stimulus  provided  important  further  support  to 
domestic demand, contributing significantly to Canadian economic growth through 2009 and 
2010. 
Owing to the underlying strength of domestic fundamentals, particularly our resilient financial 
system, these policies proved highly effective. Domestic demand in Canada grew more than 
twice  as  fast  as  in  the  United  States.  Canada  has  recovered  all  of  the  output  and  about 
140 per  cent  of  the  jobs  lost  during  the  recession.  Throughout,  price  stability  has  been 
maintained. 
As the Minister of Finance has rightly emphasised and recent events have reinforced, fiscal 
sustainability  is  fundamental.  It  is  essential  to  maintain  Canada’s  fiscal  advantage  with  an 
appropriately  paced  fiscal  consolidation  plan,  consistent  with  the  G-20’s  Toronto  Summit 
commitments. 
Similarly,  private  credit  cannot  grow  without  limit.  Canadians  are  now  as  indebted  as  the 
Americans and the British. 
In an environment of exceptionally low interest rates, we must be careful not to repeat the 
mistakes  of  others  who  now  face  the  challenges  of  simultaneously  lowering  unsustainable 
public and private debt burdens. 
Bank policy 
There are five ways in which the Bank will continue to support Canada’s economic expansion 
in this difficult external environment. 
First, the best contribution that monetary policy can make is to keep inflation low, stable and 
predictable. Monetary policy is guided by our 2 per cent target for total CPI inflation. This is a 
symmetric commitment. That is, the Bank cares as much about inflation being below target 
as above. 
Since  the  crisis  erupted,  the  Bank  has  demonstrated  its  flexibility  and  nimbleness  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy. As the Canadian recovery has progressed, we have emphasised 
that we would be prudent with respect to the possible withdrawal of any degree of monetary 
stimulus. 
As  we  highlighted  in  our  most  recent  MPR,  our  approach  will  always  be  guided  by 
comprehensive,  considered  analysis  and  informed  judgment  rather  than  mechanical  rules. 
This is particularly important in the current environment of material external headwinds. To 
state the obvious, if the outlook for growth and inflation changes, the path for monetary policy 
will be affected accordingly. 
Second, the Bank will take the necessary steps to ensure that core funding markets remain 
liquid. In the event of a major systemic shock, the Bank has a wide range of tools to provide 
exceptional liquidity, consistent with a principles-based framework. At the same time, central 
bank  liquidity  should  not  be  a  substitute  for  sound  risk  management  by  private  financial 
institutions. Accordingly, the Bank will continue to work with the Office of the Superintendent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of Financial Institutions (OSFI) to guard against moral hazard by ensuring that private banks 
maintain adequate liquidity buffers. 
Third,  we  must  continue  to  build  a more  resilient  financial system  in  Canada  and globally. 
Recent  events  underscore  the  importance  of  implementing  G-20  financial  reforms,  notably 
the  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  under  Basel  III.  Given  the  leading  positions  of  our 
banks  and  the  consistency  of  the  new  standards  with  Canada’s,  now  is  not  the  time  for 
Canada to move from the front to the back of the class. Moreover, it is in Canada’s interests 
to  ensure  that  others  follow  our  example.  This  will  reduce  the  risk  that  another  foreign 
financial crisis sideswipes our economy. 
Fourth, the Bank will continue to work with its federal partners to monitor risks to financial 
stability  and  to  develop  appropriate  responses.  An  example  has  been  the  measured 
approach to rising household indebtedness. Since 2008, the federal government has taken a 
series of prudent and timely measures to tighten mortgage insurance requirements in order 
to support the long-term stability of the Canadian housing market. 
Finally, since the biggest risks to our economy come from abroad, the Bank must work with 
international colleagues as they tackle the twin challenges of reducing excessive private and 
public debt. The situation is most acute in Europe where credible national fiscal plans need 
to  be  supplemented  by  broader  changes  to  European  economic  governance  and  fiscal 
arrangements.  We  are  in  constant,  intensive  discussions  with  our  European  colleagues 
bilaterally  and  through  the  G-7,  the  G-20,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  the 
Financial Stability Board. 
As the Bank has stressed repeatedly, the core challenge is to rebalance demand between 
advanced and emerging economies. To this end, the Bank is investing in current G-20 efforts 
to develop a framework for open capital flows, working with the FSB to devise and implement 
comprehensive financial reforms, and collaborating with our colleagues in the Department of 
Finance  to  guide  the  G-20  framework  for  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth. 
Rebalancing will require significant changes to fiscal, structural and exchange rate policies 
across a broad range of countries. 
To conclude, the challenges in the current global economic environment are significant, but 
so  too  are  the  opportunities  for  Canada.  Our  corporations  and  governments  have  strong 
balance sheets, our financial institutions are among the most resilient in the world, and our 
economy can be geared to the future sources of global growth. To take advantage of these 
attributes, we will need continued, heavy investment to improve productivity and sustained, 
innovative efforts to develop new markets. 
For  its  part,  the  Bank  has  a  wide  range  of  tools  and  policy  options  that  it  will  continue  to 
deploy as appropriate in order to ensure that Canadians can seize these opportunities in an 
environment of domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
