Caleb M Fundanga: Transparent pricing initiative in Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official lunch of 
the Transparent Pricing Initiative in Zambia, Lusaka, 6 June 2011. 
 The Vice President, Global Programs Microfinance Transparency,  
Ms Alexandra Fiorillo;  
The President of the Association of Microfinance Institutions of Zambia (AMIZ),  
Dr. George Mulomboi;  
Executive Secretary of Association of Microfinance institutions of Zambia,  
Mr Webby Mate;  
Chief Executives and Representatives of Microfinance Institutions;  
Colleagues from Bank of Zambia;  
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
 
I  would  like  to  thank  MicroFinance  Transparency  and  the  Association  of  Microfinance 
Institutions of Zambia for inviting me to officiate at this important workshop on Transparent 
Pricing. I also wish to welcome our visitors from outside the country. I hope you will enjoy 
the wonderful Zambian weather.  
Madam  Vice  President,  the  importance  of  microfinance  to  an  economy  cannot  be  over-
emphasised. The provision of financial services to the majority of people and the small and 
medium enterprises who have traditionally been excluded from the formal banking sector is a 
key element to poverty reduction and economic development.  
Mr  President,  as  you  are  aware,  in  Zambia,  the  recent  FinScope  Survey  confirmed  that 
levels of access to financial services continue to be low with only 37.3% of Zambia’s adult 
population reported to have access to a financial services. The survey however showed that 
the  number  of  people  accessing  microfinance  was  on  the  increase.  The  role  that 
microfinance institutions play in financial inclusion is therefore very crucial.  
Over the years, the microfinance institutions in Zambia have played a significant part in the 
provision  of  financial  services,  particularly  for  low-income  households.  Although  access  to 
finance remains low, microfinance institutions have had a somewhat positive impact on the 
economic activity of low income households, in both urban and rural areas. I am hopeful that 
the microfinance sector will continue to bridge the financing gap especially to the unserved 
population. 
However, the Bank of Zambia continues to receive a number of customer complaints on the 
high cost of micro loans in the country. It has been observed that the interest rates charged 
by  some  institutions  exceeded  300%  per  annum  in  some  cases.  Furthermore,  in  most 
instances the effective rate of interest and other charges are not disclosed to the customers 
resulting in them paying much more that what was initially publicised to them. This has raised 
ethical questions regarding transparency and the role of microfinance institutions in poverty 
alleviation and economic development in Zambia.  
In addition, although, the interest rates of microfinance loans may vary significantly relative to 
the duration and size of the loan, it is incumbent upon all microfinance institutions to provide 
clear  information  on  the  cost  of  the  loans  and  options  available.  It  is  also  important  for 
institutions  to  sensitise  customers  on  what  products  may  best  suit  their  incomes  and  to 
educate them to borrow prudently. It is therefore, imperative that all institutions provide the 
price  of  their  loans  in  terms  of  the  Annual  Percentage  Rate  rather  than  a  monthly 
percentage.  In  this  way,  transparency  is  enhanced  and  consumers  would  have  a  clear 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
picture of precisely how much they need to borrow relative to their income levels. This would 
result in responsible lending and a more competitive and transparent microfinance industry.  
It  is  in  this  regard  that  the  initiative  on  transparent  pricing  for  the  microfinance  sector  in 
Zambia could not have come at a more opportune time. I am informed that the Transparent 
Pricing initiative will offer training on transparent pricing and collect and publish data on the 
prices of microloans offered in Zambia. This initiative will complement the Bank of Zambia’s 
effort of enhancing transparency through the quarterly publication of financial charges, fees 
and  commissions  for  accounts  and  other  general  services  and  transactions  applied  by 
financial service providers.  
In addition, the workshop has come at a time when the Bank of Zambia is conducting a study 
on  “How  Microfinance  Institutions  Determine  Lending  Interest  Rates  in  Zambia”.  The 
deliberations from this workshop will be of great benefit to the Bank and will provide valuable 
insights into the factors affecting interest rates in Zambia.  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  one  of  the  reasons  advanced  by  microfinance 
institutions to explain the high interest rates charged for their services in the past has been 
the  high  risk  of  default  and  lack  of  credit  information  on  the  borrowers.  However,  with  the 
credit  reference  bureau  now  operational,  to  which  I  believe  most  of  these  institutions 
subscribe and access credit information on their borrowers, it is expected that the levels of 
delinquencies  that  the  sector  used  to  suffer  through  the  non-repayment  of  loans  by 
customers would decline.  
I therefore, implore all microfinance institutions to comply with the Bank of Zambia Directive 
of December 2008 regarding the use of the credit reference system and submission of credit 
data. I must emphasise that regulatory action will be taken against defaulting institutions.  
As  I  conclude,  allow  me  to  further  urge  microfinance  and  other  financial  institutions  to 
continue  revising  their  interest  rates  and  charges  in  tandem  with  the  movements  in  key 
macroeconomic indicators such as inflation. I am conscious to the fact that all microfinance 
institutions  are  in  business  and  are  therefore  expected  to  make  profits.  However,  making 
super  profits  at  the  expense  of  the  poor  and  vulnerable  is  regressive  to  economic 
development. There is a need to make financial services more affordable to the majority of 
our  people  as  well  as  small  enterprises  in  order  to  expand  their  operations,  employ  more 
people, and thereby provide an impetus to significantly reduce poverty levels in the country.  
Let me, once again, extend my gratitude to MicroFinance Transparency and the Association 
of  Microfinance  Institutions  of  Zambia  for  inviting  me  to  officiate  at  this  launch  of  the 
Transparent Pricing Initiative in Zambia.  
It is now my honour and privilege to declare the workshop on Transparent Pricing officially 
opened.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
