Jens Weidmann: The crisis as a challenge for the euro area 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the Verband der 
Familienunternehmer (Association of Family Enterprises), Cologne, 13 September 2011. 
 Introduction 
1 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  this  event  in  Cologne.  As  you  may 
know, I spent a number of years studying at the University of Bonn. It was then that I got to 
know  and  appreciate  the  Rhineland  region,  and  I’m  always  very  pleased  to  have  the 
opportunity to return – even though the subject I’m here to discuss this evening is extremely 
challenging. 
More than three years after the onset of the banking crisis, and more than a year after the 
sovereign debt crisis first came to a head in the spring of 2010, the financial markets and 
people across the globe are still scrutinising the situation in the euro area.  
As  political  efforts  are  being  undertaken  to  solve  the  urgent  problems  associated  with  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  and  alleviate  its  symptoms,  there  is  a  danger  of  many  people  losing 
confidence  in  decision-makers,  agreements  and  institutions.  People  in  Germany  –  and 
elsewhere – are worried about their currency. And I take these concerns very seriously. 
However, we must not forget that the Eurosystem can boast some remarkable successes in 
fulfilling its mandate. The euro’s record on internal and external value stability is comparable 
to  that  of  the  Deutsche  Mark.  Along  with  the  single  currency’s  economic  and  political 
significance, we must not forget this fact when discussing the current crisis.  
As President of the Bundesbank and a member of the ECB’s Governing Council, my core 
task  is  to  safeguard  the  euro’s  long-term  stability.  Credibly  fulfilling  this  mandate  not  only 
provides the justification for central bank independence; it also lies at the very heart of public 
confidence in our single currency. 
Maintaining  confidence  in  the  euro  requires,  among  other  steps,  the  construction  of  a 
sustainable bridge between short-term crisis measures and a credible and stability-oriented 
framework  for  monetary  union.  There  needs  to  be  an  institutional  framework  that  offers  a 
clear, coherent outlook and provides incentives for the individual parties to act reliably and 
sustainably. Having this outlook in place will make it easier to allay the short-term difficulties 
and  ease  the  current  tensions.  This  is  the  broad  framework  that  we  need  for  European 
Monetary Union; I would now like to look more closely at the details. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has,  without  question,  been  the  euro’s  biggest  test  to  date.  The 
financial crisis revealed major fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances in some countries. At 
the same time, it unearthed weaknesses in the fundamental framework of monetary union 
and its actual implementation. The fact that almost everyone – including us – underestimated 
the  huge  challenges  created  by  the  increasing  complexity  and  integration  of  the  financial 
markets is sure to have played an important role in these developments. 
First  and  foremost,  extensive  consolidation  and  reform  measures  now  need  to  be 
implemented in the countries that are experiencing difficulties in order to restore confidence 
in the stability of public finances, re-establish competitiveness and ensure a healthy national 
financial  system.  The  first  steps  towards  achieving  this  have  already  been  taken.  In  some 
areas, however, there is a long road ahead. 
In  addition,  comprehensive  changes  must  be  made  to  financial  market  regulation  and 
supervision to make the financial system more resilient. The resolutions expected at the G20 
summit in Cannes will be another important step towards this objective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Moreover – and this is the main focus of my speech here today – the institutional framework 
for  monetary  union  must  be  adjusted  so  as  to  achieve  the  right  balance  between  the 
responsibility  of  individual  countries,  liability  and  monitoring.  My  greatest  concern  is  the 
current  lack  of  a  coherent  outlook  in  this  area.  The  steps  announced,  and  those  already 
taken, have shifted the balance of the framework in a direction that is not sustainable in the 
long term. This threatens to substantially harm the public standing of the euro.  
In principle, I think that there are two economically sustainable approaches to designing a 
stability-oriented monetary union for the future. The first would be a return to the founding 
principles of the system agreed in the treaties, which still essentially applies; this would entail 
having European rules for national fiscal policy, countries retaining their fundamental fiscal 
policy  independence,  applying  the  no  bail-out  principle  and  financial  markets  disciplining 
fiscal  policy.  Despite  all  the  comments  to  the  contrary,  I  still  believe  that  it  is  possible  to 
successfully  stabilise  and  consolidate  this  framework.  The  other  approach  would  be  to 
embark upon a major shift entailing a fundamental change in the federal structure of the EU. 
This  would  involve  a  transfer  of  national  responsibilities,  particularly  for  borrowing  and 
incurring debt, to the EU.  
I believe that political leaders need to take a prompt decision on which of these two routes to 
take.  The  middle  road  of  communitising  liability  whilst  retaining  independent  national  fiscal 
policies threatens to be derailed by its own inconsistency. It would endanger the survival of a 
stability-oriented monetary union, and thus also the European integration achieved thus far.  
2 
Sound public finances as a crucial precondition for a stability-oriented 
monetary union 
The  current  crisis  in  Europe  was  caused  in  no  small  part  by  the  imbalances  in  fiscal  and 
economic  policy  in  some  member  states,  which,  in  combination  with  the  financial  market 
crisis,  triggered  the  current  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  combination  of  a  single  monetary 
policy  and  decentralised  fiscal  and  economic  policies  –  an  issue  which  had  already  been 
central  to  the  debate  when  monetary  union  was  founded  –  thus  proved  to  be  a  flaw  in 
European  Monetary  Union.  The  coordinating  mechanisms  designed  to  address  this 
weakness were clearly inadequate. 
Sound  public  finances  have  always  been  of  paramount  importance  to  the  internal  and 
external  stability  of  a  currency  –  all  the  more  so  in  a  monetary  union  where  national 
governments retain sovereignty over fiscal policy. The incentive for individual member states 
to incur debt is even higher in such a union; if sovereign debt rises in one country, some of 
the  negative  repercussions  are  passed  on  to  the  other  member  states.  The  risks  that  this 
entails were already clearly identified when European Monetary Union was established, and 
that  is  why  rules  for  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  were  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty. 
These rules aim to shield monetary policy from unsound fiscal policy. 
However,  one  factor  was  underestimated  when  monetary  union  was  founded:  the  risk  of 
contagion  means  that  it  is  difficult  for  the  other  member  states  to  deny  assistance  to  the 
country  at  fault  and  thus  force  it  to  bear  more  of  the  costs  and  risks  resulting  from  its 
misguided fiscal policy. This can therefore lead to a conflict between fully applying the no-
bail-out  principle  and  safeguarding  financial  market  stability  in  the  short  term.  Indeed,  the 
more successful a monetary union, ie the more integrated its real economies and financial 
markets, the greater the possible contagion effects.  
The existing legal framework for monetary union 
3 
The founders of monetary union were essentially aware of the importance of sound public 
finances. They therefore imposed a set of rules on the euro area that aimed to prevent these 
kinds of imbalances from emerging where possible and to correct them where necessary. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Because of the temptation I have already outlined for decision-makers to to misuse monetary 
policy  ,  it  was  stipulated  that  monetary  policy  would  be  independent  and  charged  with 
safeguarding price stability in the euro area as a whole. In the euro area’s single monetary 
policy, financing government deficits in the individual member states was prohibited. As well 
as  the  inflation  risks  arising  from  the  overly  expansionary  monetary  policy  that  this  would 
entail, there is another important reason for prohibiting such financing in a monetary union 
where the individual member states retain fiscal policy sovereignty. By supporting individual 
member  states  via  the  central  bank  balance  sheet,  monetary  policy  would  redistribute 
financial burdens between the taxpayers of the different countries. If assistance for individual 
countries is considered essential for exceptional and overriding reasons, such as a threat to 
financial  stability,  it  must  generally  be  provided  through  fiscal  policy,  which  is  the 
responsibility of national governments and parliaments. The most recent ruling by Germany’s 
Federal  Constitutional  Count  was  probably  based  on  this  reasoning.  Monetary  policy  in  a 
monetary union therefore differs crucially from a purely national monetary policy, such as in 
the United States or the United Kingdom, where there is no danger of having to shunt risks 
resulting from unsound public finances between the taxpayers of different countries in order 
to avoid jeopardising financial stability. 
There  is  still  a  large  degree  of  national  fiscal  autonomy  within  European  Monetary  Union. 
The  principle  of  subsidiarity  is  firmly  enshrined  in  the  current  legal  framework  and  the 
national parliaments have the last word in fiscal and budgetary policy decisions. This is true 
of  revenue  and  expenditure  and,  in  particular,  borrowing.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the 
Stability and Growth Pact were designed to impose effective limits on government borrowing 
by restricting sovereign debt to non-critical levels and avoiding lasting deficits. However, the 
public often have little awareness of these fiscal rules beyond the two threshold figures of 
3% for  the  annual  deficit  and  60%  for  the  debt  level  (both  in  relation  to  gross  domestic 
product). In fact, the rules are more comprehensive than this – including, for example, the 
objective of achieving a close-to-balance budget in the medium term.  
The run-up to the crisis 
4 
Despite  the  existence  of  this  framework  and  the  substantial  successes  achieved  in 
consolidating  public  finances  in  the  convergence  phase  before  the  euro  was  introduced, 
sovereign debt was not effectively contained in the subsequent phase – quite the opposite, in 
fact. Looking at the run-up to the crisis reveals, above all, a lack of political will to implement 
the  rules,  which  were  circumvented  or  even  actively  bent  if  there  was  no  other  way  of 
avoiding sanctions. 
One major back door for getting around the rules was the fact that a majority vote among all 
member states was required at key points in the excessive deficit procedure in order for it to 
progress.  Otmar  Issing  described  this  scenario  rather  colourfully  as  “sinners  sitting  in 
judgement  over  fellow  sinners”,  and  it  does  indeed  encourage  strategic  voting.  In  many 
cases,  the  member  states  consequently  failed  to  achieve  the  fundamental  budgetary 
objectives  and  pre-crisis  borrowing  was  far  higher  than  it  would  have  been  had  the  rules 
been applied consistently. Another aggravating factor was the weakness of the Commission, 
as the guardian of the treaties, in its confrontations with the member states. 
In some countries, a number of failures – many of which can be summarised as “a loss of 
competitiveness”, “asset price bubbles” and “excessive lending” – played a crucial role in the 
run-up  to  the  crisis.  It  would  take  too  long  for  me  to  discuss  these  issues  in  detail  in  this 
speech. However, we should remember that initially neither the national decision-makers, nor 
the  European  bodies,  nor  the  financial  market  participants  appear  to  have  recognised  the 
extent  of  these  escalating  problems.  The  preventative  mechanisms  and  risk  provisioning 
were insufficient. When these imbalances were corrected, this placed substantial additional 
pressure  on  some  countries’  government  budgets  and  financial  systems.  We  must  draw 
lessons for the future from these experiences, too.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Routes to a sustainable institutional framework for monetary union  
5 
As  a  complement  to  short-term  crisis  measures,  it  is  crucial  to  structure  the  institutional 
framework  for  European  Monetary  Union  so  that  it  is  stable,  inspires  confidence  and 
ultimately lends credibility to short-term crisis management. 
I would now like to look at the two possible routes for achieving this in more detail.  
Strengthening the existing legal framework 
5.1 
The  current  debt  crisis  in  several  euro-area  countries  has  revealed  the  inadequacy  of  the 
existing  procedures  for  preventing  and  resolving  such  crises.  In  response,  numerous 
adjustments  have  since  been  made  to  the  framework  for  monetary  union.  Some  of  these 
adjustments have yet to be specified in detail or approved by national parliaments. They do 
not aim to change the fundamental principles of monetary union. In particular, they expressly 
reaffirm  the  no  bail-out  principle,  thus  making  it  clear  that  individual  member  states  are  to 
bear  responsibility  for  their  fiscal  policy  decisions  and  investors  for  their  investment 
decisions. 
As a short-term crisis measure, the European Financial Stability Facility (or EFSF) and the 
European  Financial  Stability  Mechanism  (or  EFSM)  were  created  in  the  summer  of  2010 
after Greece had been granted bilateral assistance loans. Recent decisions specify that the 
EFSF is to be expanded substantially. Assistance was granted to Ireland and Portugal via 
the EFSF, and it has recently been signalled that Greece may be granted additional aid. 
Another  package  of  reforms  aims  to  prevent  future  crises  by  amending  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact (or SGP), introducing a procedure for preventing and correcting macroeconomic 
imbalances and adopting a Euro Plus Pact (or EPP).  
Furthermore, for emergency situations in which the preventative mechanisms do not suffice, 
a permanent crisis resolution mechanism (called the European Stability Mechanism, or ESM) 
is to be set up to avert dangers to the stability of the euro area as a whole. This mechanism 
is scheduled to replace the EFSF and the EFSM in mid-2013. 
In principle, this was the right decision. It reflects the dimension of increasing financial market 
integration,  which  was  underestimated  by  the  founders  of  monetary  union  and  which  was 
facilitated to a considerable degree by having a single currency. Nonetheless, it is crucial to 
ensure  that  the  specific  design  of  the  support  mechanisms  does  not  discard  key  basic 
principles – such as subsidiarity, independent national responsibility for fiscal policy and the 
no bail-out principle, and thus also the disciplining function of the capital markets – under the 
smokescreen of financial stability. This would risk further increasing the euro-area countries’ 
propensity to incur debt and heightening the pressure on the single monetary policy to adopt 
an accommodative stance. 
I  am  therefore  rather  critical  of  some  elements  of  the  decisions  taken  by  the  euro  area’s 
heads of state and government on 21 July. However, I must emphasise that I do not share 
the all-too common view that the existing framework is unsuitable for a monetary union. I am 
convinced  that  its  founding  principles  remain  appropriate  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary 
union, too. However, certain adjustments undoubtedly need to be made to this framework to 
reflect recent experiences. And I certainly do support many of the announced reforms.  
Before I discuss the specific points on which I take a critical view, I would like to outline the 
core  elements  that  a  strengthened  framework  would  need.  Specifically,  I  believe  that  we 
need to give renewed force to the no bail-out principle, which is still enshrined in the relevant 
treaties,  and  to  the  disciplining  of  national  fiscal  policies  via  the  capital  markets  that  this 
principle entails. There are four key elements in this context: 
1. 
Prevention:  The  planned  strengthening  of  preventative  procedures  is  key  to 
ensuring that crisis prevention is more reliable in the future. However, to ensure that 
it  actually  works  and  avoids  the  build-up  of  unsustainable  sovereign  debt,  there 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
needs  to  be  a  much  greater  automatism,  particularly  in  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact,  for  imposing  sanctions  when  the  deficit  and  debt  limits  are  breached.  The 
procedure for preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances and the Euro 
Plus  Pact  (EPP)  can  only  act  as  supplementary  tools  for  avoiding  obvious  and 
serious  imbalances.  In  their  use,  we  should  nevertheless  avoid  attempts  at 
macroeconomic fine-tuning. 
Financial market stability: In addition, further suitable measures should be taken 
in  the  fields  of  financial  market  regulation  and  supervision  to  strengthen  financial 
market  stability,  thus  reducing  the  potential  conflict  between  the  objectives  of 
safeguarding  financial  market  stability  and  ensuring  that  private  creditors  remain 
liable (including in the event of a euro-area country defaulting).  
Crisis  management  mechanism:  There  needs  to  be  a  crisis  management 
mechanism as a last resort for averting financial crises that threaten the existence of 
the euro area. It should contain three key elements: attaching strict economic and 
fiscal  policy  conditions  to  assistance,  ensuring  appropriate  interest  rate  premiums 
and a credible involvement of private investors in the event of a default. 
Having  a  strict  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  adjustment  programme  and,  above  all, 
significant interest rate premiums over the rates paid by countries with high credit 
ratings can maintain the incentive for member states to return to the capital market 
as soon as possible.  
Regarding the disciplining of national fiscal policy through the capital markets, the 
rules for monetary union should be adjusted so that, when a euro-area country looks 
likely to experience difficulties, private creditors cannot rapidly shift their liability to 
the  taxpayers  of  the  countries  providing  assistance.  The  introduction  of  collective 
action clauses (CACs) alone, scheduled to start in 2013 within the framework of the 
ESM,  is  highly  unlikely  to  be  sufficient  to  achieve  this  objective.  The  approach  of 
adding  a  trigger  clause  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  bonds  stipulating  that 
maturities  will  be  automatically  extended  for  a  fixed  period  of  time  (such  as  three 
years)  in  the  event  of  the  ESM  granting  assistance  to  the  country  in  question,  as 
proposed by the Bundesbank, should therefore be supported.  
I have already stressed that I am critical of key elements of the recent EU decisions 
concerning  the  design  of  the  crisis  resolution  mechanism.  In  my  view,  they 
undermine some of the key basic requirements for an assistance mechanism in the 
existing legal framework, which is based on countries bearing responsibility for their 
own finances. One serious cause for concern is the fact that the new, looser credit 
conditions considerably reduce the incentives for countries receiving assistance to 
make  fiscal  and  economic  reforms  to  enable  as  rapid  a  return  as  possible  to 
sounder public finances. Adopting these conditions in future assistance programmes 
(or even in the ESM) would perpetuate such problems and encourage countries to 
apply for assistance. 
The planned secondary market purchases would also further weaken the incentives 
for countries to conduct an appropriate fiscal policy. If the bonds of countries that 
are not receiving assistance are purchased on the secondary market, it is unclear 
how 
fulfil  conditions  governing 
consolidation and reforms. It is also unclear how this can be brought into line with 
the requirement of granting assistance only as a measure of last resort to avert a 
risk to the stability of the euro area as a whole.  
These  decisions  mean  that  member  states  with  an  unsound  budgetary  policy  can 
count on receiving assistance, while countries with sound finances will increasingly 
be called on to provide funds. In addition, if the impression arises that the conditions 
attached to the assistance are open to negotiation if targets are missed, there is a 
these  countries  can  be  strictly  obliged 
to 
2. 
3. 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 4. 
danger  that  the  countries  receiving  assistance  will  not  make  sufficient  efforts 
themselves. 
This  inconsistency  can  be  illustrated  through  the  following  example:  How  can  an 
improved  sanction  mechanism  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  prevent  unsound 
national  fiscal  policies  if  sanctions  are  threatened  but,  where  rules  continue  to  be 
breached,  protection  from  the  capital  market  is  ultimately  granted  at  extremely 
favourable  conditions  –  indeed,  far  better  conditions  than  those  for  some  of  the 
countries providing assistance?  
Consistent  implementation:  The  effectiveness  of  any  set  of  rules  hinges  on  its 
implementation  –  if  the  principle  “pacta  sunt  servanda”  ceases  to  apply,  reliable 
economic relationships are no longer possible. Ultimately, it is up to the sovereign 
countries  receiving  assistance  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  fulfil  the  conditions 
attached  to  receiving  assistance.  To  avoid  making  a  mockery  of  national 
responsibility, this framework must also clearly establish that no further assistance 
can be granted if the conditions are not met.  
All in all, I believe that strengthening the existing legal framework essentially remains a viable 
and promising means of stabilising monetary union. However, this framework must ensure 
that conducting a sound fiscal policy is in the best interests of each individual country – even 
more so than before the crisis. And, when taking this route, we must not allow the design of 
the crisis resolution mechanisms to open the door to misguided incentives. 
5.2 
Core elements of a fiscal union with a substantial transfer of competences 
from national to EU level 
The fundamental alternative to strengthening the existing framework would be to undertake a 
major shift to a fiscal union, involving a partial transfer of fiscal policy competences to the EU.  
Establishing  a  European  fiscal  union  would  not  by  any  means  require  a  complete 
centralisation  of  fiscal  policy  (including  policies  governing  revenue  and  expenditure).  In 
particular, the principle of subsidiarity implies that wide-ranging competences should remain 
at  national  level  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  arrangements  reflect  the  preferences  of  the 
individual countries’ citizens as closely as possible. 
In my view, enshrining strict deficit and debt limits for national budgets in EU legislation is 
pivotal  to  achieving  a  stable  fiscal  union  and  reliably  shielding  the  Eurosystem’s  single 
monetary policy from unsound public finances. These limits would then apply to all levels of 
national  government,  including  central,  state  and  local  government  and  the  social  security 
systems; the EU would need to be granted ultimate powers of intervention to ensure that the 
limits are effectively implemented in practice. In a fiscal union, these powers of intervention 
would  have  to  be  extensive  enough  to  ensure  that  national  governments  lose  their 
sovereignty  over  fiscal  policy  when  deficit  and  borrowing  limits  are  breached,  if  not 
beforehand. Consequently, the national parliaments would no longer have ultimate decision-
making authority over government budgets; their decisions would be subject to approval by a 
central body. 
I must emphasise that, contrary to public opinion, such a fiscal union would not necessarily 
have  to  entail  joint  liability.  In  principle,  this  kind  of  centralised  solution  could  function 
successfully  without  joint  liability.  This  would  allow  room  for  somewhat  greater  flexibility  in 
national  borrowing.  Existing  national  deficit  and  debt  limits  could,  in  principle,  be  set  and 
monitored by a democratically legitimised central body, such as the European Parliament. It 
should  then  be  ensured  that  decisions  exclusively  affecting  euro-area  countries  are  only 
taken by representatives of these countries. However, the system for setting deficit and debt 
limits  would  need  to  follow  consistent  rules;  it  would  have  to  be  rule-based,  much  stricter 
than in the existing framework – reflecting recent experience – and should be made difficult 
to  change,  for  example  by  requiring  large  majorities.  Within  the  bounds  of  this  framework, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
national fiscal policy could then essentially remain autonomous and, if permitted by the rules, 
could, for example, allow automatic stabilisers for cyclical smoothing to take effect and take 
out temporary own loans. The EU limits should constitute ceilings; there should, of course, 
be no obligation to fully exhaust them. 
Provided  that  stringent  rules  are  implemented,  this  approach  could  make  a  crucial 
contribution to ensuring sound euro-area public finances in the medium term and overcoming 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  This  kind  of  framework  would  shield  the  Eurosystem’s  single 
monetary policy from unsound fiscal policy.  
As  I  have  said:  introducing  joint  new  borrowing  or  communitising  existing  debt  by  issuing 
Eurobonds, which are currently being so widely discussed, would not be at all necessary in 
this context. However, it would be possible to do so as a second step (but certainly only once 
fiscal  policy  sovereignty  over  deficits  and  debt  had  been  transferred  to  the  EU)  without 
undermining the consistency of the legal framework, although this framework would have to 
be tightened even further.  
At all events, even in a fiscal union, joint liability would raise the incentives for member states 
to incur debt. These incentives would therefore have to be restricted, for example through a 
strict  ban  on  new  borrowing  at  national  and  EU  level.  Otherwise,  I  believe  that  the  fiscal 
union would be a long way from ensuring an adequate balance between liability and control. 
A communitisation of debt would be sure to result in a substantial redistribution from sound to 
unsound  countries.  In  addition,  Eurobonds,  in  and  of  themselves,  would  actually  be  rather 
counterproductive to solving the fundamental problem that led to the outbreak and spread of 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  In  short,  I  believe  that  the  risks  associated  with  Eurobonds  far 
outweigh their potential benefits.  
Alongside reforms to restore competitiveness, such a fiscal union would provide a consistent 
legal  framework.  This  would  be  a  major  step  in  the  process  of  European  integration  –  a 
significant move on the part of the EU, or at least the euro area, in the direction of a federal 
state. However, its implementation would require extensive treaty amendments and probably 
also amendments to national constitutions – doubtless including the German Constitution, as 
the  German  Federal  Constitutional  Court’s  ruling  has  shown.  We  should  be  under  no 
illusions: The route to fiscal union would be long and arduous. Without broad support from 
the people of the euro-area countries, this kind of shift would be almost inconceivable, and it 
is unclear whether this support actually exists. It is vital not to make the mistake of taking the 
steps in the wrong order. 
The increasing misuse of monetary policy 
6 
In  principle,  it  is  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  either  a 
decentralised or a centralised legal framework for monetary union, provided that the chosen 
system  is  adequate.  However,  substantial  problems  are  likely  to  arise  in  future  if  an 
inconsistent  framework  is  enshrined  in  law  or  –  perhaps  even  worse  –  an  inconsistent 
framework  is  not  re-enshrined  in  law  but  is  applied  in  practice  regardless  of  the  legal 
provisions.  
The momentum of the crisis shows a worrying pattern in this respect, particularly from the 
point of view of a central bank. 
 
Insufficient economic and fiscal policy measures in the member states lead to a loss 
of confidence on the markets, which focus on the new weaknesses.  
Sooner or later the situation escalates, the country in question sees its bond yields 
rise and has difficulty accessing the capital market. The interest rate rise is all too 
hastily classified as unsustainable. Crisis meetings are then arranged, at which ad 
hoc  measures  are  adopted  and  calls  are  made  for  monetary  policy  –  which  is 
supposedly the only institution directly able to intervene – to step into the breach to 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
stabilise the situation in the short term. The situation becomes yet more problematic 
if  neither  the  countries  concerned  take  measures  to  remedy  the  situation  nor  the 
countries potentially providing assistance wish to take on risks.  
Monetary policy certainly does have tools that can calm the financial markets in the 
short  term.  However,  taking  such  measures  can  blur  the  boundaries  between  the 
responsibilities  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  and  overstretch  the  mandate  of  an 
independent  central  bank.  In  addition,  they  threaten  to  perceptibly  weaken 
incentives for fiscal policymakers to take action themselves.  
This in particular can subsequently lead to a delayed or inadequate implementation 
of fiscal policy measures, bringing us full circle and triggering a downward spiral in 
which monetary policy is left “holding the baby”.  
  It is certainly true that central banks, too, have to learn lessons from the crisis and rethink 
fundamental  positions.  I  believe  that  one  key  lesson  is,  as  I  have  mentioned  already,  the 
primary  importance  of  efficient  financial  market  regulation  and  supervision  for  an  efficient 
framework for monetary union and, in particular, for a stability-oriented monetary policy and 
its interplay with the financial markets.  
I am also aware that the real world is not black and white and that rules and actions can be 
interpreted differently. Nonetheless, following the Bundesbank’s tradition, I believe that it is 
particularly important for monetary policy to remain true to its principles – all the more so in a 
monetary union. But there is no place for dogmatism. Certain situations not only allow room 
for a certain degree of flexibility, they also require it.  
Financial market stability is, without question, of great importance for monetary policy. Even 
so,  this  fact  must  not  lead  us  to  systematically  overturn  fundamental  commitments  and 
responsibilities.  This  would  cast  doubt  over  the  legitimacy  of  an  independent  monetary 
policy, jeopardise its primary objective – safeguarding price stability – and compromise the 
confidence of the general public in monetary policy, which is of vital importance. 
Central  banks  have  currently  relieved  fiscal  policy  of  part  of  its  burden  of  supporting 
individual  member  states  or  distressed  banks.  However,  this  has  brought  substantial  risks 
onto the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. I firmly believe that these risks must now be reduced 
and on no account increased. It is therefore high time for fiscal policymakers to decide what 
risks they are willing to take on, both in combating the crisis and going forward. That is not 
the responsibility of monetary policy.  
Closing remarks 
7 
Ladies and gentlemen, I mentioned at the beginning of this speech that this is a complex and 
challenging subject.  I  would  like  to thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  discuss  this 
issue in detail here today. 
I believe that the current developments are of vital importance for the future of the euro. The 
democratically  elected  parliaments  must  decide  on  the  future  fundamental  design  of 
European  Monetary  Union.  This  could  mean  maintaining  the  agreed  framework  and 
correcting the incentives so that they are conducive to stability. Alternatively, it could involve 
undertaking a major shift to a fiscal union, including a fundamental transfer of key areas of 
responsibility  from  national  parliaments  to  democratically  legitimised  European  bodies. 
However,  I  believe  that  the  middle  road  embarked  upon  through  some  recent  decisions  is 
leading us in a direction that is not stable in the long term. 
Thank you for your attention.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
