Ravi Menon: Building talent in the financial sector 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Institute of Banking & Finance Annual Conference, Singapore, 22 June 2011. 
 Ms  Kate  Sweetman,  fellow  Council  Members  of  the  IBF,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
morning. 
The financial crisis has triggered a fundamental shift in the global financial landscape. There 
has been much discussion globally on levelling up regulatory standards to meet the risks of 
an  increasingly  complex  and  inter-connected  financial  services  sector.  But  there  has  been 
less  discussion  on  the  competencies  that  need  to  be  levelled  up  in  financial  services  
– competencies in risk management, corporate governance, and financial supervision. Only if 
competency standards are raised, will the ongoing financial regulatory efforts bear fruit. 
Since its inception, the Institute of Banking and Finance (IBF) has been playing a critical role 
in raising the standards of the financial sector in Singapore. Today, this has become more 
relevant than ever. Let me give an update of IBF’s efforts. 
In 2005, IBF launched the Financial Industry Competency Standards (or “FICS”). This is a 
set  of  competency  standards  developed  by  the  industry,  for  the  industry.  It  provides  a 
practice-oriented approach and a clear roadmap for people working in the financial sector to 
attain the competencies they need to do their jobs.  
FICS has taken off quite well. As at end-2010, some 360 training/assessment programmes 
have been accredited under the FICS framework. In total, more than 6,000 individuals have 
been  trained  under  FICS,  with  about  2,600  of  them  assessed.  We  now  have  more  than 
300 individuals certified under FICS.  
Every craft has its master craftsmen. The financial industry is no different. To this end, IBF 
introduced the Distinguished Financial Industry Certified Professional, or FICP.  
The  Distinguished  FICP  represents  the  highest  certification  standard  under  FICS:  it  is 
bestowed on those in the industry who are the epitome of professional stature, integrity, and 
achievement. IBF is proud to have added another 15 senior industry veterans to its cadre of 
Distinguished FICPs in October last year. 
Over the years, we have developed a growing network of FICS-certified professionals. This 
is an invaluable resource: a community of professionals whom we can actively tap upon as 
partners in our learning journey – participating at industry events or in FICS working groups. 
It has been about five years since FICS was introduced. It is now timely for a review of the 
FICS  Standards.  IBF  will  be  working  with  its  group  of  Lead  Providers  to  re-look  the  FICS 
Framework and the Curriculum covered by the current Standards. Please come forward to 
give us your views. 
When we met at last year’s Conference, we had indicated that IBF will study the feasibility of 
introducing “common examinations” for the industry. I am happy to report that IBF has since 
worked  with  the  industry  to  roll  out  the  Corporate  Banking  Common  Examination.  A  new 
Client Advisor Competency Standards (CACS) assessment for the Private Banking industry 
is  also  slated  to  be  introduced  in  September  this  year.  These  two  examinations  will  allow 
Relationship  Managers  –  those  dealing  with  either  corporate  clients  or  high  net-worth 
individuals – to be independently tested on their product knowledge.  
We also want to raise the competency levels of professionals dealing with the broader retail 
investor base. IBF will roll out in the third quarter of this year, new Modules under the MAS-
regulated  Capital  Markets  and  Financial  Advisory  Services  (CMFAS)  Examination.  These 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
new modules aim at raising the minimum competency standards for CMFAS representatives 
who wish to sell “structured products”. 
Despite  these  efforts,  talent  remains  scarce  in  the  industry.  Bankers  I  speak  to  express 
concern about the sufficiency of skilled talent to sustain the growth of the financial industry. 
PwC’s  2011  Global  CEO  Survey  conducted  among  1,200  business  leaders  world-wide 
revealed that talent issues are topmost of CEO concerns. 
Every good CEO knows that it is not just business strategies, processes and technologies 
which  drive  new  revenue  streams.  It  is  people  with  strong  competencies  and  professional 
integrity,  dedicated  to  serving  the  customer,  who  make  the  critical  difference.  Financial 
institutions must put in place policies and practices to ensure that their staff are well trained 
before they are allowed to deal with clients. 
Singapore’s financial sector headcount is expected to grow by 5 to 6 per cent this year. This 
translates  to  at  least  6,000–7,000  new  jobs  for  the  financial  industry  annually.  We  should 
come together to invest in adding to the talent pool here, and avoid unproductive poaching 
from within the industry. MAS and IBF will continue to work with the industry to see how we 
can extend more competency-based skills training to new entrants joining the industry. 
More than any other industry perhaps, the financial industry depends on talent. Identifying, 
nurturing, and developing talent must therefore be the number one priority of every financial 
industry  CEO.  IBF  has  been  organising  these  Annual  Conferences  –  to  bring  together 
industry leaders to deliberate on how we can do better in building talent for the industry. 
Today's  Conference  will  focus  on  leadership  development  –  how  we  can  build  a  robust 
pipeline  of  leaders  in  our  organisations  and  develop  our  talent  base.  I  wish  you  a  fruitful 
session ahead and I look forward to your continuous partnership in our common journey of 
learning and growing in the year ahead. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
