Ravi Menon: Harnessing capital for Asia’s growth 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Deutsche  Bank  Access  Asia  Conference  “Harnessing  Capital  for  Asia’s 
Growth”, Singapore, 25 May 2011. 
 The Asian Century: what can go wrong? 
Mr Rob Rankin, distinguished speakers, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
1. 
According to Deutsche Bank’s forecasts, China’s economy will become the largest 
in the world in 2022. India is projected to become the world’s third largest economy by 2015. 
Pundits  have  dubbed  the  21st century  the  “Asian  Century”,  much  as  the  20th century  has 
been described as the “American Century”, and the 19th century the “British Century”.  
2. 
But Asia’s rise is not a pre-ordained outcome. History has shown that straight-line 
extrapolations of growth do not always hold; more recent history suggests that they are the 
exception rather than the norm.  
3. 
Two  thousand  years  ago,  at  the  height  of  the  Roman  Empire,  Asia  ex  Japan 
accounted for more than half of global GDP, while Western Europe accounted for less than 
10 per cent. The picture was not very different for the next 1500 years or so: Asia ex Japan 
was typically three times larger than Western Europe.  
4. 
Then came the Renaissance and the Industrial Revolution in Europe. By the start of 
the First World War, it was the turn of America and Europe to account for more than half of 
global GDP. Asia less Japan was less than 15 per cent. And as recently as 1970, that share 
was just under 10 per cent. But today, in the space of just 40 years, developing Asia’s share 
of world GDP has nearly tripled to 27 per cent. Projections are that developing Asia will again 
account for half of world GDP by 2050. 
Will it happen? 
5. 
There are many things that can potentially stop the Asian juggernaut. International 
conflicts,  domestic  upheavals,  wrong  economic  policies,  even  climate  change,  have  been 
cited as wild cards that can throw these projections off course. Top of my list is old-fashioned 
misallocation  of  resources.  Asia’s  strength  –  its  high  savings  and  investment  rates  –  can 
become its weakness.  
6. 
The Asian growth story is essentially an investment story, fuelled by high rates of 
domestic savings and relative openness to foreign capital. Gross fixed capital formation in 
emerging Asia during 1980–2000 was about 35 per cent of GDP, compared to 21 per cent in 
Latin America and 25 per cent in Eastern Europe. High rates of investment and high rates of 
economic growth created a virtuous cycle of development in emerging Asia during the last 
40 years, unmatched in history.  
7. 
But  there  are  growing  concerns  whether  this  is  too  much  of  a  good  thing.  The 
investment-to-GDP ratio in developing Asia has gone up further, from 30 per cent in 2000 to 
38 per cent last year. The ratio of gross capital inflows to GDP has doubled over the same 
period,  from  8  per  cent  to  17  per  cent.  These  numbers,  in  themselves,  are  not  cause  for 
concern. Indeed, some would argue that emerging Asia’s investment on a per capita basis is 
not very high. The real question is whether these investments are going into the right places. 
Asia’s periodic bouts of asset market bubbles – especially in real estate – are a case in point. 
Michael Pettis of Beijing University, for instance, warns that Asia’s extraordinarily successful 
development model will eventually run into the constraints of “massive over-investment and 
misallocated capital”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  key  challenge  that  faces  Asia  therefore  boils  down  to  this:  “how  can  Asia 
8. 
harness  its  sizeable  domestic  savings  and  large  inflows  of  foreign  capital  to  realise  its 
economic potential?’  
There are three things emerging Asia needs to do right. 
First, Asia needs to price capital correctly. 
Second, Asia needs to strengthen its infrastructure for allocating capital. 
Third, Asia needs to build up expertise in investing capital.  
Price capital correctly  
9. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  pricing  of  capital.  History  is  replete  with  examples  of  how 
mispricing  capital  leads  to  serious  misallocation  of  resources,  which  in  turn  leads  to 
excessive risk-taking and a build-up of debt that eventually ends in a financial crisis. 
Take Latin America in the 1970s. Global interest rates were low and capital sought 
10. 
higher  returns  in  a  booming  region.  International  creditors  lent  huge  sums  for  industrial 
development.  External  debt  quadrupuled  between  1975  and  1983,  rising  to  50%  of  the 
region’s GDP. But when interest rates soared from 1980 onwards, the payments to service 
this  debt  began  to  cripple  the  economy.  At  the  same  time,  the  projects  these  investments 
went into failed to deliver the expected returns. It all ended in a severe debt crisis that set 
back Latin America by at least a decade. Essentially, a mispricing of capital resulted in cheap 
funding and overinvestment.  
11. 
Developed  economies  are  equally  prone  to  the  risks  of  mispriced  capital.  The 
subprime mortgage crisis, which precipitated the global financial crisis less than three years 
ago, is another example of mispriced capital leading to excessive risk taking and leverage. 
Low interest rates in the US fuelled both a housing and a credit bubble that eventually burst, 
dragging down investors and intermediaries alike. 
12. 
In emerging Asia, today, high levels of domestic savings coupled with large capital 
inflows pose the risk of unproductive investments and asset bubbles. When capital inflows 
slow  down,  as  they  inevitably  must,  the  consequent  unwinding  will  be  rapid  and  possibly 
unpleasant. 
Asian policymakers have been responding to the situation in various ways 
13. 
First, they have allowed the price of capital to rise – either through exchange rates 
or interest rates or both. Second, they have regulated the demand for capital through fiscal 
tools, such as transaction taxes and stamp duties. Third, they have regulated the supply of 
capital  through  administrative  tools,  ranging  from  restrictions  on  bank  lending  to  selective 
capital controls.  
14. 
The most effective way is to price capital correctly. Several Asian economies have 
been raising policy interest rates, though real interest rates still remain rather low. There has 
also  been  a  fair  amount  of  exchange  rate  appreciation.  Since  mid-2009,  most  regional 
currencies have appreciated by about 5 to 6 per cent in real effective terms. Monetary policy 
in  Asia  is  likely  to  remain  tight  in  the  months  ahead.  This  should  help  to  get  the  price  of 
capital right, tame asset price inflation, and reduce the risk of misallocated resources.  
15. 
Indeed, as emerging Asia continues to grow, allowing the exchange rate to steadily 
appreciate over the medium term is vital to ensuring that capital inflows are moderated and 
capital is allocated to productive investments. 
16. 
But interest rates and exchange rates cannot take the burden of adjustment entirely, 
especially  over  the  short  term,  given  the  scale  and  pace  of  capital  inflows.  Therefore, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
macroeconomic  policy  adjustments  have  been  complemented  in  some  Asian  countries  by 
macroprudential measures, like reductions in banks’ loan-to-value ratios and debt-to-income 
ratios. In exceptional cases, resort to capital flow management measures may be necessary 
to bring the situation under control. 
Strengthen infrastructure for allocating capital  
17. 
Next, emerging Asia must strengthen its infrastructure for allocating capital. Banks 
are  still  the  principal  channel  for  allocating  capital  in  Asia,  and  post-Asian  financial  crisis, 
many Asian authorities have taken steps to strengthen their banks. Banking systems were 
cleaned up of their non-performing loans, recapitalised, and strengthened. Capital adequacy 
ratios  were  raised  and  a  more  risk-differentiated  view  was  taken  of  bank  assets.  Risk 
management  systems  were  made  more  robust.  It  was  in  large  part  because  of  these 
changes, that Asia was better able to withstand the global financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. 
18. 
But much work remains to be done in one important area. Developing Asia needs to 
continue to develop its capital markets. The Asian financial crisis was essentially due to a 
double-mismatch in bank financing – currency mismatches and maturity mismatches. This is 
where strong capital markets can play a useful role in allocating capital in a more balanced 
and efficient manner. They also help to deepen financial intermediation, so as to facilitate the 
deployment of the region’s high savings for investment within the region. 
19. 
This  was  why,  nearly  ten  years  ago,  the  ASEAN+3  countries  (namely  the  ten 
nations of ASEAN together with China, Japan and South Korea) introduced the “Asian Bond 
Markets  Initiative  (ABMI)”.  The  ABMI  has  had  a  good  start  –  the  Asian  corporate  bond 
market has grown by more than 2.5 times during 2002 to 2010. But it is still too small relative 
to  the  size  of  Asia’s  investment  needs.  It  needs  to  be  more  liquid  and  diverse.  Access  to 
capital market funding is still mostly restricted to large conglomerates and government-linked 
companies. 
20. 
Emerging  Asia  is  also  under-represented  in  the  equity  universe.  The  region’s 
45 countries  in  the  MSCI  AC  World  Index  account  for  less  than  10  per  cent  of  the  Index 
although their share of world GDP is 19 per cent. 
21. 
We  need  to  make  emerging  Asia’s  capital  markets  deep  enough  to  effectively 
intermediate its considerable savings pool and broad enough to provide a range of suitable 
instruments for risk mitigation.  
22. 
The  crying  investment  need  in  Asia  is  for  infrastructure.  A  report  released  by  the 
Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  estimates  that  the  total  investment  needs  for  national 
infrastructure development in Asia will average close to US$750 billion per year from 2010 to 
2020.  But  private  participation  in  infrastructure  investments  in  Asia  amounted  to  just 
US$15 billion in 2009, less than half the US$39 billion that went into real estate investment. It 
will be a shame if Asia’s considerable savings pool, not to mention the inflows of capital from 
abroad, goes into speculative real estate instead of productive infrastructure investments that 
enhance long-term economic growth. Having well-developed capital markets is a good way 
of ensuring that capital is allocated to productive uses. 
23. 
A promising experiment in developing better mechanisms for allocating capital is the 
World Bank-Singapore Urban Hub. Established in 2009, it brings together Singapore’s public 
agencies,  research  institutes,  and  private  sector  players  to  share  their  experiences  with 
developing  countries,  in  areas  ranging  from  water  and  waste  management,  land  use 
planning,  and  urban  development.  As  a  financial  centre,  Singapore  provides  a  suitable 
platform  for  public-private-partnership  financing  frameworks  to  help  channel  private  capital 
into infrastructure development in Asia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Build expertise for investing capital  
24. 
While  pricing  capital  correctly  and  improving  the  channels  to  distribute  it  more 
efficiently  are  necessary,  they  will  be  insufficient  if  the  human  expertise  to  manage  and 
allocate  the  capital  is  not  well  developed.  Building  a  successful  team  of  financial 
intermediaries hinges on identifying the right talent and building the right competencies.  
25. 
In Singapore, MAS and the industry have worked together to develop the Financial 
Industry Competency Standards (or “FICS”), aimed at enhancing the professionalism of the 
financial sector workforce. The accredited programmes of FICS are readily accessible, with 
funding support of up to 90 per cent of the programme fees. MAS supports relevant training 
programmes under the Financial Training Scheme, which co-funds training costs for training 
courses. 
26. 
Substantial investment has also been made in the area of financial research. The 
work of researchers here helps to increase the body of knowledge and understanding of risks 
unique to Asian markets. Many research institutes have been set up in Singapore to support 
these efforts. 
26. 
Singapore has put much effort into attracting asset managers to bolster the buy-side 
of  the  investment  equation.  As  at  end-2010,  assets  managed  out  of  Singapore  stood  at 
S$1.4 trillion, with a rolling 5-year average growth rate of 16 per cent per annum. The Asia 
Pacific  region  continues  to  be  the  key  investment  destination  for  Singapore-based  asset 
managers, accounting for just over 60 per cent of total assets under management. Private 
equity,  venture  capital,  and  other  alternative  investors  have  found  Singapore  a  conducive 
centre to access regional and international investment opportunities. Such concentrations of 
investment talent and expertise in the major financial centres of Asia augur well for sound 
investment allocation. 
Conclusion 
27. 
Let  me  sum  up.  The  prognosis  for  Asia  is  good.  An  increasingly  educated 
population,  sound  and  prudent  governance,  and  open  markets  set  the  stage  for  Asia  to 
return to its historical role as the centre of gravity in the global economy. 
28. 
But this is not an assured outcome. With high domestic savings and excess liquidity 
flooding the international system, the risk is that capital in Asia could potentially be mispriced 
and misallocated. This can in turn lead to asset bubbles and inflation. But if Asia is vigilant in 
ensuring that capital is priced correctly, that the infrastructure for allocating it is strong, and 
that the human expertise for investing it wisely is built up, Asia will be better placed to realise 
its potential. 
intermediaries,  and 
29. 
policymakers,  can  play  a  useful  role  in  the  effort  to  realise  Asia’s  promise.  I  applaud 
Deutsche Bank for lining up a strong programme of lectures and presentations, examining in 
greater depth the promises and pitfalls of the Asian century.  
30. 
I  wish  you  a  fruitful  time,  not  only  exploring  new  ideas  and  identifying  new 
opportunities at this conference, but also discovering new delights during your stay here in 
Singapore. 
Thank you. 
Conferences 
that  bring 
investors, 
together 
these, 
like 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
