Athanasios Orphanides: Interview with Reuters 
Interview  with  Mr  Athanasios  Orphanides,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Cyprus,  by 
Michele Kambas and Sakari Suonimen, conducted on 19 April 2011. 
 Q. Do you think that there will be any implications for the eurozone from putting US on 
credit watch negative? 
Overall, we should keep in mind that as a result of the crisis over the past three years, in a 
number of countries in the developed world, government debt has increased considerably. 
This is something that has affected a number of countries – including the United States and 
member  states  in  the  euro  area.  Governments  around  the  world  have  recognised  that 
continued increases in debt would be unsustainable and are taking steps to return the fiscal 
path towards sustainability. My interpretation of the decision by Standard and Poor’s is that it 
reflects the ongoing budget discussions in the United States. I have no reason to believe that 
the  United  States’  government  and  Congress  will  not  live  up  to  their  responsibilities,  as  I 
have no reason to believe that euro area governments will not live up to their responsibilities 
and ensure that their fiscal situation is under control. 
Q. How do you see uncertainty and outlook? 
A number of reasons have contributed to increased uncertainty in the past several weeks. 
Let  me  remind  you  of  the  tragic events  in Japan  with  the earthquake and  tsunami  as  one 
example that has elevated uncertainty. Let me also remind you of the political troubles that 
are observed in some countries in the Middle East and North Africa. 
The factors I have noted are factors that have added to the uncertainty for the outlook for 
inflation  and  growth  worldwide  and  in  the  euro  area.  Let  me  also  point  out  the  following. 
Once again, we are observing an increase in food and energy and other commodity prices. 
This is adding to the risk of upward pressures of inflation. At the same time, it is a dampener 
on growth. These are real factors that I believe have raised the uncertainty for the outlook 
both for inflation and for growth. 
Q. How do you see the inflation and growth outlook? 
We constantly monitor developments in the outlook for growth and inflation. Our mandate is 
to maintain price stability over the medium term. We always try to balance the upside and 
downside  risks  of  deviating  from  our  mandate,  so  with  new  developments  we  always 
revaluate the situation. 
The developments since the March projection staff exercise give me reason to believe that 
the  near-term  pressures  on  inflation  are  elevated.  In  the  near-term,  the  risks  are  to  the 
upside. That said, we continue to observe that longer-term inflation expectations remain well 
anchored. I do not think we have evidence of inflation pressures persisting beyond the near 
term. Over the longer term I see price stability being maintained in line with our mandate. 
This hump in inflation is largely due to the food and energy price pick-up that we have seen 
and that has become worse in recent months. However, at the moment, we have no reason 
to believe this would be more persistent. 
The  growth  situation  maybe  a  little  bit  trickier  to  analyse.  The  events  in  Japan  and  the 
continuing events in the Middle East and North Africa could be interpreted as a downside risk 
on  growth.  At  the  same  time,  we  see  continued  evidence  of  rather  robust  growth  in  some 
parts  of  the  euro  area,  so  I  would  not  say  that  the  overall  growth  outlook  has  shifted 
downwards  despite  the  negative  events  I  mentioned  earlier.  The  risks  may  be  to  the 
downside, but my baseline scenario has not shifted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Q. How would you describe the monetary policy stance. Is it appropriate now? 
When it comes to interest rates, I would say that monetary policy is accommodative. In my 
view, it is appropriately accommodative. It is appropriately accommodative in the sense that 
we still have some way to go towards repairing the damage that has been experienced as a 
result of the crisis we have been living through during the past three years. 
Q. Does that mean that you don’t see interest rates going up for, say, over the next 
three months?  
As you know, the Governing Council of the ECB never pre-commits on interest rate policy 
decisions. And personally I believe that it’s not useful to try to forecast the evolution of policy 
rates.  What  is  more  important  is  to  monitor  the  evolution  of  the  real  economy  and  try  to 
continuously  monitor  and  form  an  assessment  of  the  inflation  risks.  If  the  evolution  of  the 
economy over the next few months is such that there are greater upside risks to inflation, I 
believe that would justify removing some of the accommodation that is currently in place. If, 
on  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  more  negative  scenarios  with  respect  to  the  economy 
materialise  and  we  see  inflation  risks  abating,  then  that  would  not  be  the  appropriate 
reaction. 
Q. Could you phase out more non-standard measures soon? 
As the liquidity needs of the banking system become less pressing and as the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy becomes less impaired, there would clearly be less need for 
continuing with the non-standard measures to the same degree. 
Q. How do you see the state of the money markets right now? Are they improving so 
that further phasing out could be warranted? 
Overall, the money market is in a much better condition than it was earlier in the crisis, even 
though I would have to say that we are not anywhere near normal conditions we had before 
the turbulences started in 2007. 
I can envision that as time goes by, it will no longer be necessary to maintain full allotment in 
all operations. 
Q. Should the interest rate corridor be rewidened? 
As  president  Trichet  explained  in  the  press  conference  following  the  April  policy  meeting, 
there were arguments on both sides. We took the decision not to rewiden the interest rate 
corridor  to  its  normal  size  at  the  April  meeting.  However,  going  forward,  I  would  argue  in 
favour  of  normalising  the  width  of  the  corridor  sooner  rather  than  later.  In  my  view,  it  is 
increasingly harder to justify the non-standard width of the corridor as time goes by. 
I  don’t  think  there  is  any  mechanical  link  between  the  decision  as  to  when  to  phase  out 
specific non-standard measures that have been introduced during the crisis. 
Q. On bond buying programme. What is your point of view with Greece, Ireland and 
Portugal being in the hands of the EU and IMF? Does it give rise to the need for the 
ECB to intervene? 
It  is  increasingly  hard  to  justify  the  continuation  of  the  SMP  in  light  of  the  fact  that  it  was 
introduced in order to alleviate some of the dysfunction in the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism in some markets, and I do not think that those conditions hold at the moment to 
the same extent. 
Q.  Do  you  think  it  should  be  stopped  completely  or  just  be  there  in  case  the  need 
arises again? 
The mere presence of the programme, even if no purchases at all are made for a very long 
time,  can  be  a  stabilising  force  in  the  markets  in  case  additional  tensions  appear  on  the 
horizon. That would be an argument for keeping the programme in place while recognising 
that it may not be employed unless unusual circumstances appear. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Q. How would you evaluate the programme. Has it been a success? 
The  programme  has  been  a  success.  One  has  to  ask  what  is  the  counterfactual  for  what 
would have happened in the euro area had the programme not been in place. In the dramatic 
situation  that  we  were  facing  in  May  2010,  the  damage  that  could  have  resulted  from  the 
absence of this programme could have been quite severe. 
Q. Is the transmission mechanism working now? 
Speaking for myself, I have less concern for the transmission of monetary policy today than 
in May 2010 when it was introduced. 
Q.  Could  Portugal  government  bonds  be  extended  similar  treatment  as  Greece  and 
Ireland regarding collateral use in ECB operations? 
Regarding the eligibility of collateral, as a rule we rely on the rating agencies, but in those 
circumstances when we can make an independent evaluation of the country we don’t need to 
rely  on  the  rating  agencies.  This  has  happened  in  the  case  of  Greece,  this  is  what  has 
happened  in  the  case  of  Ireland  and  I  trust  that  if  it  becomes  necessary  to  have  an 
independent evaluation in order to assess the eligibility of collateral of any other sovereign in 
the euro area, then this will be done as well. 
Q. Do you believe Greece can manage without restructuring its debt, and how likely is 
it able to do without one? 
Let me first point out that I am saddened by the fact that this public discussion and market 
speculation  is  taking  place  because  it  is  quite  damaging  to  the  euro  area  overall.  As  you 
know  the  Greek  government  at  the  moment  is  implementing  a  tough  but  appropriate 
programme  of  reform  for  the  Greek  economy.  This  programme  was  evaluated  by  the  IMF 
and the European Commission, in liaison with the ECB. This evaluation has determined that 
the  debt-deficit  dynamics  of  Greece  are  indeed  sustainable,  as  long  as  the  programme  is 
being successfully implemented. 
With  this  in  mind,  I  am  puzzled  by  the  continuing  questioning  of  the  sustainability  of  the 
Greek debt. 
In my mind, restructuring of the Greek debt is not necessary as long as Greece continues to 
implement the programme that is in place. But more importantly, I believe that a restructuring 
of the Greek debt would be unwise. Under the circumstances, restructuring would be quite 
damaging to the Greek economy. In addition I believe it would be quite damaging to the euro 
area overall because of the possibility of contagion effects. 
Since  restructuring  is  both  undesirable  and  unnecessary  I  believe  that  it  is  not  helpful  for 
officials in the EU to keep bringing it up. 
Q. Even though officials continue saying that restructuring is undesirable, this does 
not appear to have convinced the markets. We have seen a spike in borrowing costs in 
past few days. Do you believe that this debate about restructuring can become a self-
fulfilling prophecy? 
In the case of a euro area member state, and Greece is a euro area member state, talk of 
restructuring  cannot  become  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy  in  the  same  sense  that  could  have 
been the case for other countries that are not part of the European Union. The reason for 
that is very simple; in the European Union a member state can count on political support and 
solidarity from other  member states. It would take a political decision against supporting a 
member state in need in order to force a restructuring in the sense you describe. 
So in my view, to the extent the Greek government continues to implement the programme of 
structural reforms that it is implementing right now, and to the extent that it recognises that a 
restructuring would be undesirable and unnecessary, then restructuring can be avoided so 
long as the Greek government enjoys the support of other member states in the European 
Union. Under these circumstances the support from other member states is critical. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Q. Greece is expected to go back to the markets next year. Do you think this could still 
happen or do you think there is a need to extend the programme? 
I think this will be evaluated as time goes by. I have to say that one of the difficulties we are 
experiencing in markets right now reflects the fact that at a political level, in the European 
Union,  we  have  disappointed  market  expectations  by  failing  to  make  sufficient  progress 
towards  strengthening  euro  area  governance  and  towards  putting  in  place  a  robust  crisis 
management framework. It is a price that we unfortunately have to pay for the delay. This 
delay is causing uncertainty in markets and this uncertainty is damaging the euro area. 
Q. If the euro area has not come up with a comprehensive plan to handle the crisis, 
how can it be expected to support Greece? 
As you know, European Union governments are currently offering support to Greece in the 
form  of  loans  subject  to  strict  conditionality  and  I  fully  expect  this  support  will  continue  as 
long as Greece continues to implement the structural reforms that are necessary in order to 
restore  healthy  fiscal  finances.  At  the  same  time  those  reforms  will  promote  growth  in 
Greece, which at the end of the day is necessary in order to alleviate the debt burden.  
Q. There seems to be in the general population less and less appetite for continuation 
of  reforms.  Do  you  see  that  as  a  real  problem  or  will  they  definitely  do  what  is 
necessary to get onto a sustainable path? 
I  expect  the  Greek  government  to  live  up  to  its  responsibility  and  continue  with  the 
implementation of the reform programme. I do observe frustration in the Greek people and 
frankly I believe a lot of this frustration is entirely justified. The Greek public was unprepared 
for the sacrifices that it now has to make because successive Greek governments gave the 
impression  to  the  Greek  citizens  that  they  could  be  living  a  lifestyle  that  they  should  have 
known was beyond the means of the country. Frustration, I think, is entirely justified. At the 
same time I trust that now the situation is clear; there is much better information about the 
necessary adjustment and the Greek people will persevere. 
Q. What can the ECB do to help Greece? Is there anything else to do apart from eased 
collateral requirements for Greek government debt? 
If I may correct you, I would not say that we have eased collateral requirements. What we 
have done is eased the reliance on credit rating agencies for evaluating the collateral for a 
very specific reason. This is because our assessment of the sustainability of the Greek debt 
situation  and  the  path  of  the  Greek  economy  is  different  from  what  is  reflected  in  credit 
ratings. We have made our own assessment in the case of Greece. 
In  terms  of  your  question  on  how  the  ECB  can  help,  as  you  know  the  ECB  is  helping  by 
providing  advice  and  by  being  present  in  the  discussions  that  are  associated  with  the 
programme that involves the IMF and the European Commission in liaison with the ECB. But 
beyond  that,  it  is  not  the  ECB’s  role  to  have  additional  involvement.  What  we  have  in  the 
case of the European Union is additional responsibilities for crisis management, which are 
responsibilities of the governments in the euro area, not the responsibility of the ECB. 
Q. The Irish Central Bank has an emergency liquidity assistance programme. Do you 
think there could be a similar one for Greece or is there actually already one in place? 
I would not comment on emergency liquidity assistance. This is a national responsibility that 
each national central bank in the euro area may apply as is necessary in their own context. 
Q. Cypriot banks hold a sizeable quantity of Greek debt. How damaging or potentially 
damaging could that exposure be? Could  the Central  Bank  have  taken any steps to 
limit banks exposure to a single borrower? 
With respect to the exposure of Cypriot banks to Greek debt, we have examined the situation 
and  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  even  though  there  is  exposure  in  our  banking 
system, that exposure is manageable because our banks are very well capitalized. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So even in the highly unlikely situation, if you wanted to run the counter factual, for example, 
of imposing losses on the holdings of Greek debt, our banks would manage to weather that. 
To understand how well capitalised our banking system is, a comparison may be useful. Our 
banks already meet the stricter capital requirements that are being phased in under Basel III. 
By  contrast,  in  some  other  member  states  in  the  euro  area  there  have  been  explicit 
calculations  about  how  much  additional  capital  would  need  to  be  infused  into  banking 
systems  in  order  to  meet  those  requirements.  This  is  testament  to  the  very  strong  capital 
position of our banking system. 
Regarding steps to limit exposure by any of our banks to any sovereign holdings in the euro 
area, as part of the supervisory process of the Central Bank of Cyprus we demand that all of 
our banks have good risk management systems in place. Of course, we do not control the 
specific decisions on portfolio holdings of banks. Whenever we determine that there is undue 
concentration of risks then we demand that additional capital be held in order to account for 
these risks. This way we manage risks to the system. 
Q.  Do  you  agree  with  an  assessment  recently  made  by  Cypriot  officials  and  the 
finance  minister  to  be  precise,  that  his  hands  are  actually  tied  in  terms  of  future 
ratings  of  the  Republic  if  rating  agencies  continue  to  make  a  linkage  between  the 
economic fortunes of Greece and the economic fortunes of Cyprus, and do you think 
that this linkage is appropriate? 
In my view, all authorities must live up to their responsibilities. What we are experiencing in 
Cyprus  over  the  past  many  months  is  a  very  unfortunate  cycle  of  downgrades  of  the 
sovereign.  In  large  part,  and  according  to  the  analysis  of  the  ratings  agencies,  these 
downgrades  are  due  to  the  fact  that  as  a  country  we  have  not  yet  taken  the  fiscal 
consolidation measures that our government and our parliament agreed were necessary to 
implement last year. It is a very costly delay as it raises the cost of financing of our public 
debt,  it  raises  the  cost  of  financing  by  private  business,  and  it  reduces  employment  and 
growth opportunities. There are things that can be done in order to reverse this. The policies 
that could reverse this deteriorating situation are well known, and they involve shoring up the 
long-term  public  finances  of  the  Republic.  So  I  repeat,  all  authorities  must  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities. 
Q. Would you give me specific examples on how you believe the structural problems 
in the Cypriot economy can be addressed? We hear a lot about fiscal consolidation 
but what exactly should be done? 
I  could  mention  a  couple  of  the  things  that  were  already  agreed  by  our  parliament  and 
government  last  year  which  unfortunately  have  not  been  implemented  as  of  yet,  with  the 
associated  damages  from  the  delay.  The  most  obvious  I  believe,  because  it  has  been 
repeatedly  mentioned,  is  the  sustainability  of  our  pension  system.  Our  government  has 
repeatedly over the past year stated that the current state of our pension system is, I quote, 
“a ticking time bomb which could destroy the Republic.” This is something that can be fixed 
by changing the parameters of the pension system going forward. Everybody recognises that 
these changes need to be made in order to ensure the sustainability of the system and the 
longer  our  country  delays  making  these  changes  the  more  costly  it  will  be  to  solve  the 
problem. This is one example that is recognised. I do not think we have to look very far. In 
my view, it is not the most responsible policy not to defuse what has been recognised as a 
ticking time bomb. 
Q. How worried are you at the unfolding fiscal situation on the island and the inaction 
on the part of the authorities? 
I  am  indeed  worried  about  our  government’s  delay  in  implementing  the  necessary  fiscal 
consolidation measures because, as I mentioned earlier, any further delay raises the cost to 
the  economy.  The  unemployment  rate  is  already  at  historic  highs.  We  do  not  help  the 
economy  generate  additional  growth  and  new  jobs  by  not  correcting  the  fiscal  imbalances 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that  we  face.  The  fiscal  imbalances  push  up  the  cost  of  financing  on  businesses  and 
discourage investment. I am quite worried about this. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
