Andrew Sentance: The challenges of the “New Global Economy” 
Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the 
Bank of England, at the Jersey Chamber of Commerce, St Helier, 25 May 2011. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches. 
 I would like to thank Adrian Chiu for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other 
colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other 
members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
It is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to speak here today at your Annual General 
Meeting  lunch  and  I  am  extremely  grateful  to  Ray  Shead  and  the  Jersey  Chamber  of 
Commerce for inviting me and helping to arrange this visit. For you here in Jersey, this event 
is a first – as I believe it is the first major speech which a member of the Bank of England 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  given  in  Jersey  or  any  of  the  other  Channel  Islands. 
Hopefully I am blazing a trail for my MPC colleagues to follow in the future! For me, however, 
it marks the close of a chapter. This is my last public speech as a member of the Bank of 
England  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC),  as  my  term  in  office  comes  to  an  end  this 
month. 
I have spent just over four and a half years as a member of the MPC and it has been a most 
eventful period to be involved with economic policy-making. My period on the Committee has 
been dominated by the global financial crisis and the major global recession it triggered in 
late 2008 and early 2009. However, the global recession is now behind us, even if we are still 
feeling some if its after-effects. Since the second half of 2009, the world economy has been 
in a recovery phase and the UK and most other European economies have shared in this 
return to growth. Indeed, the growth of the UK economy has tracked very closely the average 
performance of the European Union through the recession and into the early phases of the 
recovery, as Chart 1 shows. And current forecasts point to a continuation of this pattern this 
year and next.  
Chart 1 – UK and EU output growth, 1997–2012 
Percentage change in real GDP 
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
UK (exc. oil and gas) *
EU-27 *
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
*:2011 and 2012 are IMF forecasts. Forecasts for the UK do not exclude 
oil and gas.  
Source: ONS, IMF World Economic Outlook 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In the UK, the rate of growth which we have seen over the early stages of recovery has not 
been  spectacular,  but  that  is  not  unusual  in  the  early  period  of  a  return  to  growth  after  a 
major economic downturn. It is also not surprising that there have been variations in growth 
across  different  sectors  of  the  economy  and  that  confidence  still  remains  fragile  in  the 
business community and among consumers. It is normally only 2–3 years into the recovery 
phase  of  the  economic  cycle  that  perceptions  of  improving  economic  conditions  begin  to 
catch up with the reality of a return to growth. 
This strong correspondence between economic growth in the UK and elsewhere in the EU 
shown in Chart 1 should not be a great surprise. It reflects the close economic links which 
have grown up over the centuries and which have been reinforced by the development of the 
European  Union  and  the  Single  European  Market.  But  this  close  link  between  economic 
growth  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  in  Europe  is  an  example  of  a  much  more  general 
phenomenon. We now live in a highly integrated global economy. And economies which are 
very  open  to  trade  and  investment  –  like  the  United  Kingdom,  and  indeed  Jersey  –  are 
strongly influenced by international economic trends. 
During my time on the MPC, the growth and inflation performance of the UK, and hence our 
monetary  policy  judgements,  have  been  heavily  driven  by  global  developments.  Both  the 
financial crisis and the recession which followed it were global economic events. No major 
economy in the world was unaffected by the financial turbulence and the dramatic downturn 
in world economic activity in late 2008 and early 2009. And on the inflation front, we have 
seen major global forces operating too, with the inflation rate in the UK and other countries 
being significantly affected by large price swings in global energy and commodity markets. 
The global economy is now much more integrated and interdependent than at any time in the 
history of the world. Four main forces have come together in the past two decades to create 
the  “New  Global  Economy”  of  the  21st  Century.  First,  new  technologies  have  had  a  major 
impact,  notably 
technology,  media  and 
communications  networks.  Second,  barriers  to  trade  have  been  reduced,  with  most  of  the 
world’s  nations  now  participating  in  a  liberal  and  open  trading  system.  The  World  Trade 
Organisation now has 153 members, covering 97% of the world’s population. Third, political 
change  has  extended  the  global  market  economy  to  large  parts  of  the  world  which  were 
previously  closed  to  international  trade  and  investment  –  including  China,  India  and  the 
former Soviet Union economies. And fourth, there has been a tide of deregulation of markets 
– including financial markets – in many countries, and as markets have been deregulated, 
they have also been opened up to international competition. 
In  today’s  speech,  I  want  to  highlight  some  of  the  key  features  of  this  highly  integrated 
economic system and discuss some of the challenges it may pose in the future. In particular, 
I  will  discuss  how  the  changing  shape  of  the  world  economy  affects  the  task  of  national 
monetary  authorities,  such  as  the  MPC.  In  other  words,  how  can  economic  policy-makers 
maintain  stability  when  we  are  constantly  in  danger  of  being  buffeted  by  powerful  global 
economic forces? 
the  development  of  global 
information 
The rise of Asia and the changing shape of the world economy 
A key feature of the new global economy we now inhabit is the increasing economic strength 
of the Asia-Pacific region. Chart 2 shows that the top ten economies in this region – led by 
China, Japan and India – have already overtaken both the European Union and the United 
States in their share of world economic activity. This compares with the situation thirty years 
ago when these economies were collectively just half the size of the European economy, and 
about two-thirds the size of the United States. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 2 – The rise of Asia 
Percentage share of world GDP, at current market prices and exchange 
rates 
US
EU-27
Asia-pacific G10 *
1980
1990
2000
2010
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
 *: Includes Australia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, 
Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan Province of China and Thailand. 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook 
 
What has been the basis of the recent economic strength of the Asia-Pacific region and what 
might this suggest about its future development? Economic historians can point to estimates 
of world economic activity before the industrialisation of Europe and the United States which 
suggest that Asia accounted for about half of world GDP in the 18th century.1 So in one sense 
the growing economic strength of Asia might be seen as a restoration of the balance of the 
world  economy  which  existed  before  the  industrial  revolution.  But  a  better  explanation  is 
needed of why this might be happening now and how far it has to run in the decades ahead. 
Japan  has  been  an  industrial  power  since  the  late  19th  century.  But  the  rapid  progress  of 
continental  Asian  economies  in  recent  decades  can  be  seen  as  the  product  of  three 
overlapping phases of development. The foundation was provided by what became known 
as the “East Asian Economic Miracle” – the rapid development of four “tiger economies” – 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Korea and Taiwan – in the 1970s and 1980s. By pursuing export-led 
growth, based on high levels of savings and investment, enhanced levels of education and 
stable  macroeconomic  policies,  these  economies  achieved  strong  productivity  growth  and 
began  to  catch  up  rapidly  with  western  economies  and  Japan,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing sector.2 
The second phase of development occurred when a wider group of economies – with much 
larger populations – began to pursue similar policies. In the 1980s and 1990s, Malaysia and 
Thailand sought to emulate the export-oriented success of the “tiger economies” while China 
and India pursued market-oriented reforms and opened up their economies to international 
trade. After the shock of the Asian crisis in the late 1990s, strong growth continued in the 
2000s with China emerging as a major global economic and industrial power. 
We  are  now  in  a  third  phase  of  rapid  economic  growth  in  Asia  in  which  there  is  more 
emphasis on the growth of domestic demand and self-sustaining growth, particularly in the 
larger economies in the region. With an expanding middle class and rising living standards, 
                                                 
1  See, for example, Maddison (2007). 
2   See World Bank (1993) for a detailed analysis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
domestic consumer demand can provide a much stronger engine of growth. And a number of 
Asian economies – including China – are also investing heavily in public infrastructure. The 
sharp fall-off in export markets in the recent global recession has given added impetus to the 
desire to expand domestic demand and this provided an important platform for the recovery 
of Asian economies from the global recession. 
Chart 3 – Shares of world GDP and population 
2010 figures 
GDP at market prices
Population
Apac 
G10*, 
27%
EU-27, 
7%
US, 5%
Apac 
G10*, 
46%
EU-27, 
26%
US, 
23%
Other, 
24%
Other, 
43%
 *: Apac G10: Asia-Pacific G10, including Australia, China, India, 
Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan Province of 
China and Thailand. 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, World Bank and Eurostat. 
 
The  pattern  of  the  past  thirty  years  has,  therefore,  been  of  a  successful  Asian  model  of 
development  spreading  out  and  encompassing  a  wider  range  of  countries  with  larger 
populations and becoming more self-sustaining. The most likely scenario is that this pattern 
will  continue  over  the  next  20–30  years  as  the  strong  economic  fundamentals  which  have 
supported high rates of growth in recent decades continue to enable productivity levels and 
living standards to catch up with the West. As chart 3 shows, the ten leading economies in 
the Asia-Pacific region are home to nearly half of the world’s population. And yet they still 
account for only just over a quarter of world GDP. This shortfall largely reflects the relatively 
low average living standards in India and China, which together account for over a third of 
the world’s population.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 4 – Long-term economic and demographic projections for 
Asia 
Percentage share of world output and population 
Output
Population
2010
2050
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
 Source: Asian Development Bank  
 
Even if growth slows down somewhat from the very strong rates seen in recent years, the 
economic contribution of the Asia-Pacific region is likely to rise to match its share of world 
population. Chart 4 shows recent projections from the Asian Development Bank which point 
to  the  Asian  share  of  world  output  rising  to  around  50%  by  2050,  much  closer  to  its 
population share. To achieve this will require average GDP growth rates for Asia of 5–6% in 
the  next  twenty  years  and  4–5%  in  the  period  2030–2050.  This  does  not  appear 
unreasonable in the light of the track record of rapid growth in the past two decades and the 
strong economic fundamentals of the leading economies in the region.3 
What might this imply for the economic performance in the rest of the world economy – and 
in particular economies like the UK and Jersey? Fortunately, the economic performance of 
different  regions  and  countries  across  the  world  is  not  a  zero  sum  game.  There  are 
opportunities created by the opening up of new markets as well as competitive challenges to 
established industries. We have already seen quite a bit of economic restructuring in the US 
and Europe – particularly in manufacturing industry – in response to the development of low-
cost competition based in China and other Asian economies. We should expect this process 
of structural change to continue as the leading Asian economies continue their development 
in the decades ahead. The key for economies like the UK, other European economies and 
the United States to prosper and succeed in this new world economic order is to have the 
right supply-side policies which help businesses to remain competitive and adapt to changing 
market  conditions.  To  support  high  living  standards,  western  economies  will  need  to  stay 
ahead of the game by upgrading their levels of education of skills and maintaining a business 
climate which is conducive to enterprise and innovation. Flexible labour markets are also a 
key  ingredient  in  ensuring  that  a  high  level  of  employment  can  be  sustained  against  the 
background of structural change and increasing global competition. 
                                                 
3  See Asian Development Bank (2011). Note that the ADB analysis covers a much wider group of economies 
than Charts 2 and 3, which boosts the share of world population to over 50%. Llewellyn and Santovetti (2010) 
also provide a similar analysis of future economic prospects in Asia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 Pressure on energy and commodity markets 
There  are  two  other  wider  challenges  raised  by  the  changes  we  have  seen  in  the  global 
economy in recent decades. The first is the pressure that strong growth in Asia and other 
rapidly growing emerging market economies is placing on the markets for energy and other 
natural resources. We have already seen this pressure reflected in a strong upward move in 
global energy and commodity prices since the early 2000s, as Chart 5 shows. After a brief 
respite during the financial crisis, this upward pressure on energy and commodity prices has 
resumed  as  the  world  economy  has  bounced  back  from  recession.  The  oil  price  is  back 
above $100/barrel, and while there has been a modest correction in commodity prices over 
the past month, this seems likely to be a short-term pause in the upward trend rather than a 
fundamental readjustment. 
Chart 5 – Real oil and commodity prices since 1980 
Deflated by US consumer price index; 2000=100 
S&P GSCI Agriculture and Livestock index
S&P GSCI Industrial Metals index
Brent crude spot price
1985
1980
. Source: IMF and Thompson Datastream 
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
 
It is no coincidence that this upward pressure began to emerge in the early 2000s and has 
continued for the best part of a decade now. The rapid growth we have seen in  Asia and 
other  emerging  market  and  developing  economies  has  been  very  resource-hungry.  The 
effects of this can be seen in the pattern of global energy consumption, shown in Chart 6. 
Until  the  early  2000s,  energy  consumption  in  the  advanced  OECD  economies  and  in  the 
non-OECD  developing  and  emerging  market  economies  rose  at  a  similar  rate,  with  the 
OECD economies accounting for the majority of demand. In the wake of the strong growth in 
the 2000s, this position has been reversed with the non-OECD now the dominant contributor 
to  world  energy  demand.  For  example,  China’s  share  of  global  oil  consumption  has  risen 
from 6% to 11% in the past decade alone.4  
                                                 
4 
International Monetary Fund (2011) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6 – Global primary energy consumption 
Million tonnes oil equivalent 
OECD
Non-OECD
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
6500
6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
 Source: BP Statistical Review 2010 
 
This  pattern  of  upward  pressure  on  energy  and  commodity  prices  has  been  particularly 
noticeable  since  the  mid-2000s  and  it  has  had  a  significant  influence  on  inflation  in  many 
countries  – particularly  affecting  the  prices  of  goods.  The  so-called  “China  effect”,  through 
which  the  shift  of  production  to  low  cost  countries  held  down  the  prices  of  global 
manufactures and traded goods in the late 1990s and the first half of the 2000s, has given 
way  to  a  period  of  higher  global  inflation,  driven  by  rising  energy  and  commodity  prices. 
Chart 7 shows how this has affected the rate of inflation in goods prices in the UK, which has 
picked  up  significantly  in  recent  years  –  whether  measured  in  terms  of  manufactured 
products at the factory gate or the goods which enter into the consumer basket. 
Chart 7 – UK goods price inflation 
Annual percentage change in prices 
Manufactured goods producer prices
CPI goods inflation
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
 Source: ONS 
 
One of the key challenges facing the MPC and other monetary authorities around the world 
is judging how far this  surge in energy and commodity prices has yet to run and how far-
reaching its consequences might be. The tendency so far in many countries, including the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
UK, has been to treat this phenomenon as a series of one-off shocks. But the driving force 
behind it – strong growth in Asia and other emerging market economies – is proving quite 
persistent – as Chart 8 shows.  
Chart 8 – Emerging market growth remains strong 
Annual percentage growth rates of real GDP 
Advanced Economies *
Emerging & Developing 
Economies *
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
 *: 2011 and 2012 growth rates are IMF forecasts. 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook 
 
This  raises  the  possibility  that  some  key  commodity  markets,  including  the  market  for  oil, 
could be in a structural position of scarcity for some time yet, leading to further significant 
upward  price  movements.  For  example,  in  its  recent  World  Economic  Outlook,  the  IMF 
published an analysis suggesting that current trends in the oil market – with supply unable to 
keep up with strong demand – could lead to a further 200% rise in oil prices from current 
levels over the next 20 years.5 Of course, there is great uncertainty around such predictions. 
But my judgement would be that this IMF analysis is likely to be directionally correct, even if 
we can’t be precise about the exact timing and scale of upward price movements. 
This  upward  shift  in  energy  and  commodity  prices  cannot  carry  on  indefinitely,  of  course. 
Eventually, rising prices should choke off demand – both by encouraging more efficient use 
of  resources  and  possibly  by  squeezing  growth  in  consuming  countries.  Over  a  period  of 
time, high prices may also encourage investment in new sources of supply. But while we are 
in  this  phase  of  strong  energy  and  commodity  price  growth,  there  is  also  the  risk  that  the 
inflationary trend could become embedded in the rate of increase of wages and prices more 
generally. That is a risk that cannot be dismissed lightly, given the experience of the 1970s 
when this did indeed happen.  
Managing global volatility 
Before  discussing  how  monetary  authorities  should  respond  to  this  risk,  I  would  like  to 
highlight one other key feature of the modern global economy – which is the way in which the 
linkages and dependencies between different economies around the world have increased. 
The international trading system has supported the development of integrated global supply 
chains in many industries, with the power to transmit shocks to demand and business activity 
                                                 
5 
International Monetary Fund (2011) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
very rapidly around the world. The financial system has also become a powerful mechanism 
for transmitting shocks and disturbances. And global media, communications networks and 
the internet result in the rapid transfer of news and information around the world. 
The  financial  crisis  and  the  recession  which  followed  demonstrated  very  vividly  the  power 
and speed of these mechanisms to transmit economic volatility rapidly across borders and 
around  the  world.  And  the  conclusion  I  would  draw  is  that  these  interdependencies  and 
linkages  have  greatly  increased  the  potential  for  global  economic  shocks  and  volatility  of 
various  different  kinds.  In  an  ideal  world,  we  would  develop  stronger  international 
mechanisms for dealing with these potential sources of economic fluctuations. And there has 
been  a  renewed  emphasis  on  various  forms  of  economic  co-operation  in  recent  years, 
including  the  development  of  the  G20.  But  the  difficulties  of  establishing  and  operating 
frameworks for international co-operation mean that policy frameworks for managing global 
economic volatility are likely to remain inadequate and imperfect for some time to come. As a 
result, economies which are very open to international trade and business like the UK are 
likely to have to live with more economic volatility than we would ideally like.6  
Implications for monetary policy 
So, let me sum up my analysis so far. I have identified three potential challenges arising from 
the “New Global Economy” which is shaping the world of modern business and having such 
a powerful influence on open international economies like the UK and Jersey. The first is a 
shift in the centre of economic gravity in the world economy towards Asia – which is likely to 
become  the  dominant  region  in  the  world  economy  in  the  first  half  of  this  century.  That 
creates market opportunities for other economies as well as competitive threats, and is likely 
to result in further structural change as businesses adjust to changing patterns of demand 
and  supply.  Supply-side  policies  –  focussing  on  skills,  enterprise  and  innovation  –  are  the 
key to maintaining growth and employment in the face of these structural adjustments. The 
two other challenges I have identified – a prolonged period of upward pressure on energy 
and  commodity  prices  climate  and  an  increase  in  global  economic  volatility  more  
generally – have more significant implications for monetary policy in an open internationally 
focussed economy like the UK. So how should monetary policy respond? 
                                                 
6  See Sentance (2009a) and Sentance (2009b) for a more detailed discussion. Hume and Sentance (2009) also 
provide an analysis of how global economic trends fostered the global credit boom of the mid-2000s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 9 – UK output and inflation since 1997 
Annual percentage change in real GDP and consumer prices 
GDP growth
CPI inflation
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
 Source: ONS 
 
One reaction to my analysis could be that we have to accept a lot more volatility in growth 
and inflation, and simply grin and bear it. To some extent this will be true if the global shocks 
are big enough and very sudden, as we discovered in late 2008 and early 2009 when we felt 
the full force of the global financial crisis. But even in these circumstances, monetary policy 
played  an  important  role  in  stabilising  the  economy  and  heading  off  a  downward  spiral  in 
demand  and  the  associated  deflationary  threat.  In  the  decade  before  the  recent  global 
turbulence, there were also significant fluctuations in the international climate, including the 
impact of the Asian Crisis, the “dotcom” boom and bust in the US, and global geo-political 
turbulence  in  the  early  2000s.  In  response  to  these  fluctuations,  the  MPC  did  respond  by 
adjusting monetary policy and succeeded in keeping UK growth steady and inflation low and 
stable,  as  Chart  9  shows,  albeit  in  a  more  benign  global  environment  than  we  have  seen 
recently. 
Chart 10 – Monetary policy, the global economy and inflation 
Cost of imports
Impact of monetary policy
Exchange rate
Global economy
Demand
Domestic demand
UK inflation
Pricing climate
Expectations and 
credibility
 
In  the  future,  we  may  not  be  able  to  achieve  the  high  degree  of  stability  for  growth  and 
inflation that we saw in the MPC’s first decade. But our experience also suggests that we are 
not  powerless  to  act  in  the  face  of  significant  global  economic  changes  either.  Chart  10 
illustrates the main channels through which monetary policy can stabilise an open economy 
like  the  UK  in  the  face  of  fluctuations  in  global  demand  or  prices.  The  stabilising  role  of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary  policy  operates  through  three  main  channels  –  the  exchange  rate,  demand 
conditions  and  by  influencing  inflation  expectations  and  enhancing  the  credibility  of  the 
monetary framework. And even though monetary policy will affect the growth of the economy 
in  the  short-term,  the  overall  objective  for  UK  monetary  policy  is  and  should  remain  price 
stability. That is because stable prices provide the best climate for growth, investment and 
business success in the longer term. 
The  price  stability  objective  provides  the  ultimate  benchmark  to  guide  how  policy  should 
respond to changes in the economic climate. So it is not right to argue, as some people have 
done recently, that because inflationary risks and pressures arise from the global economy 
they should be ignored by the monetary authorities.7 In the UK and in many other countries, 
monetary  policy  responds  to  global  shocks  and  influences  all  the  time.  Nor  is  it  correct  to 
argue  that  inflation  generated  by  import  prices  is  outside  the  control  of  monetary  policy. 
Monetary  policy  affects  the  exchange  rate  –  which  in  turn  can  offset  or  reinforce  our 
exposure to rising import prices. And the demand climate and the price expectations of firms 
can affect how much of this imported inflation comes through to the consumer. Yet in the UK, 
monetary policy has not only accommodated a large part of the recent surge in energy and 
commodity prices but also allowed a very significant sustained fall in the value of the pound, 
which  has  aggravated  the  rise  in  UK  relative  inflation  relative  to  our  peer  group  of  other 
European economies.8 
Rather  than  dismissing  the  impact  of  global  influences  on  domestic  inflation,  monetary 
authorities need to assess how far they pose a threat to price stability – either in the direction 
of  persistent  inflation  or persistent  deflation.  In  the  UK,  we  took  the  view  in  late  2008  and 
2009 that the threat of deflation was the biggest risk in the wake of the global financial crisis, 
and cut interest rates to historically low levels, supported by direct injections of money into 
the  economy  through  the  policy  of  Quantitative  Easing.  But  the  world  inflation  climate  has 
become  much  more  inflationary  now,  both  through  the  direct  effect  of  rising  energy  and 
commodity  prices  and  through  a  turnaround  in  global  demand.  While  the  global  demand 
environment  remains  buoyant,  we  should  not  regard  energy  and  commodity  price 
movements as one-off shocks, as the inflationary pressure from the world economy may well 
persist  for  quite  a  while.  And  persistent  above-target  inflation  carries  other  risks  for  price 
stability in the UK – to the credibility of our policy framework and to expectations of future 
inflation.  Indeed,  Chart  11  shows  that  UK  services  sector  inflation  has  been  running  at 
around  4%  for  much  of  the  past  decade,  and  has  not  shifted  downwards  to  offset  rising 
goods prices. This raises the possibility that in the services sector, high inflation expectations 
have already become engrained. 
                                                 
7  Kemp (2011) argues that if all monetary authorities treat energy and commodity price shocks as exogenous, 
there is a strong risk of an inflationary bias to global monetary policy. 
8  As I have pointed out in an earlier speech (Sentance, 2011), UK inflation has persistently run ahead of the 
euro area, Sweden and Switzerland since the financial crisis, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Chart 11 – UK goods and services inflation 
Annual percentage change in consumer prices 
Goods inflation
Services inflation
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
 Source: ONS 
 
For these reasons, I have been arguing for the past year that the MPC should embark on a 
policy  of  gradual  interest  rate  rises  and  that  delaying  this  process  exposes  us  to  greater 
inflationary risks in the future – which would not be good for economic growth in the medium 
term.  Continuing  to  accommodate  inflation  makes  it  more  likely  that  a  future  sharp  policy 
correction will be needed, particularly if persistent high inflation becomes embedded in wage 
and price-setting. That not only poses a threat to the recovery further down the track, but it 
could erode the hard-earned credibility of the UK monetary policy framework – which would 
be very damaging for economic growth over the longer-term. 
Here in Jersey you are in a monetary union with the UK. So you too have a strong interest in 
the MPC getting its policy judgements broadly correct. Though I am leaving the MPC at the 
end of this month, I do not think the issues I have raised today in this speech will go away 
with my departure. Global economic issues will continue to have a major economic impact on 
growth and inflation performance in the UK and here in Jersey – as many of you will know 
from your own business experience.  
I hope I have shed some light today on some of the important changes in the global economy 
and how they affect the conduct of UK monetary policy. Despite the turbulence we are likely 
to  continue  to  experience  in  the  global  economy,  I  trust  you  will  be  able  to  steer  your 
businesses successfully through it. And as I come to the end of my shift at the helm of the 
UK economy, I hope that my colleagues on the MPC will not allow the UK economy to be 
blown too far off course by global inflationary winds before taking the necessary corrective 
monetary policy action, which is long overdue. 
References 
Asian Development Bank (2001). Asia 2050: Realising the Asian Century, May 2011 
Hume,  M.  and  Sentance,  A.  (2009).  “The  Global  Credit  Boom:  Challenges 
for 
macroeconomics and policy”, Journal for International Money and Finance, Volume 28, Issue 
8, Pages 1426–1461 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2011).  “Oil  scarcity,  Growth,  and  Global  Imbalances”,  World 
Economic Outlook April 2011, Chapter 3 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Kemp,  J.  (2011).  “Globalisation,  commodities  and  inflation”,  http://www.commodities-
now.com/reports/general/4653-globalisation-commodities-and-inflation.html 
Llewellyn,  J.,  and  Santovetti,  L.  (2010).  “The  Ascent  of  Asia”,  Nomura  Global  Economics 
Report, February 2010 
Maddison,  A  (2007).  Contours  of  the  World  Economy,1–2030  AD:  Essays  in  Macro-
Economic History, Oxford University Press 
Sentance,  A.  (2009a).  “Monetary  Policy  in  Turbulent  Times”,  speech  to  Agricultural 
Engineers’ Association Annual Conference, April 2009 
Sentance, A. (2009b). “Energy and Environmental Challenges in the New Global Economy”, 
speech  to  British  Institute  of  Energy  Economics  Sustainable  Energy  Seminar,  September 
2009 
Sentance,  A.  (2011).  “Key  issues  for  UK  Monetary  Policy”,  speech  at  pro.manchester 
members’ lunch, April 2011 
World  Bank  (1993).  “The  East  Asian  Miracle:  Economic  Growth  and  Public  Policy”,  World 
Bank Policy Research Report 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
