Andreas Dombret: Financial stability – challenges facing the public 
banking sector 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 9th Handelsblatt Jahrestagung, Berlin, 2 February 2011. 
 Introduction  
1. 
I  was  glad  to  accept  your  invitation  to  speak  to  you  today  about  “Financial  stability  – 
challenges facing the public banking sector”. This is certainly not a new subject. In fact, it is 
at least as old as the financial crisis itself. As early as in the summer of 2007, it was public 
sector institutions – not just public sector institutions, but they, too – or, more precisely, some 
Landesbanken that were at the centre of the financial crisis in Germany. In several cases, 
structural  problems  had  accumulated  in  this  area  even  before  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis. 
These problems then began to put financial stability at risk.  
There are two main reasons why this subject is still of current relevance.  
– 
First,  the  financial  crisis  has  by  no  means  been  overcome  more  than  three  years 
after its broke out. Although a number of positive trends can be identified overall, the 
financial system is still being set back by a whole host of factors, some of which are 
interrelated.  
Second, there is still a need for financial intermediaries to adjust. In Germany, that 
goes not least for the Landesbanken.  
 If I now deal in my following remarks with the Landesbanken, that is certainly not because I 
want  to  become  involved  in  a  discussion  about  ownership.  I  am  concerned  with  financial 
stability,  not  with  ownership  structures.  I  will  be  focusing  in  my  speech  on  the 
Landesbanken and not, say, on the savings banks. This is because, from a financial stability 
perspective, the problems of the public banking sector lie, first and foremost, with some of 
the  Landesbanken  and  their  business  models  and  not  with  the  savings  banks.  And  the 
Landesbanken belong to the category of large German banks. They clearly play a major role.  
Please  permit  me  to  make  one  further  preliminary  remark.  A  business  model  is  a  very 
specific  matter  for  each  enterprise.  It  embodies  the  enterprise’s  self-image,  its  corporate 
identity,  its  corporate  tradition  –  and,  for  that  very  reason,  it  is  sometimes  so  difficult  to 
change. In the best case, a business model can even represent something like the building 
block  of  a  “community  of  values”.  Seen  in  that  light,  the  Landesbanken  sector  consists  of 
eight individual cases with eight very different traditions and sets of underlying data which 
allow only qualified cross-comparisons to be made.  
Resilience in the German banking sector  
2. 
The  Bundesbank  is  well  aware  of  the  existing  diversity  among  credit  institutions.  It  is  not 
without  good  reason  that  one  main  chapter  of  our  recent  Stability  Review  was  entitled 
Increases and differences in resilience in the German financial system. That is one of the key 
messages of our Stability Review.  
This means, first of all, that resilience improved overall last year. With regard to the one pillar 
of resilience – the capital side – capitalisation increased on an average of the large banks. 
On the other hand, there appears a notable gap among the large institutions. And this “two-
class  society”  can  also be  found  within  the category  of  Landesbanken.  As  a  category,  the 
Landesbanken  display  lower  tier  1  capital  ratios  than  the  other  large  banks.  In  the  third 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
quarter of 2010, the aggregate figure was 10.8%, compared with 11.5% in the case of the 
other large German banks.  
Among Landesbanken, the longstanding trend decline in risk-weighted assets continued last 
year,  which  means  they  were  de-risking.  But  not  only  that:  they  continued  to  reduce  their 
total assets – unlike the other large banks, whose total assets increased.  
These differences are primarily the result of EU state aid control procedures, which aim for 
the restructuring of government-supported banks.  
Now, I am aware that, in weighing up the objectives of financial stability and a level playing 
field, the European Commission – as Guardian of the Treaties – will tend to emphasise the 
latter.  In  acute  phases  of  stress,  this  can  lead  to  decisions  that  are  not  always  entirely 
fortunate.  In  a  fragile  environment,  care  has  to  be  exercised  not  to  take  rash  action  that 
would, in fact, trigger stress. However correct and necessary they are in terms of ensuring a 
level playing field for competition, the decisions to be taken therefore have to be examined in 
terms of their systemic relevance in order to prevent an overreaction. At all events, a system 
change requires sufficient time for the necessary coordination.  
On  the  other  hand,  I  ask  myself  where  we  would  be  today  in  terms  of  the  necessary 
consolidation without the Commission’s requirements. Are these requirements not ultimately 
in  the  best  long-term  interests  of  financial  stability?  After  all,  their  aim  is  that  the 
Landesbanken  refocus  on  the  core  business.  Total  assets  are  to  be  reduced  overall,  risk-
weighted assets are to be scaled back and certain participating interests as well as non-core 
activities  are  to  be  sold.  To  that  extent,  current  developments  reflect  progress  in 
consolidation,  which  is  most  readily  apparent  where  the  European  Commission  has  made 
government rescues subject to requirements as part of the EU state aid procedures. Other 
adjustments are still outstanding. As we see it, the parts that are sustainable finally have to 
be put together so as to create enduringly viable institutions. We must be able to perceive 
whatever holds the future Landesbanken world together in its inmost folds.  
The  fact  that  some  institutions  did  not  seize  the  opportunity  to  apply  for  additional  capital 
from Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) by the end of last year in order to equip 
themselves  for  restructuring  is  regrettable  given  the  necessary  adjustments  to  the  new 
capital requirements and is, unfortunately, a continuation of the tradition of deferring or failing 
to implement adjustments that are needed. Since the beginning of this year, Federal funds 
have  generally  been  available  only  from  the  Restructuring  Fund  under  the  conditions 
imposed by the restructuring administration. Such a regime would certainly not be a “walk in 
the park” for those concerned. The Restructuring Act (Restrukturierungsgesetz) nevertheless 
provides the opportunity to protect the systemic parts of an institution without escalating the 
“too big to fail” problem. It helps to prevent contagion and, at the same time, strengthens the 
responsibility  of  the  owners  and/or  supporting  organisations.  Both  aspects  are  of  crucial 
importance for financial stability.  
With regard to the second pillar of resilience – profitability – the banking sector as a whole 
can be divided into “winners” and “losers”. Overall, commission business at the big German 
banks has benefited from a growing demand for banking services, but even here there are 
differences.  Those  banks  whose  room  for  manoeuvre  was  limited  by  balance  sheet 
shrinkage and restructuring saw a fall in their net commission income, one reason being that 
higher commission had to be paid for guarantees provided.  
Interest  business  as  a  whole  has  been  a  major  pillar  of  income  since  the  outbreak  of  the 
financial  crisis.  Lower  short-term  interest  rates  have  helped  in  this  respect.  In  the  case  of 
Landesbanken, it supported net interest income in the third quarter of last year.  
With regard to the trading results, particular attention should be paid to how many risks have 
been  taken  to  achieve  a  given  result.  For  the  large  German  banks,  the  ratio  of  returns 
achieved and risks assumed has improved enormously since the dramatic trading losses in 
2008. As a result, the average risk-adjusted trading results stabilised again at a normal level 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
last year. In contrast to the years before the outbreak of the crisis, this positive development 
is not the outcome of additional risk-taking. Rather, the “model banks” that are active in the 
market – in other words, banks that use a model approved by the supervisors – benefited 
from a sharp rise in their trading volume, albeit with marked institution-specific differences.  
Rather than looking at a current “snapshot”, the longer-term averages and comparing them 
with other institutions can tell us more about business models, risk preferences and trading 
strategies.  And  here,  too,  I  cannot  fail  to  note  that  the  risk-adjusted  trading  results  of  the 
Landesbanken sector are structurally – that is on a longer-term average – well below those 
of the other “model banks”. The Landesbanken sector therefore has to take more risks than 
other “model banks” to generate the same income.  
Consequently,  the  Landesbanken  sector  has,  for  years,  been  less  profitable  than  other 
banks. Now, that would probably be acceptable if the returns, in exchange, were less volatile. 
But that is not the case. In a study, the International Monetary Fund noted, for example, that 
“taken  together  the  Landesbanken  do  not  appear  to  have  substantially  lower  volatility  of 
ROEs than  other banks …  ”. The control group for this study consisted of the 100 largest 
European  credit  institutions.  In  other  words,  taxpayers  have  been  investing  their money  in 
the Landesbanken sector neither very profitably nor very securely.  
Crisis-prone business model  
3. 
As I have already intimated, what this ultimately reveals is that the business operations and 
self-image  –  and  therefore  the  business  model  –  of  some Landesbanken  have  changed  a 
great  deal  over  the  past  decades.  They  have  moved  far  away  from  their  original  task  of 
promoting  state  development  as  federal  state-owned  institutions  and  taking  on  important 
services  for  the  savings  banks  as  regional  giro  institutions.  For  some  time  now,  network 
business with the savings banks has accounted for only a small part of their income.  
By taking some Landesbanken as examples, it is possible – as in event studies – to follow 
the  way  in  which  business  model  and  financial  stability  interact.  The  first  “event”  was  the 
abolition of state guarantees and institutional liability. How did some Landesbanken respond 
to this with their business models?  
In the second stage of the event study, the changed business models are then confronted 
with the external shock of the financial crisis. How have the new business models coped with 
the test? Where did the limitations become evident?  
As is often the case in life, strategic errors are made less in times of crisis than in periods 
when  things  are  still  going  comparatively  well  –  in  this  instance,  the  period  when  the 
Landesbanken were still able to use the privileges of state guarantees. It was at that time 
that  some  decisions  set  the  wrong  track.  A  number  of  Landesbanken  raised  additional 
liquidity  before  state  guarantees  were  discontinued  –  liquidity  that  was  then  urgently  in 
search of higher yield and finally flowed into comparatively risky investments.  
As time went by, some Landesbanken increasingly shifted their line of business to the capital 
markets, into international financing and into credit substitution business. This made it more 
difficult  to  control  risks.  And,  like  other  banks  as  well,  they  relied  too  much  on  external 
ratings.  In  the  end,  the  financial  crisis  revealed  how  dangerous  this  was.  With  business 
models  that  focus  strongly  on  lines  of  business  like  international  financing  and  credit 
substitution,  the  asymmetric  information  problems,  as  economists  call  them,  cannot  be 
ignored.  They  are  certainly  greater  than  if  lending  business  had  been  concentrated  on 
domestic  non-banks,  which  is  where  the  actual  expertise  of  the  Landesbanken  lay.  The 
outcome was preprogrammed: a portfolio with risky exposures, which – on top of everything 
– is also insufficiently diversified. Structures like this now have to be corrected, not least in 
the case of one or the other Landesbank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
What  is  striking  is  that  the  Landesbanken  more  strongly  affected  by  the  crisis  are 
characterised by a smaller exposure in lending to non-banks. Loans were often granted to 
enterprises  that  were  not  operating  in  the  Landesbank’s  own  “catchment  area”,  not  least 
because they did not wish to compete against the region’s savings banks. And in their own 
catchment area, loans were granted more to large enterprises than to SMEs.  
Now,  what  does  the  picture  look  like  on  the  liabilities  side?  Between  the  abolition  of  state 
guarantees and the outbreak of the financial crisis, intrabank business increased. The low 
weight of deposits by non-banks was a factor, too. As a consequence, refinancing stood on a 
basis that was prone to disruption.  
Admittedly,  it  was  indeed  possible  to  observe  similar  developments  at  other  large  banks. 
However, the ownership structure of the Landesbanken would have suggested other, namely 
lower risk preferences and a different business orientation. This practice was, in any case, a 
long  way  removed  from  the  idea  of  the  Landesbanken,  in  terms  of  their  lending  policy, 
making a contribution to the development of their own federal state. The business policy of 
such  Landesbanken  had  moved  a  long  way  from  the  principle  of  decentralisation.  This 
explains why these institutions were hit particularly hard by the financial crisis.  
These trends were evident right up to the brink of the crisis. With the crisis, there occurred 
the second big event of the past decade from the point of view of the Landesbanken. The 
crisis revealed the vulnerabilities of the business models: with the crisis of confidence in the 
interbank market, the Landesbanken were now faced with major wholesale funding problems 
and, in several cases, even by considerable needs for write-downs that had to be covered by 
taxpayers.  Credit  substitution  business  collapsed.  And  in  the  wake  of  the  general 
deleveraging process, domestic business was rediscovered.  
4. 
From crisis-prone business models to a restructuring of the Landesbank 
sector  
One thing seems clear to me in this context: For the majority of Landesbanken, the issue of 
stable  business  lines  and  structures  can  be  delayed  no  longer.  What  therefore  has  to  be 
done  to  put  less crisis-prone  structures  in  place?  The  future  viability  of  the  Landesbanken 
sector hinges quite crucially on whether it is possible to develop sustainable business models 
and also on the willingness to reduce capacity surpluses. Up to now, there has been only 
isolated  large-scale  cost-cutting  measures  and,  at  most,  selective  adjustments  to  the 
business models.  
Certainly, there is no master plan for the transition from crisis-prone business models and 
structures  towards  a  robust  reorganised  system.  Nor  is  it  the  central  bank’s  or  the 
supervisors’  job  to  develop  the  specifics  of  business  models.  The  supervisors’  task  in  this 
area  is  merely  to  verify  the  consistency  between  business  and  risk  strategies,  and  any 
structural  change  should,  as  far  as  possible,  be  subject  to  market  processes  and  the 
business  rationale  of 
the  other  supporting  organisations. 
Nevertheless, it may indeed be possible to sketch out a few key features of a potential new 
system.  
Certainly, questions have to asked about the fact that some Landesbanken see themselves 
as  global  players.  Fundamentally,  the  ownership  structure  calls  for  a  low  risk  appetite. 
Likewise, they will have to distance themselves from broadly based “stand alone” solutions.  
From a financial stability perspective, the reference model for sustainable business models 
should, as a matter of principle, comprise two points.  
– 
The  model  should  be  geared,  first,  to  network  cooperation  –  in  other  words,  to 
usefully  augmenting  and  complementing  the  range  of  services  provided  by  the 
savings banks.  
the  savings  banks  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Second,  the  business  model  should  be  sufficiently  stable.  That  means  that  the 
capital base should not be corroded in its substance even in difficult financial years 
and  that  an  adequate  return  is  generated  in  good  years.  That  is  the  basis  for  all 
resilience and, hence, the basis for financial stability.  
Besides traditional network business, this could include sensibly complementing the range of 
services  provided  by  the  Savings  Bank  Financial  Group  (Sparkassenfinanzgruppe),  say, 
banking services for small and medium-sized enterprises and the settlement of payments as 
an ancillary to the savings banks’ corporate business. 
And this would undoubtedly also include looking after the foreign business interests of the 
enterprises that are the Savings Bank Financial Group’s customers. One thing has to be kept 
in mind, however: the foreign branches needed for that purpose entail a high level of fixed 
costs. For that reason, not every Landesbank that exists today can conduct such business in 
a cost-effective manner. Instead, it will be essential to refocus and concentrate business and 
use the resulting economies of scale. What would be consistent with this stance is, finally, 
purely customer-driven capital market business. In my view, what would no longer be part of 
such  a  business  model  would  be  proprietary  trading  and  credit  substitution  business,  nor 
would  the  extensive  activities  in  foreign  business,  as  in  the  past  decade,  that  had  no 
connection  with  the  customers  at  home.  Domestic  commercial  real  estate  financing  might 
likewise  be  a  function  that  complements  the  range  of  services  provided  by  the  savings 
banks.  
One should not deceive oneself, however. Even if the Landesbanken set themselves up in 
this way, there will be no getting past a reduction of excess capacities. Whatever the specific 
details of a realignment, duplication and overlapping of work have to be eradicated.  
Reorganisation requires the willingness to do this – as it does the willingness of the savings 
banks  to  share  responsibility  for  network  cooperation.  This  is  a  question  of  partnership. 
Another  question  that  has  to  be  answered  is  that  of  consolidation  and  integration. 
Theoretically, there are two possible options.  
– 
The first option would be a horizontal integration of Landesbanken. The success of 
this would essentially hinge on the cost savings and synergies that can be achieved.  
The second option would be a vertical integration with savings banks of the region.  
– 
From a financial stability perspective, what is important in the first option is that the portfolios 
usefully complement each other and that the overall risks become perceptibly smaller. Under 
no  circumstances  should  a  structure  be  created  that  is  so  large  that  the  systemic  risks 
ultimately become even bigger. In the case of vertical integration, there is the inherent risk of 
cementing existing structures. Business lines that are unsustainable in the long term would 
perhaps have to be supported by the affiliated savings banks.  
Consolidation makes sense in order to reduce surplus capacities. I call, here and now, on all 
parties involved to do this.  
Conclusion  
5. 
Certainly, at this point a central banker should not go further. He can, however, point to the 
conditions  which  are  essential  for  financial  stability.  The  decisions  themselves  ultimately 
have to be taken by those responsible for them. But one thing is clear: it is time to act. The 
situation is a pressing one. Or as the Roman philosopher Seneca put it:  
“Fate leads the willing and drags along the reluctant.”  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
