Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Intervention at Sveriges Riksbank conference “Monetary policy 
in an era of fiscal stress” 
Intervention  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  in  the  panel  “Challenges  for  monetary  and  fiscal  policy”,  at  the  Sveriges 
Riksbank conference “Monetary policy in an era of fiscal stress”, Stockholm, 17 June 2011. 
 It is a pleasure for me to contribute to this Sveriges Riksbank conference entitled “Monetary 
Policy in an Era of Fiscal Stress”. The subject is indeed a very topical – and global – one. Not 
just in Europe but around the world, the crisis has progressively acquired a fiscal dimension 
that may be with us for a number of years to come.  
Against  this  background,  it  may  be  useful  for  me  to  briefly  look  back  over  the  relationship 
between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policies,  stressing  in  particular  the  challenges  that 
monetary policy may face in an environment of sharply rising fiscal deficits and debt. Coming 
from the ECB, I will of course primarily focus on the euro area experience and lessons. 
If, in a simple one-country setting, sovereign debt becomes unsustainable, the central bank 
always retains the option – in theory and partly in practice – to monetise the debt. The short-
term implication of such monetisation is that sovereign credit risk will be replaced by both an 
inflation and exchange rate risk. In other words, the currency of that country will no longer be 
considered as a good store of value, either domestically or externally. 
None of the above constitutes a feasible scenario for the euro area, which is characterised 
by  a  unique  combination  of  centralised  monetary  policy-making  and  largely  decentralised, 
albeit  closely  coordinated,  fiscal  policy-making.  This  one-monetary-policy-and-many-  fiscal-
policies  approach  is  at  the  heart  of  the  institutional  arrangement  which  governs  the 
interactions  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  in  the  euro  area.  Importantly,  the  Treaty 
specifically excludes any “fiscal dominance of last resort”, due to the prohibition of monetary 
financing.  
So what are the implications of all this?  
Ruling  out  the  possibility  of  monetising  sovereign  debt  in  turn  rules  out  inflation  and 
exchange  rate  risks.  However,  if  we  exclude  the  possibility  of  monetising  the  debt  and  of 
bailouts between countries, the risk of sovereign default could arise. Furthermore, this type of 
risk may emerge in financial markets in a rather disruptive way, at least compared with other 
risks,  such  as  inflation  and  exchange  rate  risks.  The  reason  is  twofold.  First,  inflation  risk 
may take time to materialise and to be factored in, even when the central bank monetises the 
debt. Second, financial markets may find it easier to manage and hedge against inflation and 
currency risk than against sovereign risk.  
The  separation  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  may  create  non-linearities  and  even 
multiple equilibria in the pricing of credit risk, which in turn may fuel self-fulfilling expectations 
and precipitate crises. Given the role that government bonds play in advanced economies’ 
financial markets, such instability may impair the transmission of monetary policy. This may 
justify targeted action by a central bank to push markets towards a more stable equilibrium. 
In general, the lack of fiscal dominance and the exposure to sovereign risk should promote 
overall better fiscal policies. This is certainly the case for most of the euro area countries. 
Fiscal consolidation started already in 2010, when the euro area general government deficit-
to-GDP  ratio  and  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  reached  around  6%  and  85%  respectively.  This 
compares with a deficit of 11.2% and a debt of 92% in the US, a deficit of 9.5% and a debt of 
220.3% in Japan, a deficit of 10.4% in the UK and a debt of 80%. Further improvements in 
the  fiscal  situation  of  all  the  euro  area  members  is  expected  for  the current  year,  with  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
euro area average coming down to slightly above 4%. The euro area debt-to-GDP ratio is 
expected to stabilise in 2013 and come down thereafter. 
In  the  euro  area  three  countries  are  facing  severe  problems  regarding  market  access. 
Overall these three countries account for about 6% of the euro area GDP. I will not elaborate 
on  these  three  cases,  and  the  fact  that  they  have  emerged  in  the  midst  of  the  worst 
economic and financial crisis since World War II.  
The solution to these three cases entails a specific role to be played by the fiscal authority of 
the  respective  countries,  the  fiscal  authorities  of  the  other  countries  supporting  the 
adjustment programme in those countries and the ECB. Some commentators have said that 
in  a  crisis  stronger  coordination  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  is  desirable,  even  if  it 
comes  at  the  expense  of  reducing  the  independence  of  monetary  policy.  The  opposite  is 
actually true. Especially in a crisis the responsibilities for monetary policy and for fiscal policy 
have to remain quite separate.  
The  reason  is  that  it  is  precisely  during  a  crisis  that  the  fiscal  authorities  try  to  push  the 
central bank towards solving the fiscal problem through the inflation tax. However, the central 
bank is protected from this pressure by its statutes and the rules it adopts for the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the  rules  specify  that  it  can  lend  only  to  sound 
institutions and against appropriate collateral. The appropriateness of the collateral depends 
in particular on whether the country under stress follows rigorously the IMF/EU adjustment 
programme and is on track to regain market access. The soundness of institutions, which is 
assessed primarily by supervisors, is also a key principle. It has ensured that all adjustment 
programmes envisaged sufficient funds for the recapitalization of the banking system.  
These  rules  and  principles  apply  to  the  central  bank  but  are  ultimately  there  to  protect 
taxpayers  and  to  prevent  monetary  policy  from  being  misused  to  bail  out  insolvent 
governments.  They  constrain  the  actions  of  the  central  bank,  but  also  give  it  sufficient 
flexibility to react in the event of a crisis.  
There is no doubt that these rules cause some frustration to those who would instead like to 
shift the responsibility for solving the crisis entirely to the central bank, even if the crisis is of 
fiscal origin. 
It is quite paradoxical that the very same people who criticise the ECB for having taken too 
many risks during the financial crisis are also those who criticise it for opposing any form of 
debt  restructuring.  This  same  group  even  suggests  that  the  ECB  should  stand  ready  to 
accept, after a debt restructuring, the signature of a default-rated government as collateral. 
How are such contradictions possible? In my view they are only possible when the analysis 
is partial or the rationale is unclear. Let me give a couple of examples. 
One reason for debt restructuring – which is often made by some theoretical economists – is 
that it helps financial markets to function better and it eliminates moral hazard. The problem 
with this view is that it totally omits the broader impact on the markets. Trying to eliminate 
moral  hazard  in  the  middle  of  a  systemic  crisis  is  like  shooting  yourself  in  the  foot.  Think 
about  it:  did  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  make  markets  work  better,  or  worse?  Did  it 
reduce moral hazard?  
Another reason for private sector involvement (PSI) is to minimise the taxpayer’s contribution 
and  to  penalise  bad  investments.  This  reason  is  even  less  economically  sound.  Lehman 
Brothers’ failure proved that if PSI is applied in the wrong way, the taxpayer will in the end 
pay  more.  Short-term  speculative  investors  benefit  from  perverse  forms  of  PSI,  while  long 
term investors are punished. That doesn’t sound very clever to me. 
Having  a  clear  objective,  which  in  the  case  of  the  ECB  is  price  stability,  helps  us  to  be 
consistent and to implement a policy which is in the best interests of taxpayers, given that 
inflation is ultimately a tax.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The architecture of the euro area – which clearly divides responsibilities between the single 
monetary policy and the many national fiscal policies – offers strong protection for taxpayers: 
the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact are intended to ensure sound fiscal policies and 
to guarantee the independence of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy.  
Some strengthening of the institutional framework underlying the Stability and Growth Pact is 
needed  in  order  to  avoid  any  repetition  of  the  problems  we  are  currently  experiencing. 
Progress  has  been  achieved,  although  not  as  much  as  we  would  have  hoped.  However, 
looking  back,  it  is  encouraging  to  note  that,  when  facing  difficult  choices,  the  political 
authorities  of  the  euro  area  have  always  decided  to  move  forward,  towards  greater 
integration and a more solid foundation for Economic and Monetary Union. 
The  trialogue  between  the  Commission,  Council  and  European  Parliament  has  tried  to 
finalize an agreement  on the strengthening of fiscal discipline in the euro area, in time for 
next week’s ECOFIN Council and European Parliament plenary meetings. The Parliament is 
asking  for  a  reverse  Qualified  Majority  in  the  Council  to  vote  down  a  Commission 
recommendation to a Member State with clearly unsound budgetary policy already under the 
preventive arm of the Pact. This should not be seen by the Member States as a reduction of 
their sovereignty but rather as a way to better protect themselves against the negative impact 
of undisciplined policies in diverging countries. It will also better protect the euro. I hope that 
the Council will show courage and leadership in this important endeavour. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
