Jürgen Stark: Central banking after the financial crisis 
Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  (IMFS)  Distinguished  Lecture  by  Mr  Jürgen 
Stark,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  House  of 
Finance, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 21 February 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The global financial crisis has been the most severe financial and economic debacle since 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  Central  banks,  and  governments  played  a  key  role  in 
containing the impact of the crisis by preventing a global economic and financial meltdown. 
At  the  same  time,  the  crisis  –  which,  by  the  way,  is  not  over  yet  –  may  have  important 
implications for central banking. This is what I will reflect upon in today’s lecture.  
The crisis and central banks’ tasks and mandates 
1. 
Central banks’ main task is the management of monetary conditions in the economy in the 
pursuit of a given policy objective, such as convertibility during the gold standard era or price 
stability over the more recent period.1 
The measures taken by central banks in response to the financial crisis reflect this traditional 
function.  As  a  reaction  to  receding  inflationary  pressures  in  a  context  where  the 
intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  had  weakened  the  economic  outlook,  central  banks’ 
policy rates were globally cut to historically low levels. In our case the main refinancing rate 
was lowered in a number of steps to 1%, a level not seen in recent history in any of the euro 
area countries. In fact, since May 2009 we have kept the ECB key interest rates unchanged.  
Many central banks, including the ECB, also resorted to a number of non-standard measures 
to  support  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  with  a  view  to  maintaining  the  monetary 
transmission channel and to supporting the flow of credit to the economy in critical times. The 
ECB’s non-standard measures comprised  
 
 
 
 
 
the provision of unlimited funding support to banks, at maturities of up to one year;  
the provision of liquidity in foreign currencies;  
an extension of the list of eligible collateral;  
outright purchases of covered bonds;  
and recently also interventions in the euro area debt securities markets through the 
Securities Markets Programme.  
Major financial and economic crises like the present one often had an important impact on 
the  evolution  of  the  tasks  and  mandates  of  central  banks.2  Let  me  give  you  just  a  few 
examples.  It  was  a  sequence  of  major  bank  panics  in  the  19th  century  that  established, 
based on Walter Bagehot’s “responsibility doctrine”3, the foundation of central banks’ task of 
ensuring the smooth functioning of financial markets, in particular in times of crisis. After the 
Great  Depression  of  the  1930s,  central  bank  inaction  was  widely  held  responsible  for  the 
economic catastrophe. As a consequence, monetary policy in many countries came under 
                                                 
1   See Goodhart (1988). 
2   For an overview of the historical evolution of central banks see Goodhart (1988) and Bordo (2007a, 2007b). 
3   Bagehot (1873). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  control  of  the  fiscal  authority,  before  it  was  increasingly  restored  to  an  independent 
function in the 1950s.4 A third important example is the “Great Inflation” of the 1970s, which, 
in  a  wide  portion  of  the  industrialised  world  where  monetary  policy  governance  was  still 
characterised  by  fiscal  dominance,  paved  the  way  for  the  adoption  of  modern  monetary 
policy  frameworks:  the  primacy  of  price  stability  as  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  and 
central  bank  independence  as  the  institutional  prerequisite  for  a  credible  pursuit  of  this 
objective. 
Against this background, it is not a far fetched thought that the current crisis might as well 
have an impact on central banks’ tasks and mandates. Indeed, in many countries the crisis 
has  brought  about  a  strengthening  of  central  banks’  role  in  financial  supervision  and 
regulation. In particular, many central banks have been assigned new tasks in the context of 
the establishment of macro-prudential supervisory functions mandated with identifying risks 
to financial stability from a system-wide perspective.  
In  the  EU,  the  recent  creation  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  as  the  new 
macro-prudential  supervisory  body  is  an  important  advance  in  the  economic  governance 
framework.  
The  ECB  provides  the  secretariat  and  analytical,  statistical,  administrative  and  logistical 
support to the ESRB. The assignment to the ECB of specific tasks concerning the functioning 
of the ESRB is welcome, but does not constitute a change in the mandate or an additional 
objective  for  monetary  policy.  Rather,  these  tasks  should  contribute  to  financial  stability, 
while  being  fully  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  There  are  clear 
institutional separation lines between the ECB and the ESRB. In particular, both institutions 
are independent and have clearly defined separate mandates: price stability for the ECB and 
mitigating systemic risk for the ESRB.  
Central  banks’  ability  to  maintain  price  stability  and  keep  inflation  expectations  firmly 
anchored  over  the  last  three  years  testifies  to  their  high  credibility  grounded  on  clear 
mandates to safeguard price stability and institutional and political independence.  
At  the  same  time,  the  crisis  has  revealed  short-comings  in  the  predominant  pre-crisis 
monetary policy strategy paradigm, which was centered on two specific features: 
 
First,  the  definition  or  interpretation  of  price  stability  objectives  as  point  inflation 
targets over short horizons. 
Second,  a  systematic  disregard  of  financial  and  monetary  developments  in  the 
assessment of risks to price stability, which was instead primarily based on short-
term inflation and output forecasts. 
 These shortcomings made monetary policy frameworks unfit to meet the challenges of the 
marked  financial  cycles  that  posed  a  very  serious  threat  to  economic  and  price  stability. 
Indeed, the aim to stabilise the inflation rate around a short-term point target and disregard of 
the risks implied by unsustainable financial and monetary trends has in my view led to too lax 
a monetary policy stance in many parts of the world from the second half of the 1990s until 
the  beginning  of  the  financial  turmoil  in  August  2007.  This  accommodative  stance  has 
probably contributed to inflating the stock market and, subsequently, the housing markets.5 
Monetary policy in advanced economies needs to be more effectively geared to maintaining 
price  stability  with  a  medium-term  orientation,  also  taking  into  account  longer-term  risks  to 
price stability emanating from destabilising financial and monetary trends. 
                                                 
4   See Bordo (2007a, 2007b). 
5   See e.g. BIS (2009), Taylor (2007) and Eickmeier and Hofmann (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  in  line  with  this  requirement.  First,  our  quantitative 
definition of price stability explicitly refers to the medium term. Second, our monetary pillar, 
which  introduces  money  and  credit  considerations  in  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  factors 
financial and monetary developments into our assessment of the risks to medium-term price 
stability. This reinforces the medium-term orientation of our monetary policy. The monetary 
pillar ensures that the well-documented link between trends in monetary growth and inflation 
is duly taken into account in the monetary policy conduct. As the dynamics of  money and 
credit  aggregates  can  also  reflect  emerging  financial  imbalances,  our  monetary  analysis 
encourages  a  leaning-against-the-wind  attitude.  This  approach  suggests  a  symmetric 
conduct of monetary policy over the financial cycle to contain the potential build-up of asset 
price bubbles and the associated risks to medium-term price stability. At the same time, it 
does not imply – as sometimes has been incorrectly understood – a mechanical reaction to 
asset prices.  
The  alternative  to  an  attitude  of  leaning-against-the-wind,  namely  an  asymmetric  policy 
approach that only stands ready to lower interest rates when the imbalances unwind creates 
moral hazard and ultimately leads to even larger imbalances. Moreover, central banks may 
end up creating an environment of systematically downward-biased interest rates, as policy 
rates  are  successively  lowered  in  crisis  times, while  it  becomes  difficult  to  raise  them  in  a 
fragile  financial  system.  Such  a  “low  interest  rate  trap”6  would  create  serious  distortions. 
Central banks should avoid getting in such a situation.  
2. 
Where do we stand in the phasing out? 
1. 
Based  on  these  more  fundamental  considerations  let  me  say  a  few  words  on  the 
current assessment of the monetary policy stance. The euro area is currently in a process of 
recovering  economic  activity,  which  has  gained  momentum  and  recently  surprised  to  the 
upside. Economic recovery in the euro area is increasingly self-sustaining and increasingly 
less dependent on state support measures. Its strong momentum is in part driven by robust 
growth abroad. But it also reflects improved domestic growth dynamics. This notwithstanding 
uncertainty remains high. 
2. 
As  regards  price  developments  in  the  euro  area,  annual  HICP  inflation  has 
increased  to  2.4%  in  January  2011,  largely  driven  by  energy  and  non-energy  commodity 
prices. Inflation rates could temporarily increase further in the next few months and are likely 
to stay above 2% in 2011, before moderating again. There is continued evidence of upward 
pressure on overall inflation mainly owing to energy and commodity prices. Notably, industrial 
producer prices which have some early indicator properties with respect to consumer prices 
have strongly accelerated in the course of 2010 and are currently growing at rates above 5%. 
Available  survey  data  also  point  to  increasing  price  pressure  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the 
production process. 
3. 
However, our monetary analysis signals that inflationary pressures stemming from 
euro area monetary trends should remain contained over the medium to long-term. In making 
this  assessment,  we  need  to  carefully  consider  the  substantial  monetary  liquidity  that  had 
been accumulated prior to the crisis and that has been reabsorbed only partially. Of course, if 
the liquidity is gradually reabsorbed through a deleveraging process of a partly over-indebted 
private sector, it will dampen money growth as part of a healthy adjustment process. But in 
the current environment of improved confidence and economic activity, the liquidity may also 
be used for transaction purposes and thus contribute to upward price pressures.  
4. 
This relationship between economic activity, liquidity and price pressures also holds 
at  the  global  level  with  possible  repercussions  for  the  euro  area.  The  commodity  price 
                                                 
6   Giavazzi and Giovannini (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
pressures  that  I  just  mentioned  reflect  to  a  large  extent  strong  demand  from  emerging 
economies  and  may  not  revert  as  quickly  as  if  they  were  due  to  short-lived  tensions  in 
supply.  Moreover,  with  a  continued  strong  expansion  of  money  and  credit  in  emerging 
economies, it is not clear to what extent such commodity price pressures will be absorbed 
within the economies and to what extent they may instead be passed on in what from the 
euro area perspective are import prices. We have seen this complex impact of commodity 
prices  before,  namely  in  the  period  from  end  2005  to  mid  2008.  At  the  time,  the  warning 
signals for a more persistent upward pressure on euro area inflation were dwarfed by those 
coming from other asset markets, but we should take them serious now. Monetary policy for 
the  euro  area  can  of  course  not  control  strong  global  liquidity  trends,  but  it  needs  to  take 
them into account and possibly apply a more restrictive view on domestic liquidity expansion 
than would otherwise be the case. 
5. 
Taken all available information together, latest economic developments suggest that 
the  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  that  has  already  been  accommodative  has  become  even 
more accommodative. In my view, risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments 
in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  could move  to  the  upside.  We  therefore  need  to  very  closely 
monitor further developments.  
6. 
In this respect, we need to keep a close eye on any signs of emerging second-round 
effects in the behavior of wages and price setters. Should economic agents start to react to 
temporarily higher inflation outcomes this could give rise to a so-called wage-price spiral and 
higher inflation could become entrenched in inflation expectations. I can assure you that we 
will act quickly and decisively on any indications of emerging second-round effects and of a 
dis-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  from  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  The  firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations remains of the essence. 
7. 
To the extent that financial market conditions continue to improve and the current 
economic recovery turns out to remain strong and self-sustained, the stance would need to 
be  normalised  over  time.  In  line  with  its  mandate,  the  ECB  will  act  taking  into  account 
economic developments both at the global level and within the euro area economy, as well 
as  the  further  evolution  of  conditions  in  financial  markets,  including  those  that  are  most 
relevant for the transmission of monetary policy impulses. In this sense, we will act whenever 
we anticipate that higher costs and price increases pose upward risks to price stability over 
the medium term. 
8. 
The non-standard measures by the Eurosystem have been necessary to enhance 
its  support  of  credit  flows  to  the  economy  and  to  ensure  a  proper  functioning  of  the 
transmission of monetary policy impulses to households and firms. Indeed, this approach has 
served  the  euro  area  economy  well.  Money  market  spreads  have  come  down  significantly 
[slide 2: Euribor/OIS spread], banks’ funding risks have been reduced, and the lowering of 
our  policy  interest  rates  has  led  to  lower  bank  lending  rates,  largely  as  intended  [slide  3: 
bank lending rates]. 
9. 
Yet, keeping policy rates at very low levels for a protracted period and at the same 
time generously providing liquidity to banks entails significant risks. As outlined in the 2010 
Annual Report of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), asset price developments and 
risk spreads indicate that once again a “search for yield” may have started to play a role in an 
environment  of  near-zero  rate  policies.  In  particular,  such  a  situation  has  the  potential  to 
increasingly  over  time  distort  market  participants’  perception  of  risks,  such  as  liquidity  and 
interest rate risk. A renewed under-pricing of such risks could again lead to misallocation of 
resources  and  to  asset  price  bubbles.  The  period  immediately  preceding  the  start  of  the 
financial  turmoil  in  August  2007  is  a  case  in  point.  New  financial  fragilities  may  emerge 
which, in turn, may hamper the normalisation of rates. Finally, maintaining interest rates very 
low  for  too  long  may  reduce  activity  in  money  markets,  delay  necessary  balance  sheet 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  stabilizing 
adjustments  by  firms  and  households,  set  disincentives  to  governments  for  their  efforts  to 
consolidate public finances.7  
The  ECB  (like  other  central  banks)  faces  a  difficult  balancing  act  between  doing  what  is 
necessary to maintain a properly functioning monetary policy transmission mechanism and 
doing  too  much  for  too  long,  thus  reducing  incentives  for  market  participants  to  make 
markets  work  as  they  should.  In  Japan,  the  combination  of  zero  interest  rates  and 
quantitative easing,  while  successfully  containing  liquidity  problems  of  financial  institutions, 
have had some detrimental effect on the intermediary function of the money market and on 
corporate bond issuance.8 In our case, we saw that transaction volumes in the short term 
(EONIA) money market increased and EONIA rates were only moderately affected [slide 4: 
EONIA  rate/trading  volume]  when  the  amount  of  excess  liquidity  decreased  after  the 
expiration of the first (very large, €442 bn) 12 month LTRO, indicating that the very generous 
liquidity  provision  through  the  central  bank  might  have  had  a  dampening  effect  on  market 
activity when confidence between banks re-emerged. Some of the very same measures that 
contributed 
the  economy  might  unfold  negative  effects  and  become 
destabilizing if policy accommodation is not withdrawn in time. 
This is particularly true against the background of a recovery gaining momentum, increasing 
inflation  pressures  coming  from  commodity  prices  and  improvement  in  financial  market 
conditions,  given  the  protracted  and  global  character  of  the  current  monetary  policy 
accommodation. 
The risks of creating distortions and of hampering market activity are the reasons why we 
designed all the non-standard measures taken by the Eurosystem in response to the crisis 
with  exit  considerations  in  mind.  From  the  very  beginning,  we  have  made  clear  that  the 
measures are temporary in nature and that those which are no longer needed to cope with 
unusual circumstances will be phased out. 
The present status is that we have discontinued provision of liquidity at maturities longer than 
3 months. Neither this decision nor the termination, as planned, of the purchases under the 
Covered Bonds Purchase Programme in June 2010 has caused any new market tensions. 
On the contrary, we continue to see a gradual normalisation in the markets [slide 5: covered 
bond spreads]. 
10. 
However,  we  still  provide  unlimited  liquidity  at  a  fixed  rate  in  the  remaining 
operations. We have announced that we will do so at least until the end of this year’s third 
maintenance period (on 13 April 2011). Furthermore, the Securities Markets Programme is 
still  in  place,  although  purchases  have  been  relatively  small  lately.  Thus,  the  operational 
modalities and the SMP are the only crisis-related instruments left for phasing out and exit.  
11. 
As  regards  timing  of  the  further  exit,  there  are  risks  to  both  sides.  I  have  already 
mentioned some of the risks of exiting too late. On the other hand, accelerating the exit could 
create new market tensions, with adverse effects on the ongoing economic recovery and the 
medium-term  outlook  for  price  developments,  possibly  posing  downside  risks  to  price 
stability.  Our  two-pillar  analytical  framework,  taking  into  account  both  macroeconomic  and 
monetary  developments,  makes  us  well  equipped  to  properly  define  the  pace  of  exit.  The 
approach has been, and will be, gradual. 
Will the exit per se be difficult? In this respect, I think the ECB is in a relatively comfortable 
position. With the exception of the Covered Bonds Purchase Programme and the Securities 
Markets Programme, which are both relatively limited in size, our non-standard measures are 
directed at the euro area banks and do not have very long maturities. This is different from 
                                                 
7   See BIS (2010). 
8   Naohiko  Baba,  Shinichi  Nishioka,  Nobuyuki  Oda,  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Kazuo  Ueda  and  Hiroshi  Ugai,  Japan’s  deflation, 
problems in the financial system and monetary policy. BIS Working Papers No 188. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In  our  case,  the  majority  of  the  measures  unwind  automatically  as  the  operations 
the situations in the US and the UK. You see how repurchasing operations (red parts of bars) 
dominate  in  our  case  while  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  hold  large 
portfolios of securities (blue parts of bars), as their non-standard measures to a large extent 
have aimed at improving liquidity in specific market segments by outright purchases.  
The differences reflect that in the euro area, the vital link between our policy rates and the 
real economy largely goes through the banks, while financial markets have a more prominent 
role  in  transmitting  monetary  policy  impulses  to  the  real  economy  in  the  US  and  the  UK. 
Banks provide 77% of non-financial firms’ external funding in the euro area, while in the US 
and the UK the figure is 40% and 44% respectively [slide 6: euro area financing]. 
12. 
concerned mature unless we decide to continue them. 
13. 
Let me also mention that the non-standard measures can co-exist with any interest 
rate level. Hence, should market conditions still warrant some of the non-standard measures 
once  upside  risks  to  price  stability over  the  medium  term  require  our action,  the monetary 
policy stance can be changed.  
Some have asked how heavy reliance by some banks on Eurosystem funding will influence 
the next step of the exit from the non-standard measures. It is true that some banks under 
the current market circumstances have relied a lot on our operations. This is not a normal 
situation. Should some banks still need to resort to our funding extensively once markets are 
closer to normal, we  would have to judge whether their funding constraints are a result of 
remaining market problems or whether they are primarily attributable to weaknesses in their 
balance sheets. In the latter case, it is obvious that any funding support from the Eurosystem 
would  have  to  be  carefully  re-assessed,  as  our  operational  framework  serves  the 
implementation of monetary policy, and is not meant to cater for all individual banks’ liquidity 
needs,  irrespective  of  what  causes  them.  In  the  euro  area,  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the 
national central banks at their risk and cost, possibly guaranteed by the government, to act 
as  the  lender  of  last  resort.  Banks  should  take  all  appropriate  measures  to  reinforce  their 
balance sheets as well as their capital base, thus creating conditions under which they can 
fund themselves in the market once market conditions return closer to normal. 
We do not know today what normality will look like after the crisis. We may have to perform 
our  monetary  policy  in  an  environment  that  is  somewhat  different  from  the  one  prevailing 
before the turmoil. For instance, one might expect to observe higher liquidity and risk premia 
on  the  markets  than during  the  period  that  preceded  the crisis,  and  possibly  also  reduced 
activity in some longer-term unsecured market segments. If such changes imply that for any 
given  policy  interest  rate,  the  monetary  conditions  are  somewhat  tighter  than  they  would 
have been in the pre-turmoil period, that will of course have to be taken into account when 
setting  the  policy  rate.  But  such  “new  facts  of  life”  do  not  necessarily  require  any  major 
change in the operational framework. We shall of course consider thoroughly what lessons 
are to be learnt from the crisis, but so far, the framework that prevailed prior to the turmoil, 
featuring  a  broad  universe  of  counterparties,  a  long  list  of  eligible  collateral  and  large 
refinancing  operations,  seems  to  provide  a  good  benchmark.  It  served  us  well  before  the 
crisis, and could be adapted quickly as circumstances worsened.  
The interplay between fiscal and monetary policy 
3. 
While  the  current  challenges  for  monetary  policy  are  immense,  those  for  fiscal  policy  are 
even greater. Fiscal policy in most advanced economies does not just have to exit from the 
fiscal  stimulus  and  support  measures  taken  in  response  to  the  crisis.  Even  with  these 
measures reversed, fiscal policy still faces at least three important challenges.  
First, even excluding crisis-related stimulus measures, most advanced economies are still left 
with  historically  high  deficit-to-GDP  ratios,  which,  viewed  from  today’s  perspective,  are 
largely structural in nature. To put it another way, given the lower actual and potential post-
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
crisis  output  and  correspondingly  lower  post-crisis  tax  revenues,  pre-crisis  spending  levels 
are no longer affordable.  
Secondly, government  debt-to-GDP ratios are now much higher than before the crisis and 
the guarantees provided to the financial sector have added to the potential liabilities [slide 7: 
government debt – advanced economies].  
Thirdly, over the next two to three decades, governments face rising costs related to ageing 
populations.  Due  to  the  combination  of  these  factors,  questions  are  not  surprisingly  being 
asked about the ability of some governments to bring their public finances onto a sustainable 
path over the medium term.9 Reflecting this problem, the latest round of the financial crisis 
since early May 2010  was triggered by concerns about the current and future state of the 
public finances in some euro area countries [slide 8: government debt – EA countries]. 
What are the implications of these developments for central banking?  
The state of the public finances clearly matters for central banks. At least from a theoretical 
point  of  view,  one  of  the  reasons  is  that  monetary  policy  could  in  principle  be  used  –  or 
abused – to alleviate the government’s budgetary woes. This can be done via two channels:  
First, the real value of nominal government debt – in particular of long-term maturity – could 
be at least partly inflated away via unexpected higher inflation. 
Secondly,  expansionary  monetary  policies  could  aim  at  generating  substantial  seigniorage 
income in order to boost government revenues.  
The  exploitation  of  these  channels  would  of  course  directly  conflict  with  the  central  banks’ 
mandate to ensure price stability. Whether they can be exploited ultimately depends on the 
regime that governs the relationship between monetary and fiscal authorities. The economics 
literature distinguishes between two regimes, monetary dominance and fiscal dominance.10  
Under  a  regime  of  monetary  dominance,  the  aforementioned  channels  are  excluded  by 
construction  as  central  banks  can  pursue  price  stability-oriented  policies  without  having  to 
take  into  account  the  government’s  budgetary  constraint.  Under  a  regime  of  fiscal 
dominance, by contrast, the central bank is subordinated to the fiscal authority and monetary 
policy is tailored to the government’s budgetary needs rather than to price stability. 
The regime that has prevailed in advanced economies over the last three decades has been 
a  regime  of  monetary  dominance.  Central  banks  have  been  given  an  explicit  mandate  to 
maintain  price  stability  and  have  been  protected  by  legal  provisions  guaranteeing  their 
independence.  In  the  euro  area,  the  ECB’s  mandate  to  safeguard  price  stability,  its 
independence and a prohibition of monetary financing of government deficits are enshrined 
in the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU.  
Credible, stability-oriented monetary policy frameworks are assets that are costly to acquire 
and  must  not  be  put  at  risk.  Yet,  growing  doubts  about  government’s  ability  to  deliver 
sustainable public finances could at some point also cast doubt on the sustainability of the 
prevailing  regime  of  monetary  dominance.  This  would  lead  to  an  increase  in  inflation 
expectations  or  at  least  heightened  uncertainty  about  the  inflation  outlook  in  the  medium 
term.11 
What can central banks do to mitigate such a scenario?  
Central banks need to avoid the spreading of any doubt about their commitment to maintain 
price  stability  and  their  independence  from  political  influence.  This  reinforces  the  need  to 
                                                 
9   See Cecchetti, Mohanty and Zampolli (2010). 
10   Sargent and Wallace (1981). 
11   See Leeper (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
pursue  a  symmetric  approach  to  monetary  policy  making.  Central  banks  should  avoid 
overemphasising  potential  downside  risks  to  the  economy  and  committing  to  an  extended 
accommodative monetary policy stance.  
The  current  concerns  about  the  public  finances  also  need  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the 
consideration of non-standard monetary policy measures. Central banks need to be wary of 
the  credit  risk  incurred  in  their  monetary  policy  operations  as  this  might  put  their  financial 
independence and reputation at risk. By the same token, outright purchases of government 
debt  as  a  non-standard  monetary  policy  measure  are  obviously  a  sensitive  issue  because 
they might be perceived as a first step towards a monetisation of government debt. To dispel 
any  such  impression,  central  banks  must  be  clear  about  the  temporary  nature  of  their 
government bond purchases. 
The built-in temporary nature of the ECB’s liquidity support measures and the clearly limited 
scope and scale of our outright purchases in securities markets so far prevented excessive 
accumulation of credit risk on the ECB’s balance sheet. This has also mitigated any blurring 
of monetary and fiscal responsibilities.  
I  would  acknowledge,  however,  that  the  ECB’s  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  has 
proven  to  be  controversial  in  some  quarters.  Some  commentators  have  characterised  the 
programme as an implicit breach of the Maastricht Treaty. 
In the ECB’s view the Securities Markets Programme does not breach the provisions of the 
Treaty.  The  Treaty  prohibits  Eurosystem  purchases  of  government  bonds  on  the  primary 
market.  The  interventions  under  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  are  conducted  on  the 
secondary  market.  The  purpose  of  these  interventions  is  not  to  finance  government 
borrowing.  Rather,  it  is  to  restore  depth  and  liquidity  in  dysfunctional  segments  of  debt 
securities  markets  and  thus  ensure  the  proper  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism.  The  Securities  Markets  Programme  is  a  temporary  measure  to 
stabilise  market  conditions,  it  is  not  a  vehicle  to  provide  monetary  financing  to  insolvent 
governments, which would breach Treaty provisions.  
Our bond purchases have so far been very small. Outright holdings of government bonds in 
the  context  of  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  currently  amount  to  just  3.8%  of  the 
Eurosystem’s  total  assets.  In  addition,  the  interventions  are  fully  sterilised  by  conducting 
liquidity-absorbing operations so that overall liquidity conditions and the stance of monetary 
policy remain unaffected.  
It  is  certainly  true  that  with  this  non-standard  measure,  the  ECB  has  entered  a  terrain  in 
which it should not stay longer than absolutely necessary. It is up to euro area governments 
to address the root causes of the current problems, to develop and implement credible plans 
to put their public finances on a sustainable footing and thereby restore orderly conditions in 
sovereign debt markets. 
In this regard, let me point out that the state of the public finances in the euro area differs 
across  countries.  Moreover,  today’s  fiscal  imbalances  have  different  causes  in  different 
countries. Before the crisis, some euro area Member States, such as Greece and Portugal, 
never  managed  to  balance  their  books,  even  in  good  times.  Others,  such  as  Ireland  and 
Spain,  did  achieve  seemingly  healthy  budget  surpluses  in  good  times.  But  they  failed  to 
perceive  the  extent  to  which  tax  revenues  were  vulnerable  to  an  unwinding  of  economic 
imbalances and allowed spending to grow at an unsustainable pace. 
Looking  back,  it  is  obvious  that  the  existing  EU  fiscal  framework  has  not  been  fully 
implemented.  Many  countries  have  violated  the  rules.  Peer  pressure  has  not  worked.  In 
addition, the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) in 2005 has weakened the fiscal 
framework substantially. There has been a lack of enforcement of fiscal discipline at the EU 
level and insufficient national incentives to comply with the EU rules.  
Against  this  background,  the  European  Council  has  mandated  a  task  force  led  by  the 
President of the European Council, Herman van Rompuy, to consider ways to strengthen the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
surveillance  of  budgetary  policies  and  make  corrective  measures  more  effective.  The  task 
force was also asked to consider an improved surveillance of competitiveness developments 
and the correction of imbalances as well as the design of an appropriate framework for crisis 
management. In October 2010, the Van Rompuy Task Force presented its final report to the 
European  Council,  which  endorsed  its  recommendations  in  December  2010.  These 
recommendations  are  now  in  the  process  of  being  translated  in  changes  to  the  legal 
framework,  for  which  the  European  Commission  already  made  proposals  in  September 
2010.  The  importance  of  a  strong  commitment  from  euro  area  governments  to  the  new 
framework and to an ambitious translation in the legal texts cannot be overstated.  
But let me emphasise that restoring sound public finances is not only a challenge for the euro 
area. As mentioned before, government deficit and debt levels in many advanced economies 
outside the euro area have also risen to historically high levels. Therefore, the commitment 
by the leaders’ of the G20 countries at the Summit in Toronto to pursue fiscal plans that will 
at  least  halve  deficits  by  2013  and  stabilise  or  reduce  government  debt-to-GDP  ratios  by 
2016  is  also  an  important  step.  This  commitment  now  has  to  be  followed  by  bold  policy 
actions.  
Concluding remarks 
4. 
Let me sum up. Monetary policy should be focused on the goal of maintaining price stability 
over the medium term and central banks should be independent of governments in order to 
ensure an effective and credible pursuit of this goal. These principles are firmly enshrined in 
monetary policy frameworks of essentially all advanced economies and I see them strongly 
confirmed by the experiences of the crisis. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  crisis  has  revealed  short-comings  of  the  pre-crisis  global 
monetary order. Insufficient medium-term orientation in the monetary policy frameworks led 
to too loose a monetary policy stance in many advanced economies and contributed in my 
view  importantly  to  exacerbating  pre-crisis  financial  excesses.  Strengthening  the  medium-
term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  frameworks  also  requires  a  commensurate  leaning-
against-the-wind attitude in face of financial cycles, which can be achieved by giving money 
and credit aggregates a due place in the monetary policy strategy. 
These insights need to be taken into account in the current considerations on the phasing out 
of  non-standard  measures.  The  risk  of  creating  renewed  financial  imbalances  and  serious 
financial distortions by maintaining too loose a monetary stance for too long is considerable.  
Finally, the fundamental achievement to establish credible price stability oriented monetary 
policy frameworks must not be put at risk. Central banks need to avoid the spreading of any 
doubt  of  their  commitment  to  maintain  price  stability  and  their  independence  from  political 
influence. In this respect, it is important to refrain from any kind of monetary financing. It is 
ultimately up to fiscal authorities to address the root causes of the current problems and take 
measures to credibly ensure fiscal sustainability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
References 
Baba,  N.,  Nishioka,  S.,  Oda,  N.,  Shirakawa,  M.,  Ueda,  K.  and  Ugai,  H.  (2005),  Japan’s 
deflation, problems in the financial system and monetary policy, BIS Working Papers No 188. 
Bagehot,  W.  (1873),  Lombard  Street:  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market,  London:  Henry 
S. King & Co. 
BIS (2009), Rescue, recovery, reform, Chapter I, 79th Annual Report, pp. 3–15, Basel: Bank 
for International Settlements. 
BIS (2010), Low interest rates: do the risks outweigh the rewards?, Chapter III, 80th Annual 
Report, pp. 36–46, Basel: Bank for International Settlements. 
Bordo (2007a), A history of monetary policy, New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second 
Edition 2007. 
Bordo  (2007b),  A  brief  history  of  central  banks,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Cleveland 
Economic Commentary, December 2007. 
Cecchetti, S., Mohanty, M. and Zampolli, F. (2010), The future of public debt: prospects and 
implications, BIS Working Paper No. 300.  
Eickmeier,  S.  and  Hofmann,  B.  (2010),  Monetary  policy,  housing  booms  and  financial 
(im)balances, ECB Working Paper No. 1187. 
Goodhart, C. (1988), The evolution of central banks, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
Giavazzi,  F.  and  Giovannini,  A.  (2010),  The  low-interest-rate  trap,  Vox,  19  July  2010. 
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/5309 
Leeper, E. (2010), Monetary science, fiscal alchemy, paper presented at the Jackson Hole 
Symposion 2010. 
Sargent,  T.  and  Wallace,  N.  (1981),  Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5, 1–17. 
Taylor,  J.  (2007),  Housing  and  monetary  policy,  Proceedings,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, pages 463–476. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
