Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Banking supervision and corporate governance in 
the European architecture 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the closing seminar “Banking supervision and internal audit as contributors to sound 
corporate governance and financial stability”, Moscow, 30 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  speak  to  you  on  this  occasion  here  in  Moscow.  The  Cooperation 
Programme  that  ends  today  has  been  very  successful  in  two  important  fields  for  central 
banks: banking supervision and internal audit. Looking back at this venture, we can see that 
three unusual, eventful years have passed since 1 April 2008. The macroeconomic, financial, 
and also political environments in the euro area and around the globe have been in a state of 
flux, and sometimes in turmoil. Likewise we all have been moved and saddened by natural 
disasters and human error, by acts of war and acts of terror.  
At the same time, these three years have also seen remarkably positive events. The Central 
Bank of the Russian Federation celebrated its 150th anniversary last year. It steered its way 
successfully through the financial crisis. The Bank of Russia became a member of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  The  European 
Central  Bank,  meanwhile,  marked  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  euro.  It  became  an  EU 
institution as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon in 2009. And the EU Commission here in Russia 
has also had a change of status: it is now the EU Delegation to the Russian Federation and 
is part of the European External Action Service. 
As I just said, banking supervision and internal audit have been the focus of work here these 
past three years. A three-way partnership was formed, consisting of the EU Delegation, the 
Bank  of  Russia  and  the  Eurosystem.  The  Eurosystem  acted  through  the  ECB  and  eight 
national central banks: the Deutsche Bundesbank, Banque de France, Banca d’Italia, Banco 
de  España,  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  Bank  of  Greece  and 
Suomen Pankki/Finlands Bank.  
Central bank cooperation in challenging times calls for resolute action 
The coming years are likely to be just as challenging as recent years. Central banks will be 
required to act as anchors of monetary and financial stability in a rapidly changing world.  
The  Eurosystem  central  banks  are  cooperating  in  banking  supervision,  financial  stability, 
internal  audit  and  in  many  other  fields.  In  addition  to  the  Programme  here  in  Russia,  a 
Eurosystem programme on Basel II is under way involving the Central Bank of Egypt. A crisis 
response  package  covering  banking  supervision  and  financial  crisis  management  is  being 
conducted with south-eastern European countries. And technical assistance is being given to 
a number of would-be EU members.  
Europe strengthens its institutional framework for financial stability 
Generally, Europe has responded to the challenges of the past few years in a structured and 
thoughtful  way.  The  creation  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  broadens  the 
scope  of  cooperation  and  institutional  awareness  in  respect  of  macroprudential  oversight. 
The ECB is the supporting institution and provides, inter alia, analytical and statistical inputs 
to  the  ESRB  structures.  The  Risk  Board  enables  European  regulators  and  supervisors  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
complement the microprudential perspective with a systematic monitoring and assessment of 
potential dangers to the stability of the system as a whole. The discipline of macroprudential 
supervision  combines  the  information  and  assessments  obtained  via  microprudential 
supervision  with  macroeconomic  and  monetary  insights.  We  expect  macroprudential 
measures, such as countercyclical provisioning, to mitigate systemic risks. We also expect 
the  findings  of  macroprudential  oversight  to  feed  into  the  microprudential  work  that  alerts 
supervisors and the wider world to macroeconomic risks. 
Besides  setting  up  the  ESRB,  on  1 January  this  year,  three  European  Supervisory 
Authorities  (ESAs)  came  into  being:  the  European  Banking  Authority,  the  European 
Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  and  the  European  Securities  and  Markets 
Authority.  We  expect  that  these  new  institutions  will  sustainably  enhance  microprudential 
supervision in Europe. 
Currently,  the  EU  and  euro  area  financial  system  continue  to  face  several  important  risks. 
The  main  source  of  concern  is  the  interplay  between  fiscal  imbalances,  downside  risks  to 
economic growth and bank funding vulnerabilities. Although this interplay is limited to a small 
number of euro area countries, with a relatively small share of total EU and euro area GDP, 
potential contagion to other EU or euro area countries is not insignificant. In this respect, let 
me state how surprised I am to see how quickly some of the lessons of the crisis are being 
forgotten. One of the lessons is the need to assess risk in a systemic way, not only at the 
micro  level.  There  can  be  no  systemic  assessment  without  taking  contagion  into  account, 
across  instruments,  across  markets  and  across  countries.  The  sub-prime  crisis  or  the 
collapse of Lehman have clearly shown how devastating contagion can be! It is thus all the 
more surprising to see how in the current environment some policy  makers, academics or 
editorialists totally ignore the systemic dimension of financial markets in their proposals for 
very specific issues like for instance bank debt. Thinking that a specific category of assets 
 – such as senior bank bonds – can be treated in a specific way without immediately affecting 
all other assets, or that certain banks can be treated in a way that does not impact the whole 
system, not only within a country but also cross border is a testimony of short memory. The 
same applies for sovereign debt instruments. 
The risks related to the re-emergence of global imbalances and any disorderly unwinding are 
also considerable. Moreover, the catastrophe in Japan and tensions in the Middle East show 
us that risks of various sorts (natural, geopolitical, etc…) are never far away.  
In addition, a new round of stress tests is being carried out between March and June this 
year, with the final set of results to be published in June. There have been many comments 
and  discussions  about  these  stress  tests,  often  without  sufficient  information.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  the  success  of  these  tests  depends  on  their  full  understanding  on  the  parts  of 
market participants. It is thus essential that supervisory authorities coordinate closely within 
the EBA their communication strategy. It’s no time for cacophony, nor for national authorities 
to engage in a beauty contest.  
Compared to the previous round, the underlying scenarios are considerably more adverse, in 
particular in terms of overall decline in GDP which encompasses the sum of all the parameter 
changes (interest rates, haircuts, probability of default, …). The probability of the scenario is, 
over a two year horizon, much lower, especially for 2011 where it is 1%, instead of 7% last 
year.  Moreover,  national  supervisors  and  banks will  have  less  discretion  in conducting  the 
tests. This time the EBA will be giving direct guidance regarding the definition and projections 
of pre-provision operating profits, including the increased cost of funding. The thresholds in 
the stress tests will be set at levels which are substantially higher than the minimum solvency 
requirements. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Banking regulation is becoming stricter 
In a broader sense, Europe has been actively contributing to stronger prudential supervision, 
notably  banking  supervision.  At  both  global  and  national  levels,  there  has  been  a  marked 
tightening of banking and prudential rules. Work on corporate governance and internal audit 
has progressed too.  
In  light  of  the  financial  crisis  experienced  in  advanced  economies,  it  could  fairly  be  asked 
whether the rules are to be blamed or the way in which they were applied. The answer to this 
question is pertinent also for this cooperation Programme.  
In fact, it was decided that work foreseen in the Programme concerning the implementation 
of  the  Basel  II  framework  should  continue.  Basel  II  focuses  on  risk-based  supervision.  It 
requires  banks  to  operate  a  structured  risk  management.  The  internal  capital  adequacy 
assessment process (ICAAP) required by pillar 2 is a model for systematic strategic planning 
for  any  financial  enterprise.  Financial  firms  must  have  an  understanding  of  their  risk  and 
capital  situation.  They  are  required  to  have  a  continual  review  of  their  risks,  capital  and 
business  environment.  I  think  that  they  will  flourish  only  if  they  embrace  in  their  corporate 
processes  and  culture  the  continual  learning  paradigm.  This  focus  on  the  systematic 
management  of  a  financial  institution  has  been  repeatedly  stressed  in  both  parts  of  the 
Cooperation Programme. Rightly so: the soundness of a financial firm depends on its own 
managers’  capability  to  understand,  measure  and  master  the  risks,  and  to  grasp  the 
business opportunities on the basis of a good control of the downside risks. That capability 
constitutes its first line of defence. Supervision can only be the second line of defence. 
Internal audit is an essential part of corporate governance 
The internal audit part of the Cooperation Programme has focused on risk-based audit and 
IT audit. The audit function is oriented towards the organisation’s objectives. Internal audit 
delivers  independent  views  and  advice  on  the  governance  of  the  organisation.  A 
comprehensive and systematic view of the risks posed to the objectives and the organisation 
as a whole guide the auditors in the planning of their work as well as in the follow-up to their 
recommendations. As IT is nowadays an intrinsic part of the infrastructure as well as a critical 
business  tool,  the  Programme’s  focus  on  the  particular  challenges  of  the  IT  audit  was 
certainly  appropriate.  Overall,  the  Programme  emphasised  risk  orientation  rather  than 
compliance  checks,  an  approach  that  is  indispensable  today.  Only  an  audit  function  that 
understands the dynamics of the changing environment and the impact of these changes on 
the organisation’s objectives can provide the necessary reassurance to the organisation’s top 
management. The Programme has contributed to such a risk orientation – which has meant 
a considerable cultural change for the audit function.  
I think that risk-based audits need two key ingredients for success: firstly, chief auditors must 
enjoy  the  full  trust  and  backing  of  the  organisation’s  top  management,  even  when  they 
convey  unpleasant  or  unwelcome  messages. And  secondly,  the  auditors  can  only  do  their 
job properly if they are empowered to act autonomously.  
Central bank cooperation – a long-term investment that will bear fruit 
I have sought today to shed some light on the importance of various tools for the soundness 
of  our  financial  systems:  banking  supervision,  internal  audit,  micro  and  macroprudential 
supervision  as  well  as  audit  and  corporate  governance.  The  “investment”  that  this 
Programme  has  made  in  banking  supervision,  as  society’s  “systemic  financial  risk 
management”,  and  in  internal  audit,  as  an  element  to  help  an  organisation  achieve  its 
objectives, is fully in line with this approach. I am confident that the investment will bear fruit 
in the years to come.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Finally, let me thank all those involved in this project – the EU Delegation, the Bank of Russia 
and  also  the  colleagues  from  the  eight  national  central  banks  and  the  ECB.  It’s  the  close 
cooperation in these uncertain times which has made this remarkable project so successful. I 
sense that, although we are concluding this particular venture, the challenges of the future 
and the very positive experience of this Programme will certainly justify new partnerships in 
the future. I sense that there is no shortage of interest and enthusiasm to join forces again.  
Many thanks to all those who contributed.  
And thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
