Tiff Macklem: Mitigating systemic risk and the role of central banks  
Remarks  by  Mr  Tiff  Macklem,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to 
“Conférence de Montréal”, Montreal, Quebec, 6 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
It’s a pleasure to be here today and to be part of this panel. My assignment is to talk about 
the role of central banks with respect to systemic risk–in ten minutes. Needless to say, this is 
a  tall  order,  made  all  the  more  challenging  by  the  fact  that  systemic  risk  requires  looking 
across the entire financial system and considering the full sweep of policy instruments and 
how they interact. 
But I will do my best to break it down into the essential points and look forward to the panel 
discussion and questions afterwards. 
There are three points that I want to make. 
First,  we  have  made  considerable  progress  in  reforming  the  core  of  the  global  financial 
system. Basel III represents a very significant strengthening of the global rules. The reform 
agenda is now turning to the important issue of shadow banking–or market-based financing, 
as  it  is  more  aptly  called–and  the  appropriate  perimeter  of  supervision  and  regulation. 
Completing  this  reform  agenda  is  critical  to  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system. 
Second, central banks have a pivotal role to play in mitigating systemic risk by: 
 
identifying  system-wide  vulnerabilities  and  using  their  panoramic  view  of  the 
financial system to connect the dots; 
supporting financial stability by providing emergency liquidity assistance to solvent, 
but illiquid institutions; and 
protecting the global financial system from the failure of one institution by promoting 
robust  core  financial  infrastructure  and  overseeing  systemically  important  clearing 
and settlement systems, including central counterparties for over-the-counter (OTC) 
derivatives. 
  And third, while a better-regulated financial system should make inflation control easier, in 
the post-crisis world, monetary policy-makers have some new things to think about. 
Let me add some colour on each of these points. 
G-20 financial regulatory reform 
The logical place to start the reform agenda was at the core of the system, and there has 
been a great deal of progress. 
The financial crisis revealed all too starkly that the global banking system was dangerously 
undercapitalized  and  over-leveraged,  and  liquidity  buffers  were  glaringly  inadequate.  The 
new global standards in the Basel III Capital Adequacy Accord redress this core vulnerability. 
The crisis also taught us that regulating on an institution-by-institution basis is important, but 
it is not enough. The risk to the financial system is greater than the average risk to individual 
firms.  Managing  this  risk  requires  new  system-wide  tools,  and  here,  too,  there  has  been 
considerable progress. The counter-cyclical capital buffer included in Basel III is a giant step 
forward. The Bank of Canada played a leading role in the development of the buffer, which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
provides  for  additional  capital  to  be  built  up  during  periods  of  excessive  credit  growth  in 
anticipation of a future economic downturn. 
The reform agenda is now moving beyond the core. 
This  means  taking  into  account  the  considerable  importance  of  shadow  banking  or 
market-based  financing.  The  credit  intermediation  activities  of  banks  are  closely  regulated 
and  supervised,  and  are  backstopped  with  deposit  insurance  and  central  bank  liquidity.  In 
contrast,  market-based  financing  is  less  regulated  and  does  not  have  access  to  public 
liquidity support. 
But it is big, and the crisis highlighted the systemic vulnerabilities market-based financing can 
pose. 
For both these reasons the international agenda is now turning to the perimeter of regulation 
and  market-based  financing.  It  will  be  essential  that  reforms  strike  an  effective  balance 
between the benefits of market-based financing in terms of competition, diversification and 
innovation, and the risks related to regulatory arbitrage and systemic vulnerabilities. 
The role of central banks 
This leads to the role of central banks in mitigating systemic risks. As I said at the outset, a 
key role for central banks is to use their panoramic view of the financial system to identify 
system-wide vulnerabilities. 
Central banks are well placed to recognize risks and prioritize them within a framework that 
maps potential weaknesses and traces the chain of cause and effect throughout the system. 
But to do this effectively, we need to raise our game. We need a deeper understanding of the 
links  between  financial  intermediation,  money  and  credit  flows,  the  balance  sheets  of 
households  and  businesses,  and  the  range  of  available  policy  instruments.  And  this 
understanding needs to be combined with better detection of emerging financial imbalances. 
This  requires  engagement  with  the  private  sector  and  building  multidisciplinary  teams  that 
bring together economists, financial experts, accountants and lawyers, among others. 
And it is not enough to simply draw up long lists of vulnerabilities. Risks need to be assessed 
and ranked, providing a clear sense of priority. 
Since the outset of the crisis, the Bank of Canada has intensified its efforts to take account of 
credit  flows  in  its  policy  analysis.  Recent  research  has  made  important  strides  in 
incorporating  financial  intermediation  into  macro-economic  models.  This  will  allow  us  to 
assess  new  developments  in  the  financial  system  and  how  alternative  policy  interventions 
will affect financial stability and economic activity. 
We  have  also  sharpened  our  analysis  of  systemic  vulnerabilities  in  our  Financial  System 
Review, where we provide both an assessment and a ranking of the top-tier risks. 
In  addition  to  identifying  system-wide  risk,  central  banks  have  a  historic  role  to  play  in 
providing liquidity to avert banking panics and crises. This role of lender of last resort is as 
old as central banking itself. 
The central bank acting as lender of last resort does not prevent shocks, but it can neutralize 
their secondary repercussions. We inject liquidity where the system had generated it before 
by exchanging less-liquid assets for more-liquid ones. 
Our actions to support liquidity in markets are guided by principles: 
 
 
lending to support liquidity should reduce moral hazard; 
interventions should be graduated, targeted, well-designed and created to prevent 
further market distortions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
last 
in  Canada, 
trillion.  Here 
year  was  $618 
The financial crisis demanded new types of liquidity facilities, including longer terms, broader 
pools  of  eligible  collateral  and  a  wider  range  of  counterparties.  This  was  necessary  in 
Canada  as  domestic  banks  found  it  more  difficult  to  fund  themselves  when  global  credit 
markets seized up during the financial crisis. The Bank is now assessing the effectiveness of 
the various extraordinary facilities used in the crisis with a view to strengthening contingency 
plans in the event of new shocks. 
Finally,  central  banks  play  an  important  role  in  mitigating  the  harmful  knock-on  effects  of 
failure through robust oversight of systemically important clearing and settlement systems. 
One of the few parts of the global financial system that worked well through the crisis was 
clearing  and  settlement  systems.  They  handled  enormous  volumes  against  a  backdrop  of 
extraordinarily volatile financial conditions and successfully closed out the positions of failed 
counterparties, reducing harmful spillover effects. 
But  the  crisis  also  highlighted  the  systemic  importance  of  over-the-counter  derivatives 
markets  and  the  need  to  clear  standardized  OTC  derivatives  through  risk-proofed  central 
counterparties. Globally, the derivatives market is huge. The amount of notional outstanding 
in  OTC  derivatives 
the 
Canadian-dollar-denominated OTC derivatives market was about $9 trillion, of which a little 
over $6 trillion was in interest rate swaps. 
Central counterparties (CCPs) for OTC derivatives will provide greater certainty of payment, 
mitigating  the  harmful  spillovers  resulting  from  the  failure  of  a  counterparty,  and  reducing 
contagion in times of stress. But CCPs also have the potential to create new single points of 
vulnerability.  This  calls  for  the  careful  design  of  CCPs,  as  well  as  robust  regulation  and 
supervision.  It  will  also  be  important  to  ensure  sufficient  access  to  CCPs  to  avoid  limiting 
competition.  This  is  of  particular  concern  in  countries,  like  Canada,  that  are  not  host  to  a 
large global CCP. 
Two paths to addressing these design issues are being actively considered. The first is to 
promote 
to  global  CCPs,  combined  with  shared  oversight 
arrangements,  so  that  strong,  large  and  mid-tier  derivatives  market  participants  can  have 
efficient access to central clearing. The second is to build local CCPs that are better aligned 
to local risks and local market conditions. A number of jurisdictions are committed to building 
their own onshore CCPs, including, Japan, Korea, China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Brazil. 
Here in Canada we need to give serious consideration to the onshore option. This isn’t to say 
that  we  should  take  the  global  option  off  the  table.  However,  there  are  good  reasons  to 
consider  onshore  CCPs.  Going  local  would  give  regulatory  authorities  a  high  degree  of 
oversight  and  supervision  over  systemically  important  financial  market  infrastructure. 
Canadian  authorities  would  also  have  much  more  control  over 
the  design  and 
implementation of emergency measures, including the provision of emergency liquidity. 
The Bank of Canada is co-operating with our peers in the public sector and the Canadian 
financial sector to determine the best path for the central clearing of OTC derivatives. The 
Bank of Canada has also supported the development of a domestic CCP for Canadian-dollar 
repos, which is scheduled to be launched later this year. 
fair  and  open  access 
Implications for monetary policy 
I’d like to conclude with a few thoughts on what all this means for monetary policy. The first 
and most obvious point is that life should be better. 
Putting Basel III into effect, combined with expanding the perimeter and reducing contagion, 
will reduce the frequency and ease  the severity of financial crises. Counter-cyclical capital 
buffers should help to lean against the build-up of excessive credit, moderating the financial 
accelerator and dampening economic fluctuations. All this should make the implementation 
of monetary policy easier. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
However, there will also be some new things for monetary policy-makers to think about. The 
very  fact  that  new  macroprudential  tools  are  being  employed  will  have  an  impact  on  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Using  these  tools  will  change  the  behaviour  of  both  the 
economy  and  the  financial  sector.  Monetary  policy-makers  will  have  to  understand  these 
effects. 
Moreover,  new  trade-offs  may  arise.  Consider  a  situation  where  excess  credit  growth 
requires the counter-cyclical capital buffer to be activated at a time when inflation is already 
well  contained.  Since  the  tightening  of  such  a  broad-based  macroprudential  tool  could  be 
expected  to  put  downward  pressure  on  inflation,  monetary  policy  can either  accommodate 
this restraint and let inflation return to target over a longer horizon, or it could lower the policy 
interest rate and risk undermining the effectiveness of the counter-cyclical capital buffer. 
Finally, even the best-designed regulatory and  supervisory framework will have limitations. 
And  there  could  be  circumstances  in  which  monetary  policy  should  play  a  complementary 
role  in  support  of  financial  stability.  This  is  more  likely  to  occur  in  situations  where  an 
imbalance is broad-based or is being fuelled by a low interest rate environment. 
We know that monetary policy has a far-reaching influence on financial markets and on the 
leverage  of  financial  institutions.  This  wide-scale  impact  makes  it  inappropriate  for  dealing 
with sector-specific imbalances, but potentially valuable in addressing imbalances that have 
spread to multiple sectors of the economy. 
Needless to say, clarifying the role that monetary policy should play in supporting financial 
stability  is  an  important  issue  to  be  considered  in  the  renewal  of  the  inflation-targeting 
framework. 
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to the discussion and your questions. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
