Masaaki Shirakawa: 150 years of innovation and challenges in monetary 
control 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  in  celebration  of  the 
150th anniversary of German-Japanese diplomatic relations, Frankfurt am Main, 8 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I  am  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  speak  at  Goethe  University  (Goethe-
Universität Frankfurt am Main) in celebration of the 150th anniversary of German-Japanese 
diplomatic relations. I would first like to express my thanks for the warm words of welcome 
from  Dr.  Hölscher,  Permanent  Undersecretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  of  Hessen, 
Dr. Raettig,  Deputy  Mayor  of  the  City  of  Frankfurt,  and  Mr.  Shigeeda,  Consul-General  of 
Japan. I also extend my sincere gratitude to Professor Gerlach of the Institute for Monetary 
and Financial Stability, who has made today’s speech possible.  
The Bank of Japan (Slide 1) stationed its representative in Berlin from 1919, just after World 
War  I,  and  established  its  representative  office  here  in  Frankfurt  in  1956.  Frankfurt  is  a 
unique city in the world, with two central banks, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the European 
Central Bank (ECB) (Slide 2). The Bank of Japan has been developing very close ties with 
both  of  them.  I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Bundesbank,  the  ECB,  and 
everyone here in Germany for your support of the Bank of Japan’s Frankfurt representative 
office. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
  
About 150 years ago, in 1860, a Prussian expedition to East Asia visited Edo, now Tokyo, 
and in 1861 concluded a treaty of amity and commerce, which became the foundation of the 
subsequent  close  relationship  between  Germany  and  Japan.  This  was  in  fact  quite  an 
interesting period in Japan’s financial and economic history. In the 1850s, the price of gold 
relative to silver in Japan was set considerably lower than in international markets and as a 
result  there  were  massive  outflows  of  gold  in  a  short  period  of  time.  In  response,  the 
Japanese government issued new gold coins with a much lower gold content. In the process, 
inflation rose rapidly due to the expansion of the money stock. There is a caricature drawn in 
Japan in 1861 that vividly illustrates the economic turmoil at the time (Slide 3). It shows the 
scene of a battle between two armies – a “currency army” with a gold coin as general, and a 
“commodities  army”  with  a  straw  rice  bag  as  general  –  with  one  shouting,  “Prices,  we  will 
defeat you!” and the other replying, “No, we will not be defeated!” It could thus be said that 
Japan  at  the  end  of  the  premodern  era  found  itself  suddenly  thrown  into  the  currents  of 
international  financial  markets,  and  I  am  sure  that  the  Prussian  expedition  was  able  to 
observe the resultant turmoil Japan’s economy experienced.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  While  there  certainly  has  been  some  progress  over  the  past  150  years  in  the  area  of 
monetary control, we probably have not made as much progress as we would like, as shown 
by  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  Monetary  control  is  critical  for  the  stability  of  the 
economy. Thus, today I have chosen to talk about “150 Years of Innovation and Challenges 
in Monetary Control,” drawing on examples from Germany – and Europe more generally – as 
well as Japan, from the perspective of a central bank governor. 
Four innovations in monetary control 
II.  
In  the  history  of  economic  activity,  the  invention  of  money  itself  of  course  represents  an 
extremely  important  innovation.  Since  then,  there  have  been  numerous  innovations  in 
monetary control. In what follows, I would like to start with four innovations that I consider 
particularly important in modern times. 
The invention of central banks 
The  first  and  greatest  innovation  was  the  invention  of  institutions  called  central  banks.  In 
Germany, the first central bank was set up with the establishment of the Reichsbank in 1876, 
while the Bank of Japan was established in 1882.1 At that time, there were still only about a 
dozen central banks in the world. Of course, most countries today have a central bank. The 
establishment  of  central  banks  meant  that  the  supply  of  money  was  not  necessarily 
influenced  by  gold  discoveries  and  other  vagaries  anymore,  and  it  became  possible  to 
actively control money in a systematic manner through transactions in financial markets. 
                                                 
1   For  a  history  of  modern  central  banks,  see  Forrest  Capie,  Charles  Goodhart,  Stanley  Fischer,  and  Norbert 
Schnadt, The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England, 1994. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The invention of a “lender of last resort” 
The second innovation is the idea of central banks as a “lender of last resort.” In 1861, the 
year that the treaty of amity and commerce between Germany and Japan was concluded, 
Walter  Bagehot  became  editor-in-chief  of  The  Economist  magazine  in  England.  As  you 
probably know, he later wrote a famous book, Lombard Street, a treatise on the best central 
bank practices, providing the first-ever systematic analysis of the roles of a central bank. 
In the book, he formulated what came to be called Bagehot’s rule, namely that, to prevent 
disruption in the financial system in times of crisis, the central bank should act as a lender of 
last resort, providing unlimited funds at punitive rates.2 The practical application of Bagehot’s 
rule has been modified in line with changes in financial market structures, and in the recent 
global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  –  including  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  – 
aggressively provided funds to the markets as the lender of last resort, thereby preventing a 
collapse of the financial system. The establishment of the principle of the lender of last resort 
is of significant importance. 
The invention of monetary policy 
The third major innovation I would like to mention, although it may sound somewhat strange, 
is  the  “invention  of  monetary  policy.”  While  I will  touch  later  on  the  issue  of  how  to  define 
monetary policy, for the time being I will use the term in the conventional sense of “policy that 
aims at actively influencing the inflation rate or the economic growth rate by controlling the 
level  of  short-term  interest  rates.”  Under  the  gold  standard,  the  quantity  of  money  was 
constrained by gold holdings and thus the central bank could not influence the price level and 
economic  activity  in  an  active  manner.  In  this  sense,  central  banks  had  limited  room  to 
deploy  monetary  policy.  In  fact,  monetary  policy  was  not  discussed  in  Bagehot’s  book. 
Monetary policy worthy of the name started only with the transition to a fiat money system. 
Nowadays,  appropriate  monetary  policy  conduct  has  become  one  of  the  key  tools 
contributing to macroeconomic stability. 
The introduction of the concept of central bank independence 
Finally, the fourth innovation has been the idea of central bank independence. While it is only 
relatively recently that central bank independence has become firmly established in countries 
around the world, interestingly, in Europe active discussions on the enhancement of central 
bank independence already took place in the wake of World War I. For example, at the 1922 
Genoa  International  Economic  Conference,  which  aimed  at  restructuring  the  international 
economic and financial system in the post-World War I period, in the resolution concerning 
currency  there  was  a  proposal  that  “banks,  and  especially  banks  of  issue,  should  be  free 
from  political  pressure.”3  It  goes  without  saying  that,  in  subsequent  decades,  the  German 
public  and  the  Bundesbank  played  a  significant  role  in  establishing  the  concept  of  central 
bank independence at an early stage. Let me note that, when stationed in Berlin early in his 
career, Mr. Hisato Ichimada – who later became the Governor of the Bank of Japan for eight 
years  immediately  after  the  end  of  World  War  II  –  witnessed  the  so-called  “miracle  of  the 
Rentenmark”  (or  “Wunder  der  Rentenmark”)  that  ended  hyperinflation  in  Germany  in  the 
post-World  War  I  period.  It  is  said  that  he  utilized  this  experience  when  he  conducted 
monetary policy in Japan’s post-World War II period (Slide 4). 
                                                 
2   See Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, 1873. 
3   See Papers Relating to International Economic Conference, Genoa, April–May, 1922, 1922. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
The idea of central bank independence has begun to become firmly established in countries 
around the world since the early 1990s. For instance, the Maastricht Treaty signed in 1992 
stipulated central bank independence as one of the conditions for joining the euro, while in 
Japan the Bank of Japan’s independence in the conduct of monetary policy was stated in law 
through  the  revision  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act  in  1998.  As  central  banks  gained 
independence in their monetary policy, this made it legally possible for them to serve as a 
medium- to long-term anchor for money. 
There  have  been  various  other  innovations  in  monetary  control  apart  from  the  four  I  just 
mentioned. Money supply targeting is one of them. While the Bank of Japan did not adopt 
money  supply  targeting,  many  central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies,  including  the 
Bundesbank,  adopted  it  from  the  1970s  through  the  first  half  of  the  1980s.  However, 
subsequently,  as  the  stable  relationship  between  money  supply  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
inflation rate and economic activity on the other broke down due to technological innovations 
in finance, money supply targeting became ineffective and was consequently abandoned. In 
this  regard, the  Bank  of  Canada  Governor  Gerald  Bouey  famously  stated  that  “we  did  not 
abandon money supply targets, they abandoned us.” It could thus be said that the specific 
methods of monetary control have changed as a result of technological innovation. 
Since  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s,  many  central  banks  have  adopted  inflation  targeting  – 
excluding, however, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the Bank of Japan. This approach 
has been effective in containing inflation or entrenching inflation levels that had already come 
down. However, it seems that this framework, or the focus on the stability of general prices 
underlying  it,  now  faces  new  challenges.  From  the  viewpoint  of  price  stability,  economic 
performance was benign for a prolonged period through the mid-2000s, giving no apparent 
cause for concern, but a large-scale credit bubble built up, culminating in the global financial 
crisis.  As  a  result,  numerous  advanced  economies  are  currently  experiencing  severe 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
balance-sheet adjustments associated with the bursting of the bubble. These developments 
are having a subtle impact on how inflation targeting and, for that matter, monetary policies 
are managed. 
Having said that, I am by no means arguing that there is no point in money supply targeting 
or  inflation  targeting.  In  my  view,  history  seems  to  suggest  that  –  be  it  with  regard  to  the 
lender  of  last  resort  function  or  monetary  policy  –  it  is  necessary  to  constantly  review 
measures  of  monetary  control  in  light  of  changes  in  the  environment.  In  other  words, 
constant innovation is necessary. 
Central banks’ policy responses following the global financial crisis 
III. 
Next,  from  this  perspective  of  constant  review  and  innovation,  I  would  like  to  move  on  to 
various unconventional policy measures that major central banks took in the course of the 
recent severe financial crisis. While the term “unconventional policies” can be understood by 
different people in a number of ways, in what follows I will talk about unconventional policies 
by dividing them into two categories: first, measures taken in the midst of the recent financial 
crisis  as  part  of  central  banks’  lender  of  last  resort  function  and  aimed  at  ensuring  the 
stability of the financial system, and second, measures taken in less difficult times, after the 
crisis had settled, that aim at stabilizing economic activity.4 
As  for  the  former,  the  measures  were,  in  essence,  in  line  with  the  lender  of  last  resort 
principle  emphasized  by  Bagehot.  However,  naturally, 
the 
21st century is not quite the same as that in the 19th century when Bagehot lived. Central 
banks  around  the  world  have  faced  new  challenges  he  never  imagined,  and  have  worked 
with considerable ingenuity. 
financial  system 
the 
in 
Resolving the issue of stigma 
In  the  course  of  the  recent  financial  crisis,  the  first  challenge  was  to  resolve  the  stigma 
attached  to  receiving  emergency  funds  from  the  central  bank.  While  aggressive  liquidity 
provision is critical in a crisis, financial institutions might hesitate to borrow funds even in an 
emergency and try to raise funds in the market at all costs out of fear that their perceived 
creditworthiness will decline if it becomes known that they received emergency funds. As a 
result  of  such  collective  behavior,  the  liquidity  shortage  will  accelerate  further  and  interest 
rates will rise. 
Under the mechanism described by Bagehot, it is assumed that liquidity is provided based on 
negotiations  with  individual  financial  institutions,  which,  however,  would  stigmatize  such 
institutions. To overcome this problem, major central banks have introduced new measures. 
For example, the Federal Reserve in 2007 introduced the Term Auction Facility (TAF), under 
which  the  range  of  financial  institutions  eligible  for  funds-supplying  operations  was 
substantially  broadened,  the  duration  of  funds  provided  was  significantly  lengthened,  and 
interest rates on funds were determined by auction. And the ECB in 2008 fixed the rate for its 
operations to the policy rate and initiated monetary control that provides unlimited funds upon 
request from financial institutions.  
                                                 
4   For  the  policy  responses  taken  by  major  central  banks,  see  Monetary  Affairs  Department,  Bank  of  Japan, 
“Major Central Banks’ Policy Conduct during the Current Financial Crisis,” 2009 (available only in Japanese); 
and Brian F. Madigan, “Bagehot’s Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the 
Financial Crisis,” speech given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Annual Economic Symposium in 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming on August 21, 2009. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Responding to the evaporation of market liquidity 
The second challenge was to respond to the evaporation of market liquidity. When writing 
about declining liquidity, Bagehot also referred to liquidity in the government bond market in 
a  crisis,  but  in  his  time  there  were  neither  the  kind  of  complex  financial  products  nor  the 
derivatives transactions we see today. Therefore, in his day, systemic risk referred mainly to 
a  contagious  bank  run  on  deposits.  However,  as  a  result  of  financial  globalization  and 
technological  innovations,  the  forms  in  which  systemic  risk  manifests  itself  have  become 
more complex and diverse. If counterparty risk heightens, that is, market participants become 
concerned about the creditworthiness of counterparties, this can result in an “evaporation of 
market  liquidity,”  in  which  counterparties  disappear  from  the  market.  If  fire  sales  of  assets 
spread and market prices start to plunge, the capital position of a large number of financial 
institutions may erode due to valuation losses on assets, which could develop into a solvency 
problem  of  financial  institutions.  To  avoid  such  a  situation,  liquidity  provision  through 
traditional lender of last resort measures alone will not be sufficient. Instead, someone needs 
to serve as a trusted counterparty standing between market participants that no longer trust 
each other. During the crisis, it was central banks that played this role. 
In this situation, major central banks implemented measures that in essence directly provided 
liquidity  to  fund-raisers  in  markets  where  market  functioning  had  deteriorated  significantly. 
For  example,  in  2008,  the  Federal  Reserve  introduced  a  policy  measure  to  lend  to 
CP issuers  and  holders  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs).  The  Bank  of  Japan  also 
purchased  CP,  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP),  and  corporate  bonds  in  order  to 
cope with the rapid decline in liquidity in these markets, which were the main funding sources 
for large firms that were directly hit by the financial crisis.  
Provision of foreign currency liquidity 
The third challenge was the provision of foreign currency liquidity. In Bagehot’s day, liquidity 
meant  liquidity  in  the  home  currency  for  domestic  transactions  and  gold  for  international 
transactions.  There  is  a  reference  in  Bagehot’s  book  to  a  situation  in  which  the  Bank  of 
England did not sufficiently carry out its lender of last resort function due to concerns over a 
shortage of gold. During the recent financial crisis, liquidity in the U.S. dollar funds market 
declined significantly and dollar funding became an extremely pressing issue, especially for 
private financial institutions whose home currency was not the dollar. In order to ensure that 
central  banks  could  smoothly  provide  dollars  to  home  financial  institutions,  financial 
institutions needed to have a sense of security that central banks themselves could provide 
unlimited  amounts  of  dollars.  To  this  end,  major  central  banks,  including  the  ECB  and  the 
Bank  of  Japan,  secured  dollar  funds  by  making  currency  swap  arrangements  with  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  then  introduced  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  domestically.  The 
currency swap arrangements were made not only for the dollar but also for other currencies. 
For  example,  the  ECB  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank  established  a  currency  swap 
arrangement  for  Swiss  franc  funding,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Bank  of  Korea 
established  a  currency  swap  arrangement  for  yen  funding,  both  of  which  contributed  to 
restoring stability in foreign currency funding markets. 
Unconventional monetary policies 
Since  the  recent  financial  crisis,  major  central  banks  have  also  been  implementing 
unconventional policies that aim at stabilizing economic activity. These are intended to deal 
with the challenge of achieving monetary easing effects to return the economy to  a stable 
recovery path when nominal short-term interest rates are already near zero. One example is 
the  increase  in  the  government  bond  purchases  decided  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the 
autumn of 2010, which aimed at absorbing interest risks in the private sector and lowering 
long-term interest rates. Another example is the comprehensive monetary easing decided on 
by  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  the  autumn  of  2010,  which  includes  various  unconventional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
measures. The measure is quite exceptional in that the eligible assets for monetary policy 
operations  were  expanded  to  include  not  only  government  bonds  but  also  CP,  corporate 
bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and real estate investment trusts (REITs). The Bank 
of Japan’s purchases aim at stimulating economic activity through a reduction in various risk 
premiums, as there is little room for a decline in short-term interest rates. 
IV.  
The Bank of Japan’s policy response after the 1990s: the bursting of Japan’s 
asset bubble 
Looking  at  the  outcome,  it  can  be  said  that  the  unconventional  measures  to  deal  with  the 
global financial crisis have been effective. At the same time, though, the measures pose new 
challenges. Before discussing these new challenges in detail, let me digress slightly and talk 
about the unconventional policies that the Bank of Japan hammered out from the latter half 
of the 1990s in response to the bursting of the asset bubble. This experience meant that the 
Bank  of  Japan  had  to  deal  with  the  consequences  of  the  bursting  of  a  bubble  and  the 
ensuing economic and financial difficulties ahead of other countries. There is not sufficient 
time  to  elaborate  today  on  this  point,  but  let  me  note  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  a 
lonely forerunner in terms of the adoption of unconventional policies such as the introduction 
of  quantitative  easing  and  of  a  policy  duration  commitment  in  2001.  In  the  course  of  the 
current  financial  crisis,  many  other  central  banks  have  implemented  measures  that  are  in 
essence similar to the Bank of Japan’s, although they may differ in detail. This shows that 
what we are experiencing during the current global financial crisis is not a special case but 
reflects changes that are more or less universal. With this in mind, let me explain some of the 
unconventional  policies  pursued  by  the  Bank  of  Japan,  focusing  on  three  measures  in 
particular.5 
Fund provisioning to Yamaichi Securities 
The first measure is the provision of loans as a lender of last resort to a securities company 
whose  solvency  could  not  be  judged  clearly.  In  the  autumn  of  1997,  massive  off-balance-
sheet liabilities were suddenly revealed at Yamaichi Securities, one of the biggest securities 
companies in Japan at the time, and it was decided to liquidate the company. However, the 
company  had  bank  subsidiaries  in  Europe,  and  at  that  time  other  Japanese  financial 
institutions held a large amount of impaired assets. Thus, it was judged that an immediate 
legal  liquidation  would  very  likely  pose  a  systemic  risk.  The  Bank  of  Japan,  therefore, 
decided  to  provide  Yamaichi  with  an  unlimited  amount  of  liquidity  to  support  the  orderly 
closure  of  its  business  operations.  However,  because  the  disclosure  of  off-balance-sheet 
liabilities occurred suddenly and financial markets were unstable, there remained uncertainty 
about  the  value  of  Yamaichi’s  net  assets.  The  premise  of  Bagehot’s  rule  is  that  the 
counterparty financial institutions are solvent so that they can submit good-quality collateral. 
Since this was not the case, it was all the more difficult for the Bank of Japan to decide the 
proper course. Regrettably, at Yamaichi’s subsequent legal bankruptcy proceedings, it was 
determined  in  2005  that  part  of  the  loans  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  Yamaichi  were 
unrecoverable. However, it should be noted that a situation like the one after the failure of 
Lehman Brothers, when real quarterly GDP contracted at a double-digit rate on a year-on-
year basis, was avoided. In other words, the measure prevented the worst-case scenario of 
having  Japan’s  financial  crisis  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  trigger  turmoil  in  the  global 
financial system. 
                                                 
5   The Bank of Japan implemented other innovative measures apart from the three measures mentioned here. 
For  example,  in  2001  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  the  bill  purchasing  operation  conducted  at  all  of  its 
branches, providing longer-term funds to a wider range of counterparties including local financial institutions. 
This measure is similar to the Federal Reserve’s TAF. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Operation twist to facilitate foreign currency funding 
The  second  policy  measure  pursued  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  concerns  foreign  currency 
liquidity. In the latter half of the 1990s, Japanese banks, amid serious concern about their 
soundness, faced difficulties in raising U.S. dollar funds, especially longer-term ones. In this 
situation, the Bank of Japan, as part of its funds-supplying operations, provided longer-term 
yen  funds.  Japanese  banks  exchanged  these  yen  funds  for  dollar  funds  in  the  foreign 
currency  swap  market  with  foreign  banks  as  their  counterparties.  Viewed  from  the  foreign 
banks’  side,  such  transactions  were  dollar  loans  using  yen  funds  as  collateral.  Therefore, 
even  under  the  zero  interest  rate  environment,  they  accepted  the  trades  as  long  as  yen 
funding  rates  were  negative,  despite  the  deteriorated  creditworthiness  of  Japanese  banks. 
However, foreign banks had to find safe investment opportunities for their yen funds. In this 
regard, interest-bearing bills issued by the Bank of Japan to absorb shorter-term yen funds 
became suitable investment opportunities. Bills sold were safe and had no default risk. This 
string of trading ultimately had the effect that the Bank of Japan became the counterparty of 
both  Japanese  and  foreign  banks,  thereby  promoting  smooth  dollar  funding  for  Japanese 
financial institutions. 
The stock purchasing program 
The third measure, introduced in 2002, is the Bank of Japan’s purchase of stocks held by 
commercial  banks.  At  that  time,  Japanese  banks  held  large  amounts  of  stocks  on  their 
balance sheets. Therefore, market risk associated with stock price volatility was a major risk 
for  Japanese  banks,  and  the  adverse  feedback  loop  of  falling  stock  prices,  restrained 
lending, and a deterioration in the real economy became a problem. In these circumstances, 
the Bank of Japan decided to purchase stocks held by commercial banks. This measure was 
very unorthodox, but was an effective tool in ensuring stability in the financial system and the 
real economy through the reduction of market risk associated with banks’ stockholdings. The 
credit easing and the large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs adopted by the Federal 
Reserve  during  the  current  financial  crisis  are  very  similar  to  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  stock 
purchasing program in that in both cases the central bank absorbs private-sector risks and 
thereby aims at improving financial conditions. 
New challenges 
V.  
As shown by the examples I have mentioned, central banks in the major economies – in their 
role  as  monetary  policy  authorities –  have  been  implementing  innovative  policy  measures, 
though they adopted the measures at different times: since the latter half of the 1990s in the 
case of the Bank of Japan and the current global financial crisis in the case of the Federal 
Reserve and the ECB. These policy measures have helped to prevent a depression as deep 
as the one that occurred in the 1930s. At the same time, however, as central banks stepped 
outside  the  framework  of  conventional  behavior,  they  have  been  confronted  with  new 
associated challenges. 
The division of roles between the government and the central bank 
The  first  challenge  is  the  division  of  roles  between  the  government  and  the  central  bank. 
When acting as the lender of last resort in a crisis, the central bank must judge whether the 
problem it is dealing with is a liquidity problem or a problem concerning financial institutions’ 
solvency. If the problem is one of a shortage of liquidity, it is the central bank that should act, 
based on Bagehot’s rule. In contrast, if the problem concerns the solvency of one or more 
financial institutions, it is the government that needs to act by, for example, injecting public 
funds.  However,  in  reality,  and  especially  during  a  crisis,  it  is  often  difficult  to  distinguish 
between  these  two  problems,  as  shown  by  the  case  of  Yamaichi  Securities  mentioned 
earlier. Moreover, even if it is possible to tell the difference, the decision of injecting public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
funds tends to be delayed because it is politically unpopular. However, a financial crisis does 
not allow us to wait for such a political decision.  
The problem of the division of roles between the government and the central bank remains 
even  after  the  acute  symptoms  have  disappeared.  At  present,  policy  rates  in  major 
economies are virtually zero and these economies face balance-sheet constraints due to the 
bursting  of  the  bubble.  For  example,  in  the  United  States,  unemployment  continues  to  be 
high on the back of balance-sheet adjustments in the household sector. In this situation, the 
Federal Reserve has announced that it would purchase 600 billion U.S. dollars in longer-term 
Treasury  securities  until  June  2011.  The  Bank  of  Japan  started  comprehensive  monetary 
easing in the autumn of 2010, and as part of this, has purchased corporate bonds, REITs, 
and ETFs. In a zero interest rate environment, if a central bank aims to stimulate economic 
activity through monetary policy, one option is to seek a reduction in risk premiums through 
purchases of assets with relatively high credit risk. So far, such policy measures have been 
relatively  effective.  At  the  same  time,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  central  banks  eventually 
incur losses through these measures. Moreover, there is an increasing possibility that central 
banks will no longer be seen as neutral institutions, partly due to their stronger intervention in 
resource and capital allocation at the micro level. If this happens, public confidence in central 
banks – the very foundation for policy implementation – could be undermined. 
The reason why central banks are granted independence is fundamentally that their mission 
is to provide liquidity. The more policy measures become involved in the micro-allocation of 
resources  and  capital,  the  more  these  measures  have  the  flavor  of  quasi-fiscal  policy. 
However, in a democracy, fiscal policy is and should be decided by parliament. At the same 
time, however, central banks need to act flexibly in response to a crisis to maintain economic 
and financial stability. I do not think there is a universally applicable answer to the problem of 
the division of roles between the government and the central bank. The Bank of Japan has 
been addressing this problem by making tough decisions based on, for example, the severity 
of economic conditions, the legal framework for the central bank, and society’s tolerance of 
central bank involvement. 
What should the role of monetary policy be? 
As we consider these difficult issues, it is stating the obvious that the most important thing is 
to take preemptive measures to avoid falling into such a situation in the first place. In this 
regard, it is critical to take a deep look at the role monetary policy should play.6 It seems to 
me that in the past two decades, no other issue has been as frequently discussed as how 
monetary  policy  should  respond  to  a  bubble.  The  orthodox  view  prior  to  the  recent  global 
financial crisis, put simply, was that monetary policy should not respond to a bubble and that 
any resulting problems could be resolved if central banks took aggressive policy measures 
after  the  bubble  had  burst.  In  this  context,  Japan’s  “lost  decade”  tended  to  be  simply 
dismissed as mainly due to the delayed policy response of Japanese authorities. However, 
we  are  now  entering  the  fifth  year  since  the  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble  in  the  United 
States  and  real  GDP  there  has  hardly  increased  in  the  meantime.  Thus,  I  think  few  today 
would support the optimistic view that any problems resulting from the burst of a bubble can 
be easily resolved through aggressive policy measures after the fact.  
The  first  lesson  that  could  be  drawn  from  the  experience  of  the  past  two  decades  is  that, 
while price stability is important, this alone does not guarantee that the economy is stable. 
Looking back at the causes of the recent financial crisis, we find that financial imbalances in 
various  forms,  such  as  the  rise  in  asset  prices,  the  increase  in  credit,  the  increase  in 
leverage,  and  the  increase  in  maturity  mismatches,  had  built  up  to  an  extent  that  became 
                                                 
6   See, for example, Masaaki Shirakawa, “Revisiting the Philosophy behind Central Bank Policy,” speech at the 
Economic Club of New York on April 22, 2010. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unsustainable. The causes of these financial imbalances are complex, and although failures 
in financial institutions’ risk management and a delay in adequate regulation and supervision 
have no doubt played a role, this is not all. At the root of the financial imbalances was the 
expectation  that  interest  rates  would  remain  low.  The  subdued  inflation  seen  in  many 
advanced economies in the run-up to the global financial crisis gave rise to expectations that 
accommodative monetary conditions would continue for an extended period into the future. 
Of course, bubbles are not generated by expectations for protracted low interest rates alone, 
but it is also true that bubbles do not arise without such expectations. While price stability is 
important,  paying  too  much  attention  to  the  near-term  inflation  outlook  could  impair  the 
stability of the financial system, which is critical from the viewpoint of economic stability – the 
ultimate goal of price stability.  
The second lesson is the danger of monetary policy swinging too far in the direction of fine-
tuning. Of course, it would be ideal if fine-tuning were possible, but in my view, monetary policy 
has  a  more  important  role  to  play,  namely  ensuring  economic  and  financial  stability  in  the 
medium  to  long  term.  In  his  famous  presidential  address  to  the  American  Economic 
Association  in  1967,  Milton  Friedman  stated  that  “the  first  and  most  important  lesson  that 
history teaches about what monetary policy can do – and it is a lesson of the most profound 
importance – is that monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a major source of 
economic  disturbance.”  Seeing  the  significant  decline  in  the  level  of  real  GDP  in  advanced 
economies  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  continuing  high  unemployment,  I 
keenly feel it is important to prevent money itself from becoming a major source of economic 
disturbance. 
While  it  is  not  easy  to  apply  these  lessons  in  practice,  policy  authorities  must  tackle  the 
challenges I have mentioned, and in fact they are already making various efforts to do so. In 
this regard, in terms of the conduct of monetary policy, the ECB and the Bank of Japan seem 
to be taking similar approaches. The ECB has adopted a “two-pillar approach” – consisting of 
economic analysis that focuses on economic and financial developments and assesses the 
short-  to  medium-term  determinants  of  price  developments,  and  of  monetary  analysis  that 
examines medium- to long-term price developments from a monetary perspective – and then 
cross-checks the results. Similarly, the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy conduct is based on 
a  “two-perspective  approach.”  The  first  perspective  focuses  on  economic  and  price 
conditions one to two years ahead and examines whether, in the Bank of Japan’s baseline 
scenario,  the  economy  follows  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  The  second 
perspective  also  includes  a  longer  time  horizon  and,  from  the  viewpoint  of  achieving 
sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability,  examines  risk  factors  that  have  a  low 
probability of materializing but that could have a large impact on economic activity and prices 
if they do materialize. In my view, what the monetary policy frameworks of the ECB and the 
Bank  of  Japan  have  in  common  is  that  they  both  deliberately  incorporate  the  practice  of 
examining financial imbalances using various types of information. 
Regardless  of  what  framework  central  banks  adopt  in  their  monetary  policy,  preparing  for 
so-called tail risks will be increasingly important. As shown by Japan’s experience and the 
recent global financial crisis, preparing for risks which have a low probability but could have a 
large impact if they materialize is crucial. The keyword in the debate currently in progress on 
this issue is “macro-prudential policy.” The first critical step in this direction is to accurately 
understand risk profiles at the macro level. In Europe, this will be the task of the European 
Systemic Risk Board, which was set up in January this year. Together with such steps on the 
analytical front, it will also be necessary for societies as a whole to consider whether or not to 
take preemptive measures for tail risks. In this regard, a  major premise for the conduct of 
macro-prudential  policy  is  the  independence  of,  and  a  clear  mandate  for,  the  macro-
prudential  authority.  However,  it  is  optimistic  to  think  that  this  alone  will  lead  to  the 
implementation of the necessary policies. The key is whether a social consensus can be built 
that – because of the high costs involved in dealing with a bubble once it has arisen – the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
macro-prudential  authority  should  “take  away  the  punchbowl”  even  when  economic 
conditions still seem benign. 
Concluding remarks 
VI.  
My  speech  today  focused  on  the  topic  of  “150  Years  of  Innovation  and  Challenges  in 
Monetary  Control.”  The  four  innovations  I  mentioned  have  played  an  important  role  in 
monetary control and consequently in achieving economic stability. However, in the practical 
application  of  these  innovations,  constant  adaptation  to  changes  in  the  financial  and 
economic  environment  is  necessary.  In  this  regard,  I  discussed  the  challenges  we  face 
regarding the lender of last resort function, central bank independence, and monetary policy. 
In  terms  of  the  existence  of  central  banks,  which  I  pointed  out  as  the  first  of  the  four 
innovations, it is essential that central banks take policy actions in response to changes in 
the  environment.  If  we  think  about  the  next  150  years  ahead,  financial  and  economic 
globalization  are  bound  to  advance  further.  Thus,  for  central  banks  to  function  as  true 
“central banks” rather than as local banks in individual countries, cooperation among central 
banks is essential. International cooperation is necessary not only among central banks but 
also at various levels of government and in the private sector. Let me conclude my speech 
today  by  expressing  my  hope  that  the  friendship  and  cooperation  between  Germany  and 
Japan in this regard will continue to prosper in the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
