K C Chakrabarty: Emerging trends in payment systems and challenges 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
Banknet’s 7th Annual Conference on Payment Systems, Mumbai, 19 January 2011.  
 The  assistance  provided  by  Shri  G  Padmanabhan,  Shri  K  Vijayakumar  and  Smt  Radha  Somakumar  in 
preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
It is a pleasure and privilege to be here at the Banknet’s 7th Annual Conference on 
Payment Systems. The theme of today’s conference – “Moving to next generation payment 
systems  & solutions”  –  is  fitting  especially  at  a  time  when  the  banking  industry  is  going 
through  a  transitional  phase  of  broadening,  deepening  and  strengthening  the  financial 
services available to the masses. I take this opportunity to congratulate Banknet for providing 
this platform for the banks, the IT industry and other stakeholders to interact in an attempt to 
outperform  the  global  benchmarks  and  in  ensuring  greater  reach  of  the  banking  sector 
amongst the masses. 
2. 
An efficient and well run payment system is sine-qua-non for the efficient functioning 
of any economy. The smooth functioning of the market infrastructure for enabling payment 
and settlement systems is essential for market and financial stability, as also for economic 
efficiency,  and  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  financial  markets.  The  central  bank  plays  a 
crucial role by providing the ultimate settlement asset in the form of central bank money.  
3.  
The importance of a well run payment system was recognised in its entirety as the 
financial  crisis  of  2008  unfolded.  But  we  need  to  recognise  that  the  financial  crisis  also 
brought  to  the  fore  another  important  lesson.  The  financial  sector  and  the  payment  and 
settlement system infrastructure have to be subservient to the real sector and no country can 
attempt to reverse it as it would be akin to the classical case of putting the cart before the 
horse or the tail wagging the dog. The euphoria of financial alchemy might have created a 
mirage of the financial sector existing on its own; but the reality is different. Financial sector 
is like a wheel which derives its strength and resilience from the real economy which is the 
engine of growth. It is this engine which drives the financial sector. Smooth running of these 
wheels  calls  for  an  efficient  payment  system  which  is  safe,  secure  and  efficient,  thereby, 
enabling faster and safer movement of funds in the economy. The legislation of the PSS Act 
in India has given a boost to the confidence in the Indian payment system.  
4.  
The  topic  of  my  address  today  –  “Emerging  Trends  in  Payment  Systems  and 
Challenges” – is a dynamic one. Although banks are major players in this arena, there are 
non-banks  players  also  and  any  discussion  on  this  would  be  incomplete  without  including 
them.  My  speech  would,  therefore,  cover  payment  products  provided  both  by  banks  and 
non-banks.  Let  me  share  some  thoughts  on  (i)  initiatives  in  electronic  payment  systems, 
(ii) other payment products & payment channels and (iii) challenges for banks and regulators. 
Initiatives in electronic payment systems 
5. 
Electronic payment products are expected to provide speedier, cheaper and hassle 
free  payment  experience  to  customers  in  comparison  to  traditional  paper  based  payment 
instruments.  The  evolution  of  electronic  payment  products  in  the  country  have  progressed 
through two main phases – (i) introductory phase and (ii) rationalization phase. During the 
introductory  phase,  electronic  products  like  ECS  and  EFT  were  introduced  the  country  by 
Reserve Bank of India. These systems were decentralized serving the population of specific 
areas. Straight through pan-India coverage was not provided by these systems. The focus of 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  during  the  rationalization  phase  has  been  to  introduce  centralized 
payment  solutions.  This  coincided  with  the  implementation  of  Core  Banking  Solutions/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
centralized liquidity management solutions in banks. The RTGS, NEFT and NECS provided 
settlement at a central location.  
6.  
The vision for the next phase was set out in the “Vision Document” on Payment and 
Settlement  Systems  for  the  year  2009–2012.  The  document  clearly  identifies  the  new 
frontiers  and  a  road  map  for  implementation  of  new  projects.  The  vision  includes 
implementation  of  a  new  RTGS  system  which  would  provide  additional  features  including 
that  for  liquidity  management,  India  MoneyLine  –  a  24x7  system  for  one-to-one  funds 
transfers,  India  Card  –  a  domestic  card  initiative,  redesigned  ECS  to  function  as  a  truly 
Automated  Clearing  House  (ACH)  for  bulk  transactions,  and  mobile  payments  settlement 
network. 
7. 
the momentum acquired in the area of payment systems. (Annex) 
The growing trend in the usage of various modes of payment is a clear indication of 
Other products and payment channels 
The  card  based  payment  systems  have  been  evolving  over  the  period.  The  card 
8. 
based  payment  system  in  the  country  covers  credit/debit  and  prepaid  cards.  About 
230 million cards have been issued in the country. We have been witnessing an increase in 
the usage of cards (debit, credit) across various delivery channels like ATMs, POS, internet 
transactions, etc. On an average, 396 million transactions of value rupees one lakh crore is 
being processed during a month using these cards. The challenging canvas for the central 
bank and operators of the various payment systems lies in ensuring that while the various 
products are increasingly used across various delivery channels, the security of the payment 
systems is not compromised and the customer’s funds are protected. This is a big challenge 
to be faced to avoid erosion of customer confidence in the new age payment systems. It was 
towards this endeavor that RBI mandated the additional factor of authentication for all card-
not-present  transactions,  which  is  perhaps  the  first  attempt  made  in  this  direction  by  any 
regulator.  We  are  also  in  discussion  with  banks  and  the  card  companies  to  introduce  an 
authentication  system  for  transactions  at  POS.  At  the  same  time,  given  the  sprouting 
instances of cloning happening, particularly with regard to ATM cards, we have also started 
contemplating a move over to more secure “Chip and Pin” cards. 
9. 
Subsequent  to  issuance  of  the  guidelines  on  prepaid  payment  instruments,  this 
segment has also seen a spurt in activity. Banks as well as non-banks currently operate in 
the  prepaid  payments  segment.  This  product  segment  is  being  leveraged  by  non-bank 
providers for entry into payments arena. 16 non-bank entities have been given approval to 
issue these products. It is heartening to see that these players have been able to bring in 
many innovative payment products leveraging payment channels like internet and mobiles. 
Currently,  on  an  average  5  lakh  payment  transactions  are  processed  by  these  entities. 
Reserve  Bank  would  promote  the  activities  of  these  players  so  as  to  make  the  payments 
scenario more vibrant. 
10. 
Mobile  phone  based  payments  are  one  of  the  important  evolutions  in  payment 
systems. The guidelines on mobile banking issued by RBI were an initiative to promote the 
orderly  development  in  the  use  of  this  channel  by  banks.  Currently,  39  banks  have  been 
granted approval by RBI to provide payment services using this channel. 34 of these banks 
have  started  operations.  On  an  average,  5.5  lakh  payment  transactions  of  value  rupees 
56 crore are being processed through this channel during a month.  
11. 
Banking is an activity which only banks can undertake. For development of mobile 
banking,  co-operation  between  the  banks  and  the  mobile  service  providers’  is  important. 
World over the race for mobile companies to become banks and banks to become mobile 
service  providers  have  failed.  Mobile  transaction  platforms  initially  designed  by  banks  or 
mobile service providers based on this race have resulted in silos, which provide only limited 
transaction ability and almost nil interoperability. This has resulted to stagnation in the growth 
potential  for  such  services.  A  successful  model  requires  building  up  of  partnership 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
arrangements which leverage on the respective strengths of the stakeholders. The roles and 
responsibilities  of  each  partner  have  to  be  clearly  defined  and  agreed  to.  No  entity  can 
consider itself to the dominant partner for deciding on issues like revenue sharing. Further, 
no entity can operate a successful service independently in the long run. This realization has 
resulted  in  coming  together  of  operators  in  US  to  provide  a  transaction  channel  to  their 
customers which would facilitate the use of bank issued payment instruments – effectively 
leading to the clear demarcation of the role of each service provider. 
Financial inclusion 
12. 
Although I have listed out the efforts taken by the Reserve Bank in the promotion of 
payment systems and for ensuring the operations of efficient and risk free payment systems, 
none  of  these  would  receive  applause  unless  financial  concerns  of  the  underprivileged 
sections  in  the  rural  and  urban  areas  is  addressed  by  the  various  participants.  The  banks 
have  been  including  savings  and  credit/overdraft  as  major  components  of  the  financial 
inclusion plans. However, in a country like India where there is a large proportion of migrant 
labour,  the  crying  need  of  the  hour  is  to  provide  hassle  free  remittance  services  to  this 
segment  of  the  population.  It  is  an  unsavoury  truth  that,  today,  a  migrant  category  house 
maid, even in metropolitan cities like Mumbai, face challenges in remitting funds back to her 
village. Let alone an uneducated maid, even the privileged class of people face challenges in 
remitting  money.  The  other  day,  one  of  our  own  officers  (who  obviously  believed  in 
maintaining his anonymity) was turned away by a bank branch in Mumbai when approached 
to remit money to his own account maintained with the same bank at an urban centre in a 
different part of the country. The reason given the branch manager – the need to adhere to 
KYC  norms!  If  the  KYC  norms  are  carried  by  the  banks  to  this  extreme  to  deny  service, 
despite the person offering to prove his identity, in no time the banking sector will lose this 
business  to  alternative  models.  Another  reason  often  stated  by  the  bank  branches  for 
denying service is the cash management related issues. While this issue can be reason for 
imposing  a  reasonable  charge,  I  find  no  justification  for  denial  of  service  for  this  reason. 
Therefore, addressing this issue needs a clear mind set change on the part of the financial 
institutions. Having stated this, I also do clearly appreciate the challenges before the banks 
which ranges from identification of various delivery channels, decision making on whether to 
leverage on existing technology or adopt a big bang approach, extension of the existing risk 
management practices to various delivery channels, acquisition of all these transactions over 
the existing settlement networks, adoption of various services as part of their existing cross-
selling  and  co-branding  initiatives,  fraud  prevention  and  security  standards,  safeguards 
against  money  laundering,  KYC  issues  and,  above  all,  ability  to  leverage  their  existing 
reporting, auditing, and campaign management at back end. 
13. 
The ICT enabled channel, including the mobile channel, is the most cost-effective 
way to achieve this. As stated earlier, leveraging this channel requires participation from all 
stake holders. In this regard, it is encouraging to note that such partnership arrangements 
have started to happen. We would be monitoring the developments. Any residual issues in 
scaling-up the models would be examined once these arrangements reach a critical mass. 
However,  we  have  an  open  approach  and  would  be  ready  to  intermediate  if  the  specific 
issues in this regard are brought to our notice.  
14. 
New initiatives in the oversight of payment systems domain have begun and efforts 
to necessitate standards through a consultative process that is need-based and appropriately 
calibrated to reflect rational expectations have taken full form. An effort to comply with the 
general  principles  enunciated  in  the  “Report  on  Central  Bank  Oversight  of  Payment  and 
Settlement  Systems”  published  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems 
(CPSS)  duly  taking  into  account  our  practices  and  requirements  has  been  initiated.  The 
general  principles  of  oversight  are  (i)  transparency  (ii)  international  standards  (iii)  effective 
powers  and  capacity  (iv)  consistency  and  (v)  co-operation  with  other  authorities.  RBI 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
contributes to international oversight and co-operation initiatives as a member of the CPSS, 
the SAARC Payments Council and other such bodies. 
Challenges ahead 
15. 
The developments in electronic payment products present challenges for both banks 
and the regulators. For banks, the challenges arise from technology, customer service and 
fraud control points of view. Further, banks would also have to gear-up for competition from 
non-bank players. Let me discuss the challenges for banks first. 
Outsourcing 
16. 
The  fast  paced  developments  in  electronic  payment  products  have  posed 
technological  challenges  for  many  banks.  In  order  to  provide  their  customer  the  latest 
payment products, many banks have outsourced these activities to specialized entities. The 
numbers of such specialized entities are limited and many of these entities sub-contract the 
activities.  The  concentration  of  such  activities  among  few  service  providers  is  a  matter  of 
major concern. Outsourcing of activities should not result in outsourcing of controls by banks. 
That would be tantamount to abdication. I find it strange when banks often approach us for 
permitting outsourcing of performing KYC checks. This would be the opposite extreme of the 
example  I  stated  earlier.  Outsourcing  activities  should  be  monitored  by  banks  on  a 
continuous basis. The operational and concentration risk aspects have to be assessed with 
due care on a continuous basis. Outsourcing has to be a measure undertaken to reduce cost 
and bring in more efficiency. Outsourcing cannot be a conduit for abdication of responsibility.  
to  have 
two  effects  – 
innovation  have 
Technology  driven 
Cost 
17. 
(i)  speed, 
auditability/security  etc,  (ii)  reduction  in  cost  for  the  consumers.  In  his  recent  book  Global 
Crisis,  Recession  and  Uneven  Recovery,  Dr  Y.  V.  Reddy  writes,  “Ethics  in  globalised 
finance.....tended to comply with the formality of transparency, but attached no value to the 
fairness of transactions between the contracting parties... The level of interest charged, the 
level  of  profits  made,  or  the  level  of  remunerations  to  individuals  were  not  required  to  be 
justified  as  morally  right  or  wrong,  because  it  was  left  to  the  markets  to  determine  the 
appropriateness  of  compensations”.  Extending  this  to  the  area  of  payment  and  settlement 
system which touches the lives of every citizen in a country, I would venture to say that no 
technology  driven  payment  system  can  be  called  fair  unless  it  is  able  to  bring  about  an 
overall  overwhelming  reduction  in  the  cost  of  transactions  –  achieved  through  decreased 
overheads and increased processing volumes.  
18. 
A review of the progress we have achieved so far makes one conclude that while we 
have been able to achieve the first aspect, we are yet to pass on the benefit of reduction in 
cost to the customers. In fact, in many cases, the cost of transactions has often increased. 
Banks have also found innovative means of sustaining the income even when the regulatory 
interventions on charges have happened. What else can justify the customers being charged 
for moving money within the same bank from one branch to another? We have often been 
confronted with complaints where the customers are charged more for moving funds intra-
bank vis-à-vis inter-bank since the latter is regulated by the central bank. Such happenings 
defy all logic and needs to be debated in forums like the IBA. The banks often counter this 
concern raised by the central bank by arguing that such charges should be best left to the 
market. As a person who has seen both sides, I am of the view that while the central bank 
need not intervene in the pricing of various payment products, it should not hesitate to step in 
if it finds a large section of the customers that cannot afford or are shying away from such 
products on account of arbitrary fixing of charges linked to the value of the transactions in a 
technology-driven  scenario.  Rationalisation  of  service  charges  for  paper  and  electronic 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
products  by  the  Reserve  Bank  was  an  attempt  in  this  direction.  Acquiring  space  in  the 
payment systems arena is a huge opportunity for bank and non-bank entities if adopted with 
a level playing attitude where the increasing number of customers coming into its fold is the 
game  changer  for  pricing  strategy.  But  above  all,  no  attempt  would  be  considered  fruitful 
without the benefits percolating to the aam aadmi. 
19. 
Having  stated  the  above,  I  must  admit  that  one  reason  for  costing  of  electronic 
products at a higher band in comparison with the traditional products has been the banks’ 
attempt  to  part-recover  the  cost  of  deployment  of  technology.  The  process  of  introducing 
innovative  products  in  India  has  been  costly  for  the  banks  due  to  the  unsystematic 
developments during the initial stage of technology deployment by the banking industry. In a 
country  of  our  size,  co-operative  efforts  and  sharing  of  infrastructure  while  deploying 
technology is a lost opportunity story. 
Customer service – dispute resolution and frauds 
Dispute resolution  
20. 
The customer dispute resolution has to be given a greater attention in the promotion 
of electronic payment products. Appropriate processes have to be implemented for speedy 
resolution  of  such  complaints.  The  time  taken  for  resolution  of  such  disputes  should  be 
reasonable.  In  an  electronic  payment  scenario,  a  time  period  of  45  to  50  days  for  dispute 
resolution  cannot  be  accepted  as  normal.  Our  intervention  in  the  resolution  of  disputes 
related to failed ATM transactions was necessitated by this unreasonable time period. Outlier 
issues cannot be the bottlenecks or benchmarks for dispute resolution process. By this logic, 
we feel that banks can bring down the 12 day period currently prescribed by RBI for failed 
ATM transactions by implementing systems for automatic reversals. The outlier issues like 
part cash disbursal have to be resolved through modifications in the ATMs. 
21. 
In  this  context,  the  continuing  of  customer  complaints  related  to  failed  ATM 
transactions  is  also  a  matter  of  concern.  We  are  often  asked  to  mediate  cases  where  the 
credits are passed on within the mandatory period and later reversed. Few instances have 
come to our notice where the banks take written approvals from customers stating that they 
would forgo the penalty amount.  
22. 
The  role  of  system  providers  in  timely  redressal  of  such  complaints  is  important. 
NFS accounts for around 98 percent of the inter-bank ATM transactions in the country. The 
operators – NPCI – have a role in ensuring that failed transactions involving their network are 
conclusively  resolved.  Being  authorized  arrangements,  they  have  to  also  monitor  the 
practices followed by system participants and report these to the regulator. Let me state in 
this  connection  that  RBI  has  commissioned  a  survey  of  customers  using  the  ATMs  and 
based on the findings appropriate regulatory action would be taken. 
Fraud 
23. 
Frauds  in  an  non-electronic  payment  system  were  mainly  related  to  tampering  of 
cheques  (Fake/printed  cheques  and  material  alterations)  or  presentation  of  fraudulent 
cheques.  These  were  detectable  on  close  examination  at  the  drawee/drawer  bank  level. 
However, in an electronic payment scenario, funds are disbursed on genuine authentications 
stolen by the fraudsters. The establishment of liability in such cases has become challenging. 
Identification  and  prevention  of  such  frauds  requires  investment  in  risk  management 
processes.  The  risk  management  process  should  have  built  in  logic  to  alert  customers  or 
reach out to customers in case of suspected transactions. I believe that it would be unfair to 
dismiss 
technology  driven  scenario  as  customer 
carelessness/compromise.  Banks  have  to  recognize  that  investment  in  technology  has  to 
take into account customer education for change over to the new system. Further, the efforts 
must be made to put in place checks and balances to prevent such frauds. Customers have 
instances  of 
frauds 
in  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the 
local 
to  put 
towards 
the  onus  of  proving 
regulatory/legal  authorities,  pose  challenges 
to be made aware of the importance of following certain best practices in a technology driven 
scenario  and  an  attempt  must  be  made 
the 
carelessness/compromise on the banks rather than the less savvy customers. The system 
must also move towards a zero customer liability principle wherever feasible. This alone can 
result in increased customer confidence in such technology driven systems. Otherwise, the 
acceptance and adoption are bound to be low.  
24. 
Another challenge that has to be highlighted is the growing complexity of payment 
products  and  their  impact.  The  internet  and  mobile  channels  are  emerging  as  the  most 
important channels for commerce. In sync with this, payment products are being developed 
to facilitate transactions on these channels. These include customization of existing products 
and  development  of  new  products.  The  developments  in  this  field  internationally  pose  a 
challenge  for  regulators.  The  “World  Wide  Web”  offers  options  for  development  of  “World 
Wide  payment  systems”.  Many  payment  service  providers  already  operate  in  this  domain. 
Many  of  these  operators,  who  are  licensed  to  operate  by  regulators  of  their  country  of 
incorporation, solicit customers from across the globe. They do not seek to comply with the 
legal/regulatory  requirements  of  the  countries  covered.  Instead,  in  many  such  cases  the 
responsibility of compliance to the local legal/regulatory requirements are bestowed on the 
customers  who  sign-up  for  such  services  from  these  countries,  through  the  “Terms  and 
Conditions”  for  online  signing-up  for  such  services.  These  operators  do  not  have  any 
obligations 
from 
KYC/AML/CFT  angle.  Further,  they  also do  not  fall  within  the  gamut  of  the  local customer 
redressal measures. We have also initiated action against some such operators. We have 
been monitoring the activities of few such operators and would take appropriate action in due 
course.  
25. 
The payment card network has been one of the major revolutions in the payment 
world.  The  International  network  put  in  place  by  these  multinational  organizations  have 
transformed the payment and settlements arrangements for travel and commerce. However, 
the development of these networks has been based on the standard, rules and regulations of 
few developed countries. Further, the legal requirements on the country of operation are also 
not  fully  taken  into  consideration.  Our  experience  shows  that  the  product  development 
procedures in these organizations do not take into consideration the rules and regulations of 
most countries while promoting new products globally. In this context, unlike other countries, 
these  entities  are  legally  authorized  service  providers  in  India.  The  authorization  granted 
makes  it  mandatory  for  them  to  comply  with  all  the  legal/regulatory  requirements  of  this 
country.  However,  we  have  come  across  instances  where  these  local  requirements  were 
repeatedly violated due to poor internal controls in these organizations. For instance, we had 
come  across  instances  where  some  entities  have  been  leveraging  the  card  network  to 
extend  payment  and  money  transfer  services  across  border  domestic  residents,  without 
consideration  of  the  local  legal/regulatory  requirements.  Their  modus  operandi  include 
shipping prepaid cards denominated in foreign currency into the country, and facilitating the 
funding of these cards from other prepaid cards or any other international payments channel. 
Another instance is the proliferation of non-bank payment gateway service providers. These 
entities based across the globe acquire merchants in any country. Domestic transactions are 
masked as foreign currency transactions and settled through overseas acquiring banks.  
26. 
The card payment network has become a conduit for facilitation of initial funding and 
customer verification for internet based payment service providers stated earlier. It would be 
appropriate  that  card  companies  and  the  member  banks  take  note  of  these  developments 
and initiate appropriate and timely action so as to guard themselves against any reputational 
risk.  We  are  continuously  monitoring  the  developments  and  will  take  strong  action  against 
such violations.  
27. 
This  does  not  mean  that  Reserve  Bank  is  averse  to  innovations  in  payment 
systems/products.  We  have  an  open  mind  towards  all  innovations.  Innovations  within  the 
existing  legal/regulatory  framework  are  easier  to  access  and  authorize;  innovations  which 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
require modifications to these would require further debate and above all the enabling legal 
mandate.  However,  all  payment  system  providers  would  have  to  be  approved  under  the 
payment system act to operate in the country. In this regard, we need to note that USA, a 
country which permitted free development of such products, has also started discussions on 
licensing and regulation of products. 
Conclusion 
28. 
The evolving payment systems scenario offers new challenges and opportunities to 
all segments of this industry. To leverage on the opportunities provided by new products, the 
system providers/banks need to ensure that the challenges are adequately addressed. It also 
has  to  be  ensured  that  the  products  cover  all  segments  of  the  population  and  provide  an 
incentive  to  adopt  these  products.  The  regulatory  process  would  support  all  orderly 
development  of  new  systems  and  processes,  within  the  legal  mandate.  I  hope  this 
Conference will deliberate on all these issues especially how the aam aadmi can be provided 
cost-effective,  safe,  speedier  and  hassle  free  payment  and  settlement  products  and 
solutions. The challenge before all the stakeholders including banks and non-bank players, 
IT vendors, other service providers, etc. is how to introduce such a next generation payment 
and settlement system and solutions that is needed to take the country into the 21st century. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Annex 
Statistics – at glance 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
