Durmuş Yılmaz: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the press conference for the presentation of the Inflation Report, Ankara, 25 January 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests and Members of the Press, 
Welcome to the press conference held to convey the main messages of the January 2011 
Inflation Report. 
The  report  typically  summarizes  the  economic  framework  addressed  in  monetary  policy 
decisions, elaborates global and domestic macroeconomic developments and presents the 
medium-term  inflation  forecasts,  which  have  been  revised  in  view  of  previous  quarter 
developments, along with the monetary policy stance.  
The  report  contains  eight  boxes  written  in  the  light  of  completed  and  continuing  research 
projects  conducted  under  the  aegis  of  the  Central  Bank.  These  boxes  include  detailed 
analyses  on  issues  affecting  our  policies.  Considering  the  extraordinary  significance  of 
developments  in  the  global  economy  for  our  policies,  one  of  the  boxes  where  the 
developments  in  the  euro  area  and  the  USA  are  analyzed  explains  the  sensitivities  of  the 
peripheral  economies  of  the  euro  area  against  the  debt  crisis.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the 
second  box  the  reasons  for  the  increase  in  long-term  nominal  bond  yields  in  the  USA 
following  the  second  round  of  quantitative  easing  is  discussed.  Besides,  two  more  boxes 
were  prepared  aiming  to  elucidate  domestic  inflation  dynamics.  While  the  first  of  these 
examines  the  reasons  for  volatility  in  unprocessed  food  prices,  the  second  box  offers  an 
assessment of Core inflation indicators. Moreover, the report also incorporates a study that 
examines recent developments in foreign exchange and derivatives markets by relating them 
to  monetary  policy  decisions.  Two  boxes  also  clarify  the  new  policy  approach  we  are 
currently implementing. The former discusses the place of the reserve requirements in the 
monetary  policy  and  its  channels  to  influence  economy,  while  the  latter  discusses  the 
relationship  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  within  the  context  of  the  inflation-
targeting regime. Lastly, the sources of our revisions of inflation forecasts during 2010 are 
explained in a study that we designed within the context of our liability of accountability. 
Before  moving  on  to  the  Central  Bank’s  assessments  of  inflation  outlook  and  economic 
activity,  which  I  will  cover  in  detail  shortly,  I  would  like  to  summarize  the  current  global 
conditions that continue to be determinant of the domestic economic outlook. 
The  world  economy  continued  to  recover  gradually  in  the  final  quarter  of  2010,  while 
downside  risks  remained  a  major  concern  for  advanced  economies.  Financial  institutions, 
firms and households in advanced economies are still undergoing the process of balance-
sheet repair, limiting the contribution of private consumption and investment to the economic 
recovery. On the other hand, the relatively less affected emerging economies are recovering 
steadily amid robust domestic demand (Figure 1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
This growth discrepancy between advanced and emerging economies and its implications for 
the Turkish economy became the key determinants for the Central Bank of Turkey’s (CBRT) 
monetary policy strategy in the fourth quarter. Exceptionally loose monetary policies adopted 
by  advanced  economies  to  eliminate  the  downside  risks  on  economic  activity  not  only 
boosted  global  liquidity  but  also  stimulated  the  search  for  yield,  which  encouraged  more 
capital  flows  into  emerging  economies.  Moreover,  the  weak  recovery  in  developed 
economies  –  Turkey’s  main  export  destinations,  dampened  foreign  demand  growth 
(Figure 2). Low interest rates across the globe, soaring imports driven by strong credit growth 
amid  increased  short-term  capital  inflows,  and  weaker  foreign  demand  caused  the  current 
account deficit to widen rapidly in 2010. All of these developments prompted the CBRT to 
adopt a strategy, which partly targets financial stability besides the main objective of price 
stability, parallel to the conditions referred to as the “new normal”. In this context, as stated 
previously, the CBRT has actively begun to use tools such as required reserves and liquidity 
management, in addition to the one-week repo auction rate, the main policy instrument. 
Inflation developments 
1. 
Having summarized the global economic conditions and the implications of this outlook on 
the monetary policy, I would now like to inform you about the inflation developments of the 
last quarter. As you will recall, we underlined in the October 2010 Inflation Report that the 
increases in unprocessed food and tobacco prices – which are beyond the immediate control 
of the CBRT – added about 5 percentage points to annual inflation, and suggested that these 
items would leave sizable room for disinflation. Indeed, inflation dropped by 2.83 percentage 
points, yielding a rate of 6.4 percent, meeting the year-end inflation target. As predicted in 
the previous report, the decline in inflation was due to the sharp drop in unprocessed food 
prices. Accordingly, the annual rate of increase in food prices was 7.02 percent at the end of 
2010, undershooting the October estimate of 10.5 percent. The slowdown that occurred was 
sharper  than  we  expected.  These  developments  in  unprocessed  food  prices  explain  the 
almost  one  percentage  point  deviation  in  short-term  inflation  forecasts.  In  fact,  as  also 
illustrated  on  the  slide,  inflation  excluding  unprocessed  food  and  tobacco  remained  in  line 
with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report (Figure 3). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
Food  prices  became  the  main  determinant  of  the  course  of  consumer  prices  in  the  last 
quarter of 2010 as well. Food prices that posted record highs in the third quarter due to the 
hikes  in  unprocessed  food  prices,  declined  in  the  last  quarter  as  opposed  to  the  previous 
years  (Figure  4).  Moreover,  the  favorable  developments  in  inflation  in  this  quarter  did  not 
remain limited to food prices; quarterly inflation across all goods and services items stayed 
below the average of previous years (Figure 5). Meanwhile, energy prices, which followed a 
horizontal course in the second and third quarters of the year, increased in the last quarter 
parallel to the developments in international oil prices and exchange rates. 
 
 
The core inflation indicators decelerated in the fourth quarter of 2010 compared to the third 
quarter (Figure 6). Although hikes were seen in these indicators, which edged up again in 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
November  and  December,  the  main  trend  of  inflation  remained  in  line  with  medium-term 
targets (Figure 7). 
 
 
Against this background, medium-term inflation expectations declined significantly (Figure 8). 
While  near-term  inflation  expectations  declined  in  a  higher  ratio  compared  to  the  previous 
quarter, the longer the maturities, the less was the decline in expectations. 12 and 24-month 
ahead inflation expectations remained above the figures implied by the targets for 2011 and 
2012 year-ends, however, the difference went down slightly in the last quarter (Figure 9). 
 
  4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy response 
2. 
After  commenting  briefly  on  inflation  developments,  I  would  now  like  to  cover  the  policies 
pursued by the Central Bank during the last quarter.  
The  second  round  of  quantitative  easing  initiated  in  the  last  quarter  of  2010  by  some 
advanced economies and the attendant ramp up of capital inflows to emerging markets has 
required  significant  modifications  to  the  CBRT’s  strategy.  Macroprudential  measures  were 
needed  because  short-term  capital  inflows  have  strengthened  the  divergence  between 
domestic and foreign demand causing the current account deficit to widen rapidly. Since core 
inflation trends were in line with medium-term inflation targets, the monetary policy was able 
to focus on financial stability. 
The new monetary policy strategy envisions the use of multiple instruments to manage both 
internal and external balances. In this context, policy rates, liquidity management facilities, 
and reserve requirement ratios are concurrently used to ensure price stability and financial 
stability. Therefore, the Monetary Policy Committee is of the opinion that given the economic 
situation,  the  combination  of  a  lower  policy  rate,  a  wider  interest  rate  corridor  and  higher 
reserve  requirement  ratios  is  the  most  appropriate  policy  mix  in  terms  of  jointly  upholding 
financial stability and price stability. 
In this respect, the policy rate -the one-week repo auction rate – was reduced from percent to 
6.25 percent in the last two months. In addition to the policy rate cuts, the CBRT decreased 
the  overnight  borrowing  rate  by  450  basis  points  to  1.5  percent.  The  corridor between  the 
overnight  lending  and  borrowing  rates  was  widened  to  allow  fluctuations  in  short-term 
interest  rates,  when  needed  (Figure  10).  All  these  decisions  aim  to  extend  the  maturity  of 
short-term capital inflows as well as to prevent the Turkish lira from following trends that are 
detached from economic fundamentals. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Another issue taken into consideration when formulating the new policy mix was to limit rapid 
credit growth, an important factor contributing to the widening of the current account. In this 
context,  reserve  requirement  ratios  are  used  as  active  policy  instruments  with  an  aim  to 
decelerate the credit growth and to extend maturities of banks’ liabilities. As illustrated on the 
slide, in December, the weighted average of the reserve requirement ratios were remarkably 
raised  by  differentiating  the  ratios  such  that  they  are  lower  for  longer  maturities  (Table  1). 
Moreover,  the  reserve  requirement  base  has  been  expanded  to  include  funds  received  by 
banks  through  repurchase  agreement  (repo)  transactions  from  foreign  and  domestic 
customers, except for those funds received from repo transactions with the Central Bank and 
those  among  domestic  banks.  Finally,  with  the  decision  we  made  yesterday,  TL  reserve 
requirement ratios were re-increased for the short-term deposit/participation fund and other 
liabilities.  Hence,  the  weighted  average  reserve  requirement  ratio  calculated  by  taking  the 
share  of  liabilities  into  consideration  has  increased  by  4.4  percentage  points  since 
23 September 2010. 
 
  
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  inform  you  about  our  evaluations  regarding  the  effects  of  our 
recent  decisions.  The  change  in  required  reserves  is  expected  to  affect  the  credit  market 
through cost and liquidity channels. With the said regulations, nearly a total of TL 22.5 billion 
a  will  have  been  withdrawn  from  the  market.  According  to  the  recent  data,  this  amount 
equals  to  approximately  5.8  percent  of  TL-denominated  credits  excluding  financial  sector. 
We believe that the monetary tightening implemented by increasing in the weighted average 
of reserve requirement ratios would more than offset the expansionary effects of the interest 
rate reductions. Therefore, we expect that the net impact of the monetary policy decisions we 
have taken recently will be tightening. 
Despite  the  volatile  global  risk  perceptions  in  the  fourth  quarter,  market  interest  rates 
maintained  their  downward  trend  on  the  back  of  downward  revisions  to  future  policy  rate 
expectations. Accordingly, the benchmark bond rate continued to hover around all-time lows 
(Figure 11). Meanwhile, we think that the fall in inflation expectations have contributed to the 
decline in market rates as well.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
The decline in market interest rates was more obvious for the shorter maturities during the 
final quarter, resulting in a steeper yield curve relative to the previous quarter. The CBRT’s 
rate  cuts  over  the  last  two  months  caused  short-term  market  rates  to  fall  quickly.  On  the 
other hand, longer-term interest rates displayed only a modest decline, since the CBRT did 
not provide any explicit signal about the future course of policy rates. Yet, despite the volatile 
global risk appetite, long term interest rates remained at historically low levels and relatively 
stable,  reflecting  prospects  of  a  prolonged 
in  Turkey 
(Figure 12).  The  decline  in  nominal  market  rates  also  affected  real  interest  rates,  as  real 
medium-term rates remained at unprecedented lows (Figure 13). 
 
low-interest-rate  environment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
After following a similar trend seen across other emerging market currencies in the post-crisis 
period,  the  Turkish  lira  has  recently  taken  a  different  path  and  experienced  a  relative 
depreciation.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  divergence  started  with  the  Rate  cut  signal  in 
December and has become more obvious after the actual rate cuts (Figure 14). 
 
 
Factors  such  as  low  interest  rates  across  the  globe,  easy  access  to  external  funds,  and 
strong  economic  activity  continued  to  help  improve  credit  conditions  in  the  final  quarter  of 
2010. As a result, the gap between loan rates and deposit rates remained at historically low 
levels (Figure 15). Both the low loan rates and the improved credit risk indicators helped the 
credit volume continue to expand rapidly (Figure 16). As per sub-categories, both household 
loans  and  business  loans  continued  to  increase  rapidly.  At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  once 
more emphasize that it is very important to closely monitor the upcoming course of loans and 
to take necessary macroprudential measures. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
In  sum,  monetary  and  financial  conditions  remained  supportive  of  economic  activity  in  the 
fourth quarter. Accordingly, the credit channel has maintained its expansionary effect on the 
consumption and investment demand. 
 Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
3. 
After  summarizing  our  monetary  policy  stance  and  its  impacts  on  the  financial  markets,  I 
would now like to talk about the financial outlook and assumptions underlying our forecasts. 
Third quarter national accounts data are consistent with the outlook presented in the October 
Inflation Report. Following the deepening debt crisis in European economies since May, the 
growth rate of Gross Domestic Product slowed down in the third quarter and displayed an 
increase of 5.5 percent year-on-year (Figure 17). The largest contribution to annual growth in 
the  third  quarter  came  from  private  sector  demand  through  consumption  and  investment; 
whereas,  due  to  the  contraction  in  exports  and  the  acceleration  of  demand  for  imported 
goods, the net foreign demand contributed to annual growth negatively. Thus, the divergence 
between domestic and foreign demand growth has become evident (Figure 18).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 
Recent  data  releases  indicate  that  the  third-quarter  slowdown  in  economic  activity  is 
temporary.  The  composition  of  economic  activity  suggests  that  the  divergence  between 
domestic and foreign demand continued in the fourth quarter. Domestic demand for imported 
goods accelerated in the last quarter amid rapid credit expansion and lagged effects of the 
appreciation of the Turkish lira in the third quarter. As a result, the current account balance 
continued to deteriorate (Figure 19). 
 
  
The  slow  recovery  in  the  global  economy  continues  to  restrain  economic  activity,  whereas 
the strong domestic demand bolsters aggregate demand growth. In fact, the sharp upward 
trend  in  private  consumption  and  investment  spending  that  started  in  the  fourth  quarter  of 
2009 continued into the fourth quarter of 2010 (Figure 20).  
Continued economic recovery fueled by robust domestic demand has supported the gradual 
improvement in employment conditions. The rapid recovery in non-farm employment paused 
in  the  third  quarter  of  2010,  which  appears  temporary,  as  suggested  by  leading  indicators 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(Figure 21). However, due to high labor force participation rates, it will take a while before 
unemployment rates come down to precrisis levels (Figure 22). Therefore, it is unlikely for 
unit labor costs to be subject to cost pressures in coming months. 
 
  
In sum, monetary conditions remained supportive of domestic demand in the fourth quarter. 
Private  demand  recovered  more  rapidly  amid  increased  consumption  and  investment 
spending, therefore aggregate demand conditions provided less support for disinflation than 
suggested in the October Inflation Report. Nevertheless, I would like to emphasize that the 
recent policy measures are expected to bring domestic demand back on to a more moderate 
growth path in the upcoming period. 
Our inflation forecasts are based on the projections of the Medium-Term Program (MTP) as 
was the October Inflation Report. The use of a large fraction of the additional increases in tax 
revenues  as  a  result  of the  stronger-than  expected  economic  activity  in the  last  quarter  of 
2010  has  been  the  primary  driver  of  the  slight  upward  revision  to  output  gap  forecasts. 
However, as the budget balance remained largely in line with MTP targets, the medium-term 
fiscal  policy  outlook  was  barely  changed.  Therefore,  our  forecasts  are  based  on  the 
assumption that the primary expenditure-to-GDP ratio would decline gradually, the debt-to-
GDP  ratio  to  decline  further,  and  the  risk  premium  to  remain  broadly  unchanged  over  the 
forecast  horizon.  Moreover,  I  would  like  to  note  that  we  assume  tax  adjustments  to  be 
consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. 
Now I would like to brief you about the assumptions underlying our inflation forecasts. The 
developments since the reporting period of the October Inflation Report urged us to revise 
our assumptions underlying our forecasts. I would like to elaborate on these factors to enable 
a better understanding of the forecasts.  
The October Inflation Report envisaged food inflation to be 10.5 percent at end-2010, to fall 
gradually  to  7  percent  at  end-2011  and  to  remain  at  these  levels  throughout  the  forecast 
horizon. As I stated at the beginning of my speech, the sharp decline in unprocessed food 
inflation during the fourth quarter resulted in lower-than-expected food inflation. However, the 
potential  impact  of  the  recent  upsurge  in  agricultural  commodity  prices  on  processed  food 
prices  led  to  an  upward  revision  in  the  assumption  for  food  inflation  from  7  percent  to 
7.5 percent,  which  had  around  basis  points  upside  impact  on  2011  inflation  forecasts 
(Table 2).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  
In the October Inflation Report, oil prices were assumed to be USD 85 per barrel for 2011 
and USD 90 per barrel for 2012 and beyond. Moreover, import prices were assumed to rise 
gradually over the forecast horizon, increasing by an average percent year-on-year in 2011. 
Commodity prices have accelerated further since the release of the October Inflation Report 
due  to  the  ongoing  quantitative  easing  in  advanced  economies  and  the  strong  growth  in 
emerging economies. In this context, in view of the commodity futures prices for the first half 
of January, we raised our oil price assumption to USD 95 per barrel for 2011 and thereafter 
(Table  2).  Furthermore,  again  considering  the  commodity  futures  prices,  we  assume  that 
import prices will increase by about 10.9 percent in 2011 (Figure 23). The changes in our 
assumptions have led us to revise our inflation forecasts for end-2011 upwards by around 
35 basis points. 
 
 
Since the launch of inflation targeting in 2006, the CBRT has been announcing its medium-
term  inflation  forecasts  and  providing  a  qualitative  perspective  regarding  the  outlook  for 
policy  rates.  As  I  have  mentioned  earlier  in  my  speech,  the  current  economic  climate 
prompted  the  CBRT  to  consider  financial  stability  along  with  price  stability,  which  in  turn 
required the diversification of policy tools. Accordingly, we adopted a policy mix made up of 
required  reserve  ratios  and  liquidity  management  facilities,  besides  policy  rates.  Given  the 
significant  level  of  uncertainties  concerning  the  global  economic  outlook  in  the  upcoming 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
period, we believe that there should be flexibility regarding the direction and course of each 
instrument within the policy mix. Therefore, this Report will provide forecasts for the net effect 
of the policy combination, and will not outline any specific path regarding its sub-items.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  and  output  gap  forecasts  produced  within  the 
framework  outlined  so  far.  Assuming  that  the  policy  mix  is  suited  to  deliver  an  additional 
limited  monetary  tightening  during  the  rest  of  2011,  inflation  is  expected  to  be,  with  70 
percent probability, between 4.5 and 7.3 percent with a mid-point of 5.9 percent at end-2011, 
and between 3.3 and 6.9 percent with a mid-point of 5.1 percent by the end of 2012. Inflation 
is expected to stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term (Figure 24). 
 
  
Hence,  assuming  that  a  limited  monetary  tightening  will  bring  credit  growth  rate  down  to  
20–25  percent  in  2011,  our  revised  forecasts  indicate  that  inflation  would  be  close  to  the 
target by the end of 2011. I would like to highlight that the envisaged monetary tightening in 
2011 may be through various combinations of different policy tools. The monetary tightening 
could be implemented by either required reserve ratios or policy rates, or a combination of 
both.  Moreover,  during  the  tightening  process,  both  instruments  could  move  in  either  the 
same  or  the  opposite  direction.  Yet,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  the  baseline  scenario 
envisages  the  net  impact  of  the  policy  mix  on  credits  and  domestic  demand  to  be  on  the 
tightening side.  
We believe that evaluating our forecasts in comparison with those presented in the previous 
Report would serve to provide a better understanding of the changes in forecasts. As I have 
mentioned earlier, the rapid decline in unprocessed Food Prices pulled short-term inflation 
forecasts  down,  while  the  upward  revision  of  oil  and  other  commodity  price  assumptions 
drove  end-2011  inflation  forecasts  higher  (Figure  25).  The  output  gap  has  been  revised 
slightly  upward  for  the  last  quarter  of  2010  (Figure  26).  Moreover,  taking  into  account  the 
lagged effects of monetary tightening, the output gap is assumed to close slower than what 
was suggested in the previous report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
 
Given  the  correction  in  unprocessed  food  prices  and  the  high  base  effect  from  the  first 
months of 2010, inflation is expected to fall markedly in the short term, below medium-term 
targets, and remain volatile thereafter. Inflation is expected to reach the medium-term target 
of 5 percent by mid-2012 once the effects of rising commodity prices wear off. 
It  should  be  emphasized  that  any  new  data  or  information  may  lead  to  a  change  in  the 
monetary policy stance. Therefore, assumptions regarding the future policy rates underlying 
the inflation forecast should not be perceived as a commitment on behalf of the CBRT. 
 Risks 
4. 
In  the  last  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on the  risks  regarding  the inflation 
outlook  in  the  upcoming  period  and  the  prospective  monetary  policy  strategies  to  be 
implemented should these risks materialize.  
In the baseline scenario, which is the basis of our medium-term forecasts, it is envisaged that 
the policy mix composed of policy rates and reserve requirement ratios should be determined 
in a way to achieve a limited monetary tightening, in order to make sure that inflation remains 
consistent with the targets. Such a tightening aims to keep inflation under control by slowing 
down  credit  growth  and  domestic  demand  and  to  reduce  the  risks  surrounding  financial 
stability. We expect the impact of the measures we took in December and January to contain 
credit supply to be observed in the near term. However, the time lag and the extent of the 
impact of the policy measures may vary depending on developments beyond the control of 
the  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  the  CBRT  will  closely  monitor  the  effects  of  the  policy 
measures and take further actions should the credit growth rate or the inflation rate deviates 
from desired levels. 
Developments  regarding  the  global  economy  remain  central  for  the  domestic  inflation  and 
monetary  policy  outlook.  Under  current  conditions,  we  employ  several  instruments  to 
maintain  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  Therefore,  unlike  previously,  global 
developments  would  affect  not  only  the  direction,  but  also  the  composition  of  our  policy. 
Accordingly, global developments will be assessed with respect to their effects on the growth 
rate of aggregate demand as well as its composition. 
Although  there  has  been  some  improvement  in  the  expectations  pertaining  to  the  US 
economy,  uncertainties  driven  by  debt  sustainability  problems  across  the  euro  area 
peripheral economies still persist. Ongoing problems in credit, real estate, and labor markets 
across  advanced  economies  and  uncertainties  regarding  the  impact  of  potential  fiscal 
consolidations continue to pose downside risks to the pace of global economic recovery. The 
possibility of a longer-than-anticipated period of anemic global growth and the likelihood of a 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
long period of quantitative easing by advanced economies not only creates downside risks 
regarding foreign demand but also suggests that capital inflows to Turkey may continue at a 
faster  pace.  Should  such  a  scenario  materialize,  a  policy  mix  of  low  policy  rate  and  high 
reserve requirement ratios may be implemented for a long period, both to balance domestic 
and foreign demand and for macroprudential purposes. If global economic problems further 
aggravate  and  domestic  economic  activity  assumes  a  stagnation  trend,  we  may  have  to 
utilize  all  policy  instruments  with  their  effect  being  on  the  easing  side.  Although  downside 
risks persist, there are also upside risks regarding global economy, particularly driven by the 
lagged impacts of the exceptionally loose policies implemented by the advanced economies 
over  the  past  two  years.  If  the  global  economy  assumes  a  faster-than-expected  recovery, 
global inflationary pressures may occur and thus trigger a tightening in the monetary policies 
of  advanced  economies.  The  materialization  of such  a  scenario  would  mean  higher  global 
interest  rates  and  domestic  demand-driven  inflationary  pressures,  and  thus  necessitate 
increasing both policy rates and reserve requirements.  
Oil and other commodity prices have displayed rapid increases in the recent period. If the 
rise in commodity prices persists, this may have implications on the general pricing behavior 
given the strong pace of domestic demand. Should such a risk materialize in the upcoming 
period and hamper the attainment of medium-term inflation targets, there may be stronger 
tightening than was envisaged in the baseline scenario. However, the policy mix may vary 
depending on the developments regarding foreign demand, capital flows, and the outlook for 
credit growth.  
We will continue to closely monitor fiscal policy developments while formulating our monetary 
policy. Under current circumstances, increasing government savings and adhering to fiscal 
discipline are essential to control the risks brought about by the current account deficit rising 
on the back of the decoupling between domestic and foreign demand. Our inflation forecasts 
take the fiscal projections of the MTP as given. A revision in the monetary policy stance may 
be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, having an 
adverse effect on the inflation outlook. 
In the upcoming period, monetary policy will continue to focus on sustaining price stability. To 
this end, we will meticulously evaluate the impact of macroprudential measures taken by the 
CBRT and other institutions on the inflation outlook. Fulfilling commitments to fiscal discipline 
in  the  medium-term  and  strengthening  the  structural  reform  process  would  facilitate  the 
relative improvement in Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus bolster macroeconomic and price 
stability. Maintaining fiscal discipline will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and 
contribute  to  social  welfare  by  keeping  interest  rates  at  low  levels  permanently.  In  this 
respect,  timely  implementation  of  the  structural  reforms  envisaged  by  the  MTP  and  the 
European Union accession process remains to be of utmost importance.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
