Jean Boivin: How people think and how it matters 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean  Boivin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  presented  to  the 
Canadian Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 23 August 2011. 
 It  is  always  an  honour  for  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  be  invited  to  CABE’s  annual  summer 
conference.  I  am  especially  pleased  to  find  myself  in  the  company  of  so  many  fellow 
economists. 
My remarks today will be about expectations – how people form them and how it matters for 
monetary policy. 
I will be talking about how we think we think. At some level, this might sound absurd. Don’t 
we actually know how we are thinking? 
This  reminds  me  of  a  question  once  asked  of  me.  While  completing  graduate  school  and 
looking for a job, I presented my dissertation at various institutions. The goal of my work at 
the time was to use historical data to document the behaviour of the Federal Reserve and 
how it had changed over time. On one occasion, after I had spent the better part of an hour 
explaining  the  brilliant  methodology  I  was  so  proud  of,  someone  asked,  “Wouldn’t  it  have 
been easier to just go and ask Chairmen Greenspan and Volcker what they did?” 
This was meant as a joke – although I am not sure I laughed much at the time. Whether it 
would  have  been  conceivable  to  question  directly  the  Fed  Chairmen,  I  don’t  even  know.  I 
would have certainly loved to. But that was not the point. Although we obviously learn much 
by  talking  directly  to  people  and  get  important  colour,  actions  are  the  results  of  a  very 
complex  process  –  believe  me,  something  I  appreciate  even  more  now  –  and  we  cannot 
hope to get a complete understanding of behaviour simply by asking. That’s why I needed to 
take a hard look at the actions themselves. 
This should resonate even louder in the context of today’s topic. As economists, we spend 
our  professional  lives  trying  to  make  sense  of  how  the  economy  works.  Ultimately,  this 
understanding depends on how we think we think – and that’s not something we can fully 
understand by simply asking ourselves. 
My goal today is to paint a portrait of the uncertainty we have about how expectations are 
formed and discuss the implications for two current policy questions: the desirability of price-
level targeting and the implications of financial imbalances for monetary policy. I will end with 
a few remarks about efforts to deal with the uncertainty surrounding expectation formation 
and ongoing challenges. 
Why are expectations so important for monetary policy? 
But  the  first  question  is:  why  are  expectations so  important  to  monetary  policy?  Economic 
outcomes are the result of people’s collective decisions and these decisions depend on how 
people think and what they expect the future to bring. 
For example, a decision to buy a house will depend on expectations of future income, what 
interest rates might be, and whether one thinks the real estate will increase or decrease in 
value. The price a firm sets and the wages it negotiates with employees are influenced by its 
expectations about the rate of inflation in the coming quarters. 
The future is inherently uncertain. Firms, individuals, families and policy-makers – all of us – 
form best guesses, or expectations, regarding events we are uncertain about. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This means that current economic outcomes are determined by what people think the future 
will be, not necessarily by what the future will actually be. People will be right or wrong about 
the future, but what matters to their decision today is their perception of it. 
This  perception  can  be  fast  changing,  as  recent  developments  in  financial  markets  have 
once again made clear. A reassessment of the global economic outlook and a heightened 
degree of uncertainty contributed to the significant fall in equity prices and increase in overall 
market  volatility  of  the  past  few  weeks.  But  Keynes  coined  the  term  “animal  spirits”  to 
describe  the  emotional,  non-purely  logical  state  that  influences  our  decision-making.1  With 
the unusual sequence of large drops and rebounds in capital markets in recent weeks,2 it is 
difficult to argue that fear and animal spirits were not also at play. 
Obviously, given that expectations determine the evolution of the economy, they matter for 
monetary policy. 
But it works both ways. 
Monetary  policy  also  influences  expectations.  In  fact,  expectations  management  –  or  the 
expectations channel – is a powerful tool through which monetary policy can influence and 
stabilize the economy. What people think future policy will be influences their decisions and 
can have an important impact today. 
Through the adjustment of expectations, the monetary authority has the opportunity to better 
offset fluctuations in the level of output or inflation. This expectations channel of monetary 
policy  has  always  been  at  work,  but  as  its  existence  has  become  better  appreciated,  its 
influence  might  have  become  greater  as  well.3  We  can  see  a  clear  illustration  of  its 
importance  in  the  conditional  commitment  the  Bank  of  Canada  used  during  the  financial 
crisis – one of three types of potential unconventional monetary policy tools at its disposal.4 
In April 2009, the Bank stated that it would maintain the policy interest rate at 0.25 per cent 
from  April  2009  to  mid-2010,  conditional  on  the  outlook  for  inflation.  This  exceptional 
guidance  provided  additional  monetary  policy  stimulus  through  greater  certainty  about  the 
policy path and by influencing rates at longer maturities.5 The Federal Reserve used a similar 
device two weeks ago with the statement that interest rates are likely to remain at current 
levels through mid-2013. 
But the expectations channel can also seriously handicap policy if not managed properly. As 
research  and  experience  have  shown,  policy  makers  cannot  manipulate  the  economy  by 
creating false expectations without damaging their credibility. And with impaired credibility, a 
central bank’s influence on the economy is seriously diminished.6 
                                                 
1  Keynes (1936). 
2  For instance, the Dow Jones Index dropped by 5.5 per cent and 4.6 per cent on 8 and 10 August, respectively, 
followed by pick-ups of 4.0 per cent and 3.9 per cent on 9 and 11 August. 
3  Woodford  (2003)  emphasized  the  importance  of  “managing”  the  public’s  expectations  through  systematic 
monetary policy. Boivin, Kiley and Mishkin (2010) showed that changes in the behaviour of monetary policy in 
developed countries have anchored inflation expectations better and significantly changed the transmission of 
shocks to economic activity and inflation. 
4  Bank of Canada, Monetary Policy Report, April 2009. The Annex to this report describes the Bank of Canada’s 
approach to and the principles surrounding the conduct of monetary policy when the overnight interest rate is 
at the effective lower bound. 
5  Evidence suggests that the Bank of Canada’s forward-guidance lowered Canadian interest rates out the yield curve 
relative to what their historical relationship with inflation and unemployment rates would imply. See He (2010). 
6  Kydland and Prescott (1977); and Barro and Gordon (1983). For more recent contributions, see Clarida, Galí 
and, Gertler (1999); and Athey, Atkeson and Kehoe (2005). For a discussion of challenges involved in trying to 
build credibility in the early days of inflation targeting in Canada see Clinton and Zelmer (1997). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This  reciprocal  dynamic  between  expectations  and  monetary  policy  is  one  of  the  most 
important insights of economic research of the past forty years. The successful achievement 
of monetary policy objectives helps to establish credibility and anchor inflation expectations. 
This  credibility,  in  turn,  gives  the  central  bank  greater  scope  and  flexibility  to  stabilize  the 
economy  more  effectively  while  keeping  inflation  expectations  in  line  with  monetary  policy 
objectives. 
These insights are the cornerstone of Canada’s inflation-targeting regime. Since its adoption, 
well-anchored  inflation  expectations  have  allowed  businesses,  individuals  and  families  to 
take  a  longer  view  in  their  planning,  which  has  led  to  a  better  allocation  of  economic  and 
financial resources and a more stable economy overall. 
Decision making and expectation formation 
So we know that expectations are crucial, but what do we know about how they are formed? 
Trying to understand better how we think is a timeless quest, spanning numerous disciplines 
such  as  philosophy,  psychology,  biology,  neuroscience  and  political  science,  as  well  as 
economics.  These  all  offer  different  perspectives  and  the  picture  that  emerges  confirms  in 
some ways the obvious: decision making is an extremely complex process. It is in part about 
conscious  rational  calculations,  but  it  is  also  about  the  unconscious  influences  of  intuition, 
beliefs,  perceptions  and  emotions.  In  recent  years,  important  progress  has  been  made  in 
satisfying the rigorous part of our brains and providing scientific support for Keynes’ intuition 
on the importance of animal spirits. 
So what’s an economist to do? How do we form a view on how people think? 
A useful starting point has been rational expectations. As the name states, it’s based on the 
optimistic assumption that people are as sophisticated as they can possibly be – that they 
fully  understand  how  economies  and  markets  work,  take  into  account  all  the  information 
available,  fully  appreciate  the  future  consequences  of  their  actions  today,  and  make 
decisions that are fully consistent with this understanding. 
Taken  at  face  value,  this  might  look  like  a  completely  crazy  idea.  The  mere  fact  that  we 
economists  have  jobs  –  and  think  that  we  play  a  useful  role  –  contradicts  rational 
expectations.  After  all,  if  everyone  was  so  sophisticated  in  their  understanding  of  how  the 
economy works, why would the world need us? 
But,  while  crude  and  simplistic,  the  assumption  of  rational  expectations  is  a  useful  and 
tractable way to capture two fundamental ideas. First, what people think about the future can 
affect their current decisions. Second, in the face of changing circumstances, people will not 
forever do the same thing expecting a different outcome, to paraphrase Einstein’s oft-cited 
definition of insanity. They will eventually adapt their behaviour to changing circumstances or 
policies. 
These insights have proven to be powerful7. As I discussed earlier, they make a compelling 
case  for  the  importance  of  expectations  for  monetary  policy  and  form  the  intellectual 
foundation of inflation targeting regimes around the world. 
But rational expectations should come with warning labels: “Handle with care.” “Keep away 
from children.” The concept was never meant to be taken literally and never should be. While 
useful for some policy issues, it can be a very misleading assumption for others. In trivializing 
the  decision-making  process,  it  leaves  out  elements  that  have  the  potential  to  overturn 
important policy prescriptions. 
                                                 
7  For instance, they are the basis of both the Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1968) hypotheses on the absence of 
the long-run trade-off between inflation and real activity, and the Lucas critique (Lucas 1976). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Researchers  across  disciplines  have  investigated  various  aspects  of  decision  making  that 
are not consistent with a literal and simplistic interpretation of rational expectations. Here are 
a few key examples. 
First, our conscious cognitive capabilities are limited. People are able to retain only a finite 
number of signals in their memory. Consequently, it may in fact be rational to ignore some 
types  of  information,  or  to  be  “rationally  inattentive.”8  It  also  seems  that  these  cognitive 
constraints may make us overreact or under-react to information depending on the general 
degree of uncertainty we perceive. 
Second,  perceptions  and  emotions  can  play  an  important  role,  even  in  the  most  practical 
business decisions. For instance, price changes might appear unfair to consumers and they 
may experience regret, disappointment and anger when they occur. To avoid alienating its 
consumer  base,  a  firm  might  take  these  fairness  considerations  into  account  in  its  pricing 
decision, even if that means sacrificing some short-term profits.9 Some would say that this is 
just good marketing. 
Third, dozens of unconscious tendencies and biases have been found to be “hardwired” into 
human  behaviour.  People  often  rely  on  a  limited  number  of  “heuristic”  rules,  or  rules  of 
thumb, to reduce a complex task of assessing probabilities of future events.10 
These  tendencies  can  lead  us  to:  evaluate  outcomes  within  a  frame  of  reference  or  pre-
existing  beliefs  so  that  we  see  only  what  we  want  to  see;  react  to  the  order  in  which 
information arrives or put too much weight on some particular piece; be impatient and put 
more weight on the present; be overconfident in the face of uncertainty; be subject to herd 
mentality and believe what we do simply because others believe it as well; have a preference 
for  the  status  quo;  or  see  patterns  where  there  are  none  and  mechanically  extrapolate 
current outcomes and views into the future.11 
To be clear, the issue is not whether these behaviours and tendencies are ultimately rational. 
For instance, some patterns of behaviour, even if unconscious, could represent automated 
responses  that  millions  of  years  of  evolution  and  adaptation  have  refined  and  perfected. 
Rather  the  issue  is  that,  rational  or  not,  how  we  think  involves  many  dimensions  that  a 
stylized view might miss and these have key implications for monetary policy. 
Expectations and monetary policy issues 
For example, the way people form expectations has a significant impact on two issues that 
have been the subject of research at the Bank related to the renewal of the inflation-control 
target  agreement  between  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Canada.  These  are  the 
desirability of price-level targeting versus inflation targeting and the nexus between financial 
stability and monetary policy. 
Let me talk about price-level targeting first. 
                                                 
8  The concept of “bounded rationality” (i.e., in making decisions, people are limited by the amount of information 
they have or can process, by the amount of time they need to make a decision or by other limitations of their 
minds)  was  introduced  by  Herbert  Simon  (1955)  and  further  developed  by  Tversky  and  Kahneman  (1974). 
See also Kahneman (2003). Sims (2010) reviews the literature on rational inattention. 
9  Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986); Akerlof and Yellen (1987); Rotemberg (2010, 2011). 
10  Tversky and Kahneman (1974). 
11  Hostile  media  effect:  Vallone,  Ross,  and  Lepper  (1985);  hyperbolic  discounting:  Ainslie  (1992)  and 
Laibson (1997); anchoring: Tversky and Kahneman (1974); confirmatory bias: Lord, Ross and Lepper (1979); 
overconfidence effect: Hoffrage (2004); bandwagon effect: Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer and Welch (1992); status 
quo bias: Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988); primacy and recency effects: Luchins (1957). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Research has shown that targeting the price level instead of the rate of inflation could help 
better  stabilize  the  economy.  Under  price-level  targeting,  the  monetary  authority  would 
commit to reverse deviations of the price level from its target path. If properly understood, 
firms  should  feel  less  compelled  to  change  their  price  since  they  know  that  the  effect  of 
shocks  on  the  price  level  will  be  reversed.  Since  prices  do  not  move  as  much,  smaller 
adjustments in production levels are required. In essence, what price-level targeting does is 
to  make  expectations  act  as  a  buffer  against  shocks,  delivering  lower  volatility  in  both 
inflation and output.12 
This  could  prove  particularly  useful  in  situations  where  deflationary  forces  cause  the  zero 
lower bound on the policy rate to bind. The promise that the effects of shocks pushing the 
price level below target will be reverted means that prices don’t have to fall as much today. 
The only way by which monetary policy can bring the price level back up to its target is by 
eventually injecting further monetary stimulus. The promise of bringing the price level back to 
target  is  thus  equivalent  to  a  promise  of  future  monetary  policy  stimulus  which  helps  to 
stimulate the economy today.13 
Clearly,  then,  under  price-level  targeting,  expectations  do  the  heavy  lifting.  They  serve  as 
automatic  stabilizers  in  response  to  shocks.  But  if  people’s  expectations  do  not  adjust 
favourably, the edge of price-level targeting over inflation targeting diminishes.14 The success 
of a price-level targeting regime would depend on how quickly the public learns and adjusts 
its  expectations  and  on  the  degree  of  credibility  with  which  policy-makers  can  implement 
price-level targeting.15 
Our  understanding  of  behaviour  and  of  expectation  formation  also  has  an  impact  on  a 
second question that has come to the forefront in the aftermath of the crisis: to what extent 
does monetary policy have a role to play in supporting financial stability? 
A  blind  faith  in  purely  rational  expectations  would  tilt  one  towards  the  conclusion  that 
monetary policy – and in fact most policies – would have a limited role in this regard. Asset 
prices should reflect all available information and the best decisions people could make given 
this information. Contracts should be designed optimally, reflecting a complete understanding 
of the consequences of the incentives at play. If expectations are assumed to be fully rational 
– while not impossible – it may be harder to see how bubbles could form. 
But,  as  the  recent  financial  crisis  made  clear,  various  facets  of  human  behaviour  and 
decision  making  can  contribute  to  the  build-up  of  financial  vulnerabilities.  People  show  a 
tendency to forget the past and assume that the future will be like the present. Periods of 
stability could breed complacency, making us overconfident that good times are here to stay 
and generate an excessive appetite for risk. 
                                                 
12  For a recent review of research on price-level targeting see Côté (2007); Amano et al. (2009); Ambler (2009) 
and Murray (2010). 
13  Krugman  (1998),  Svensson  (2001),  Egertsson  and  Woodford  (2003),  Lavoie  and  Murchison  (2008), 
Murchison (2011).  Amano  and  Shukayev  (2010)  provide  an  overview  of  implications  of  the  zero  bound  on 
nominal interest rates for monetary policy. 
14  Price-level targeting leads to smaller welfare gains than inflation targeting if the fraction of backward-looking 
agents is larger than half, see Steinsson (2003); and Ambler (2009). Dorich (2009) provides a review of the 
literature estimating backward-looking rule-of-thumb price-setting behaviour. 
15  Kryvtsov,  Shukayev  and  Ueberfeldt  (2007)  examine  the  desirability  of  switching  to  price-level  targeting  if 
imperfect credibility caused the private sector to be slow in adjusting their inflation expectations under the new 
policy regime. They find that when imperfect credibility lasts for more than 10 quarters, the cost of switching to 
price-level targeting outweighs the benefits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The existence of such patterns of behaviour reinforces the importance of proper regulatory 
and  supervisory  policies.16  After  personal  responsibilities  of  the  borrower  and  the  lender, 
these  are  the  next  lines  of  defence  against  the  build  up  of  financial  imbalances.  But  we 
cannot rule out the possibility that monetary policy might also, in some circumstances, have 
a role to play. In fact, monetary policy could itself be a contributing factor. For instance, if 
people mechanically extrapolate the present into the future, or overweight the present in their 
risk assessment, low interest rates – or a perceived certainty around their future path – could 
generate excessive risk taking on the part of financial institutions or induce people to take on 
more debt than they should. These are some of the manifestations of what is known as the 
risk-taking channel of monetary policy.17 
Policy  makers  are  grappling  with  these  and  other  issues,  all  of  which  are  affected  by  the 
formation of expectations. 
What does it mean for policy? 
Faced  with  the  uncertainty  and  complexity  of  decision  making  and  our  imperfect 
understanding of it, what should policy makers do? 
For a start, we need to embrace this uncertainty. We cannot be dogmatic. We need to take a 
broad  perspective  and  make  sure  that  our  decisions  are  robust  by  choosing  policies  that 
would be desirable under different types of expectation formation. This is another important 
reason why monetary policy cannot simply follow mechanistic and simplistic rules. 
This is why various types of expectation formation mechanisms are explicitly included in our 
analysis  at  the  Bank  of  Canada.  We  look  at  different  surveys  of  expectations  from 
forecasters and business owners. Also, one of our main policy models, ToTEM, allows for 
different  types  of  expectation  formations  –  incorporating  both  forward-looking  expectations 
and alternative types as well.18 
We  also  need  to  push  our  understanding  of  decision  making  further.  This  requires  that 
insights  and  tools  from  the  other  disciplines  that  study  the  human  brain  and  its  decision-
making processes from different perspectives be more integrated in our economic research 
and policy analysis. 
In  that  spirit,  Bank  researchers  have  recently  been  drawing  on  the  growing  field  of 
experimental economics to investigate more directly how people’s expectations behave and 
adapt under different policy regimes. Simulations that replicate key features of the Canadian 
economy  have  allowed  us  to  observe  how  people’s  expectations  change  when  we  tweak 
some aspects of the environment. For instance, in one set of experiments, we looked at how 
inflation  expectations  would  change  if  monetary  policy  evolved  from  inflation  targeting  to 
price-level targeting. The results suggest that expectations do adapt to a change in regime. 
However, the subjects’ behaviour revealed only incomplete understanding of the implications 
of  price-level  targeting.19  These  experiments  constitute  a  useful  starting  point  and  can  be 
                                                 
16  Macklem  (2011)  reviews  G-20  efforts  and  achievements  toward  a  more  resilient  financial  system  and  the 
challenges related to oversight and regulation. 
17  Carney  (2010)  discusses  the  factors  that  have  led  to  a  low  interest  rate  environment  in  major  advanced 
economies and the implications for financial stability and economic growth. Borio and Zhu (2008) discuss the 
need  to  incorporate  the  risk-taking  channel  in  monetary  policy  analysis,  including  that  of  extrapolative 
expectations. Sims (2008) argues that rational inattention and differences of opinion in expected inflation can 
generate excess investment in real capital. See also Adrian and Shin (2009). 
18  ToTEM is the Bank of Canada’s principal projection and policy-analysis model for the Canadian economy. It is 
a medium-scale, open-economy, dynamic-stochastic general-equilibrium (DSGE) model with multiple goods. 
See Murchison and Rennison (2006); and Dorich, Mendes, and Zhang (2011). 
19  Amano, Engle-Warnick and Shukayev (2011). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
extended to investigate many more questions, including how central bank communications 
influence people’s decisions or the tendency people have to extrapolate the present into the 
future. 
Conclusion 
I would like to conclude with the following observation. 
I  have  argued  that  the  uncertainty  we  have  about  how  we  think  has  important  policy 
implications. But we should not forget a fundamental lesson from rational expectations. The 
way  we  think  is  not  set  in  stone.  People  learn  and  eventually  adapt.  Even  if  people  are 
constrained  by  their  cognitive  ability  and  a  hardwired  need  for  simple  rules  of  thumb, 
effective  communication  and  greater  common  knowledge  can  override  some  unconscious 
biases;  make  it  possible  to  switch  to  still  simple,  but  better,  rules  of  thumb;  learn  more 
quickly;  make  more  informed  decisions;  and,  ultimately,  reach  better  outcomes.  A  better 
understanding of expectation formation and effective communications can positively reinforce 
each other. This is not only true for monetary policy, but for decision making in general. 
This is why, even though I am not sure how you think, I’m sure you expect me to be done 
just about now. And you are right. 
Thank you. 
References 
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin. 2009. “Money, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Staff Report No. 360. 
Ainslie, Gorge W., “Picoeconomics,” Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
Akerlof, George A & Yellen, Janet L, 1987. “Rational Models of Irrational Behavior,” American 
Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 77(2), pages 137–42, May. 
Amano,  R.,  T.  Carter,  and  D.  Coletti.  2009.  “Next  Steps  for  Canadian  Monetary  Policy.”  
Bank of Canada Review, Spring. 
Amano  R.  and  M.  Shukayev.  2010.  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Zero  Bound  on  Nominal 
Interest Rates.” Bank of Canada Review, Summer. 
Amano  R.,  J.  Engle-Warnick,  and M.  Shukayev.  2011.  “Price-Level  Targeting  and Inflation 
Expectations: Experimental Evidence,” Forthcoming Bank of Canada working paper. 
Ambler, S. 2009. “Price-Level Targeting and Stabilization Policy: A Review.” Bank of Canada 
Review, Spring. 
Athey, S., A. Atkeson, P. Kehoe. 2005. “The Optimal Degree of Monetary Policy Discretion,” 
Econometrica 73 (5), September, 2005, 1431–1476. 
Barro, Robert J.; Gordon, David B. (1983). “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural 
Rate Model”. Journal of Political Economy 91 (4): 589–610. 
Bikhchandani,  Sushil;  Hirshleifer,  David;  Welch,  Ivo  (1992).  “A  Theory  of  Fads,  Fashion, 
Custom,  and  Cultural  Change  as  Informational  Cascades”.  Journal  of  Political  Economy 
100 (5): 992–1026. 
Boivin,  J.,  M.  Kiley,  F.  Mishkin,  How  Has  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism  Evolved 
Over  Time?  In:  Benjamin  M.  Friedman  and  Michael  Woodford,  Editor(s),  Handbook  of 
Monetary Economics, Elsevier, 2010, Volume 3, Pages 369–422. 
Borio, C. and H. Zhu. 2008. “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing 
link in the transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Paper No 268. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Carney,  Mark.  2010.  “Living  with  Low  for  Long,”  Remarks  at  Economic  Club  of  Canada, 
13 December 2010, Toronto, Ontario. 
Clarida,  G.,  J.  Gali  and  M.  Gertler  (1999),  “The  Science  of  Monetary  Policy:  A  New 
Keynesian  Perspective,”  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  American  Economic  Association, 
37(4), 1661–1707. 
Clinton, K. and M. Zelmer. 1997. “Constraints on the Conduct of Canadian Monetary Policy in 
1990s: Dealing with Uncertainty in Financial Markets,” Technical Reports 80, Bank of Canada. 
Côté, A. 2007. “Price-Level Targeting.” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2007–8. 
Dorich,  J.  2009.  “Forward-looking  versus  backward-looking  behavior  in  inflation  dynamics:  
a new test.” Bank of Canada manuscript. 
Dorich, J., Mendes, R. and Y. Zhang. 2011. “Introducing Multiple Interest Rates in ToTEM.” 
Bank of Canada Review, Summer 2011. 
Eggertsson,  G.  and  M.  Woodford.  2003.  “The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and  Optimal 
Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 139–211. 
Friedman,  Milton.  1968.  “The  Role  of  Monetary  Policy”.  American  Economic  Review 
(American Economic Association) 58: 1–17. 
He,  Z.,  “Evaluating  the  Effect  of  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  Conditional  Commitment  Policy” 
(Discussion Paper No. 2010–11, Bank of Canada, 2010). 
Hoffrage, Ulrich (2004), “Overconfidence”, in Rüdiger Pohl, Cognitive Illusions: a handbook 
on fallacies and biases in thinking, judgement and memory, Psychology Press. 
Kahneman,  Daniel  (2003).  “Maps  of  bounded  rationality:  psychology  for  behavioral 
economics”. The American Economic Review 93 (5): 1449–75. 
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Thaler (1986). “Fairness as a Constraint on 
Profit: Seeking Entitlements in the Market.” American Economic Review, 76, 728–741. 
Keynes,  John  M.  The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  London: 
Macmillan, 1936, pp. 161–162. 
Krugman, Paul R. 1998. “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” 
Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  Economic  Studies  Program,  The  Brookings 
Institution, vol. 29(2), pages 137–206. 
Kryvtsov, O., M. Shukayev and A. Ueberfeldt. 2008. “Adopting Price-Level Targeting under 
Imperfect Credibility: An Update.” Bank of Canada Working Papers 08–37. 
Kydland,  Finn  E  &  Prescott,  Edward  C,  1977.  “Rules  Rather  Than  Discretion:  The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, 
vol. 85(3), pages 473–91, June. 
Laibson,  D.,  1997.  “Golden  eggs  and  hyperbolic  discounting,”  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 112, 443–478. 
Lavoie, C. and S. Murchison. 2008. “The Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates: Implications 
for Monetary Policy,” Bank of Canada Review, Winter 2007–2008. 
Lord,  Charles  G.;  Ross,  Lee;  Lepper,  Mark  R.  (1979),  “Biased  assimilation  and  attitude 
polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently  considered  evidence”, Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology (American Psychological Association) 37 (11): 2098–2109. 
Lucas,  Robert  Jr,  1976.  “Econometric  policy  evaluation:  A  critique,”  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy, Elsevier, vol. 1(1), pages 19–46, January. 
Luchins,  Abraham  S.  The  Order  of  Presentation  (1957)  Hovland,  C.  I.  New  Haven:  Yale 
University Press. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Macklem, T. 2011. “Global Financial Reform: Maintaining the Momentum,” Remarks at the 
G-20 Workshop, 7 July 2011, Paris, France. 
Murchison,  S.  2011.  “Consumer  Price  Index  Targeting,”  forthcoming  Bank  of  Canada 
Working Paper. 
Murchison, S. and Andrew Rennison (2006), “ToTEM: The Bank of Canada’s New Quarterly 
Projection Model,” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 97. 
Murray, John. 2010. “Re-examining Canada’s Monetary Policy Framework: Recent Research 
and  Outstanding  Issues,”  Remarks  at  Canadian  Association  for  Business  Economics, 
24 August 2010, Kingston, Ontario. 
Phelps, Edmund S. (1968). “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium”. Journal 
of Political Economy (Chicago University Press) 76: 678–711. 
Rotenberg,  Julio.  2010.  “Altruistic  Dynamic  Pricing  with  Customer  Regret,”  Scandinavian 
Journal of Economics, 112 (4), pages 646–672, December. 
–––. 2011. “Fair Pricing.” Harvard Business School Working Paper. 
Samuelson, W. & R. J. Zeckhauser. (1988). Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of 
Risk and Uncertainty, 1, pp. 7–59. 
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioural model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 
99–118. 
Sims, Christopher A. Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics, In: Benjamin M. Friedman 
and  Michael  Woodford,  Editor(s),  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  Elsevier,  2010, 
Volume 3A, Pages 155–181. 
Sims,  Chris.  2008.  “Inflation  expectations,  uncertainty  and  monetary  policy,”  BIS  Working 
Paper No 275. 
Steinsson,  Jon,  2003.  “Optimal  monetary  policy  in  an  economy  with  inflation  persistence,” 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 50(7), pages 1425–1456, October. 
Svensson, L. 2001. “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping 
from a Liquidity Trap.” Monetary and Economic Studies 19 (Special edition): 277–312. 
Tversky,  A.  &  Kahneman,  D.  (1974).  Judgment  under  uncertainty:  Heuristics  and  biases. 
Science, 185, 1124–1130. 
Vallone,  R.P.,  Ross,  L.,  &  Lepper,  M.R.  (1985).  The  hostile  media  phenomenon:  Biased 
Perception and Perceptions of Media Bias in Coverage of the “Beirut Massacre”. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 577–585. 
Woodford, M., 2003. Interest and prices. University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
