Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Nagasaki, 23 June 2011. 
 The current situation of and outlook for the world economy 
I. 
The Bank of Japan released its latest Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the 
Outlook  Report)  on  April  29.  The  report  presents  the  scenario  for  Japan’s  economy 
considered to be the most likely by the Bank. The Bank projects that the economy will return 
to  a  moderate  recovery  path  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2011.  Although  supply-side 
constraints – due to the damage to production facilities and the disruption of supply chains 
for parts and components caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake in March – as well as 
constraints on electric power supply are expected to weigh down the economy for a while, 
these downward pressures are expected to gradually ease, paving the way for a moderate 
recovery in production. Of course, this recovery in production will not be long-lived unless it is 
accompanied  by  a  rise  in  sales.  A  key  element  in  this  scenario  of  a  return  to  a  moderate 
recovery, therefore, is the expectation that exports will increase based on an improvement in 
overseas economies. Consequently, before talking about the domestic economy, let me take 
a closer look at the world economy.  
Following the recovery from the Lehman shock in the autumn of 2008, growth in the world 
economy  temporarily  slowed  in  the  summer  of  2010.  From  the  end  of  autumn,  economic 
growth  then  regained  momentum,  driven  by  strong  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies. At present, the pace has slowed somewhat due partly to the effects of 
soaring crude oil prices. As for the outlook, a number of issues require careful attention, but 
basically it is expected that – fueled by rapid growth in emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies – the pace of global growth will soon pick up again and the global economy will 
continue to expand. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) in its World Economic Outlook 
released in April 2011 forecasts that the global economy will grow by around 4.5 percent in 
both 2011 and 2012.  
Advanced economies 
A. 
Looking  at  developments  in  the  global  economy  in  greater  detail,  it  is  useful  to  focus  on 
advanced economies and on emerging and commodity-exporting economies separately. Let 
me start by considering advanced economies. In the United States, from the autumn of 2010 
onward, various stimulus measures, such as monetary easing by the Federal Reserve and 
the extension of tax cuts introduced by the Bush administration, led to optimism regarding 
the  U.S.  economy.  Caution,  however,  has  returned  as  personal  consumption  has  been 
curtailed by higher prices for gasoline and other daily necessities, leading to a slight decline 
in the growth rate of the economy overall. Moreover, job market data for May showed that 
nonfarm payroll employment was well below market forecasts, indicating that the recovery in 
the  job  market  remains  shaky.  With  balance-sheet  adjustments  continuing  to  be  a  burden 
and the path for addressing the fiscal deficit unclear, the need to pay attention to downward 
risks is increasing.  
Even  though  upward  momentum  is  currently  weak,  however,  the  Bank’s  main  scenario, 
which  expects  the  U.S.  economy  to  recover  moderately,  remains  unchanged.  While 
developments up to the present are somewhat on the low side, they are within the range of 
expectations.  As  for  the  outlook,  exports  –  mainly  to  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies – are expected to follow an upward trend. Furthermore, the U.S. stock market, 
which has been in an adjustment phase for the past few weeks, remains firm from a longer-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
term  perspective.  In  this  environment,  private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment 
are  unlikely  to  deteriorate  to  any  serious  extent.  In  short,  we  should  be  aware  of  the 
downside risks without being unduly pessimistic.  
Economic activity in the euro area is recovering moderately as a whole, although the contrast 
has  been  increasing  further  between  the  strong  performance  of  Germany  and  the 
performance  of  peripheral  countries  with  serious  fiscal  problems  such  as  Greece  and 
Portugal. As for the outlook, the situation as a whole is likely to remain unchanged, with the 
moderate  recovery  continuing.  However,  since  around  April  2011,  doubts  have  emerged 
regarding the credibility of Greece’s plans for fiscal reconstruction and funds procurement, 
leading to a surge in the yield on 10-year Greek government bonds to record levels of more 
than  15  percent.  The  surge  triggered  a  rise  in  the  yields  on  government  bonds  issued  by 
other peripheral countries. Damage could spread from financial markets to economic activity. 
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  closely  watch  fiscal  developments  in  Greece  and  other 
peripheral countries, as well as the response of the European Union (EU) as a whole.  
Emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
B. 
Emerging and commodity-exporting economies are expanding steadily, led by firm domestic 
demand.  Moreover,  although  these  economies  are  likely  to  continue  tightening  their 
monetary  policies  in  response  to  heightened  concerns  over  inflation,  they  are  expected  to 
maintain  relatively  high  growth,  albeit  at  a  slightly  reduced  pace.  In  China,  for  instance, 
consumer  prices  are  rising  at  a  rate  of  more  than  5  percent  and  authorities  are  tightening 
monetary policy. The Chinese economy is expected to continue showing high growth, though 
at a somewhat slower pace, due to the continued increase in private consumption, housing 
investment,  and  investment  in  various  infrastructures,  reflecting  higher  household  incomes 
and  continuing  urbanization.  Economic  activity  in  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN  countries  is  also 
likely to follow a recovery trend. It has been suggested that production is being affected by 
sluggish  shipments  of  parts  from  Japan,  but  domestic  demand  –  such  as  business  fixed 
investment and private consumption – is expected to remain firm, and exports are expected 
to  continue  increasing.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  concern  that  growth  in  commodity-
exporting  economies  may  slow  if  international  commodity  prices  drop.  Any  deceleration, 
however, is unlikely to be prolonged. 
The Japanese economy 
II. 
Keeping in mind the present situation of and outlook for overseas economies I just outlined, 
let me now talk about the Japanese economy and prices.  
Economic activity 
A. 
The pace of improvement in the economy slowed temporarily from the autumn of 2010, partly 
due to the expiration of subsidies for purchases of environmentally friendly cars. Thereafter, 
from the beginning of 2011, the economy started to gradually return to a moderate recovery 
path.  The  devastating  earthquake  that  struck  northeastern  Japan  in  March,  however, 
destroyed  many  production  facilities,  disrupted  supply  chains,  and  caused  electric  power 
shortages. Production of cars and other products came to a standstill even though demand 
was  clearly  present.  The  index  of  industrial  production  for  March  showed  a  decline  of 
15.5 percent from the previous month, the steepest fall ever for a single month since data 
started  to  be  compiled.  The  cause  of  the  decline  in  production  differed  from  that  after  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, when demand simply evaporated. This meant that immediately 
after the earthquake, the usual mechanism for economic recovery – in which a recovery is 
preceded  by  an  improvement  in  overseas  economies  that  boosts  Japanese  exports  and 
production – was partially paralyzed.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Supply-side  constraints  are  still  in  evidence  and  downward  pressure  on  production  will 
remain for the time being, although there are also signs of recovery. Supply chains are likely 
to be restored earlier than previously anticipated due to the close cooperation among firms, 
especially in the car industry, and the wholehearted and coordinated efforts of workers on the 
ground. Another bright factor is that electricity demand in the Kanto and Tohoku regions this 
summer is expected to be lower than forecast earlier, although of course much depends on 
the weather. Initially, it was expected that supply constraints would ease from the beginning 
of autumn 2011, but now it appears that production will return to pre-earthquake levels in the 
July–September quarter and that supply constraints will be largely resolved by early autumn. 
From a somewhat longer-term perspective, uncertainties persist with regard to the supply of 
electricity.  However,  as  the  supply  constraints  ease,  Japan’s  economy  should  continue  to 
recover, driven by the increase in exports and production that the expected improvement in 
the global economy should bring with it. Moreover, by that time, restoration and rebuilding of 
infrastructure,  buildings,  and  other  facilities  damaged  by  the  earthquake  should  be  in  full 
swing, pushing the economy forward.  
Looking at each demand component, exports, particularly of cars and car parts, declined as 
a  result  of supply  chain  disruptions.  However,  overseas  demand  in  general  is  expected  to 
continue  to  expand.  Furthermore,  exporters,  particularly  automobile  makers,  are  working 
hard  to  resume  shipments  as  quickly  as  possible.  Therefore,  although  much  depends  on 
developments in the foreign exchange market, it looks increasingly likely that shipments will 
return  to  pre-earthquake  levels  sometime  in  the  July–September  quarter,  which  is  earlier 
than previously expected. Exports are expected to follow an upward trend thereafter.  
Business fixed investment bottomed out and started to recover moderately during the second 
half  of  fiscal  2009,  reflecting  increased  production  and  a  recovery  in  corporate  profits. 
Although  business  sentiment  deteriorated  due  to  the  impact  of  the  earthquake,  various 
indicators  suggest  that  business  fixed  investment  has  remained  surprisingly  resilient.  This 
shows that firms’ growth expectations have remained stable. On this basis, business fixed 
investment, despite some fluctuations, is likely to remain firm against the backdrop of strong 
profits  in  fiscal  2010.  It  is  likely  to  start  to  clearly  turn  upward  from  around  the  autumn  of 
2011,  supported  by  the  expected  recovery  in  exports  and  production as  well  as  rebuilding 
efforts in areas hit by the earthquake.  
Turning to private consumption, the mood of restraint seen immediately after the devastation 
resulting from the earthquake has gradually eased, with department stores and retailers of 
electrical appliances voicing, albeit cautiously, the view that consumption is returning to more 
normal  levels.  Furthermore,  various  indicators  point  to  a  slight  improvement  in  consumer 
sentiment. Therefore, private consumption is expected to head toward a gradual recovery. 
Needless to say, it is important to keep an eye on the effect, particularly in the service sector, 
of the supply and demand balance of electricity during the summer. In addition, consumer 
sentiment is likely to be dampened by the ongoing problems at the nuclear power plant and 
awareness  of  the  need  to  save  electricity.  What  is  more,  the  employment  and  income 
situation, particularly the wage situation, is becoming more severe. The expected recovery in 
consumption is, therefore, bound to be modest.  
Prices 
B. 
The  three  key  factors  likely  to  shape  the  direction  of  prices  for  the  time  being  are  (1)  the 
aggregate supply and demand balance; (2) medium- to long-term inflation expectations; and 
(3) international commodity prices. In the short term, the net impact on the aggregate supply 
and demand balance is unclear, since on the one hand supply capacity has declined as a 
result of the earthquake, while on the other demand has also fallen due to a deterioration in 
consumer  sentiment.  Nevertheless,  in  the  longer  run,  the  supply  and  demand  balance  is 
likely  to  follow  an  improving  trend  as  the  economy  returns  to  a  moderate  recovery  path. 
According to various surveys, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been stable 
at around 1 percent in recent years. Prices of international commodities, such as crude oil, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
have  been  undergoing  adjustments  recently.  However,  there  has  been  little  change  in  the 
factors  that  have  fueled  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  so  far,  such  as  the  strong  growth  of 
emerging economies and the increased “financialization” of primary commodities.  
Under these circumstances, with the aggregate supply and demand balance remaining on an 
improving  trend  in  the  longer  run,  and  assuming  that  international  commodity  prices  will 
increase  moderately,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  are  expected  to  rise.  For  the  same 
reasons,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI;  excluding  fresh  food)  is 
expected to remain slightly positive. The CPI, however, is very likely to be revised downward 
somewhat as a result of the planned change in August of the CPI base year to 2010.  
Risks to the outlook 
III. 
I would now like to turn to risks affecting the outlook for economic activity and prices.  
Risks to economic activity 
A. 
In the April 2011 Outlook Report, the Bank listed the following as risk factors concerning the 
outlook  for  economic  activity:  (1)  uncertainty  about  the  possible  effects  of  the  earthquake 
disaster  on  Japan’s  economy;  (2)  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  growth 
expectations; (3) developments in overseas economies; and (4) the effects brought about by 
a possible further rise in international commodity prices.  
As for the first risk factor, there is great uncertainty regarding the timing when supply-side 
constraints will be resolved, the timing and scale of the restoration of damaged capital stock, 
and the impact on the economy of possible changes in consumer and business sentiment 
caused by the disaster. The degree of the impact varies depending on future developments 
in the situation at the nuclear power plant, as well as on the outlook for corporate profits and 
the  compensation  of  employees.  In  addition,  if  concern  about  the  growth  potential  of  the 
economy increases due to the effects of the disaster, and firms’ and households’ medium- to 
long-term growth expectations decline as a result, this could depress firms’ and households’ 
appetite  for  spending  and  act  to  reduce  economic  activity  for  a  protracted  period.  On  the 
other hand, medium- to long-term growth expectations by firms and households could rise if 
firms take the disaster as an opportunity to bolster efforts to implement growth strategies.  
Risk factors regarding  overseas economies, as I explained earlier, are increasing to some 
degree.  In  emerging  economies,  there  are  upside  risks  due  to  economic  expansion,  and 
although  monetary  tightening  has  continued  in  these  economies,  this  has  not  sufficiently 
calmed concern over overheating or inflation. Therefore, there is concern that from a longer-
term  perspective  sustainable  growth  may  be  undermined  due  to  increased  fluctuations  in 
economic activity. In addition, if international commodity prices rise further, this could lead to 
a  decline  in  the  purchasing  power  of  households  and  a  deterioration  in  corporate  profits, 
which could depress private domestic demand in Japan.  
I believe that all of these risk factors are equally important. Although there is a possibility that 
the  economy  will  grow  faster  than  expected  if  supply-side  constraints  ease  earlier  than 
anticipated, it seems to me that the downside risks stemming from uncertainties regarding 
the effects of the disaster require the most attention, simply because the disaster involved an 
unprecedented  tsunami  and  a  nuclear  power  plant  accident.  Moreover,  firms,  particularly 
small firms, are concerned about whether the shift to overseas production will accelerate and 
the hollowing out of domestic industry will continue. This is an issue that I also feel requires 
attention.  
Risks to prices 
B. 
Next, turning to the risks to prices, these involve the materialization of the risks to economic 
activity  that  I  have  just  described.  Developments  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
balance  play  an  important  role  in  determining  the  outlook  for  prices,  but  because  of  the 
impact  of  the  earthquake,  these  developments  in  the  short  term  are  not  yet  clear.  Even  if 
supply-side  constraints  cause  supply  shortages,  firms  will  avoid  making  hasty  decisions  
– such as raising prices of their products – that may result in losing customers, if firms judge 
the supply shortages to be temporary. On the other hand, if downside risks to the economy 
materialize, leading to a prolonged economic downturn, prices will be affected accordingly.  
Other  risk  factors  to  prices  include  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations, as well as developments in import prices, which are affected by fluctuations in 
international commodity prices and foreign exchange rates.  
IV. 
Monetary policy 
The bank’s thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy 
A. 
So far, I have talked about economic activity and prices in Japan. I would now like to turn to 
the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. The Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy is faced 
with  the  extremely  important  challenge  of  emerging  from  deflation  and  returning  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  Based  on  this  recognition,  the  Bank  has  been 
doing – and is determined to continue to do – its utmost as the central bank, using a three-
pronged  approach  consisting  of  (1)  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  under  the 
comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy,  (2)  ensuring  stability  in  financial  markets,  and 
(3) providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. Furthermore, with a 
view to ensuring stability in financial markets, the Bank introduced a number of measures in 
the wake of the earthquake to address its impact on the economy and associated risks.  
1. 
Pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  under  the  comprehensive  monetary  easing 
policy 
“Comprehensive  monetary  easing”  is  a  policy  package  that  the  Bank  introduced  in 
October 2010, consisting of three measures. First, the Bank lowered its policy interest rate, 
that is, the target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate – the shortest interbank rate – to 
“at  0  to  0.1  percent”,  thereby  indicating  that  it  was  pursuing  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate 
policy. Second, the Bank clarified its commitment regarding the time horizon based on the 
“understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” (hereafter the “understanding”). The 
“understanding” is the level of inflation that each Policy Board member understands as being 
consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. The “understanding” at present 
falls  in  a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  and  the  midpoints  of  most  Policy  Board 
members’ understanding are around 1 percent. The Bank has made clear that it will maintain 
the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judges, on the basis of the “understanding”, that 
price stability is in sight, on condition that no problem is identified in examining risk factors, 
including the accumulation of financial imbalances. And third, the Bank decided to establish 
the  Asset  Purchase  Program.  The  Bank  decided  on  this  temporary  easing  measure  to 
conduct outright purchases of various financial assets, such as Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs), and risk assets such as CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and 
Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  The  Bank  has  been  steadily  conducting 
outright  purchases  of  such  financial  assets,  which  are  registered  on  its  balance  sheet, 
through the Asset Purchase Program.  
2. 
The  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth  supplies  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  private  financial  institutions  in 
accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  to  strengthen  the 
foundations  for  economic  growth.  The  Bank  has  provided  18  examples,  including 
“environment  and  energy  business”,  “medical,  nursing  care,  and  other  health-related 
business”,  and  “tourism  business”,  as  areas  for  which  financial  institutions’  lending  or 
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
investment would be funded by the measure, and in addition to these areas, a large amount 
of  funds  has  been  invested  in  the  area  categorized  as  “others”,  such  as  lending  or 
investment to support local industries. The Bank decided to implement this measure based 
on the recognition that the decline in the economic growth trend since the 1990s has been 
the fundamental cause of deflation and that it was important to support various growth areas 
to overcome deflation. In other words, it is important not only for Japan’s economy to achieve 
a  cyclical  recovery,  but  also  to  make  efforts  to  raise  Japan’s  economic  growth  in  the  long 
term. While the government, for its part, also has been implementing measures to support 
economic growth, such as its “New Growth Strategy” aimed at achieving renewed economic 
vigor, I believe that the Bank’s measure to support the economy from the financial side – that 
is, to provide funds to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth – not only 
produces effects through the provision of funds, but also sends a strong message and raises 
awareness about the issues faced by Japan’s economy.  
The  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth was decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on June 14 and 15, 2010. 
On June 8, 2011, the Bank carried out the fourth loan disbursement under the measure, and 
the total amount of loans disbursed has reached nearly 3 trillion yen – the amount set as the 
ceiling  for  the  measure.  Therefore,  given  that  the  maximum  amount  of  loans  had  almost 
been disbursed, Policy Board members at the MPM held on June 13 and 14, 2011 discussed 
how to proceed with the measure. If we assess the loan disbursements carried out so far, it 
could be said the measure has played its intended role as a catalyst in prompting financial 
institutions to develop their own initiatives to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
A wide range of financial institutions have been actively making a number of efforts targeting 
their  specific  customer base  or  the  region  they  serve,  such  as  establishing  new dedicated 
funds  that  will  support  economic  growth,  so  that  the  amount  of  lending  and  investment 
greatly  exceeds  the  amount  of  loans  disbursed  by  the  Bank.  However,  the  effects  of  the 
measure on equity investment and in terms of encouraging financial institutions to cultivate 
new business models have been insufficient, and it has been pointed out that a side effect of 
the measure is to intensify competition among financial institutions to lower lending rates.  
Against this background, my view with regard to the future of this scheme was that it should 
continue to firmly support as broadly as possible the efforts of private financial institutions to 
build on their specific experience and expertise and devise their own ways to meet demand 
in the areas and regions they serve. This view was shared by other members of the Policy 
Board, and at the MPM held on June 13 and 14, 2011 the Bank decided that it would firmly 
maintain its stance of supporting financial institutions’ efforts to strengthen the foundations 
for  economic  growth  and  take  measures  that  would  focus  on  boosting  Japan’s  growth 
potential  even  further.  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  to  establish  a  new  line  of  credit  for 
equity investments and asset-backed lending (ABL) aimed at encouraging smooth financing 
of firms that lack sufficient collateral or equity investment, and/or who so far have received 
very little financing from the existing fund-provisioning measure. In introducing this measure, 
the  Bank  decided  to  set  long  loan  periods  to make  them  easier  for  financial  institutions  to 
administer,  and  to  lower  the  minimum  amount  per  investment  or  loan  to  meet  even  small 
requests and sow the seeds for growth in even the smallest “nooks and crannies.”  
The bank’s responses after the earthquake 
B. 
Since  immediately  after  the  earthquake  disaster,  the  Bank  has  been  taking  a  range  of 
measures in a timely manner, from three main perspectives: (1) maintaining the functioning 
of  financial  and  settlement  systems;  (2)  ensuring  the  stability  of  financial  markets;  and 
(3) supporting the economy. I would now like to discuss the Bank’s response to the disaster. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
1. 
Maintaining  the  functioning  of  financial  and  settlement  systems  and  ensuring  the 
stability of financial markets 
In terms of maintaining the functioning of the financial and settlement systems, the Bank has 
been  taking  all  possible  measures  to  provide  cash  to  the  disaster  areas  and  to  operate 
Japan’s  major  payment  and  settlement  systems  as  usual,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan 
Financial  Network  System,  or  BOJ-NET  –  the  core  settlement  system  for  funds  and 
Japanese  government  securities.  In  addition,  to  respond  to  the  increase  in  precautionary 
demand for funds, the Bank provided ample funds to sufficiently meet market demand. More 
specifically,  on  Monday,  March  14,  the  first  business  day  after  the  disaster,  the  Bank 
provided  a  total  of  21.8  trillion  yen  in  funds,  almost  three  times  the  largest  daily  funds 
provision during the financial crisis after the failure of Lehman Brothers. Thereafter, the Bank 
continued  its  ample  provision  of  funds.  As  a  result,  the  outstanding  balance  of  financial 
institutions’ current accounts at the Bank marked a historical high of 42.6 trillion yen as of 
March 24. Comparing this amount to the level before the earthquake of around 17 trillion yen 
illustrates  well  the  amount  of  funds  provided  by  the  Bank  after  the  disaster.  Due  to  these 
measures taken by the Bank, financial markets remained stable following the earthquake.  
2. 
Further enhancing monetary easing by increasing the amount of the Asset Purchase 
Program 
Supporting financial institutions in disaster areas 
At the MPM held immediately after the earthquake, on March 14, 2011, the Bank decided to 
take measures to further enhance monetary easing, with a view to preempting a deterioration 
in business sentiment and an increase in risk aversion in financial markets from adversely 
affecting  economic  activity.  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  to  double  the  amount  of  asset 
purchases – mainly of risk assets, such as CP,  corporate bonds, and ETFs – through the 
Bank’s  Asset  Purchase  Program  from  about  5  trillion  yen  to  about  10  trillion  yen.  I  also 
shared  the  view  that  it  was  extremely  important  for  the  Bank  to  decide  on  drastic  further 
monetary  easing  to  fully  reassure  market  participants.  I  believe  that  the  measure  was 
effective  in  reassuring  market  participants  in  that  it  prevented  a  deterioration  in  business 
sentiment  and  an  increase  in  risk  aversion  in  financial  markets:  for  example,  issuance 
spreads on CP, which had expanded immediately after the earthquake, declined to more or 
less the same level as prior to the earthquake and issuing conditions for CP continue to be 
favorable. I should note, however, that there are signs that since the earthquake small firms 
have been facing some difficulties in obtaining funding, and I will pay close attention to this 
issue when assessing the financial environment.  
3. 
In  addition  to  the  measures  mentioned  thus  far,  the  Bank  decided  to  conduct  long-term 
funds-supplying  operations  to  financially  support  initial  response  efforts  by  financial 
institutions  in  the  disaster  areas  even  before  demand  for  the  purpose  of  rebuilding  and 
revival  becomes  full-fledged.  Furthermore,  with  a  view  to  securing  sufficient  financing 
capacity of financial institutions in disaster areas, the Bank decided to broaden the range of 
eligible collateral for money market operations.  
I believe the Bank’s bold measures, including the decision to quickly provide long-term funds 
to financial institutions in disaster areas to support firms in distress – particularly small and 
medium-sized firms – were timely and most appropriate. The damage caused by the recent 
earthquake has been much larger than that of the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake in 1995, 
but the Bank has taken full advantage of the lessons learned at the time.  
The  first  funds-supplying  operation  to  support  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas  took 
place in May, and the second such operation took place on June 21. The amount disbursed 
so far totals some 200 billion yen at a rate of 0.1 percent. In principle, the operations, whose 
expected maximum amount is 1 trillion yen in total, will continue every month until October 
this year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
These  measures  were  put  in  place  as  an  initial  response  to  meet  the  demand  for  funds 
expected  to  emerge  for  rebuilding  and  revival.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  study  further 
measures  to  help  disaster  areas  recover,  reconstruct,  and  move  forward  as  quickly  as 
possible. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
