Muhammad Al-Jasser: Diversifying sources of finance 
Remarks  by  His  Excellency  Dr  Muhammad  Al-Jasser,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  (SAMA),  at  the  Euromoney  Saudi  Arabia  Conference,  Riyadh,  17  May 
2011. 
 Thank you Padraic for inviting me again to this yearly event entitled this time “Diversifying 
Sources of Finance.” 
It is a fact that finance and the financial sector have been at the centre of global attention 
since the financial market crisis in 2008. That crisis involved a temporary breakdown in the 
credit  system  which  produced  a  global  recession,  and  this  example  shows  the  critical  role 
that finance plays in generating or undermining economic growth.  
This morning, I would like to address the role of government, including SAMA, in enabling the 
environment  for  private  enterprises  including  the  SMEs,  and  then  describe  the  current 
situation  in  terms  of  local  and  global  sources  of  finance  for  economic  development.  I  will 
conclude with some lessons from the recent global financial crisis. 
The  first  source  of  finance  is  internal  to  the  Saudi  economy,  and  the  second  is  external. 
Domestically  there  is  credit  intermediation  by  channeling  local  savings  into  productive 
investments.  Externally  savings  are  allocated  between  economies,  where  Saudi  Arabia 
competes with others for the global pool of savings. 
Role of government 
1. 
The government targets investment in social infrastructure (education, health, housing, etc.) 
to promote the wellbeing of the people, and is also pursuing diversification of the economy to 
create work opportunities for its young population. Fiscal and monetary policies are but tools 
to achieve these goals. Government policies can play a vital role in providing a stable and 
predictable  macroeconomic  environment  for  investors,  which  is  why  the  policy  horizon  is 
long-term.  
Monetary policy is anchored on the pegged exchange rate to the Dollar, so interest rate risk 
premia over the Dollar can be kept low and investors have confidence to commit long-term 
funds.  The  result  of  this  long-term  success  is  that  Riyal  financing  is  available  with  no 
currency risk and at attractive interest rates.  
Saudi Arabia’s fiscal policy provides a stable background for investment. It works on counter-
cyclical basis, so that it runs budget surpluses when times are good, as at present, so as to 
allow for deficit spending to keep the economy on a steady growth track when global demand 
for oil weakens. The result is that Saudi Arabia currently has a very low debt/GDP ratio (less 
than 10%).  
Saudi Arabia also has favourable tax rates for businesses (such as a maximum 20% rate on 
foreign enterprises) with no capital controls on remittances abroad. The government provides 
support  for  investment  projects  besides  developing  a  supportive  legal  and  arbitration 
structure. In summary, Saudi Arabia’s economic policy remains cautious and long-term and 
provides  global  investors  with  an  ideal  backdrop  for  allocating  their  capital  to  the  different 
sectors of the Saudi economy. 
Financial stability 
2. 
A sound financial system is the backbone of an economy. Indeed, banking crises tend to be 
very costly to the exchequer and taxpayers. Our recent experiences revealed that sovereign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and  banking  crises  are  highly  and  tightly  intertwined.  In  this  context,  SAMA  as  the 
commercial bank and insurance regulator will continue its conservative policy on banking and 
insurance supervision, and will fully implement the recommendations of the Basel Committee 
on capital requirements.  
Sources of finance: domestic 
3. 
In emerging/developing economies, banks are the most important source of finance. As is 
the case in most emerging markets, bank intermediation is still a favoured option in Saudi 
Arabia, with bank credit/GDP at about 50%. The economy, in common with other developing 
economies,  is  relatively  under  banked,  but  bank  penetration  is  increasing.  Similarly, 
borrowing by individuals is relatively conservative (consumer loans/GDP is about 12%). The 
eventual passage of a mortgage law, along with increased lending to SMEs, should help to 
encourage  responsible  borrowing  in  these  areas  and  improve  banking  penetration  in  the 
economy. 
The problem in the advanced economies is that banks are forced to retrench from an over-
leveraged position; but that is not the situation here. The domestic banks have strong capital 
adequacy and liquidity ratios. This means they are well-placed to extend credit to the private 
sector (corporates, households & SMEs) without burdening their balance sheets. Banks are 
now  diversifying  their  revenue  stream  by  widening  their  focus  to  include  SMEs  and 
households. 
In  addition  to  bank  lending,  Saudi  businesses  have  access  to  funds  through  the  Tadawul 
stock  market.  The  infrastructure  of  the  market  is  at  a  high  level  in  terms  of  listing 
requirements, ongoing supervision, as well as settlement and custody arrangements. IPOs 
and  capital  raisings  by  local  companies  have  been  gaining  pace,  and  this  augurs  well  for 
corporate governance and operational efficiency. 
Government  specialized  credit  institutions  (such  as  the  Public  Investment  Fund,  the  Real 
Estate  Development  Fund,  the  Saudi  Industrial  Development  Fund,  the  Saudi  Credit 
& Saving  Bank  and  the  Saudi  Agricultural  Development  Fund)  play  an  important  role  in 
providing long-term credit to productive sectors of the economy. Their outstanding loans as 
at  the  end  of  2010  totalled  SAR  178  billion.  Moreover,  government  partnership  in 
investments  is  an  important  factor  in  Saudi  Arabia.  For  instance,  the  Saudi  Electricity 
Company has a programme of public-private partnership projects in the power industry.  
The  third  source  of  local  funds  for  businesses  after  banks  and  equity  market  should  be 
corporate bonds. The corporate debt market is in the process of emerging, with outstanding 
corporate bonds to GDP at about 3%. The first corporate bond issue in Saudi Arabia took 
place  in  2003  and  in  2009  a  corporate  bond  trading  platform  was  launched.  A  number  of 
bond issues have taken place, but so far no active secondary trading in debt has developed. 
Nevertheless, I am confident that this will develop in due course, both in conventional and 
sukuk form, as it has done in other markets. 
Sources of finance: external 
4. 
Businesses in Saudi Arabia also have access to external capital markets. These funds can 
either  come  into  the  economy  indirectly  via  the  local  banks  accessing  wholesale  funds 
abroad,  or  directly  through  equity  investment  and  FDI.  FDI  is  the  most  attractive  form 
because it is long-term. Banking flows are highly volatile and can reverse as they did during 
the  2008  crisis.  The  CMA  (Capital  Markets  Authority)  has  been  gradually  opening  up  the 
stock market to investment by non-residents in a series of steps. The latest one was when 
the  CMA  allowed  foreigners  effectively  to  buy  shares  through  swap  arrangements  with 
licensed intermediaries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Saudi Arabia has a very strong record in inward FDI flows. Last year, UNCTAD ranked Saudi 
Arabia among the top ten recipients of FDI worldwide (ranked no. 8) and 17th in the world in 
terms of the performance returns on inward FDI.  
Lessons from the global financial crisis and update 
5. 
When  complacency  takes  precedence  over  prudence,  it  becomes  a  recipe  for  ultimate 
financial breakdown. This was precisely the case behind the recent global financial markets 
meltdown.  In  hindsight,  regulatory  lapses,  unrestrained  balance  sheet  leverage,  explosive 
growth of complex structured products and risk-taking incentives through fat compensation 
were  the  main  drivers  of  the  crisis.  Even  countries  which  had  been  tightly  regulated  and 
supervised, such as Saudi Arabia, were not immune from the contagion. When the big global 
banks  reversed  their  funding  policy  towards  developing  markets  in  2008  and  very  rapidly 
withdrew funds, the banking system was impacted despite the conservative posture of our 
banks with prudent loan/deposit ratios.  
Saudi  Arabia  has  always  been  cognizant  of  risks  inherent  in  the  leveraged  and  leniently 
regulated  model.  A  sustainable  model  is  one  which  supports  resiliency  of  the  financial 
system  in  a  crisis.  In  particular,  the  crisis  made  clear  that  regulators  need  to  have  a 
macroprudential  framework  for  the  system  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  focusing  on  the 
microprudential risk management of each individual bank.  
Regulatory challenges 
6. 
Recent efforts by the G20 and other global entities (Basel Committee, FSB, G20 & IMF) in 
addressing system pitfalls and weaknesses show the seriousness of the problem as well as 
the  need  for  remedial  action.  It  is  well-known  that  crises  are  a  recurring  phenomenon, 
warranting  appropriate  countermeasures  to  contain  systemic  risks  of  the  scale  seen  in 
2007/2008.  Some  big  challenges  in  reforming  the  world’s  financial  system  still  remain, 
however. Allow me to say a few words on this point.  
In the past two years or so, the G20 has issued calls for coordinating financial regulations 
and  their  reforms  across  multiple  issues,  such  as  capital  and  liquidity  requirements, 
derivative instruments, and orderly resolution of failing banks. However, the G20 process is 
facing increasing resistance within some member countries on these measures for reasons 
of  domestic  politics  and  practicality  of  the  proposed  reforms  in  some  G20  economies.  For 
example,  it  is  agreed  that  a  sound  macroprudential  framework  needs  to  be  in  place.  The 
regulators  will  be  expected  to  decide  when  the  pace  of  credit  expansion  is  unhealthy. 
Similarly, SIFI’s definition has proven to be contentious. 
On bank capital adequacy, some countries (such as the UK and Switzerland) have indicated 
that  the  standards  they  apply  will  be  tighter  than  the  minimum  set  out  in  Basel  III.  This 
represents  a  cross-border  challenge  to  regulators  because  banks  from  relatively  lightly-
regulated countries will have a competitive advantage. It was this sort of problem that led to a 
“race  to  the  bottom”  in  regulatory  standards  in  the  pre-crisis  years,  and  we  must  strive  to 
avoid this happening again. Regulatory arbitrage is a serious threat. 
For  financial  institutions,  which  are  systemically  important  to  the  world  economy  (and  that 
therefore  are  practically  “too  big  to  fail”),  there  needs  to  be  additional  rules.  The  FSB  will 
report  to  the  G20  Summit  in  November  on  which  banks  and  insurance  companies  qualify, 
and what additional capital requirements they need to have. Some banks are resisting this 
strongly. They argue that tighter regulations will drive financial transactions into the world of 
“shadow  banking”  where  the  activities  will  be  regulated  lightly.  In  my  view,  international 
banks  need  to  accept  tighter  regulation,  which  will  mean  lower  returns  on  capital  in  good 
years  due  to  lower  leverage.  In  return,  this  approach  should  help  them  avoid  the  frequent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
crises  and  losses  of  bank  capital  which  have  been  seen  in  the  last  two  decades  or  so. 
Hence, in the long-term, bank shareholders should be no worse off as a result. 
Finally, emerging/developing economies have been subject to wide swings in financing from 
abrupt  withdrawal  of  funds  in  2008  to  significant  inflows  recently,  and  as  a  result  they  are 
starting to implement capital controls. The risk is that these may spread unless financial flows 
become less erratic and more long-term and stable. 
Concern about commodity bubble and high-yielding products 
7. 
Over  the  past  several  decades,  the  world  financial  system  has  produced  a  seemingly 
endless  series  of  bubbles  (e.g.  the  dotcom  bubble,  the  housing  bubble  and  the  Yen  carry 
trade). Each bubble had its apologists before it burst, who argued that it was rational and that 
“this time is different.” Historically, commodities (apart from oil) were in a downward trend for 
over  100  years  until  2002.  Since  then  the  entire  decline  has  been  reversed  and 
commentators  are  talking  about  a  “Paradigm  Shift.”  Compared  to  historical  trends, 
commodities  are  as  over-priced  as  the  US  stock  market  during  the  “tech  bubble”  of  2000. 
 The parabolic rise in commodity prices has serious consequences and it is open to question 
whether  the  world  economy  is  strong  enough  to  support  their  continued  gains.  It  is 
particularly  damaging  to  inflation  and  growth  in  emerging  market  economies  which  are 
relatively heavy users of commodities.  
With interest rates at current low levels, investors are looking for high-yield products; but high 
yield  brings  high  risks  as  well.  For  example,  some  banks  are  marketing  synthetic  ETFs 
tracking an index which are not collateralised by the underlying investment in the index but 
by  other  assets  with  the  return  guaranteed  by  a  swap  with  a  counterparty  which  involves 
counterparty risk. Some ETFs are offering a leveraged return up to 3x that on the index. The 
IMF, among others, has expressed its concerns (in the Financial Stability Report April 2011) 
and  pointed  out  that  the  computer-driven  trading  used  by  these  products  could  lead  to 
another “flash-crash” like that of April 2010. 
Conclusion 
8. 
In  conclusion,  a  supportive  macro  and  regulatory  environment  is  critical  to  attracting 
domestic and global sources of capital. Saudi Arabia has been going about this process for 
many years, backed up by a prudent monetary and fiscal track record. We welcome long-
term  capital  inflows  in  various  sectors  of  the  economy  to  gain  mutual  benefits  from  the 
economic potential of Saudi Arabia. To promote this, the government has adopted an “open 
door”  policy  towards  foreign  capital  which  has  provided  excellent  returns  to  FDI  investors. 
Saudi Arabia has opened up the financial sector to foreign financial institutions by granting 
licenses  to  foreign  commercial  &  investment  banks  as  well  as  asset  management 
& insurance  companies  to  optimize  the  level  of  competence  and  coverage  in  different 
financial disciplines. In terms of regulation of financial institutions, we will continue with the 
prudent policy which has served us well in the past. As for the G20 agenda, the challenge is 
to  transform  its  broad  vision  into  detailed  rules  that  prevent  regulatory  arbitrage  of  which 
banks took advantage of in the run up to the crisis.  
In closing, I am reminded of an old saying: “Money is a good servant but a bad master.” In 
the last crisis, excesses in the financial system came close to driving the world economy into 
the abyss and a repeat of the Depression of the 1930s; and it is my belief that nobody wants 
to see that happen again. 
I wish you a productive and successful conference. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
