Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with L’Agefi Hebdo  
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
on 20 April 2011 by Mr Philippe Mudry and published on 18 May 2011. 
 Agefi: A survey of our readers on the future of finance reveals deep scepticism about 
the  nature  of  the  benefits  resulting  from  regulation  and  also  about  its  possible 
contradictions. What do you think? 
Jean-Claude  TRICHET:  Considering  the  gravity  of  the  situation  which  the  international 
community has had to face, the lingering scepticism in some areas is understandable. It is 
important to understand that we had to cope with a crisis of extraordinary severity in 2007 
and  in  2008  which  intensified  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Without  the 
unwavering determination of the central banks on the one hand, and of governments on the 
other, and without significant exposure to budgetary risk, on both sides of the Atlantic and in 
all  the  developed  countries,  we  would  have  faced  a  very  deep  depression  and  the  worst 
financial crisis since the First World War! Our calculations at the European Central Bank and 
throughout the European System of Central Banks tell us that, in total, some 27 % of gross 
domestic product, in terms of risk to the taxpayer, had to be mobilised on both sides of the 
Atlantic in order to avoid the worst. Fortunately, of course, this risk was not converted into 
losses  in  the  majority  of  cases,  and  many  such  cases  have  yielded  profits;  nonetheless, 
without this risk-taking we would have been facing a terrible disaster. The central banks as 
well  as  all  the  governments  of  the  developed  and  the  emerging  countries  have  been  very 
determined.  Inasmuch  as  disaster  has  been  averted,  a  number  of  partners,  in  the  private 
sector essentially, feel that there is no point after all in making sweeping improvements to the 
rules and regulations governing the financial sector, in particular the prudential rules. This is 
not  our  view  at  all.  The  central  banks  all  consider  that  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  remain 
aware  of  the  fragility  of  the  financial  system  and  to  implement  the  reforms  we  need.  We 
would be unable to address a situation as severe as the one in September 2008 a second 
time. 
When you look at the path followed since 2007 in terms of financial regulation, what 
strikes  you  as  being  the  main  benefits,  but  also  current  limits,  of  the  process 
prompted by the G20? 
–  The  G20’s  action  follows  two  major  pillars:  financial  regulation  and  the  coordination  of 
economic  policies  aimed  primarily  at  reducing  major  imbalances.  On  financial  regulation 
itself, we are halfway down that road. We managed to reach a global agreement in record 
time,  not  just  between  the  industrialised  countries,  but  also  now  with  the  systemically 
important emerging countries on new prudential regulations and fresh requirements in terms 
of own funds for all banks, with decisions that have far-reaching repercussions. Moreover, 
the decisions required a great deal of goodwill from all European and American partners, but 
also  from  those  in  China,  India,  Brazil,  Mexico,  Russia  and  all  the  other  major  emerging 
countries. I regard this as a notable success. It must not be called into question. Here and 
there I hear market participants, who are members of private financial institutions, saying that 
some decisions are too stringent and too demanding. The decisions taken must of course be 
implemented. In addition, there are still a lot of things to do, particularly as regards the so-
called  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  Equally,  there  is  the  “shadow  banking” 
issue  which  is  related  to  those  financial  institutions  that  do  no  fall  under  the  scope  of  the 
regulatory framework for banks. Of course, there is also the issue of effectively implementing 
the prudential rules on liquidity. These are all examples of  work in progress, and they are 
being examined by the G20, the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board. 
Do you regard the convergence of national laws as satisfactory today?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
–  The  rigorous  implementation  of  the  rules  defined  at  the  global  level  by  each  of  the 
countries affected is absolutely essential. If there is uneven implementation, we immediately 
create extremely dangerous distortions in the functioning of the global financial system; we 
open the way for  what  is known as “regulatory arbitrage”, the aim of  which is to attract to 
one’s  own  country  the  most  financial  activities  possible  by  having  more  lenient  and  more 
limited regulation. All the conditions for a fresh disaster would then be in place. The same 
rules must be implemented by countries worldwide. This is especially true on both sides of 
the Atlantic. That’s why it is vital for the so-called “Basel III” framework to be implemented 
rigorously,  particularly  by  all  the  European  countries  of  course  as  well  as  by  the  United 
States. We must not repeat the bad experiences of previous years, notably with “Basel II”, 
which was not implemented uniformly, particularly on the other side of the Atlantic. As central 
bankers, we continue to stress this fundamental aspect. If we fail to adhere to it, we will then 
have all the ingredients for further crises. 
A number of the criticisms directed at re-regulation concern its contradictions, real or 
assumed. For example, some feel that the tightening of capital and liquidity ratios is 
too  severe  and  risks  adversely  affecting  the  financing  of  economies.  Does  this 
criticism strike you as justified? 
Jean-Claude  TRICHET:  In  our  view,  the  rules  which  have  been  defined  for  capital 
requirements  are  optimal.  We  reflected  long  and  hard  on  them.  Of  course,  there  are 
arguments in both directions, but considering the drama resulting from a crisis in terms of lost 
growth  and  job  creation,  we  gain  a  lot  more  by  being  reasonably  demanding  in  terms  of 
capital.  Preventing  further  crises  from  occurring  is  a  benefit  that  far  outstrips  the  potential 
losses,  if  certain  analyses  are  anything  to  go  by.  Let’s  be  clear  one  more  time:  these 
decisions, debated at length by those primarily responsible, have been evaluated at governor 
and ministerial level and adopted at the global level by heads of state and government. They 
must be implemented. 
Another  criticism:  this  tightening  of  the  rules  runs  the  risk  of  producing  a 
concentration  in  the  financial  sector,  and  on  the  financial  markets  as  well,  which  is 
even stronger than it is today.  
Jean-Claude TRICHET: I do not believe so. We must be constantly and closely vigilant with 
regard to the structural changes to international finance. There are permanent risks that we 
must continue assessing, but I do not think the rules we have just defined, or those still being 
worked out, will lead to this hyper-concentration. On the contrary, I have to say that one of 
the main lessons of the present crisis is that there were very high risks associated with what I 
would call the “financial mammoths”. 
Is too little attention being paid to the much-discussed area of “shadow finance”?  
–  The  issue  of  the  “non-banks”,  of  shadow  finance,  and  of  all  the  institutions  or  market 
participants not under the oversight of the banking supervisors, is very important. Over the 
last two decades we have witnessed a tremendous explosion in new financial institutions. I 
myself lived through a period during which all the institutions with high leverage, by the end 
of  the  1980s,  were  managing  capital  worth  something  in  the  region  of  USD  100  billion. 
17 years later, in 2007, the figure was USD 3,000 billion! Very significant financial services 
have been, and are being, rendered by these market participants, but the systemic risk which 
can  be  associated  with  them  must  be  considered  from  every  angle. Obviously  it  would  be 
counterproductive if tighter regulations had the effect of pushing regulated finance into the 
unregulated area. This is a major topic which is being examined right now at the request of 
the entire international community, particularly at the level of the Financial Stability Board. I 
think I am expressing the feelings of all central bankers when I consider that there are crucial 
issues here in terms of transparency and appropriate regulation. We must be sure that these 
financial market participants do not create new systemic risks.  
Are  you  satisfied  with  the  rise  of  the  organised  markets  compared  with  over-the-
counter (OTC) transactions, with specific reference to centralised compensation? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
–  Here  again,  we  are  dealing  with  another  core  issue  on  which  the  entire  international 
community  is  reflecting.  The  act  of  pushing  activities  which  are  very  broadly  disorganised 
towards clearing houses, towards organised markets, is a formidable undertaking. Of course, 
there  will  always  be  OTC  contracts,  but  we  have  a  major  interest,  in  terms  of  regulation, 
financial  stability  and  the  removal  of  as  much  systemic  risk  as  possible,  in  ensuring  that 
these contracts, these derivative instruments, become as standardised as possible and can 
be traded through organised markets. 
In  more  macroeconomic  terms,  how  do  you  judge  the  actions  of  the  G20  aimed  at 
reducing global imbalances?  
–  The  reasons  for  the  crisis  and  the  responsibilities  are  manifold,  because  there  were 
multiple failures. It is unnecessary to dwell on finding a single scapegoat. However, one of 
the  causes  was  certainly  the  prevailing  complacency  over  a  long  period  about  very  large 
international  imbalances.  One  of  the  main  lessons  from  the  crisis  is  the  need  to  have  the 
right kind of coordination of macroeconomic policies, which is the international community’s 
responsibility. We have created integrated global finance and a globalised economy: there is 
a need to strengthen very considerably the governance of these. The International Monetary 
Fund  is  playing  a  leading  role  here  by  providing  significant  conceptual  support  for  this 
strategy  of  the  G20  and  the  entire  international  community.  We  have  a  lot  of  progress  to 
make in this area as well. Everyone is well aware of the dangers associated with these major 
imbalances – surpluses on the one hand, deficits on the other – in a full-blown crisis. Then, 
as we emerge from it, as is the case, with a perceptible upturn that is getting stronger, some 
then  start  to  question  things.  I’m  rather  shocked  by  the  number  of  voices  being  raised  to 
explain  how  we  can,  after  all,  easily  live  with  major  imbalances  and  that  they  can  be 
economically justified. I do not believe this to be the case at all. I think we have to resolutely 
carry on and bolster the efforts being made in this area. From that viewpoint, the euro area 
as  a  whole  does  not  have  an  external  imbalance  since  our  current  account  balance  is 
broadly in equilibrium.  
What importance do you ascribe to the debate on the international monetary system? 
– I think that the points identified by the G20, from a long-term standpoint, particularly the 
issue  of  capital  flows,  special  drawing  rights  and  other  topics  associated  with  the 
international monetary system, are interesting. It is good to discuss them. Ultimately, though, 
we have two questions for the short to medium term. One of these involves the relationships 
between the major convertible currencies: the dollar, the euro, the yen, the pound Sterling, 
the  Canadian  dollar.  For  over  30  years  we  have  had  a  system  in  which  these  important 
relationships have been monitored by the G7. From that viewpoint, these relationships have 
not been destabilised in the course of the crisis. We should congratulate ourselves on this, 
even though it calls for constant vigilance of course. Then there is a topic on which it seems 
to me that the international community also agrees, i.e. the ties between the currencies of the 
major  emerging  countries,  which  themselves  have  very  large  surpluses,  and  all  the  other 
currencies,  including  the  major  convertible  currencies.  The  currencies  of  these  major 
emerging  countries  with  large  surpluses  must  progressively  become  more  flexible,  i.e. 
appreciate in an orderly and progressive manner.  
In  Europe  there  are  genuine  concerns  about  the  Union’s  capacity  to  overcome  the 
debt crisis facing the peripheral countries. The markets are highly sceptical. What can 
they be told in order to convince them of the relevance of the measures undertaken at 
the European level? 
– On the issue of fiscal policies, I believe that the European Central Bank, through me, can 
reiterate certain points. Firstly, we always said that when there was a single currency but no 
political  federation,  there  was  a  clear  need  for  budgetary  supervision.  This  was  hotly 
disputed. I can remind you how in 2004 and 2005 major countries, notably France but also 
Germany and Italy, were telling us that we did not need this surveillance framework for fiscal 
policies. We had to fight very hard to preserve it. Today, this episode obviously seems totally 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
outlandish,  bearing  in  mind  what  has  happened  since.  Some,  moreover,  said  that  the 
Stability and Growth Pact itself was “stupid”. We always said that the careful monitoring of 
fiscal policies was essential, as were healthy policies. This remains true today. However, one 
should  add  another  pillar  of  governance,  particularly  within  the  euro  area,  in  the  form  of 
monitoring competitiveness indicators, and unit production costs especially; the changes to 
these must also be tracked extremely carefully. For six years at least, we have been telling 
all European governments to monitor very closely changes to competitiveness indicators and 
imbalances  within  the  euro  area.  We  emphasise  the  three  pillars  necessary  for  European 
governance, all three of which must be improved substantially: supervision of fiscal policies, 
supervision of competitiveness indicators, and structural reforms. The central banks across 
the whole of the Eurosystem – the ECB and the national central banks, i.e. the Banque de 
France  in  France’s  case,  for  instance  –  have  a  very  clear  message  for  governments: 
Europe’s  governance  must  be  improved  decisively,  and  governments  are  not  going  far 
enough.  We  expect  a  great  deal  from  the  dialogue  with  Parliament  in  order  to  push 
governments towards taking a decisive step. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
