Matthew Elderfield: The future of Irish banking 
Address by Mr Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
31st Annual MacGill Summer School, Glenties, 25 July 2011. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen and thank you for inviting me here today to address 
this  prestigious  gathering.  Your  invitation  has  encouraged  me  to  spend  a  very  healthy 
weekend sampling Donegal’s excellent hill walking and has allowed me to see a little more of 
Ireland, now that I have been in post for some 18 months.  
The top priority during that time has been the Irish banking system. So, this afternoon I would 
like to set out for you in some detail the work that is underway at the Central Bank to ensure 
we remain on track to meet the targets for the banking system under our regulatory strategy 
and under the Financial Measures Programme of the International Monetary Fund, the ECB 
and the European Commission. In particular, I want to make reference to the update on our 
banking supervision strategy, published at the end of June, which set out some new thinking 
in a few areas in particular, such as provisioning policy and credit standards.  
To best explain our work in this short presentation, I will set it out under five main themes:  
 
 
 
the capital story, or, what is being done to strengthen the banks;  
the deleveraging story, or, how the banks are being restructured;  
our new rules for corporate governance and fitness and probity aimed at refreshing 
boards and senior management; 
some recent thoughts on new standards to improve the management of credit risk; 
and, finally, 
the work underway to improve supervisory practices at the Central Bank through the 
implementation of a new risk-based assessment framework. 
  That is a big agenda and a lot of ground to cover in twenty minutes – so I will have to be 
brief,  but  I  want  to  try  to  give  you  a  flavour  of  the  interconnected  nature  of  the  work 
programme. I think we are making good progress on all these fronts, but each area has its 
own timeline for completion and seeing results.  
Capital adequacy – strengthening the banks 
The  immediate  challenge  of  rebuilding  the  banking  system  involves  a  number  of 
interconnected exercises under the Financial Measures Programme aimed at strengthening 
the  capital  position  of  the  banks.  These  exercises  include  the  independent  loan  loss 
forecasting  and  stress  testing  exercises  carried  out  earlier  this  year  to  help  establish  the 
capital needs of the banks under the Prudential Capital Assessment Review (PCAR).  
Our  PCAR  took  place  against  the  very  difficult  background  of  a  severe  crisis  in  the  euro 
sovereign debt markets, a weak Irish economy, a formal EU-IMF programme for Ireland, and, 
a lack of market confidence in the Irish banking system, reflected in the stressed wholesale 
funding  position  of  the  banks,  and  concerns  about  future  loan  losses.  Against  this 
background  we 
took  a  conservative  approach,  making  conservative  hard-nosed 
assessments  of  loan  losses  and  adding  an  additional  capital  buffer,  and,  we  built  in 
transparency and strong external validation into the exercises.  
In terms of validation, the stress tests were informed not only by views of the banks, but also 
by  the  fully  independent  assessment  of  portfolio  loan  losses  conducted  by  consultants 
BlackRock  Solutions.  The  data  inputs  for  this  exercise  were  themselves  subject  to  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
external  assurance  process  to  make  sure  that  the  information  was  reliable  and  we  used 
Boston  Consulting  to  provide  quality  assurance  over  the  capital  calculation  and  loan  loss 
methodology. And, our detailed findings were subject to close scrutiny by large teams from 
the IMF, ECB and European Commission. By any measure, this has been a very thorough 
process with very extensive external validation.  
In  terms  of  transparency,  our  detailed  80  page  Financial  Measures  Programme  report  is 
published  on  our  website.  The  goal  of  this  transparency  is  straightforward:  we  wanted  to 
address market scepticism of the banks’ financial position by being completely open about 
the results of this process so that market participants can make an independent judgement 
about the conclusions of our exercise.  
An important issue we exposed in our recently published Banking Supervision update, and 
which  is  closely  related  to  capital,  concerns  the  banks’  provisioning  for  loan  losses.  Our 
PCAR exercise was focused on ensuring adequate regulatory capital is in place to provide 
for anticipated loan losses. It does not directly relate to the banks’ accounting for such loan 
losses,  which  should  normally  occur  under  their  provisions  in  line  with  IFRS  international 
accounting standards. We feel it is important that further measures are put in place to ensure 
that  bank  balance  sheets  reflect  more  accurately  their  current  underlying  risks.  We  have 
therefore decided to require banks to make a number of new disclosures designed to align 
the provisions they make with the underlying realities of their portfolios. We will require banks 
to ensure that any potential impairment from future disposals is recognised as fully and as 
early as possible.  
In  determining  the  banks’  capital  needs  we  assessed  their  residential  mortgage  portfolios 
and  I  would  now  like  to  take  a  brief  opportunity  to  refer  to  the  difficult  issue  of  mortgage 
arrears.  I  recognise  the  stress  and  anxiety  that  mortgage  arrears,  or  even  the  imminent 
threat of mortgage arrears, is having on the day-to-day lives of many people. On 1 January 
this year, we introduced our revised Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA) – the 
Code  and  a  consumer  guide  to  the  Code  is  published  on  our  website.  The  revised  Code 
changes  the  way  all  mortgage  lenders  must  treat  customers  who  are  in  arrears  or  pre-
arrears, and, by setting rules, aims to take away the fear factor for troubled borrowers when 
they  are  dealing  with  their  lenders.  At  the  heart  of  the  revised  Code  is  a  requirement  for 
mortgage  lenders  to  establish  a  Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution  Process  (MARP)  containing 
five key elements: every mortgage lenders’ process must include better communication with 
borrowers,  a  standard  financial  statement  to  gather  financial  information,  an  assessment 
process which considers the borrowers full circumstances and which is managed through a 
centralised  Arrears  Support  Unit,  a  resolution  process  where  the  lender  must  explore 
alternative  repayment  schedules,  and,  an  appeals  process  so  the  borrower  can  seek  a 
review of a lenders decision.  
This MARP framework is aimed at ensuring a more consistent and transparent approach by 
lenders  when  dealing  with  arrears  cases.  Additional  protections  introduced  by  the  Code 
include a requirement that legal action cannot be taken against borrowers as long as they 
adhere  to  an  arrangement  agreed  with  their  lender.  Often  referred  to  as  “the  moratorium”, 
this is a key measure which allows time and space for borrowers to deal with their difficulties. 
The Code also ensures that borrowers in financial difficulties cannot be required to change 
from an existing tracker mortgage to another type of mortgage as part of a move to a new 
payment schedule. We have also put a limit on the number of unsolicited communications 
that  a  lender  can  make  to  a  borrower  which  can  only  add  to  the  pressures  a  customer  in 
arrears  already  feels.  From  January  this  year,  we  have  also  required  lenders  not  to  apply 
certain charges to mortgage accounts that fall within the CCMA.  
Now  that  the  banks  are  being  conservatively  capitalised  they  will  have  more  capacity  to 
restructure the debts of their mortgage or small business customers. But there are a couple 
of caveats. The PCAR exercise has , by some measures, been to overcapitalise the banks, 
so  the  expectation  is  that  at  some  point,  when  banking  conditions  have  settled  down 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sufficiently, the taxpayer will wish to recover some of that capital, for example to assist the 
overall government debt position in due course. Also, any approach to restructuring needs to 
take  account  of  the  risk  that  it  creates  incentives  for  borrowers  to  cease  meeting  their 
obligations. But despite these considerations there is now more scope for the banks to take 
individual  decisions,  based  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  borrower,  to  restructure 
debt.  And  I  am  encouraged  by  the  Government’s  commitment  to  reform  the  antiquated 
bankruptcy laws. Allowing a statutory but non-judicial debt settlement mechanism would be a 
welcome reform and allow borrowers to earn a fresh start by discharging their debt after a 
reasonable period.  
Mortgage arrears continue to be a focus for the Central Bank. The treatment of customers in 
mortgage arrears and compliance by mortgage lenders with the CCMA form a key part of our 
consumer protection agenda. But it is important to point out that our focus on arrears is not 
confined  to  mortgage  arrears.  In  our  review  of  the  Consumer  Protection  Code  we  have 
proposed  new  requirements  for  arrears  on  other  types  of  non-mortgage  debt.  These  will 
similarly  prevent  harassing  behaviour.  We  plan  to  finalise  the  revised  Code  in  the  autumn 
following  a  consultation  over  the  summer.  We  are  also  considering  what  additional 
protections  need  to  be  put  in  place  to  help  small  companies  who  may  be  viable  but  who 
currently  have  arrears  on  existing  loans.  To  facilitate  arrears  resolution  between  SME 
borrowers and their lenders we have brought forward the review of two specific provisions of 
the Code of Conduct for Business Lending to Small and Medium Enterprises to examine how 
they  are  operating  in  practice.  Broadly,  provisions  16  and  17  of  the  Code  are  aimed  at 
protecting borrowers facing financial difficulties or in arrears, and require regulated lenders to 
have  procedures  in  place  to  handle  arrears  cases,  to  give  borrowers  reasonable  time  to 
resolve an arrears problem and to try to agree an approach with the borrower to resolve the 
problem.  
Deleveraging and restructuring the banks  
Another  work  stream  underway  at  the  Central  Bank  is  aimed  at  correcting  the  funding 
positions of the banks which in turn involves their restructuring: this is in large part a story of 
beginning  a  steady  process  of  deleveraging  the  system.  Loan  losses  and  credit  quality  is 
only half the problem in the resuscitation of the Irish banking system. The other half of that 
problem is the funding position of the banks which in turn is linked to their structure.  
Our Prudential Liquidity Assessment Review or PLAR is aimed at repairing the balance sheet 
funding  mix  of  each  bank  through  a  combination  of  agreed  deleveraging  transactions  or 
asset  disposals,  and  a  set  of  liquidity  metrics  to  be  achieved  by  December  2013.  Four 
institutions, AIB, BOI, EBS and ILP, are currently executing the PLAR plans agreed with the 
Central Bank. Under the PLAR we have set three key target funding ratios:  
 
 
 
We  are  monitoring  progress  towards  achieving  all  these  three  key  targets.  Banks  must 
submit a detailed point-in-time quarterly liquidity profile to us. We will examine funding ratios 
and compare them against the interim targets established as part of PLAR 2011. In addition, 
the  Central  Bank  and  other  public  authorities  are  interacting  more  regularly  with  banks  to 
monitor progress towards the disposal of non-core assets.  
Deleveraging at individual banks is a critical part of the necessary restructuring process. By 
the  end  of  2013  the  core  components  of  the  banks  will  focus  on  supporting  the  Irish 
economy.  In  the  meantime,  assets  for  disposal  and  deleveraging  will  be  managed  though 
non-core  divisions.  We  have  ensured  that  capital  is  set  aside  to  support  this  deleveraging 
process.  But  there  is  common  cause  between  the  Central  Bank,  the  Government  and  the 
a loan to deposit ratio;  
a Net Stable Funding Ratio: and  
a Liquidity Coverage Ratio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
banks  that  deleveraging  should  not  come  at  any  price  and  that  fire  sales  should  not  be 
adopted for the deleveraging process. We are therefore monitoring this process closely.  
This deleveraging process will be a long slog but it is now starting in earnest. It will require 
close  monitoring  and  perseverance,  with  some  difficult  judgement  calls  around  transaction 
prices.  The  banks  themselves  have  the  lead  responsibility  for  ensuring  progress  with  this 
process  while  responsibility  for  ensuring  value  for  money  lies  with  the  bank’s  principal 
shareholder,  namely  the  government.  It  will  be  important  that  the  non-core  management 
teams and governance arrangements are put in place swiftly to ensure momentum with the 
deleveraging process.  
Refreshing boards and management 
A third key work stream involves improving standards of governance and fitness and probity 
for  the  financial  services  sector  generally,  and  continuing  the  process  of  refreshing  the 
boards and management teams of the banks.  
We have learned from the banking crisis the importance of good corporate governance. As a 
result,  we  are  working  to  develop  effective  corporate  governance  codes  for  the  different 
financial services sectors. We have introduced a Statutory Code of Corporate Governance 
which  sets  out  clear  requirements  that  the  directors  and  boards  of  banks  and  insurance 
companies  must  meet  and  have  set  Fitness  and  Probity  standards  for  those  who  work  in 
regulated financial institutions.  
Our  new  statutory  Code  is  a  balanced  and  proportionate  approach  to  strengthening  the 
governance of our banks and insurance companies and is an important milestone in the drive 
to  ensuring  high  standards  in  the  board  rooms  of  regulated  financial  firms.  We  made  a 
conscious decision to impose more demanding Corporate Governance standards than those 
in place in other jurisdictions because Ireland has suffered more than most countries in the 
financial  crisis  and  we  need  to  get  to  grips  with  the  home  grown  elements  of  that  crisis. 
Stronger remedies are needed here to shake up prevailing corporate governance practices 
and to improve the reputation of Ireland as an international financial centre.  
Putting a framework in place to ensure that the people operating at senior levels in regulated 
firms  are  fit  and  proper  is  also  an  important  part  of  our  work.  Fitness  and  probity  are  the 
broad  headings  for  applying  standards  to  individuals  who  work  –  or  wish  to  work  –  in  the 
financial  services  industry  in  Ireland.  They  relate  to  an  individual’s  ethics,  integrity  and 
financial  soundness  but  also  their  competence  and  capability.  Last  year  we  sought  new 
statutory powers to allow us to raise the bar in this area. We wanted to be able to take action 
where we have concerns about someone’s fitness and probity to do the job. We wanted to a 
consistent legislative methodology, applicable to all industries, that would allow us to prevent 
individuals from entering into senior positions in regulated firms, in our gatekeeper role.  
When  our  new  powers  are  in  place  later  this  year,  we  will  be  able  to  act  on  fitness  and 
probity  issues.  We  will  have  the  power  to  carry  out  a  full  investigation  and,  where 
appropriate, we will be able to suspend or remove an individual from a senior position in a 
regulated firm. We will have the power to prohibit individuals from holding senior positions in 
the financial services industry.  
The drafting of the new statutory regime means that all incumbent directors will continue in 
their positions and do not have to reapply under the new law. As you know the Central Bank 
plans  to  conduct  a  review  of  the  fitness  and  probity  of  all  existing  executive  and  non-
executive  directors  at  the  Irish  banks  which  have  received  government  support.  We  will 
assess  the  incumbent  directors  against  the  new  statutory  Fitness  and  Probity  Standards, 
including, where it is relevant, their competence and track record in the period leading up to 
the financial crisis. We will use our new investigative powers, where appropriate, to ensure 
that  the  people  in  those  positions  meet  the  required  level  of  fitness  and  probity.  I  don’t 
underestimate the legal challenges that we might have in using our new powers, but we must 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
be prepared to make difficult judgments on fitness and probity and it is right that we should 
start with this group.  
In  the  meantime  the  Minister  for  Finance  has  announced  that  he  is  seeking  Board  and 
Management  renewal  plans  from  all  the  banks.  He  has  also  said  that  he  would  expect  all 
board  members  (both  executive  and  non-executive)  who  were  in  place  at  the  time  of  the 
guarantee  to  step  down  from  their  posts  by  early  next  year.  It  is  important  to  distinguish 
between the Minister’s initiative and our own. Ours is a regulatory process under statutory 
powers to determine fitness and probity of individuals based on their track record during the 
period leading up to the crisis. In contrast, as I understand it, the Minister is basically saying 
to a class of all directors that it is in the public interest that they stand aside to refresh and 
renew  the  Boards  and  management  teams  of  the  banks,  to  make  it  easier  to  move  the 
banking system forward, and that this does not in itself reflect on their individual commercial 
or regulatory performance. This is an understandable initiative and will help provide a clean 
break with the past. If all those involved take up the Minister’s request to act in the public 
interest then there will be a smooth succession process and obviously there should be no 
need to conduct our regulatory reviews. But we are gearing up to consider initiating statutory 
investigations if they are in fact required, in order to establish the necessary facts to make 
individual judgements. And going forward, the new fitness and probity framework provides a 
mechanism to assess the suitability of individuals who wish to re-enter the financial services 
system, taking account not just of track record at the banks but also the type of role they are 
seeking.  
Credit risk management standards 
Poor credit risk management practices were at the heart of the problems in the Irish banking 
sector  and  seeking  improved  standards  is  another  important  work  stream.  We  set  out  our 
most  recent  thinking  in  June  in  our  Banking  Supervision  update.  While  the  international 
regulatory agenda is acting to close gaps in this area through tougher regulatory capital (as 
well  as  liquidity)  standards,  there  was  an  “Irish  dimension”  to  the  banking  crisis  here  that 
requires Irish remedies.  
We are therefore contemplating a few initiatives in this area.  
First,  we  believe  that  there  is  scope  to  expand  and  develop  the  role  of  credit  bureaux  to 
assist banks, borrowers and public authorities in managing credit risk. The absence of robust 
credit intelligence has lead to poor credit decisions by lenders, and, has limited the ability of 
the Central Bank to monitor risk levels in the banking system. How can a bank make a good 
lending decision when it does not have a complete picture of the exposure profile of the loan 
applicant?  
To address this risk we are actively participating in an inter agency working group which will 
soon  make  recommendations  to  the  Minister  for  Finance  aimed  at  ensuring  more  robust 
lending practices around credit approval decisions, better supervision of both institution and 
system  wide  risk,  improved  consumer  awareness  and  increased  access  to  credit.  To  give 
you a brief preview – the Central Bank wants to see mandatory and frequent reporting to the 
register  and  wants  entities  that  provide  credit  registry  services  to  be  licensed  and  actively 
regulated. We also want to see the introduction of standard credit scores in Ireland.  
Second,  we  think  it  would  be  helpful  in  December  of  this  year  to  set  out  best  practice 
standards  on  credit  risk  management,  covering  areas  such  as  valuation  (where  standards 
were particularly weak). We are reviewing valuation standards for collateral, particularly for 
mortgages  and  commercial  real  estate  loans,  and  investigating  credit  risk  processes, 
behaviours and policies that we consider weak and that were in place prior to and during the 
financial  crisis.  We  are  benchmarking  these  against  best  practice  and  this  will  help  us  to 
develop  our  supervisory  approach.  We  want  to  put  credit  risk  management  standards  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
place  that  are  appropriate  for  the  future.  And  we  are  reviewing  the  potential  for  applying 
sectoral credit limits as a macro prudential measure.  
Improving supervisory practice  
The final work stream underway that I want to discuss involves developing and implementing 
a new framework to manage risk across the full range of financial institutions in Ireland that 
we regulate. Having a better approach to managing risk across the population of regulated 
firms in Ireland is crucial. We will implement a new formal risk assessment framework by the 
end of this year. Called PRISM – from Probability Risk and Impact SysteM – this framework 
is designed to allow a more structured approach to assessing financial firms based on the 
impact they have on the economy or consumers if things go wrong and on the probability that 
problems arise.  
Impact  and  probability  are  important  distinct  concepts  which  combine  to  yield  risk.  As  a 
regulator  you  worry  a  lot  about  your  high  impact  events,  even  if  they  are  low  probability, 
because the consequences are so severe for the economy and the consumer. One of the 
clear  organisational  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  was  that  we,  along  with  many  global 
regulators,  spent  too  little  time  rigorously  challenging  the  really  high  impact  firms  –  those 
firms whose failure, even if low probability, can seriously damage the economy of a country. 
The reports on the causes of the banking crisis in Ireland all highlight the problem of this lack 
of challenge, both within the Central Bank and Financial Regulator and also within the banks 
and they all point to the need for a more structured and systematic approach to assessing 
risk. That means having a better way of applying resources to risk, based on impact; a higher 
level of engagement and scrutiny with those highest impact firms, taking much less on trust; 
a more systematic way of assessing the probability of a problem occurring; and, above all, a 
system which obliges supervisors to follow up on risks in a conclusive manner where they 
have been identified.  
We will have to make difficult choices, unpopular choices even, to ensure that our frontline 
staff can focus on the firms that really matter to Ireland. We will categorise all the firms we 
regulate into four impact categories, high, medium high, medium low or low impact. We will 
have  four  engagement  models  to  match  our  four  impact  categories.  For  example,  for  the 
small  number  of  highest  impact  firms  we  will  have  dedicated  teams  following  a  pro-active 
programme of supervision to ensure we always have an intimate knowledge of their strategy 
and business models. We will expect firms to co-operate with this level of supervision and we 
will  make  judgements  on  their  leadership  and  the  judgement  shown  by  that  leadership.  In 
contrast,  for  the  many  thousands  of  low  impact  firms  we  will  use  technology  to  help  us 
supervise  them  in  an  efficient  way.  Our  objective  is  to  have  the  capacity  to  get  automatic 
alerts when a low impact firms fails key financial or consumer related checks so that we can 
act immediately on that information.  
We will not, of course, be just focused on size. Our supervisors will constantly assess the risk 
profile of each high impact firm. The PRISM system will involve taking a structured approach 
to assessing the probability of a problem occurring by seeking to identify issues that could 
cause  prudential  or  consumer  failures.  When  risks  exceed  our  risk  appetite  –  where  the 
probability of a problem is too high – we will require action to be taken to mitigate the risks.  
Making judgements and taking action on them is important. We will not merely work out that 
a firm has a problem; we will work out how to solve it. We have started to set some firm’s risk 
mitigation  programmes  requiring  firms  to  deal  with  issues  –  these  are  specific  actions 
required  to  reduce  risks  that  have  been  identified.  Our  new  risk  system  will  help  us  track 
progress on mitigation and we will continue to work to make sure that all our risk mitigation 
actions  are  outcome  focused  and  result  in  problems  being  sorted  out  rather  than  simply 
analysed further. This to me is a very big point from the crisis: if you identify a risk you must 
make sure that your mitigation is strong and conclusive enough.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The PRISM framework will be rolled out to parts of our banking and insurance supervisory 
departments at the end of this year and then more widely next year. But I am sure it will take 
a while to bed down the new framework: it will take some time to embed a more challenging 
culture within the Central Bank and to develop our understanding of the business models of 
the firms we supervise. We are getting pretty close to our target level of resources but we 
need  to  continue  to  challenge  ourselves  to  improve  our  technical  skills  and  our 
understanding of the commercial drivers facing industry.  
Conclusion  
I hope this short summary has given you a good understanding of the various developments 
that we believe will combine to provide for a strong, more robust banking sector subject to 
more effective governance and regulation.  
As  a  final  observation,  I  would  note  that  these  changes  occur  in  the  context  of  the  wider 
financial  services  industry,  where  Ireland  is  a  leading  player  in  the  funds  and  insurance 
industries and has an important international wholesale banking sector. These parts of what 
is  loosely  known  as  the  IFSC  play  a  crucial  role  in  Irish  economic  life.  However,  the 
reputational damage of the banking crisis has cast a long shadow and has indirectly touched 
them  too.  By  reforming  the  banking  sector  –  and  strengthening  financial  regulation  more 
generally  by  closing  gaps  in  governance  and  probity  standards,  implementing  a  new  risk 
assessment framework and adopting forthcoming legislation on new powers – through these 
measures Ireland can rebuild its reputation as a financial centre based on strong regulation. 
This will help avoid fresh supervisory problems in the future and allow the IFSC to continue 
to prosper.  
So, progress on the banking agenda, while essential in its own right, has important broader 
benefits.  There  is  still  some  way  to  go,  but  I  hope  I  have  shown  you  there  are  positive 
developments on a number of fronts. By the time of the next summer school or two, I would 
hope  to  not  only  have  a  few  more  of  Donegal’s  hills  under  my  belt  but  also  to  be  able  to 
report further progress with this ambitious but essential set of reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
