Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Postimees, Hospodárske noviny and 
Delo 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Postimees,  Hospodárske  noviny  and  Delo,  conducted  by  Ms  Laura  Raus  (Postimees, 
Estonia), Mr Ján Kováč (Hospodárske noviny, Slovakia) and Mr Miha Jenko (Delo, Slovenia) 
on 13 July 2011 and published on 19 July 2011. 
 Question: What will happen if the US politicians fail to agree on lifting the country’s 
debt ceiling? What would the implications be for the euro area?  
Trichet: I have no doubt that the US authorities will find an appropriate way to cope with the 
present  difficulties  and  that  they  will  succeed.  If  not,  it  would  create  a  problem  of  great 
magnitude for the entire world. But I’m sure that they’ll find a solution. 
Question:  After  the  past  bad  experience  with  United  States-based  rating  agencies, 
would you now be in favour of the creation of a European rating agency?  
Trichet:  The  present  framework  of  a  very  small  number  of  global  rating  agencies  is 
pro-cyclical, amplifying the booms and busts. This “oligopolistic” structure is not optimal. In 
any  case,  we  encourage  all  initiatives  that  go  in  the  direction  of  eliminating  conflicts  of 
interests  (where  they  exist),  improving  surveillance  and  oversight  and  permitting  more 
competition in this industry. Everything that goes in this direction is correct.  
Question:  Despite  the  continuing  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  has  raised 
interest  rates  by  25  basis  points  recently.  It  could  be  the  beginning  of  a  series  of 
increases  to  occur  during  the  year,  as  economists  forecast.  Disparities  between 
countries are strong in the area and higher rates may be especially detrimental to the 
weak  economies  (Greece  and  Portugal,  for  example).  What  is  your  answer  to  this 
criticism?  
Trichet: Throughout the crisis we have always applied the separation principle between the 
“standard” measures of monetary policy on the one hand and the “non-standard” measures 
on  the  other  hand.  Standard  measures  are  the  interest  rates.  Non-standard  measures  are 
designed  to  help  restore  a  more  correct  transmission  mechanism  of  our  monetary  policy 
when  financial  markets  or  segments  of  markets  are  disrupted.  The  interest  rates  must  be 
decided upon with a view to delivering price stability to the euro area as a whole in line with 
our definition of price stability: an inflation rate of less than 2% but close to 2%. Over the past 
12  years  we  have  delivered  a  rate  of  1.97%  as  a  yearly  average  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole,  exactly  in  line  with  our  definition.  And  we  will  continue  to  deliver  this  level  of  price 
stability  in  the  next  ten  years  to  come.  That  is  our  primary  mandate,  our  contribution  to 
stability and, therefore, to confidence in Europe. It is a necessary condition for growth and 
job creation in the euro area. I think that this solid anchoring of inflation expectations and the 
credibility of the ECB to deliver price stability in the medium term is positive for all countries 
in the euro area, including those that have adjustments to implement. In particular, if we were 
not  credible,  the  medium  and  long-term  interest  rates  would  incorporate  a  higher  level  of 
inflation  expectations  and  therefore  these  market  interest  rates  would  also  be  higher 
everywhere in the euro area.  
Question: The Nobel Prize laureate Paul Krugman has also criticised the recent rate 
hike. He believes that the ECB intends to place on the periphery of the euro area the 
burden  of  economic  adjustment  to  avoid  the  eruption  of  inflationary  pressures  in 
Germany. Is this true?  
Trichet:  We  look  at  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  We  are  responsible  for  the  currency  of 
331 million citizens. Just as the Federal Reserve in the United States looks at all the states of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
America  and  not  particularly,  for  example,  at  Florida,  California  or  Massachusetts.  Our 
decisions are based upon our assessment of what the euro area as a whole needs to enjoy 
price stability in the medium term.  
Question:  The  European  Commission  wants  to  increase  its  expenses  in  the  next 
financial  framework  (2014–2020).  What  do  you  think  of  this  move,  also  considering 
that thousands of European Commission officials earn more than, say, the Estonian 
Prime Minister. Is such a situation fair?  
Trichet: These decisions are taken by the Council, namely the college of governments. In our 
view, governments should be very careful: if they increase spending at the level of Europe as 
a whole, they have to reduce their spending at the national level. Because when everything 
is taken into account – the national level plus the European level – Europe has a very high 
level of public spending as a proportion of GDP in comparison with, for example, all other 
G7 advanced economies.  
Question:  Are you satisfied with the  way the ECB, the EU and the governments are 
collaborating and managing the debt crisis and the financial crisis in Europe? 
Trichet:  We  first  have  to  avoid  such  crises  and  considerably  improve  governance.  I  have 
spoken of the necessity of a “quantum leap” in the domain of governance. That is work in 
progress. There is at the moment a trialogue going on between the European Parliament, the 
European  Commission  and  governments,  namely  the  European  Council.  In  the  present 
circumstances,  we  encourage  Europe  to  go  as  far  as  possible  in  reinforcing  governance, 
which is the position of the Parliament. 
Question:  Will  the  euro  area  still  exist  in  its  present  form  in  five  or  ten  years?  Is  it 
possible for you that any country (for example, Greece at the bottom or Germany at 
the top) might leave the club in order to manage its monetary policy by itself?  
Trichet: It is not an assumption which I envisage in any respect. By the way, it is not in the 
Maastricht Treaty .  
Question: How far do you think European integration will have developed by the year 
2030? How far should it develop ideally?  
Trichet: European integration and construction is a long-standing historical endeavour, which 
started  more  than  60  years  ago.  You  are  absolutely  right  to  ask the  question  on what  will 
come 20 or 30 years from now. As I said in a speech in Aachen, it is perfectly legitimate not 
only to do all we can to improve the situation today within the current framework of the Treaty 
as regards improving economic governance, but also to ask what could be done tomorrow 
and  also  the  day  after  tomorrow.  My  personal  understanding  is  that  the  European 
construction has not yet been achieved in a long-term perspective and that we will have to go 
further. In particular, the Europeans might design a new type of confederation which will not 
be exactly like the US federation, but will incorporate European features and will fully take 
into account European history. But these possible developments will be decided upon by our 
fellow citizens, by the people of Europe. 
Question: Do you think that the EU will have a common finance ministry in 20 years? 
Trichet: I can’t say that this will come at a particular date in time. As I said in Aachen, I think, 
as a citizen, that at a certain moment we might have a confederation with various ministries, 
including a ministry of finance. Yes. 
Question: Do you think the debt crisis will cause another recession in Europe?  
Trichet:  We  have  no  recession  in  our  baseline  scenario  (in  accordance  with  the  IMF,  the 
European Commission and other international institutions) and, in the view of the Governing 
Council, the risks to the present scenario are balanced. 
Question: Why are you unable to stop the debt crisis?  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Trichet:  This  is  being  discussed  by  governments;  we  encourage  them  to  find  appropriate 
solutions as soon as possible. 
Question:  The  ECB  should  stop  its  current  policy  of  buying  sovereign  debt  papers 
because the “risks are becoming too big”, according to one of your former colleagues 
from the ECB’s Governing Council. Is the ECB going to continue to buy this kind of 
papers?  
Trichet: We are fully transparent in this domain and we publish every week what we do – or 
do not do. 
Question: Whose fault do you think it is mainly that the euro area is in a debt crisis? 
Some experts say that Germany is also responsible for the crisis, since it lent money 
to Greece and other indebted countries recklessly in order to make them buy German 
goods. Do you agree?  
Trichet: The sovereign risk tensions are a global phenomenon which, after the crisis of the 
financial  system,  is  affecting  the  sovereign  bonds  of  a  number  of  advanced  economies.  A 
small number of European countries are particularly affected, but it is a global issue.  
In Europe there is a paradox because the euro area as a whole is in a better situation than 
several other advanced economies. For instance, at the end of this year, our public finance 
deficit  will  probably  be  at  the  level  of  around  4½%.  So  we  will  have  a  yearly  deficit  level 
which will be half the level of the public finance deficit of the two other very big economies of 
the G7, namely Japan and the United States. We have to keep that in mind.  
The  tensions  and  problems  are  due  to  the  absence  of  sound,  rigorous  and  correct 
management by the countries themselves: they have the primary responsibility. Second, they 
are due to the lack of rigorous surveillance by all the other countries, which is required by the 
Stability and Growth Pact.  
Question:  Could  more  euro  area  countries  (e.g.  Italy)  need  an  international  bailout 
package this year, or is such a scenario out of the question?  
Trichet: As I just said, I am fully confident in their capacity to reinforce their credibility. 
Question: The economists say that the bankruptcy of Greece is inevitable. They also 
say it is possible to avoid a chaotic bankruptcy. Don’t you think that your aversion to 
rescheduling the debt might even worsen the situation of Greece?  
Trichet: On behalf of the Governing Council of the ECB, I said that a credit event, selective 
default or default should be avoided. 
Question: Your biggest objector among the euro countries is Germany. They want to 
prolong the repayability of Greek bonds and they want the participation of the private 
sector. Under which conditions would you support this?  
Trichet: I have already mentioned the message of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Question: In what way can default be avoided? 
Trichet: That is the responsibility of the governments.  
Question: Is it possible for Greece to pay back the extra money that they will get from 
the European countries?  
Trichet:  That  depends  entirely  on  their  capacity  to  adjust  public  finances  and  economic 
competitiveness,  to  redress  the  situation,  to  deliver  a  significant  primary  surplus  and  to 
engage in large-scale privatisations in a professional and active manner. All the conditionality 
of the international community and of the European Union is designed to produce this result.  
Question:  Why  does  the  ECB  consider  the  default  of  Greece  such  a  bad  solution? 
What will happen with the euro area if Greece defaults?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Trichet: Again, the message of the Governing Council of the ECB is known. The decisions 
are  in  the  hands  of  governments.  That  being  said,  who  would  consider  the  default  of  any 
sovereign  issuer  –  in  the  context  of  a  European  and  global  crisis of  public  finances  in  the 
advanced economies – a “good solution”?  
Question:  Estonia did not participate in the first bailout package for Greece since it 
was not in the euro area at that time. Do you think Estonia should now contribute to 
the  second  bailout  package  for  Greece,  considering  that  wages  in  this  country  are 
much higher than in Estonia?  
Trichet:  When  one  is  a  member  of  the  euro  area,  one  should  participate  as  actively  as 
possible  in  the  discussion  of  the  rigorous  surveillance  of  the  policies  of  the  member 
countries. And, of course, participate actively in the discussions of the conditionality of the 
assistance programme, if any. Once you have decided on the conditionality, all countries in 
the euro area should act together. Being a member of a single market with a single currency 
creates  a  high  level  of  interdependency.  I  always  say  that  it  means  sharing  a  common 
destiny.  
Question: According to our opinion poll, a huge majority of Slovaks don’t want to help 
Greece.  They  also  don’t  support  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and  the 
European  Financial  Stabilisation  Mechanism.  Why  should  they  pay  for  the  bad 
budgetary control of EU countries or too much risk-taking by the banks? 
Trichet: Being a member of the euro area creates a lot of interdependencies, which are some 
of the advantages of the single currency area. Of course, the loans agreed to help finance 
the adjustment must be based on strong conditionality, which today is defined by both the 
European  and  the  international  community.  Every  country  must  participate  very  actively  in 
the surveillance of other members and in the discussions on conditionality. And all countries 
must act together.  
Question: Inflation in Slovakia is above the euro area average. Why is it so? 
Trichet: In the long run it is important that national inflation is close to and oscillates around 
the average, which we know in advance will be less than 2%, but close to 2% over the next 
ten years (as it has been for the last 12 years). The main danger for any country is to be 
trapped in a spiral of cost, wage and price increases, which would lead to a deterioration of 
its  competitive  position.  One  has  to  look  very  carefully  at  the  unit  labour  costs  in  each 
country. It is the new pillar for surveillance which we have asked for since 2005 and which 
will be integrated into the new legislation which is being discussed at present in Brussels. 
Question: The deficit of the Slovak public finances is planned to be 4.9% of GDP. Do 
you think such consolidation effort is enough?  
Trichet: I think that Slovakia, like all other countries, has to be fully in line with the Stability 
and Growth Pact and has to make sure that it reaches its 2013 target of 2.9% of GDP. All 
decisions that permit any country to be ahead of the curve are very important in the present 
situation.  
Question: In Slovenia, having one of the lowest inflation rates in the euro area, people 
are not happy with the decision to raise interest rates. We expect money will be more 
expensive,  slowing  modest  economic  growth. 
therefore  acting 
pro-cyclically in some euro area countries?  
Trichet: As I said before, the ECB takes its decisions with a view to ensuring price stability in 
the euro area as a whole. This is extremely important. We look at each country as part of an 
overall economic area comprising 331 million people. We do what we judge to be necessary 
for all from the standpoint of the single market with the single currency.  
It is very important that national governments fully take into account the fact that monetary 
policy is designed to ensure inflation of less than 2% but close to 2% as an average for the 
euro area, and that they take their own national economic policy decisions in the light of this. 
the  ECB 
Is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
They have to take their decisions precisely with a view to optimising the overall situation of 
the country.  
Question:  Slovenia  is  called  a  “new  member”;  however,  our  country  has  been  an 
active “new member” since January 2007, having now its own financing challenges, 
and  simultaneously  fully  participating  in  financial  bailouts  for  Greece,  Ireland  and 
Portugal, assuring essential sums of money for a nation of two million. What is your 
message to our citizens and taxpayers in this regard? Should they sacrifice for new 
bailouts for Greece and other countries in order to save the euro? 
Trichet: First: it is not to save the euro. The euro is a very solid currency which is credible 
and has all the characteristics of a highly stable currency which keeps its value over time. As 
you know, the ECB has delivered price stability at the level of less than 2%, close to 2% per 
year over its first 12 years of existence. It is the public finance situation in some countries of 
the euro area which is at stake.  
Second:  this  money  that  has  been  lent  must  be  repaid.  This  is  not  a  subsidy,  it  is  not  a 
transfer. It must, of course, be lent on the basis of very strong conditionality, which is based 
on European as well as international conditionality.  
Question: What is your message to the decision-makers in Slovenia after the failure of 
pension reform in the June referendum?  
Trichet: We have called for all appropriate measures to be taken to redress the situation of 
public finances and of competitiveness in the euro area. This is a message for all countries. 
Everything  that  goes  in  the  direction  of  sound  public  finances  is  essential  for  sustainable 
growth,  job  creation  and,  particularly,  for  resilience  in  the  situation  of  a  global  crisis.  The 
efforts  which  were  made  by  some  countries  in  this  direction  have  been  amply  rewarded. 
Germany, for example, is seeing its unemployment rate fall during the crisis. This is a reward 
for sound past decisions in the field of public finances and structural reforms. There are other 
examples  from  advanced  economies  outside  the  euro  area:  take  the  case  of  Sweden  or 
Canada,  for  example,  which  proved  to  be  remarkably  resilient  owing  to  their  wise 
management.  Sound  management  is  always  rewarded.  It  is  regrettable  that  the  pension 
reform in Slovenia was not supported.  
Question: Slovenia doubled its “Maastricht” debt in the last three years, from 22% to 
45% of GDP, while the government deficit stays relatively high at 5.5% of GDP for the 
third year in a row. Is the fiscal position of Slovenia becoming critical? 
Trichet: Again, to Slovenia as well as to all countries in the euro area or Europe as a whole, 
the message is: be at least as sound and reasonable as required by the Stability and Growth 
Pact. Be ahead of the curve. It is the best way to be resilient and to create growth and jobs.  
Question:  Does  the  debt  crisis  mean  a  lot  of  additional  work  for  you?  Do  you  have 
holidays this summer? 
Trichet: For all members of the ECB’s Executive Board and the Governing Council, for all the 
staff of the ECB and the national central banks, the present crisis, which started four years 
ago in August 2007 and which has been the worst financial crisis since the Second World 
War, means additional work, permanent alertness and extreme attention. This is, of course, 
what is needed in demanding times. We all work very long hours on normal working days 
and also many hours on Saturdays and Sundays.  
I  will  have  holidays  in  the  summer.  But  there  is,  of  course,  permanent  availability  to  work 
even on holiday.  
Question: What has been your most difficult moment as President of the ECB?  
Trichet: There is no “most difficult” moment. One permanently has to be prepared, alert and 
ready to take appropriate decisions. I have to say that ever since its creation, the ECB has 
had many challenges – the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the terrorist attack of 9/11, oil and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
commodity  price  shocks.  I  was  not  President  at  that  time,  when  my  predecessor,  Wim 
Duisenberg, had to cope with the 9/11 shock. And all my colleagues and myself have been 
coping for four years with a succession of tensions that are all demanding.  
Question: What do you consider your biggest achievement as President of the ECB? 
Trichet: The biggest achievement of the ECB is to be able to tell 331 million fellow citizens 
that 12 years after the introduction of the euro, we have average yearly inflation of 1.97%, 
which is fully in line with what the democracies in Europe have asked for, fully in line with our 
primary mandate and with our definition of price stability. And a better result than what was 
achieved in the euro area countries over the previous 50 years. But it’s not an achievement 
of mine particularly, it’s an achievement of the Executive Board, of the Governing Council, of 
all the staff of the institution and of the Eurosystem as a whole. 
Question: Are you planning to write your memoir? It would be very interesting reading 
for all of us. 
Trichet: Until the end of the month of October, I have no plans. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
