Subir Gokarn: Mutual funds and market development in India 
Address  by  Dr  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  CII 
(Confederation  of  Indian  Industry)  7th  Edition  of  Mutual  Fund  Summit  2011,  Mumbai, 
22 June 2011. 
Inputs from Sudarsana Sahoo, Bhupal Singh and Deepa S. Raj are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Financial  sector  development  can  be  viewed  as  a  process  that  enhances  four  critical 
attributes  of  the  financial  system:  efficiency,  stability,  transparency  and  inclusion.  The 
emergence of intermediation mechanisms and products that help improve on one or more of 
these  without  causing  others  to  weaken  are,  therefore,  a  meaningful  indicator  of  financial 
development. 
From  this  perspective,  Mutual  Funds  play  an  important  role  in  the  development  of  the 
financial system. First, they pool the resources of small investors together, increasing their 
participation in financial markets, which helps both inclusion and the efficient functioning of 
markets themselves, as a result of larger volumes. Second, Mutual Funds, being institutional 
investors,  can  invest  in  market  analysis  generally  not  available  or  accessible  to  individual 
investors,  thereby  providing  services  based  on  informed  decisions  to  small  investors. 
Decisions  made  on  the  basis  of  deeper  understanding  of  risks  and  returns  contribute  to 
financial stability,  besides  helping  to  mitigate  market  risk for  this  group  of  investors.  Third, 
transparency  in  investment  strategies  and  outcomes,  though  typically  mandated  by 
regulators, is relatively easy to deliver on, so that investors can find out exactly where they 
stand with regard to their investments at any point of time.  
As far as regulation is concerned, Mutual Funds cut across domains. The Reserve Bank of 
India regulates three categories of financial markets; money markets, government securities 
markets and foreign exchange markets. Mutual Funds have a presence in the first two and 
the  Reserve  Bank  is  therefore  interested  in  the  role  that  they  play  in  developing  them.  In 
what  follows,  I  shall  provide  a  brief  description  of  the  role  of  Mutual  Funds  in  these  two 
critical markets and discuss some of the regulatory issues that arise. I shall then make some 
more general comments about the role of Mutual Funds in financial inclusion. 
Mutual funds and market development 
II. 
Mutual  Funds  have  contributed  significantly  in  broadening  and  deepening  of  different 
segments  of  the  Money  Market  and,  to  some  extent,  the  Government  Securities  market. 
Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs) were introduced in India in April 1991 to provide an 
additional short term investment avenue to investors and to bring money market instruments 
within the reach of individuals.  
The guidelines for MMMFs were announced by the Reserve Bank in April 1992. The Reserve 
Bank had made several modifications in the scheme to make it more flexible and attractive to 
banks  and  financial  institutions.  These  guidelines  were  subsequently  incorporated  into  the 
revised  SEBI  regulations.  In  October  1997,  MMMFs  were  permitted  to  invest  in  rated 
corporate bonds and debentures with a residual maturity of up to one year, within the ceiling 
existing  for  Commercial  Paper  (CPs).  The  minimum  lock-in  period  was  also  reduced 
gradually to 15 days, making the scheme more attractive to investors.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
MMMFs have witnessed phenomenal growth over the period. As on May 31, 2011, the total 
assets under management of the MMMFs was placed at Rs.1,83,622 crore1, 25 per cent of 
the aggregate assets under management of the Mutual Funds.  
In order to promote retail holding in government securities and broaden the investor base, 
Mutual Funds which invest exclusively in government securities, Gilt Funds, were introduced. 
The  first  Gilt  Fund  in  India  was  set  up  in  December  1998.  However,  Gilt  Funds  have 
registered moderate growth. As on May 31, 2011, the total assets under management of the 
Gilt  Funds  was  placed  at  Rs.3,336  crore2,  0.5 per  cent  of  the  aggregate  assets  under 
management of the Mutual Funds. 
Mutual Funds occupy a large share of the primary market of Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and 
CPs. As on June 10, 20113, the total holdings of Mutual Funds in CDs and CPs remained at 
Rs.2,95,164 crore (66 per cent of the aggregate outstanding) and Rs.82,951 crore (65 per cent 
of  the  aggregate  outstanding)  respectively.  Mutual  Funds  have  also  provided  substantial 
liquidity to the secondary market segments of CPs and CDs. Their increased activity in the 
secondary  market  corresponds  to  their  growing  portfolio  of  money  market  investments. 
During the last six months, MFs’ share in the daily turnover the secondary market of CDs and 
CPs stood at around 41 per cent and 46 per cent respectively. 
The  overnight  segment  of  the  money  market  has  also  benefitted  from  the  participation  of 
Mutual  Funds.  Their  reliance  on  the  collateralized  segment  of  the  overnight  markets,  viz. 
market repo and Collateralized Borrowing and Lending Operations (CBLO), for placement of 
their daily surplus liquidity enhanced the depth of the markets. 
By contrast, in the Government Securities market, the participation of Mutual Funds has not 
been very encouraging. Of the outstanding Government of India dated securities4, the Mutual 
Funds held 0.9 per cent as at end December 2010, which dropped to 0.2 per cent as at end 
March 2011. The average holding of government securities by the Mutual Funds during the 
last two years remained at 0.6 per cent as against 38.7 per cent by the banks, 22.4 per cent 
by insurance companies, 8.9 per cent by PDs, 6.7 per cent by PFs, 3.1 per cent by corporate 
entities. During the current calendar year till end of May, the average share of Mutual Funds 
in  the  secondary  G-Sec  market  remained  at  5.8 per  cent  of  the  total  traded  volume.  One 
possible reason for the lower level of participation of Mutual Funds in the G-Sec market is 
lack of investor interest in the gilt-oriented Mutual Funds due to significant interest rate risks.  
Future role and regulatory issues 
III. 
There  is  a  need  for  Mutual  Funds,  especially  gilt  funds,  to  complement  the  role  of  PDs  in 
promoting retail holding in government securities. Mutual Funds are supposed to tap retail 
investors,  who  in  turn,  to  the  extent  that  they  have  long  horizons,  provide  stability  to  the 
market.  They  also  benefit  small  investors  by  providing  them  access  to  risk-free  gilt  edged 
securities.  
The Mutual funds are allowed to participate in the Interest Rate Swap (IRS) market for the 
purpose of hedging their own balance sheet risks. However, their participation has remained 
quite  muted.  The  IRS  market,  although  very  liquid,  suffers  from  a  low  customer  base  of 
around 1 per cent. The Mutual Funds may increase the use of IRS for hedging their interest 
rate risk which would help in broadening and deepening of the IRS market. 
                                                 
1  Source : AMFI Monthly – May 2011. 
2  Source : AMFI Monthly – May 2011. 
3  Source: NSDL. 
4  Rs.23.3 lakh crore as on December 31, 2010; Rs.23.5 lakh crore as on March 31, 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Mutual  Funds  are  also  allowed  by  SEBI  to  trade  on  Interest  Rate  Futures  (IRF).  IRF 
contracts  on  10-year  notional  coupon  bonds  were  launched  on  NSE  in  August  2009.  The 
product  witnessed  significant  activity  during  the  initial  period,  but  liquidity  tapered  off 
subsequently.  RBI  has  already  issued  guidelines  for  futures  contracts  on  91-day  T-Bills, 
which  are  expected  to  be  introduced  shortly.  RBI  is  also  considering  introduction  of  IRF 
contracts  on  2-year  and  5-year  G-Secs.  If  the  reason  for  Mutual  Funds  not  actively 
participating  in  the  G-Sec  market  is  the  underlying  interest  rate  risk,  then  they  obviously 
should make use of the IRF to hedge their interest rate risk. Their active participation will give 
impetus to the development of the IRF market.  
The  launch  of  Credit  Default  Swap  (CDS)  is  impending.  The  guidelines  on  introduction  of 
plain  vanilla  OTC  single-name  CDS  for  corporate  bonds  in  India  would  be  effective  from 
October  24,  2011.  The  Mutual  Funds  would  be  eligible  to  buy  credit  protection  (buy  CDS 
contracts)  to  hedge  their  underlying  credit  risk  on  corporate  bonds.  They  would  also  be 
permitted as market-makers subject to their having strong financials and risk management 
capabilities as prescribed by SEBI and as and when permitted by the SEBI. It is expected 
that Mutual Funds’ participation will provide momentum to the CDS market.  
A significant feature of MMMFs or liquid Mutual Funds in India is that they have been mainly 
catering to the short-term investment needs of institutional investors such as corporate and 
banks whose redemption requirements are large and simultaneous. As on March 31, 20115, 
the investor profile of liquid funds was dominated by corporate (76.5 per cent) followed by 
Banks/FIs (17.1 per cent), HNIs (5.3 per cent). As a consequence, when the banking sector 
faces  liquidity  shortfall  and  withdraws  its  investment  from  liquid  Mutual  Funds,  they 
collectively come under stress. This may lead to a sharp fall in banks’ fresh investment in 
liquid  funds  which,  in  turn,  could  intensify  the  pressure  on  those  entities  that  receive 
investments from the liquid funds.  
It  may  be  recalled  that  during  October–November  2008,  RBI  had  to  provide  a  special 
dispensation in the form of Term Repo facility of Rs.60,000 crores, under which banks could 
avail  central  bank  funds  to  address  the  liquidity  stress  faced  by  Mutual  Funds,  NBFCs, 
HFCs.  Banks  were  given  an  SLR  exemption  up  to  1.5 per  cent  of  NDTL  to  address  this 
problem. 
A  related  issue  is  the  circularity  of  funds  between  the  banking  system  and  Mutual  Funds. 
Banks invest in Mutual Funds and the Mutual Funds put large volume of funds back to the 
banking  system  through  investments  in  CDs,  lending  in  CBLO  and  Market  Repos.  Such 
circular  flow  of  funds  between  banks  and  Mutual  Funds  has  the  potential  for  creating 
systemic  instability  in  times  of  stress/liquidity  crunch.  Thus,  banks  could  potentially  face  a 
large  liquidity  risk.  In  this  connection,  RBI  had  announced  in  the  monetary  policy  on 
May 3, 2011  that  the  bank’s  investment  in  debt  oriented  Mutual  Funds  to  be  capped  at 
10 per cent of net-worth as on March 31 of the previous year and banks would be given a 
period of six months to achieve this limit.  
From  a  prudential  perspective,  there  is  the  possibility  of  banks’  investments  in  the  Mutual 
Funds getting channelized to sensitive sectors such as real estate and stocks. This may lead 
to banks’ exposure to such sensitive sectors going beyond the prescribed prudential limits.  
Mutual funds and inclusion 
IV. 
The role of Mutual Funds in promoting savings continues to be insignificant in India. Despite 
a long history, assets of Mutual Funds in India constitute less than 10 per cent of GDP. A 
cross-country comparison suggests that Mutual  Funds are very popular  all over the  world. 
                                                 
5  Source: AMFI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
However,  assets  under  them  in  India  are  relatively  low  as  compared  with  other  emerging 
market economies. 
One  of  the  major  reasons  for  relatively  low  activity  of  Mutual  Funds  in  India  is  that 
penetration, especially in the rural areas remains small. This is an important issue from the 
perspective of financial inclusion of low-income households in the formal financial system. It 
is generally perceived that Mutual Funds are popular mainly with the middle and high-income 
groups and have not been found to be an attractive investment avenue for the low-income 
groups. Thus, if the sector has to grow fast, it needs to devise appropriate schemes to attract 
the  saving  of  low-income  groups,  especially  in  rural  areas.  This  is  the  only  way  to  ensure 
participation  of  all  categories  of  investors  in  the  financial  markets,  which  is  crucial  for 
sustained development, both of the financial sector and the economy as a whole.  
Concluding remarks 
V. 
Mutual Funds clearly have a significant role to play in financial development. Their modus 
operandi of aggregating pools of saving from a large number of retail investors and deploying 
these resources in a variety of financial markets, based on different risk-return preferences 
simultaneously enhances efficiency, stability and inclusion. It is also relatively easy for them 
to be transparent about both their strategies and outcomes.  
This, of course, is a statement of ideal conditions. In the real world, there are clearly barriers 
to  achieving  these  objectives.  Some  of  these  have  to  do  with  penetration,  others  with  the 
preferences  of  investors,  particularly  with  respect  to  duration,  some  more  with  legitimate 
regulatory  concerns  about  systemic  risk  and  yet  others  with  gaps  or  imbalances  in  the 
broader  regulatory  framework.  However,  if  there  is  broad  agreement  that  appropriately 
regulated  mutual  fund  activity  can  play  a  large  part  in  financial  development  in  all  its 
dimensions, these barriers can surely be addressed in a collaborative way between the three 
stakeholders – the investors, the fund managers and the regulators. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
