Manuel Sánchez: Policy challenges in a decelerating world economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Eighth 
China International Finance Forum, Pudong, Shanghai, 25 September 2011. 
 It  is  a  privilege  to  be  back  in  this  beautiful  country  to  participate  in  the  Eighth  China 
International  Finance  Forum,  put  together  this  year  with  the  suggestive  theme  of  green 
finance  development.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  of  this  conference  for  their 
invitation to share the podium with distinguished speakers who will address important issues 
related  to  the  financial  opportunities  that  will  continue  to  support  China’s  outstanding 
economic development. 
On this occasion, I would like to discuss some of the policy challenges posed by the global 
economic  situation  and outlook.  In particular,  I am  interested  in  assessing  the  recent  poor 
performance of the world economy in order to identify possible underlying problems, which 
may help to design appropriate economic policy measures. I would also like to examine the 
implications of the weak world economic evolution for developing countries. Obviously, my 
comments are entirely my own responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Bank of Mexico. 
The unusual recovery 
As  you  know,  since  the  middle  of  2009  the  global  economy  has  been  in  a  process  of 
recovery  from  the  deep  contraction  stemming  from  the  great  financial  crisis.  The 
improvement has been different from other modern business cycles, because among other 
factors,  this  time  it  has  been  notably  slow  and  has  not  followed  the  typical  “V”  shape  that 
tends to be sharper the deeper output falls. 
The  relatively  weak  world  economic  recovery  has  reflected  an  anemic  turnaround  of  the 
advanced  economies  that  were  most  affected  by  the  financial  debacle.  Specifically,  in  the 
United States, the epicenter of the turbulence in 2007 and 2008, real GDP barely attained its 
pre-crisis  level  by  the  second  quarter  of  2011.  Moreover,  this  indicator  has  remained  well 
below  the  real  value  that  would  have  prevailed  if  growth  had  kept  up  consistently  with  its 
secular trend of approximately three percent per year.1  
The unsatisfactory behavior of industrialized economies was accentuated during 2011. GDP 
growth showed a declining path in the first half and several activity indicators suggest that 
this trend has worsened in the third quarter. Furthermore, consensus GDP forecasts for this 
and the following year have been successively revised downward, at least since last March. 
Although the world economy is still predicted to continue expanding, this is basically due to 
the higher expected growth momentum in emerging markets.  
In  particular,  the  United  States  and  most  advanced  countries  are  expected  to  grow  only 
modestly  in  the  near  future,  and  some  analysts  already  estimate  significant  odds  for  an 
imminent  or  even  ongoing  recession  in  those  economies.  Although  a  global  economic 
contraction is not the baseline scenario for most forecasters, the continuation of downward 
revisions to growth projections for advanced countries would definitively affect the economic 
prospects for the rest of the world. 
                                                 
1   For an analysis of the current deviation of U.S. output from its secular trend and a comparison with that of the 
Great Depression, see Robert E. Lucas, Jr., “The U.S. Recession of 2007–201?”, Milliman Lecture, University 
of Washington, May 19, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Possible explanations 
What lies behind the disappointing upturn in industrialized economies? A striking feature of 
the weak and deteriorating nature of the recovery in these countries is that it has occurred in 
spite  of  unprecedented  expansionary  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stances.  Large  public 
deficits have resulted from automatic stabilizer mechanisms as well as from special tax relief 
programs and higher government  expenditures, including bailouts of troubled financial and 
non-financial  institutions,  aimed  at  stabilizing  financial  markets  and  promoting  aggregate 
spending. 
In  addition,  monetary  policy  has  remained  extraordinarily  accommodative  during  recent 
years. Central banks from the main industrialized countries have combined remarkably low 
policy interest rates with an increase and change in the composition of their balance sheets. 
The leader in expansionary monetary policy has been the U.S. Federal Reserve, which has 
maintained  the  federal  funds  rate  close  to  zero  since  the  end  of  2008,  and  has  also 
implemented  large  purchases  of  government  bonds  and  private  financial  assets  funded 
through higher voluntary bank deposits during the last four years.  
Among other objectives, through the purchase of financial assets, the Fed sought to meet the 
extremely  high  liquidity  demand  shown  by  the  public  during  the  financial  crisis  and,  more 
recently,  to  lower  long-term  interest  rates  in  order  to  stimulate  private  financing  and 
investment.  Other  monetary  authorities  have  implemented  similar  practices.  The  European 
Central Bank has participated actively in the markets in an attempt to stabilize the sovereign 
bond prices of countries experiencing fiscal difficulties. 
While the extraordinary actions undertaken by the Fed as a lender of last resort during 2008 
appear to have contributed effectively to the normalization of non-bank financial markets, the 
impact of accommodation by this and other central banks on aggregate demand has been 
less clear. Questions arise in light of the ambiguous effects of monetary policy on long-term 
interest rates, the still weak credit channels of monetary policy transmission, and poor output 
performance and expectations. Similarly, the net effect of fiscal policy on spending may have 
been  weak  given  that  policy  measures  were  probably  perceived  as  temporary,  potentially 
inducing savings in view of higher taxes expected in the near future to finance them. In any 
case, regardless of their actual effectiveness, the presence of highly expansionary fiscal and 
monetary  stances  suggests  that  the  unsatisfactory  recovery  in  advanced  economies  does 
not reflect a lack of stimulus measures.2 
On  the  other  hand,  recent  negative  supply  shocks  have  affected  the  performance  of  the 
world  economy  and  particularly  that  of  the  United  States.  These  shocks  included  bad 
weather, high oil prices which have partly reversed course, and the tragic events in Japan 
during  the  first  quarter of  2011.  Yet,  independently  of  their  importance,  these  events  have 
been  transitory  and,  therefore,  the  extent  to  which  they  explain  the  sluggish  rebound  of 
advanced countries since 2009 is necessarily limited. 
The  previous  observations  suggest  the  need  to  search  for  the  existence  of  possible 
fundamental obstacles to a stronger economic recovery in industrialized countries. While in 
the current complex economic situation many factors certainly interact, some features stand 
out.  
In particular, in the United States, there seem to be two important sources of growth-limiting 
factors. One is the sequel to the financial crisis summarized by the consumer debt overhang, 
slow  debt  restructuring  and  foreclosed  home  sales,  and  high  risk  aversion  and  contingent 
                                                 
2   Questions about the effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand are found in Frederic S. Mishkin, “Monetary 
Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis,” NBER Working Paper No. 16755, February 2011. For a discussion of 
the possible limitations of fiscal stimulus, see Robert J. Barro and Charles J. Redlick, “Macroeconomic Effects from 
Government Purchases and Taxes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 51–102, February 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
include 
the  discussions  of  eventual 
reserve provisioning by banks. The resolution of the problematic debt and credit legacy from 
the  previous  asset  price  bubble,  as  illustrated  by  the  large  number  of  households  with 
negative home equity, is taking a long time, as seems to be the case in the aftermath of any 
big  financial  crisis.  This  impasse  contributes  to  an  explanation  of  the  virtual  stagnation  of 
mortgage lending and residential construction in the United States.3 
A  second  source  of  obstacles  in  the  United  States  appears  to  be  the  unintended 
consequences  from  the  corrective  measures  after  the  crisis,  which  might  have  resulted  in 
heightened  uncertainty.  These  actions 
fiscal 
consolidation  in  terms  of  future  higher  taxes  and  expenditure  cuts  to  confront  the 
unsustainable  path  of  projected  public  debt,  and  the  implementation  of  new  regulations  to 
prevent  financial  crises.  To  some  extent,  this  environment  of  uncertainty  may  have  partly 
induced the recent reduction of producer and consumer confidence. 
Additionally, the European Monetary Union (EMU) is severely affected by the fiscal fragility of 
some of its member countries, which since the financial crisis have exhibited sharp rises in 
their  public  debt-to-GDP  ratios,  with  projected  paths  that  are  judged  to  be  unsustainable. 
Some  states  have  already  received  substantial  financial  support  from  the  European 
community  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  and  are  implementing  strict  fiscal  and 
structural adjustment programs. However, the perception of credit risk of the corresponding 
governments, as summarized in the spreads paid for credit default swaps, has continued to 
portray the deteriorating trend observed since 2010 and has reached worrisome levels.  
Several  concerns  apparently  lie  behind  market  skepticism  surrounding  remedial  actions  in 
the  EMU.  One  is  the  difficulty  of  resolving  the  troubled  governments’  debt  burden  through 
austerity programs and ever-increasing support funds. Another factor is the negative impact 
that the worsened public finances of any country can have on others within the Union, given 
the fact that their financial systems are interlinked and their institutions, notably banks, are 
significant  holders  of  government  bonds.  Contagion  fears  have  spread  to  other  regions 
outside  the  EMU,  where  financial  intermediaries  may  also  have  substantial  exposures  to 
European  sovereign  bonds,  either  directly  or  indirectly.  In  the  past  weeks  the  urgency  of 
finding  a  solution  to  these  problems  has  become  even  clearer.  Uncertainty  on  future 
developments in the Monetary Union hinders growth prospects in this area and fuels sharp 
volatility and an investor rush to safety, factors that have recently deepened in international 
financial markets.  
Policy challenges 
The existence of fundamental factors that, to a large extent, explain the meager growth of the 
world  economy  poses  important  challenges  to  policy  makers.  First,  short-term  economic 
policies  are  facing  significant  limits  in  advanced  countries.  The  high  and  rising  public-debt 
ratios  in  many  economies  call  for  substantial  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  in  order  to  make 
public finances sustainable and, hence, supportive of financial stability and long-term growth.  
Monetary  policy  is  already  extraordinarily  accommodative,  and  authorities  will  need  to 
continue  monitor  the  anchoring  of  low  inflation  while  at  the  same  time  remain  ready  to 
function  as  lenders  of  last  resort  to  guarantee  the  integrity  of  their  payment  systems.  As 
noted earlier, slow growth after the crisis seems not to reflect a lack of economic stimulus 
policies. Authorities should exercise caution in considering further accommodative policies, 
as negative side effects on expectations could offset their intended benefits. 
3   Based on international experience, Reinhart and Rogoff found that deleveraging after big financial crises is a 
 lengthy  process  and  the  resulting  negative  deviation  from  pre-crisis  per-capita  income  typically  takes  more 
than  four  years.  See  Carmen  M.  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial Folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Second and, perhaps, more importantly, significant measures will have to be implemented in 
order to overcome the underlying difficulties that seem to explain low growth in industrialized 
countries. Obviously, the sooner these actions are taken the better, as the postponement of 
solutions may increase their cost. Given that public finances are at the root of problems in 
many  advanced  nations,  fiscal  reforms  that  reduce  uncertainty  and  permanently  enhance 
incentives  toward  productivity  are  necessary.  Also,  deregulation  and  better  regulation  that 
can make markets more efficient and amicable for innovation, investment, and hiring should 
take priority. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  a  crucial  challenge  will  potentially  be  the  design  of 
programs  to  help  the  resolution  of  the  consumer  debt  overhang  in  the  United  States  and 
other  countries,  possibly  through  more  expeditious  restructuring  and  further  bank  balance-
sheet cleanups, which, in turn, may reinvigorate the mortgage and housing markets.4 
By far, the most serious task is the definitive solution to the fiscal difficulties of the vulnerable 
EMU member states, which implies imaginative plans needed for both debtors and creditors. 
The choices faced are certainly hard. The solution must inevitably include adding capital to 
banks. However, these steps are a prerequisite for the stability of the financial system and 
the resumption of economic expansion.  
Implications for emerging economies 
The  expected  lower  dynamism  in  advanced  economies  will  necessarily  limit  growth 
momentum  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  particular,  as  was  clearly  shown  during  the  great 
contraction  of  2009,  emerging  economies  will  not  be  immune  to  the  pressures  faced  by 
industrialized  nations.  The  possible  negative  effects  on  specific  emerging  economies  will 
necessarily be higher the more integrated they are with slowing economies.  
For  example,  the  Mexican  economy  is  highly  interrelated  with  that  of  the  United  States, 
especially through manufacturing production and trade. Although Mexico has recently fared 
well  in  terms  of  external  demand,  in  part  because  of  gradual  geographic  diversification, 
dampened activity in the United States is already affecting Mexican growth performance and 
forecasts.5  
Despite  these  constraints,  emerging  economies  are  in  a  better  situation  than  those  of 
advanced  countries.  Largely  as  a  result  of  the  lessons  learned  from  previous  crises,  in 
general,  most  of  these  economies  have  maintained  relatively  strong  public  finances  with 
reduced exposures to foreign currency liabilities. Additionally, regulation and supervision and 
the  business  models  of  financial  intermediaries  have  improved  substantially.  As  a 
consequence,  financial  systems  showed  a  high  degree  of  resilience  during  the  great 
international turmoil and thus far have remained sound.  
Hence,  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  fundamentals,  developing  countries  should  likely 
continue to be a positive factor for global economic growth. This is all the more important, as 
now the emerging economies account for almost half of world GDP. Within this contribution, 
China is expected to maintain its key role as an engine of global economic expansion.  
The favorable contribution of developing nations to the world economy will require that these 
countries  continue  profiting  from  their  own  experience  and  that  of  advanced  nations.  In 
4   For an interesting proposal to facilitate mortgage debt renegotiation in the United States, see Eric A. Posner 
5  From February to September of 2011, Blue Chip growth forecasts for 2011 and 2012, respectively, fell from 
and  Luigi  Zingales,  “A  Loan  Modification  Approach  to  the  Housing  Crisis,”  American  Law  and  Economics 
Review, 11 (1): 575–607, 2009. 
 4.4 and 4.1 to 3.8 and 3.0 percent in the case of U.S. industrial production, and from 3.9 and 3.8 to 3.9 and 
3.5 percent for Mexico’s GDP.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
particular, exceptionally expansionary policies have been a response to serious drawbacks in 
developed  countries  and  may  involve  unknown  future  costs.  To  the  extent  that  such 
difficulties are absent in emerging economies, they do not need to take these risks. Although 
inflation  remains  relatively  contained,  in  some  developing  countries  there  are  signs  of 
overheating.  Thus,  monetary  authorities  will  have  to  continue  monitoring  inflationary 
pressures  to  act  appropriately.  In  short,  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  strong  public 
finances, strict prudential oversight of financial systems and openness to international trade 
continues to be the safest road to growth in emerging market economies, especially during 
these volatile times. 
Concluding remarks 
The  lackluster  economic  performance  of  advanced  countries,  which  largely  explains  the 
weak upturn of the world economy from the great contraction, does not seem to reflect a lack 
of stimulus policies or just the influence of temporary events. The anemic growth has been a 
lasting  phenomenon  which  reveals  deep  factors  that  fuel  uncertainty  and  pessimistic 
expectations.  The  main  contributing  elements  include  the  consumer  debt  overhang  and 
unintended  consequences  from  corrective  measures  after  the  financial  crisis  in  the 
United States, and the worsening fiscal and financial troubles in the EMU. 
The root causes of the deceleration of advanced economies pose significant challenges for 
policy  makers.  Their  response  will certainly  imply  hard  choices  that  need  to  be  made  in  a 
timely  way  in  order  to  avoid  aggravation.  In  this  context,  while  they  will  not  be  decoupled 
from  the  developed  countries,  emerging  economies  will  continue  to  face  relatively  better 
conditions for growth, provided that solid economic fundamentals are maintained. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
