Jürgen Stark: Adjusting monetary policy in a challenging environment 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the “ECB and its Watchers XIII” conference, Frankfurt am Main, 10 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at the thirteenth in this series of conferences 
entitled “The ECB and its Watchers”.  
The theme of this session is the return to normality. It assumes that we know what the “new 
normal” will look like. What we do know is that it will be different from the “old normal”, as the 
crisis has changed the economic and financial environment in many ways. But it is still too 
early to characterise what exactly the new normal will look like, also because the crisis is still 
ongoing.1  Therefore,  rather  than  talking  about  going  back  to  normal,  I  prefer  to  talk  about 
adjustments to policies.  
Indeed, during the period of acute financial stress we have seen many changes in the area of 
economic and prudential policies. However, this is far less the case for the ECB’s monetary 
policy. Our main objective which is to maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole 
over the medium term has remained unchanged. Of course, exceptional circumstances have 
called for extraordinary measures. In response to the crisis, we lowered our key interest rates 
in an unprecedented manner. We have also introduced a number of non-standard measures 
to support the transmission of our interest rate decisions to the euro area economy. All these 
measures have lent considerable support to economic activity, while remaining fully aligned 
with our deep-rooted aim of maintaining price stability.  
Now, economic recovery in the euro area is on a more self-sustained path. Looking ahead, 
we  expect  the  economy  to  further  benefit  from  ongoing  global  growth  and  the  still 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  At  the  same  time,  for  some  months  by  now,  we 
have been observing relatively high inflation rates and continued upward pressure on prices. 
Overall, we see risks to price stability on the upside. This calls for strong vigilance. In this 
respect,  we  stand  ready  to  further  adjust  our  still  very  accommodative  monetary  policy 
stance. In the same vein, we will act in a timely manner as regards further steps to phase out 
our non-standard measures. The concrete steps of adjustment will remain guided by our aim 
of keeping inflation in the euro area below, but close to, 2% over the medium term for the 
euro area as a whole. 
In my contribution today, I will emphasise that the ECB conducts monetary policy “as usual”. 
In  particular,  after  briefly  recalling  the  motives  for  our  April  interest  rate  increase,  I  shall 
elaborate on how the ECB deals with the particular challenges prevailing, namely  
• 
• 
• 
inflation pressures stemming from commodity prices 
costs of keeping interest rates low for too long 
the adjustment to the monetary policy stance with some non-standard measures still 
in place, and 
divergent  macroeconomic  and  financial  developments  in  the  countries  of  the  euro 
area.  
                                                  
1  Further elaborations on this theme can be found in my intervention “The new normal” at the 13th Euro Finance 
Week, Frankfurt, 16 November 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Commodity prices and the outlook for price stability 
2. 
On 7 April we increased our key interest rates by 25 basis points. This decision was the first 
policy  move  since  May  2009.  It  was  mainly  driven  by  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  in 
particular  relating  to  further  increases  in  energy  and  commodity  prices.  Continued  upward 
pressure on overall inflation is discernible in the early stages of the production process. It has 
the  potential  to  translate  into  inflation  expectations,  broad  based  second-round  effects  in 
price and wage-setting and inflationary pressures over the medium term.  
As  mentioned,  we  continue  to  see  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  Signals  from  the  monetary 
analysis indicate that the underlying pace of monetary expansion is gradually recovering. At the 
same time monetary liquidity remains ample. It could accommodate upward price pressures.  
 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  addition,  strong  economic  growth  in  emerging  markets  likely  contributes  further  to 
commodity price rises. Ample liquidity at the global level could support this development. The 
monetary  policy  stance  of  many  central  banks  around  the  world  also  remains  very 
accommodative.  This  creates  an  environment  which  is  raising  inflationary  challenges,  in 
particular for emerging economies that shadow US monetary policy.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
 
Is the fact that inflation is being driven mainly by commodity prices not a reason to be less 
concerned  about  inflation  in  the  medium  term,  as  these  such  developments  are  usually 
temporary only? Theoretically, it is possible to look beyond the volatility in inflation triggered 
by first-round effects of commodity price changes if these are of a purely temporary nature. 
However,  the  central  bank  also  needs  to  consider  policy  action  in  case  sustained  upward 
trends in commodity prices are seen as a risk to price stability over the medium term. We 
have  already  observed  in  the  past  that  commodity  prices  tend  to  follow  a  secular  “trend” 
reflecting amongst others things the fast growth in emerging economies. 
Moreover,  if  transitory  rises  in  commodity  prices  ran  the  risk  of  triggering  second-round 
effects,  they  may  also  have  a  more  lasting  impact  on  consumer  price  developments  and 
medium-term inflation expectations. Monetary policy then needs to avert temporary inflation 
increases that lead to second-round effects in wage and price-setting behaviour, for instance 
due to the indexation of wages and prices to past inflation.  
Today’s discussion on how to react to rising commodity prices reminds me of that prevailing 
in the 1970s. In the aftermath of the oil price shocks of 1973 and 1979, inflation in the OECD 
countries increased dramatically from already relatively high levels 5.7% in 1971 to double-
digit numbers 14.8% in 1980. It seems evident that this evolution, which was later labelled 
the “Great Inflation”,2 was mostly driven by increasing oil prices.3 However, Germany – and 
also  Switzerland  –  was  a  notable  exception.4  German  inflation  rose  from  5.2%  in  1971  to 
5.4%  in  1980.  The  Bundesbank  chose  to  tighten  its  monetary  policy  stance.  This  policy 
resulted  in  significantly  higher  real  interest  rates  in  Germany,  compared  to  other  OECD 
countries. This helped the economy to grow in line with its potential. Moreover, on account of 
the associated appreciation of the D-Mark, the oil price increase had a more limited direct 
impact  on  inflation.  Overall,  the  different  inflation  experiences  of  the  1970s  clearly 
demonstrate that the “Great Inflation” was not only the result of rising oil prices but to a large 
extent  driven  by  different  monetary  policies.  Faced  today  with  rising  commodity  prices  we 
should not forget this lesson, a fortiori in a context of globally loose monetary policies and 
ample liquidity. 
Costs of keeping interest rates low over a long period 
3. 
Maintaining  our  medium-term  focus  is  particularly  important  in  the  current  environment. 
Short-term volatility is extensive and uncertainty remains unusually high. Thus, central banks 
need to avoid just looking at the short-term consequences of a somewhat tighter monetary 
policy stance and take a longer-term perspective. This should include the costs and related 
risks to price stability that may arise if interest rates are kept too low for too long.  
The risks associated with keeping interest rates low for too long a period have been clearly 
exposed and documented in several recent analytical contributions. The period prior to the 
financial crisis has demonstrated that global policy accommodation for a protracted period of 
time can inadvertently distort incentives and behaviour in the financial sector. Low interest 
rates over too long a period foster an under-pricing of risk5, inducing excessive risk-taking. 
                                                 
2  See  for  instance  Meltzer  A.  (2005),  “Origins  of  the  Great  Inflation,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Saint  Louis 
Review, 87, pp. 145–175. 
3  On this interpretation see for instance Blinder A. (1982), “The Anatomy of Double Digit Inflation in the 1970s,” 
in Hall, R.E. (ed.), “Inflation: Causes and Effects,” University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 261–282, and 
Bruno M. and J. Sachs (1985), Economics of Worldwide Stagflation, Harvard University Press. 
4  See “The ‘Great Inflation’: Lessons for Monetary Policy,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, May 2010, pp. 99–110. 
5  See  for  instance  Bekaert  G.,  Hoerova  M.  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2010),  “Risk,  uncertainty  and  monetary  policy,” 
NBER Working Paper, No 16397. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And low interest rates delay and ultimately prevent the necessary repair of balance sheets. In 
the  end,  this  turns  low  interest  rates  into  a  curse.  It  does  not  only  hinder  strong  and 
sustainable economic growth but also compromises price stability over the medium term. 
Nonetheless, the current global policy debate seems to favour the same asymmetric approach 
that characterised the pre-crisis conventional wisdom, the so called Jackson-Hole consensus  
– to which the ECB never subscribed – and which can be summarised in three elements:  
1. 
2. 
aggressive policy easing when financial developments turn sour; 
postponing  the  exit  from  low  rates  even  when  conditions  improve,  for  fear  of 
harming the economic recovery;  
no policy reaction to domestic and global liquidity over and above what is requested 
by standard inflation forecasts at standard horizons.  
3. 
Undoubtedly, this asymmetric approach at the global level contributed to the financial crisis.  
In contrast to this, the two-pillar strategy of the ECB follows a more structured approach. It 
currently indicates that improvements in monetary, credit and financial conditions require an 
adjustment to the monetary policy stance. Empirical evidence shows that, also in the past, 
monetary policy in the euro area reacted symmetrically to signals coming from monetary and 
credit  conditions.6  This  symmetry  has  contributed  to  limiting  financial  imbalances  and  will 
continue to provide a clear medium-term focus.  
Does the above imply that the ECB is carefree as regards current economic developments? 
Of  course  not.  We  are  aware  of  the  risks  surrounding  the  current  pace  of  economic 
expansion.  But  easy  money  cannot  and  will  not  address  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis. 
Homework needs to be done on the fiscal side. Governments need to strengthen decisively 
public  finances.  We  need  a  safer  financial  system.  This  requires  improving  the  capital 
position of banks and tighter regulation. Central banks can not be expected to continuously 
prolong measures to compensate for lingering risks from the financial system.  
Interest rates and non-standard measures 
4. 
Do liquidity support measures constrain the conduct of monetary policy? Decisions on policy 
interest  rates  and  on  non-standard  measures  are  largely  separated:  as  always,  we  set 
interest  rates  to  maintain  price  stability,  while  our  non-standard  measures  support  the 
transmission of monetary policy.  
Nevertheless,  to  some  extent,  the  two  decisions  are  also  interlinked.  The  fixed-rate 
full-allotment  procedure  in  all  refinancing  operations,  for  instance,  created  large  amounts  of 
excess  liquidity,  as  observed,  in  particular,  over  the  lifetime  of  the  1-year  LTROs,  driven  by 
strong  demand  from  banks,  which  resulted  in  short-term  money  market  rates  (such  as  the 
EONIA)  falling  below  the  rate  of  the  main  refinancing  operations.  Movements  in  the  EONIA 
have further trickled down the EONIA swap curve at different maturities. The money market 
rate therefore does not unambiguously reflect the stance of monetary policy in the same way 
as in the past. 
                                                 
6  A  “thick-modelling”  approach  can  be  used  to  estimate  a  very  large  number  of  monetary  policy  reaction 
functions  using  different  indicators  for  inflation,  economic  activity  and  monetary  and  credit  developments  is 
estimated.  This  approach  takes  into  account  the  degree  of  uncertainty  stemming  from  the  different  signals 
policymakers  receive  from  the  broad  range  of  indicators  available  before  each  Governing  Council  meeting. 
The average estimated reaction function is: interest ratet = 0.92 interest ratet-1 + 0.08 (0.78 + 1.94 inflationt + 
weak).  The  estimation  sample  runs  from  January 
1.16  outputt  +  0.34  money/creditt
1999 to September 2008. See also Blattner T. and E. Margaritov (2010), “Towards a robust monetary policy 
rule for the euro area,” ECB Working Paper, No 1210. 
strong  +  0.37  money/creditt
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The MRO rate will become more relevant again in the future, signalling our monetary policy 
stance. This implies that the overnight rate will be close to the MRO rate. We already see 
that  interbank  markets  are  performing  better,  as  shown  for  instance  by  the  decreasing 
dependency  of  banks  on  ECB  refinancing  operations.  Recourse  to  these  operations  has 
declined significantly from close to €900 billion in June 2010 to around €430 billion today.  
 Monetary policy and heterogeneity 
5. 
In  public  debates,  viability  of  the  euro  has  again  been  questioned  on  the  ground  that  the 
financial  crisis  has  deepened  the  economic  divide  across  member  states.  But  the  ECB’s 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 monetary policy continues to be geared towards price stability in the euro area as a whole. 
The single monetary policy of the ECB cannot address different economic growth or inflation 
across  regions  of  the  euro  area.  Such  macroeconomic  heterogeneity  is  a  normal  feature 
within a monetary union. Heterogeneity can even be a desirable feature when it reflects the 
necessary adjustments to macroeconomic imbalances that have built up.  
Macroeconomic  diversity  is  an  issue  that  national  policy-makers  should  deal  with,  not  the 
ECB.  Their  primary  contribution  of  course  would  be  to  avoid  building  up  unsustainable 
macroeconomic imbalances. Indeed, the bulk of the current imbalances in some euro area 
countries reflect that countries have insufficiently internalised the participation in a monetary 
union into domestic policies. To fully realise the benefits of EMU requires national policies to 
adapt  to  EMU.  This  applies  to  the  areas  of  fiscal  policy  (including  taxation),  structural 
reforms, regulation and banking supervision. Without this, imbalances will inevitably reoccur, 
challenging the proper functioning of EMU and thus of monetary policy. It is essential to put 
in  place  a  European  framework  that  is  incentive-compatible  and  credibly  enforceable,  to 
avoid the re-emergence of significant imbalances. National policies should be fully guided by 
the framework. 
Does this then imply that monetary policy completely ignores developments in individual euro 
area  countries  of  the  euro  area?  No,  but  specific  national  developments  play  a  role  for 
monetary policy only to the extent that they have an impact on the medium-term outlook and 
risks for price stability in the euro area as a whole.  
Maintaining  price  stability  for  the  entire  euro  area  is  the  central  contribution  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy makes with a view to supporting sustainable economic growth, job creation 
and financial stability. Any other monetary policy would come at the cost of lower medium-
term  growth,  for  instance  on  account  of  higher  longer-term  interest  rates  or  reduced 
confidence on the part of economic agents.  
Concluding remarks 
6. 
Let me conclude.  
For  the  main  elements  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  there  is  no  need  for 
adjustment  as  these  elements  have  not  changed  during  the  crisis.  We  will  do  all  that  is 
needed to ensure price stability over the medium term. We will change the monetary policy 
stance  whenever  necessary.  There  is  no  pre-defined  sequence  as  regards  interest  rate 
decisions and the decisions on the phasing-out of non-standard measures.  
Monetary policy will continue to be orientated towards the medium term, taking into account 
macroeconomic  effects  that  take  place  after  the  initial  effect,  including  effects  on  the 
incentive-structures  of  economic  agents  caused  by  keeping  interest  rates  low  over  a  long 
period. In this respect, we rely on the structured approach provided by our two-pillar strategy. 
Likewise, the ECB’s single monetary policy will continue to be geared towards the euro area 
as a whole, not just a small part of it.  
The  times  of  crisis  have  shown  that  we  in  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  are  strongly 
determined to deliver what we are expected to deliver: price stability in the euro area in the 
medium  term.  The  continuation  of  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area 
illustrates the credibility we have achieved in reaching our objective. For this objective, and 
this one alone, the ECB can be held accountable.  
For other policy areas, national policy-makers and authorities need to take full responsibility. 
National  authorities  need  to  address  outstanding  imbalances  urgently,  by  restoring  fiscal 
sustainability and by putting the financial sector on a healthy footing. Embarking on this path 
would also ensure that the single monetary policy fits all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
