Yves Mersch: International financial centers after the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  a  Lunch-
Conference of the BLC (Business Club Belgo-Luxembourgeois en Suisse), Zurich, 23 May 
2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  talk  in  front  of  this  distinguished  audience  about  the  challenges  of 
international financial centers after the crisis. I would therefore like to thank Business Club 
Belgo-Luxembourgeois en Suisse for inviting me to this conference breakfast.  
The  worldwide  scenery  of  international  financial  centers  is  in  transition.  The  respective 
locations  face  massive  upheaval  as  global  competition  and  the  post-crisis  reforms  in 
regulation and supervision begin to bite. In order to overcome the challenges of a changing 
environment and to identify the potential opportunities, it is important to distinguish between 
the different drivers.  
A  large  part  of  the  challenges  financial  centers  are  facing,  are  due  to  regulatory  changes, 
which  result  from  the  reform  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis.  In  addition  there  are 
global trends that have been going on already before the outbreak of the financial crisis and 
which continue to have an impact.  
I will refer to these major sources of change in more detail in the course of my talk, provide 
some  experience  from  Luxembourg,  and  will  discuss  the  shortcomings  and  remaining 
challenges of the new regulatory framework. 
the  global 
International financial centers – hit hard by the global crisis  
The high degree of integration and interconnectedness of financial markets contributed to the 
amplification and spread of the financial crisis around the world. The crisis had devastating 
effects  on  both  the  banking  sector  and  the  real  economy,  in  particular  in  international 
financial centers with a high concentration of activities in banking, trading etc. They are the 
nodes of a global network.  
By  consequence, 
financial  crisis  hit  Luxembourg’s  open  economy  and 
internationally-integrated  financial  center  –  although  relatively  less  than  the  neighboring 
countries, such as Germany and France.  
Luxembourg is the world’s second largest investment fund center in terms of size (after the 
United  States)  and  the  largest  in  terms  of  interconnectedness,  the  most  important  private 
banking  center  in  the  euro  zone  and  Europe’s  leading  center  for  reinsurance  companies. 
Moreover, Luxembourg is among the 25 most systemically important financial centers in the 
world.  
At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  Luxembourg’s  sizeable  investment  fund  industry  endured 
substantial redemptions and its foreign-subsidiary dominated banking system experienced a 
sharp drop in the aggregate balance sheet as well as in the off-balance sheet positions. This 
led  to  a  20  percent  contraction  in  the  aggregate  balance  sheet  of  the  foreign-subsidiary 
dominated banking system in Luxembourg. Banks have also seen a 30 percent drop in their 
off-balance sheet positions as assets under management dwindled. About 8 percent of the 
financial  sector’s  work  force  lost  their  jobs,  only  a  part  of  which  could  be  re-employed  by 
other institutes. 
Still,  Luxemburg  was  less  scathed  by  the  financial  crisis  than  countries  with  a  highly 
leveraged  home  banking  sector  that  sometimes  had  expanded  excessively  abroad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Moreover,  the  overall  situation  has  since  stabilized.  No  bank  rescues  were  required  since 
2009  and  investment  fund  assets  have  rebounded  beyond  pre-crisis  peaks.  In  2010,  the 
number  of  investment  funds  that  have  been  registered  in  Luxembourg  increased  by 
5.9 percent  to  3,463.  The  net  asset  value  in  turn  rose  by  around  20  percent  to  2.2  billion 
Euros.  
Thanks  also  to  the  global  recovery  and  developments  in  neighboring  countries,  growth 
resumed early in the second half of 2009 and labor markets showed initial signs of recovery. 
Last year, Luxemburg’s Gross Domestic Product expanded by 3½ percent – compared to an 
average of 1.7 percent in the European Union. 
The  global  financial  crisis,  nonetheless,  will  leave  a  lasting  imprint  on  the  Luxembourg 
economy. 
Global trends increase competition  
Even  before  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis  in  the  summer  of  2007  the  worldwide  scenery  of 
international  financial  centers  was  in  motion.  At  first  glance,  however,  the  picture  looked 
rather static.  
While the traditional financial centers in the industrialized world were prospering in an overall 
growing  environment,  and  managed  to  defend  their  relative  positions,  emerging  financial 
centers,  particularly  from  Asia,  were  able  to  improve  their  competitiveness  dramatically.  It 
was therefore apparent that the top dogs would be facing increasing pressures to maintain 
their dominant positions. 
As financial centers emerge and develop over long periods of time, they are not too easily 
shaken.  Most  of  the  described  trends  therefore  will  continue  after  the  recovery  from  the 
crisis. 
By consequence, traditional financial centers from the US and EU continue to represent the 
lions  share  of  the  global  market.  Although,  in  absolute  terms,  in  many  market  segments 
overall levels of market activity have diminished, financial centers from the US and Europe 
provide around three-quarters of global financial services.  
Let me be more precise:  
– 
More  than  two  thirds  of  global  banking  assets  remain  concentrated  in  financial 
centers in the US and Europe.  
The US and Europe capture more than three quarters of the global revenue pool in 
investment banking.  
Over  two-thirds  of  all  private  and  public  debt  securities  and  almost  four-fifth  of  all 
interest-rates derivatives outstanding are registered in financial centers from the US 
and Europe. 
Foreign exchange trading still is highly concentrated in London and Chicago, with 
the  UK  and  the  US  capturing  together  some  50  percent  share  in  global  trading. 
70 percent of all foreign exchange derivatives transactions are undertaken in the US 
and the EU. 
   Emerging financial markets, especially in Asia, have grown strongly in past years. But they, 
too, have been hit hard by the crisis. After they will have recovered from the setback of the 
crisis, experts expect that they will speed up again their catch-up process. 
Concentration is ongoing as size still matters. Most experts predict that London, New York, 
Hong  Kong,  and  Singapore  are  set  to  remain  strongholds  of  global  finance.  Their  major 
advantage  is  that  they  can  build  on  existing  market  strength  and  favorable  economic 
conditions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the long-run, emerging financial centers are likely to succeed in establishing the scale and 
scope in their market environment that will help them advance into the top group of global 
locations. The crisis may have accelerated this trend. 
The  foreseeable  increasing  global  competition  will  put  even  more  pressure  on  financial 
centers to defend or improve their respective positions. This holds in particular for those in 
Europe which is far from being a homogeneous jurisdiction.  
Indeed,  European  financial  market  places  are  at  risk  to  fall  behind  in  the  global  race  for 
markets  shares.  The  main  European  financial  centers  in  Paris,  Zurich,  Madrid,  Milan, 
Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Luxembourg, and even London, have clearly lost ground compared to 
other advanced and emerging locations.1  
Changing environment trough new rules 
The financial crisis triggered a fundamental reassessment of the financial industry. Until four 
years ago, it was widely understood that financial markets were inherently self-correcting and 
therefore best left to their own devices. This prevailing paradigm has been sacrificed.  
After more than two decades of deregulation in the majority of the industrialized countries, 
finance  has  entered  a  new  era:  various  initiatives  have  been  undertaken  to  reform  and 
strengthen  the  global  framework  for  financial  stability  and  reduce  the  probability  of  such  a 
devastating global crisis occurring again.  
Major steps have been taken in the area of regulation, most notably in the “Basel III” capital 
accord. The Basel III rules stand on two pillars: 
– 
First, they focus on strengthening micro-prudential regulations, aiming to bolster the 
resilience of individual banks during periods of stress. In particular, Basel III calls for 
more and better capital of financial institutions and also introduces leverage ratios 
and stresses the role of liquidity risk. 
Second, they also include macro-prudential regulations, aiming to mitigate systemic 
risks across the banking system.  
 Better and more capital buffers are supposed to make the banking sector more resilient in 
the case of another crisis. The increased capital requirement may come at high cost, though. 
If banks hold too little capital, they are left crisis-prone and in the potential need of bail-outs. 
Too much capital, however, could lead to huge swathes of the banking business becoming 
unprofitable.  This  might  cause  higher  borrowing  cost  which  could  affect  economic  growth 
negatively. By consequence, riskier assets but more profitable activities might be driven into 
the shadow-banking sector.  
But the regulation of the shadow banking system is still an unsolved issue. These entities are 
no banks in the legal sense, although they take – and generate – similar risks. If there is a 
strict  silo-regulation  of  the  formal  banking  sector,  the  actual  risky  business  does  not 
disappear, but moves on in the non-regulated sector.  
An important issue is the problems of banks that have become too big or too interconnected 
to fail. The idea that a “Systemically Important Financial institution”, SIFI, will be saved in a 
crisis  because  of  its  systemic  importance  is  not  compatible  with  the  core  principles  of  a 
market  economy.  Those  who  fail  in  the  market  have  to  bear  the  ultimate  consequence  of 
leaving the market. But if the maxim is “too big to fail”, then the state and the taxpayers are 
vulnerable to blackmail.  
                                                 
1  Compare Kern, Steffen: Global financial centres after the crisis, DB Research, August 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The financial crisis has exacerbated the problem in so far as some of the surviving banks 
have  become  even  bigger  or  more  interconnected.  Moreover,  the  government  guarantees 
which were appropriate in the crisis now encourage banks to grow, to connect and to take 
even bigger risks.  
To  repair  this  clearly  flawed  incentive  structure,  the  G20  endorsed  the  Financial  Stability 
Board’s (FSB) policy framework to address the moral hazard risks and externalities posed by 
SIFIs. The key policy objectives of the FSB SIFI framework are to  
(i) 
(ii) 
increase their loss absorption capacity to reduce the likelihood of their failure,  
to  facilitate  the  orderly  restructuring  or  unwinding  of  a  failing  SIFI  to  reduce  the 
impact of its failure on the financial system (“living will”); 
to intensify supervisory oversight for SIFIs;  
to  strengthen  core  financial  market  infrastructures  to  reduce  contagion  risk  from 
failure.2 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Challenges imposed by liquidity rules  
Though it is highly welcome that the new rules tackle liquidity risks, the new requirements for 
liquidity management could themselves become a source  of instability. One reason is that 
the  regulators’  definition  of  liquidity  is  highly  concentrated  on  government  bonds.  As  the 
current environment shows, some market segments of government bonds can eventually dry 
up.  
Another reason is the respective definitions of the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) and the 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). 
– 
The LCR is the main component of Basel III’s liquidity regime. It is also known as 
the “Bear Stearns rule”. It requires banks to maintain a stock of “high-quality liquid 
assets”  that  is  sufficient  to  cover  net  cash  outflows  for  a  30-day  period  under 
financial stress.  
The NSFR seeks to counter maturity mismatches in the balance sheet of financial 
institutions. It calculates the proportion of long-term assets, which need to be funded 
by longer term stable funding.  
 While  the  LCR  stresses  the  liquidity  situation  up  to  30  days,  the  NSFR  focuses  on  the 
situation beyond one year. Assets which are liquid for more than 30 days and less than one 
year  are  not  taken  into  account,  not  even  on  a  weighted  basis.  However,  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  has  recognized  this  shortcoming  and  is 
investigating the issue.  
In addition, there is the risk that the reformed banking regulation has damaging impact on the 
European model. The treatment of covered bonds, mutual funds, deposits etc. in the liquidity 
ratios  affect  the  business  model  oft  many  continental  European  banks.  One  can  also 
question  whether  the  main  victims  of  the  new  rules  will  not  be  the  European  universal 
banking model which was certainly not at the origin of the crisis but constituted an anchor of 
stability. 
Finally, the lack of a resolution framework for cross-border financial institutions remains on 
the agenda. In spite of the insight, that the reform of regulation and supervision cannot be 
successful at the national level alone, it is still unclear how the costs would be distributed if a 
cross-border institution would get into difficulty and should need to be saved.  
                                                 
2  Financial Stability Board, Macroprudential policy tools and frameworks: Update to G20 Finance Ministers and 
Central Bank Governors, February 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Shortcomings in macro prudential supervision … 
As  the  importance  of  systemic  financial  stability  has  become  apparent,  questions  on 
macroprudential  policies  have  become  highly  topical.  Unfortunately  good  answers  are 
outnumbered by open questions.  
There are few purely macroprudential policy tools, and in many cases policy makers need to 
rely  on  micro  prudential  instruments.  The  financial  sector  is  constantly  changing,  and  the 
level of risk does not remain the same. Systemic risk is difficult to measure and define. The 
credit to GDP ratio for example is not a particularly good indicator of risks. Financial cycles 
often last longer than business cycles. The probability of different shocks may be difficult to 
estimate.  Their  impact,  however,  is  even  more  difficult  to  assess  e.g.  because  of  non-
linearity.  The  application  of  the  classical  Tinbergen  rule  (“one  tool  –  one  objective”)  is  not 
possible.  
In short: the understanding of how to use which instrument in which situation remains at a 
very early stage.  
Three layers of shortages can be identified:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
We therefore need to recognize the limits of our understanding; these difficult questions must 
be approached with a certain degree of humility.  
The analytical framework is short of data; 
The instrumental framework is short of experience 
The institutional framework is short of resources 
… in spite of progress in the institutional set-up 
Although the toolkits are still in their infancy, institutional progress has been made in macro 
prudential  supervision.  In  the  EU,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  was 
established in January 2011. Its mission is to contribute to prevent or mitigate systemic risk 
to  the  financial  stability  in  the  Union.  The  ESRB  comprises  the  ECB,  the  national  central 
banks of the EU, the three new European authorities on banking, insurance and securities, 
the  European  Commission,  and  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (representing 
national treasuries). Its role will be to conduct macroprudential surveillance across the EU, to 
issue  risk  warnings  and  recommendations,  so  as  to  contribute  to  the  prevention  and 
mitigation  of  systemic  risks.  Recommendations  can  be  issued  to  any  national  or 
supranational authority.3  
Macro prudential policy is viewed as having a wide range of tools from monetary, fiscal and 
competition policies. But these instruments are under the responsibility of others. In the light 
of  the  above-mentioned  shortcomings,  however,  there  is  the  risk  that  macro  prudential 
becomes policy making with other peoples instruments. The potential fight for competencies 
among  different  institutional  bodies  might  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  the  macro 
prudential approach.  
Concluding remarks: Challenges remain, opportunities emerge  
The  financial  crisis  has  traumatized  the  global  financial  system.  The  huge  losses  of  many 
major  financial  institutions  and  negative  feedback  loops  from  the  real  economy  in  the 
aftermath of the financial crisis have triggered changing market structures. In addition, global 
competition between financial centers has intensified.  
                                                 
3 
IMF: Macroprudential Policy: An Organizing Framework, March 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In response to the crisis, the world has moved into a new stage of international regulation 
and  supervision  of  financial  markets.  The  new  rules  –  many  of  which  have  not  been 
implemented yet – start to bite already, due to the tightening of capital requirements and a 
more  homogeneous  regulatory  framework  which  pose  challenges  in  particular  to  smaller 
financial centers.  
But this changing environment implies also opportunities to improve their relative positions. 
In order to do so the provision of convincing conditions is of the essence. Local factors gain 
weight, e.g. a well-educated workforce in an open and flexible labour market and excellent 
infrastructure. The respective governments should comply with robust public finance in line 
with a stability-oriented monetary policy.  
Smart regulation – at national, regional and global level – and a stable legal and institutional 
framework  are  a  prerequisite  for  success.  Global  standards  are  needed  to  ensure  a  level 
playing  field.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  crucial  that  international  financial  centers  of  systemic 
importance have a voice in the international standard setting, so these can benefit from their 
wealth  of  experience  and  competence  in  supervision  based  on  the  proximity  and  high 
interaction with the supervised entities.  
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
