Cleviston Haynes: Re-inventing Human Resources and the power of 
internal marketing – making Human Resources’ presence felt within your 
organisation 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Cleviston  Haynes,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados,  at  the  Central  Bank/Human  Resource  Management  Association  of  Barbados 
(HRMAB) sponsored workshop, Bridgetown, 15 April 2011. 
 The  Central  Bank  is  delighted  to  co-sponsor  this  workshop  with  the  Human  Resource 
Management Association of Barbados Inc. on the theme “Re-inventing HR and the Power of 
Internal Marketing: Making HR’s Presence Felt Within your Organization. 
The  Bank’s  involvement  in  enriching  intellectual  debate  on  matters  pertaining  to  our  core 
disciplines of economics, banking and finance is well known. It may seem somewhat unusual 
to  some  for  the  Bank  to  headline  a  presentation  on  human  resources  management. 
However,  when  our  HR  Director,  Janis  Marville  approached  senior  management  with  the 
idea of supporting this venture, there was no hesitation in agreeing to our participation. We 
are acutely aware that, as a knowledge-based institution, our ultimate success rests heavily 
on the quality of our human resources, the culture we foster, the morale of the organization 
and  the  responsiveness  to  the  dynamic  changes  in  the  environment  in  which  our  human 
resources practise their craft. 
We believe therefore that the human resource function is central to all that we do. The role of 
HR  is  constantly  evolving  and  no  longer  is  the  HR  specialist  to  be  viewed  simply  as  one 
responsible  for  recruitment,  discipline,  and  the  storage  of  employee  records.  Properly 
utilised,  he  has  the  potential  to  be  a  Strategic  Partner  in  the  achievement  of  our  core 
objectives. The HR specialist has to prepare himself for this role, for his contribution to the 
organisation will not be limited to the policing of rules, important as they may be. Instead, the 
HR  specialist  will  need  to  focus  on  working  closely  with  management  to  leverage  the 
potential of all employees, while providing guidance to management on how to navigate the 
employee-related challenges that our organisations face.  
At  the  Bank,  we  recognise  the  need  for  a  strategic  approach  to  Human  Resource 
Management  so  that,  through  a  strategic  partnership,  the  Human  Resource  function  can 
support the Bank’s vision and direction by inter alia 
a) 
Strengthening our processes for the recruitment, development and retention of staff 
with the appropriate technical and/or leadership skills to enable the Bank to achieve 
its objectives; 
Promoting  a  Strategic  Approach  to  Training  and  Development  to  assist  in  the 
alignment of training with the Bank’s needs; 
Launching talent management to facilitate individual growth, succession and career 
development across the organization; 
Creating  business  partnerships  between  HR  and  line  departments  to  enable 
appropriate information sharing and nimble responses to issues as they arise; 
Developing the necessary infrastructure and programmes to support an Emotional 
Intelligence  strategy  as  a  means  of  building  trust,  encouraging  teamwork  and 
promoting greater cooperation at all levels of the organization; and 
Introducing  feedback  channels  to  evaluate  progress  in  achieving  our  objectives, 
including compliance with the values that we establish for ourselves.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Reduce manual processes; 
Store, manipulate and analyse employee data; 
Develop on-line training; and 
Enhance the timeliness of communication. 
We live in a world where labour is increasingly mobile, but the opportunity costs of training 
new  employees  can  be  high.  We  need  therefore  to  consider  what  systems  we  can  put  in 
place to engender increased employee loyalty, productivity and efficiencies. It is clear that 
remuneration is not the sole criterion that motivates individuals to stay in an organisation or 
to produce at a high level. It is important to build a culture that encourages trust, respect and 
caring. While our HR departments cannot be the sole agents for this culture, they represent 
the  barometer  that  helps  us  to  gauge  where  our  organisations  are  and  how  we  can 
strengthen  them.  The  concept  of  marketing  yourself  so  that  you  remain  relevant  to  your 
stakeholders is therefore crucial for us to achieve progress in this area. 
Some may question how we can do this with all the other demands on our time. I believe that 
HR needs to embrace the use of technology to improve efficiency in its functions so that it 
can inter alia 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
I am of the view that the profile of HR within the Barbadian setting is already on the rise and, 
I noted with interest, that earlier this week a new publication on best HR practices within the 
local economy was launched. Such publications have the potential to establish benchmarks 
and I encourage you to continue to reach for the best. 
Workshops such as this are useful in helping practitioners to broaden their toolkit in coping 
with  the  emerging  challenges.  I  encourage  you  therefore  to  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities provided here to strengthen your capabilities. 
I wish to extend a special welcome to Jeremy Ashworth who will guide the workshop today. 
Jeremy  brings  a  wealth  of  experience  to  these  discussions  and,  based  on  my  limited 
interaction with him, I am sure that you will find him engaging and passionate about how to 
effect  behavioural  change  within  the  organisation.  Jeremy,  I  know  that  you  have  visited 
Barbados before, but I do hope you have some time on this trip to enjoy the sights and tastes 
of Barbados. 
Let me also offer, on behalf of the Bank and other sponsors a welcome to all of you who 
have taken the opportunity to benefit from this workshop. It is my hope that you will be able 
to take away new implementable ideas at the end of the day. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
