Mario Draghi: The euro – from the past to the future 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart (Università Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore), Milan, 21 March 2011. 
 The euro: an idea that goes back a long way  
The idea of a single currency, in place of a congeries of local or national monies, did not gain 
much  ground  in  modern  Europe  until  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Why  was 
that? It would be natural to think that a universal currency is a timeless aspiration: to extend 
the traditional functions and therefore the advantages of money in the widest geographical 
sphere.  
A  possible  explanation  is  the  redistributive  use  that  money  had  been  put  to  over  the 
centuries:  in  classical  antiquity  and  then  in  the  Middle  Ages,  adjusting  the  currency  
– increasing or reducing the gold or silver content of metal coins – was often a way for the 
prince to appropriate resources; striking coins was an attribute of sovereignty. It took a long 
time  to  reach  the  point,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  when  the  value  of  a  monetary  unit  was 
defined  solely  by  the  quantity  of  precious  metal  it  contained;  paper  money  was  declared 
convertible into metal; money had been “depoliticized”.  
Thinking up monetary unions then became a possible exercise, as long as the candidates 
had the same standard: gold, silver or bimetallic; it was sufficient to agree on the fineness, 
the weight and the denomination of the coins to be put into circulation. A union of this kind, 
the Latin Monetary Union, inaugurated in 1865, brought together Italy, France, Switzerland, 
Belgium  and  Greece,  but  it  had  a  difficult  life  and  broke  up,  as  a  practical  matter,  at  the 
beginning of the next century. The monetary unions realized within federal states – the Swiss 
and the German ones – fared better.  
But  the  use  of  the  currency  for  redistributing  wealth  did  not  come  to  an  end.  Despite  the 
establishment and consolidation of technical institutions – the central banks – delegated to 
manage the issuance and circulation of money, the currency reverted, at least in wartime, to 
being an instrument of state financing. The transition to paper money facilitated this process. 
During the First World War, the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Bonaldo Stringher, noted that 
the Bank of Italy “has given a stimulus to banknote production equal to that received by the 
machine shops producing bullets”.1 
In  the  1920s  and  1930s,  marked  by  the  Great  Depression,  the  monetary  instrument  was 
returned, with the contribution of Keynes, to the toolkit of economic policy. The potential of 
this  instrument  prompted  the  central  banks  and  the  governments  that  controlled  them  to 
make ample use of it to manage the economic cycle but also as a means of more or less 
openly  supporting  the  public  finances.  The  height  of  this  era  was  reached  in  the 1970s,  a 
decade of high inflation. In Europe the Bundesbank basically protected the German economy 
from these excesses. There ensued a reconsideration of the role of the central banks and the 
objectives and instruments of monetary policy, whose findings would be used extensively in 
the period that followed right up to today.  
In  the  1950s  the  ruinous  effects  of  the  Second  World  War  spurred  a  revival  of  interest  in 
integration  among  the  European  economies,  which  would  simultaneously  be  a  means  of 
promoting  growth  and  ensuring  peace.  The  creation  of  the  European  Common  Market 
accompanied the period of the fastest economic growth ever experienced on the Continent. 
                                                 
1   Banca d’Italia, Adunanza generale ordinaria degli azionisti, year 1918, p. 49 (only in Italian). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To buttress these results and, almost in a utopian spirit in the midst of international monetary 
disorder, plans were made for the single currency.  
The 1970 Werner Report was the first official plan for European monetary union and, while it 
was never implemented, it paved the way twenty  years later for the Delors Report, which, 
basing itself on the still limited experience of monetary cooperation realized in the meantime 
(the  “snake”  of  the  1970s  and  the  European  Monetary  System  of  the  1980s),  planned  the 
creation of the euro. This was made possible by an altered cultural climate, which viewed the 
independence of the central banks and price stability as the fundamental values upon which 
to base a sound currency.  
The plan was propelled by personalities from a generation that harboured the memory of the 
ruins of war: Andreotti, Ciampi, Delors, Giscard d’Estaing, Kohl, Mitterrand and Schmidt, who 
were flanked by figures from the next generation, like Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa.  
The  Maastricht  Treaty  of  1992  created  the  institutions  of  modern  monetary  Europe, 
establishing the passage of monetary sovereignty to the European System of Central Banks. 
The System’s objective was defined clearly and with legislation having constitutional status  
–  taking  a  leaf  from  the  German  experience  –  as  maintaining  price  stability,  a  value  that 
became  the  common  heritage  of  all  citizens  of  the  area.  From  this  followed  the  basic 
principle that governments must not interfere in monetary policy; monetary financing of states 
was prohibited.  
The euro has been with us since 1999 and, as an actually circulating currency, since 2002.  
To achieve this outcome, in many countries major political obstacles had to be surmounted. 
In  Italy,  it  was  necessary  to  overcome  society’s  inurement  to  devaluations  and  inflation. 
There  was  no  lack  of  academic  scepticism,  including  from  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic. 
There were doubts about the European economies ever being able to constitute an optimal 
currency area in Mundell’s terms.  
The European monetary construction works. The euro is not in question.  
The first twelve years of the euro  
Today the euro is the second most important currency in the world: it accounts for 27 per 
cent  of  global  currency  reserves;  before  the  Union,  the  currencies  replaced  by  the  euro 
together accounted for 18 per cent.  
Between 1998 and 2010 the total value of imports and exports of goods within the euro area 
rose  from  27  to  32  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  greater  volume  of  internal  trade  was  not  at  the 
expense of that with the rest of the world, which recorded an even sharper increase, from 
25 to 33 per cent, driven by the expansion of the emerging economies, more and more open 
to world trade.  
Integrated  infrastructures  were  created  for  payments  in  the  area:  for  wholesale  and  retail 
payments and, in the near future, for the settlement of securities transactions. Between 1999 
and 2008 the average daily volume of cross-border payments between euro-area countries 
via  TARGET  increased  by  almost  250  per  cent;  the  average  total  volume  of  transactions, 
which includes domestic payments, grew by more than 120 per cent – more than four times 
greater than the growth recorded by the equivalent infrastructure in the United States.  
Price stability is inscribed in the conduct of economic agents, even in countries which were 
previously  the  most  inflationary,  enhancing  the  legacy  of  the  best  traditions  of  the 
participating central banks. In the twelve years of the euro, annual inflation in the area has 
averaged just under 2 per cent, fully in line with the definition of price stability adopted by the 
Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB). It has fallen by more than one half 
compared  with  the  previous  two  decades;  the  reduction  was  greater  than  that  seen  in  the 
United States in the same period. In Italy, the average annual increase in consumer prices 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
was five percentage points lower than in the twenty-year period preceding the introduction of 
the euro.  
Today exogenous price shocks have modest repercussions on the euro-area economies: the 
increases in oil prices between 2007 and 2008 were comparable, in real terms, to those at 
the end of the 1970s, but they generated a one-off rise in consumer prices of less than two 
percentage points, which did not take hold in inflation, in contrast to what happened in the 
past in several countries in the area. According to our estimates, the inflationary effect in Italy 
of a shock of this kind has been reduced to one tenth of what it was in the 1970s. Of course, 
structural changes in production processes have played a part, but the credibility earned by 
monetary policy and the resulting changes in price and wage setting have played a crucial 
role.  
Price  stability  and  low  risk  premiums  lead  to  low  nominal  and  real  interest  rates,  thereby 
fostering economic growth. From the introduction of the euro to today, the real three-month 
interest  rate  in  Italy  has  averaged  1  per  cent,  four  percentage  points  lower  than  in  the 
previous decade; the average nominal rate on bank loans for house purchases and that on 
short-term  loans  to  non-financial  firms  have  averaged  4.5  and  5.5  per  cent  respectively, 
compared with 11.3 and 12.6 per cent in the ten previous years. It is surely not the monetary 
conditions that are responsible for the growth difficulties of the Italian economy.  
Again  with  reference  to  the  twelve  years  of  the  euro,  annual  expenditure  for  interest 
payments on Italy’s public debt averaged 5.3 per cent of GDP, against 11.5 per cent in the 
first half of the 1990s and 7.5 per cent in the 1980s. It is still the case today that, despite 
strong pressures on the government securities markets of some of the countries of the area, 
the  yields  on  Italian  ten-year  securities  are  in  line  with  the  averages  recorded  in  the  last 
decade.  
The response of euro-area monetary policy to the global crisis of the last three years was 
rapid and decisive. Inflation expectations held firm even at the height of the crisis, allowing us 
to  take  action  to  keep  the  markets  working,  support  lending  and  avert  the  collapse  of  the 
economy. Money market rates were reduced to close to zero; exceptional liquidity creation 
measures were adopted.  
Without  the  Union,  simply  coordinating  national  decisions  would  not  have  produced  such 
rapid and effective results. Some countries, including our own, could have been overcome by 
the crisis.  
But  the  credibility  we  have  earned  will  not  necessarily  last  for  ever;  we  have  to  remain 
vigilant in safeguarding price stability. The culture of stability must also be extended to other 
fields: to fiscal policy, to structural reform where weaknesses have emerged in the European 
construction, as they did clearly during the recent sovereign debt crisis.  
The sovereign debt crisis of some euro-area countries  
The strains spread outwards from Greece, where they had been generated by the disorder of 
that  country’s  public  finances,  and  hit  the  Irish  and  Portuguese  government  securities 
markets  last  spring.  Spanish  and  Italian  government  bonds  have  also  seen  their  yield 
spreads widen with respect to the corresponding German securities.  
The response of the European institutions and governments has followed a rough path.  
The financial support plan for Greece, agreed at the beginning of May 2010 by the euro-area 
countries with the European Commission and the IMF, did not eliminate the tensions, which, 
on the contrary, spread to the stock, bond and interbank markets.  
To  contain  the  contagion  risk  posed  to  other  countries,  several  days  later  the  EU  Council 
instituted  a financial  stabilization  arrangement  under  which the  countries  of  the  area  could 
get a loan at analogous conditions to those applied by the IMF in similar circumstances. It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
was decided that the bulk of the resources would come from the European Financial Stability 
Facility  (EFSF),  a  new  body  authorized  to  fund  itself  on  the  market  by  issuing  securities 
guaranteed  by  the  countries  of  the  euro  area.  In  the  same  days  a  number  of  countries 
adopted or announced drastic plans for the consolidation of public finances.  
In the same month of May 2010, the Governing Council of the ECB came to the conclusion 
that  the  tensions  in  the  markets  were  compromising  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. It launched the Securities Markets Programme of purchases of public securities 
issued by euro-area countries with a view to supporting market segments hit especially hard 
by the crisis; and it confirmed its commitment to supply abundant liquidity to the system. This 
did  not  imply  the  monetary  financing  of  sovereign  states  or  the  creation  of  liquidity;  the 
interventions were temporary and sterilized.  
This  set  of  measures  stemmed  the  tensions,  which  nevertheless  began  to  intensify  again 
during the summer and even more in the final part of the year, once more affecting not only 
Greek bonds but those of Portugal and especially of Ireland, which had issued a government 
guarantee for all bank liabilities. At the end of November the EU finance ministers approved 
a plan of financial support for Ireland.  
This measure too helped to allay but did not eliminate the tensions, in a context of elevated 
uncertainty in the markets regarding the prospects of stabilization in the countries hit by the 
crisis  and  the  possible  interconnections  between  sovereign  risks  and  the  vulnerability  of 
some banking systems.  
The crisis originates from imbalances that in some countries concern the public finances, in 
others the banking system. Overcoming the difficulties first requires drastic, resolute national 
measures.  
The stance of monetary policy has been expansionary for a long time: since May 2009 the 
Eurosystem’s reference interest rate has held at 1 per cent, an exceptionally low level; real 
short-term rates have remained negative by a wide margin even after the start of the cyclical 
recovery.  The  emergence  of  inflationary  pressure  calls  for  a  careful  evaluation  of  the 
timetable  and  manner  in  which  to  proceed  with  a  normalization  of  monetary  conditions.  A 
deterioration  of  expectations  must  be  prevented,  to  keep  the  impulse  originating  from 
international  prices  from  being  transmitted  to  domestic  prices  and  wages  and  thereby 
influencing inflation beyond the short term. As President Trichet recalled on the occasion of 
the meeting at the beginning of March, the Governing Council of the ECB remains prepared 
to act in a firm and timely manner to ensure that these risks do not materialize.  
We are following the tragic events in Japan with the closest and most heartfelt attention. The 
exchange rate interventions agreed on 18 March by the finance ministers and central bank 
governors of the G7 countries are intended to prevent excessive volatility of exchange rates 
from having adverse effects on economic and financial stability.  
A construction to be strengthened  
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  brought  to  light  at  least  two  factors  of  fragility  in  European 
construction.  
In the first place, the rules did not avert imprudent fiscal policies in some countries, which 
were either unable or unwilling to exploit the positive phases of the economic cycle in order 
to  consolidate  their  public  finances.  Each  country  was  given  a  specific  medium-term 
objective for the budget position, agreed at European level: a position in balance or surplus, 
depending on its specific sensitivity to the economic cycle and to interest rates; the objective 
was subject to review in the light of long-term factors such as population ageing and the debt 
level.  In  addition,  the  countries  whose  public  debt  exceeded  60  per  cent  of  GDP  had  to 
reduce it “at a satisfactory pace”. When the global crisis came, many countries were still far 
from achieving those objectives.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, the system of multilateral surveillance did not prevent pronounced macroeconomic 
imbalances:  productivity  differentials,  current  account  deficits,  excessive  private  sector 
borrowing. In 2009, the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments amounted 
to 10 per cent in Greece and 7.5 per cent in Portugal. In Ireland, Portugal and Spain, the 
financial debt of households and firms amounted to between one and a half and two times 
the  euro-area  average  of  170  per  cent  of  GDP  (in  Italy  it  was  equal  to  130  per  cent).  In 
Ireland, the largest national banks had balance-sheet assets totalling more than five times 
GDP; the collapse of property prices and the recession caused them huge losses.  
Imbalances  of  this  kind  ultimately  have  repercussions  on  the  public  finances,  even  in 
countries where these are initially in order. In the Irish case, the public resources spent on 
supporting the banks came to more than 20 per cent of GDP.  
Last  autumn  the  European  Commission  and  the  working  group  led  by  European  Council 
President  Herman  Van  Rompuy  put  forward  proposals  concerning  both  aspects:  how  to 
make  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  more  cogent;  how  to  extend  surveillance  to 
macroeconomic developments.  
It  was  proposed  that  the  Pact  be  strengthened  for  the  prevention  of  fiscal  imbalances,  by 
intensifying monitoring and introducing timely monetary sanctions, and for their adjustment, 
by  providing  in  particular  for  the  possibility  of  initiating  the  excessive-deficit  procedure  not 
only  when  the  deficit  exceeds  3  per  cent  of  GDP  but  also  when  the  reduction  in  the  debt 
towards the 60 per cent ceiling is deemed unsatisfactory.  
In the macroeconomic field, a system of monitoring imbalances having potentially significant 
implications for the euro area’s financial stability was envisaged, with quantitative indicators 
and critical thresholds based on which the European Council may issue recommendations to 
the country concerned and, in the most serious cases, apply financial sanctions.  
Lastly, it was recommended that the EFSF be replaced from 2013 onwards by a permanent 
mechanism  of  financial  support,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  Only  the 
countries  considered  to  be  solvent  would  have  access  to  financing,  which  would  be 
conditional  in  any  case  on  their  adopting  serious  adjustment  plans;  the  others  would  be 
asked  to  negotiate  a  debt  restructuring  plan  with  private  creditors  by  which  to  return  to  a 
situation of solvency.  
On 15 March the EU finance ministers agreed a “general approach” that fully implements the 
recommendations of the Commission and of the Van Rompuy working group. In particular, 
they approved the proposal to introduce a numerical rule – one twentieth of the debt-to-GDP 
ratio in excess of the 60 per cent ceiling – for the annual reduction of the debt.  
Several days earlier the Heads of State and Government of the euro area had increased the 
effective  lending  capacity  of  the  EFSF  to  €440  billion  and  set  that  of  the  future  ESM  at 
€500 billion;  they  also  decided  that  in  exceptional  circumstances  both  the  Fund  and  the 
Mechanism  could  purchase  euro-area  countries’  government  securities  on  the  primary 
market.  
The  pact  for  the  euro,  with  all  these  measures,  widens  the  focus  of  attention  to  include 
macroeconomic  imbalances,  strengthens  budget  discipline  in  the  area,  and  improves  the 
mechanism  of  support  for  countries  that  get  into  financial  difficulty.  This  was  a  necessary 
step to avoid dangerously sapping the Community spirit that is the lifeblood of the euro.  
The measures are based on correct principles. The technical and negotiating effort involved 
has  been  substantial;  the  results  are  encouraging  but  not  yet  sufficient.  Discussion  of  the 
pact will continue in policymaking fora; deficiencies or points that are hazy can be corrected. 
Fiscal  policy  surveillance  needs  to  rely  on  more  automatic  procedures  that  limit  the 
politicization  of  public  accounting  as  far  as  possible  and  avert  possible  collusive  conduct 
between  countries.  Several  other  aspects  of  this  complex  reform  of  European  governance 
still require attention and work. It is necessary, for example, to determine with precision all 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the “relevant factors” to be considered in assessing the adequacy of the pace of public debt 
reduction;  to  identify  the  set  of  indicators  serving  to  signal  a  situation  of  macroeconomic 
imbalance  and  the  related  critical  thresholds;  and  to  establish  the  criteria  for  evaluating  a 
country’s solvency.  
Concerning structural policies to boost potential output and competitiveness, the pact, for the 
time being, relies on procedures based on peer pressure, which in the case of the Lisbon 
strategy have not worked. The commitment of the national governments remains central.  
We  must  not  forget  a  golden  rule:  increasing  the  economy’s  growth  potential  and 
consolidating the public budget are national priorities first of all. Governments should pursue 
them even independently of the European rules, for the good of their peoples, and should do 
so with special commitment in the countries farthest from these objectives.  
Italy’s situation  
Between 2008 and 2009, with the global crisis in full swing, Italy’s budget deficit rose from 
2.7  to  5.4  per  cent  of  GDP;  discretionary  policies  did  not  contribute  to  the  increase.2  The 
deficit of the euro area as a whole more than tripled, rising to 6.3 per cent. In 2010 the deficit 
declined to 4.6 per cent in Italy, while in the euro area it remained unchanged according to 
European  Commission  estimates.  The  Government’s  management  of  the  accounts  was 
facilitated by the fact that the solidity of the Italian banking system did not require significant 
aid to be charged to the public budget.  
Italy’s public debt, already very high, rose again. Its management was prudent; the average 
residual  maturity  was  lengthened  progressively,  notwithstanding  a  context  that  remained 
uncertain and volatile.  
The financial condition of firms and households is solid on the whole. Savers’ propensity to 
invest in high-risk financial instruments is low; debt is limited, although it is concentrated in 
variable-rate liabilities, which are inherently riskier.  
The  Italian  economy’s  problem  –  it  is  well  worth  recalling  –  is  the  structural  difficulty  of 
growth. The arduous task of economic policy is to change this situation while at the same 
time reducing the ratio of public debt to GDP. To rebuild a solid primary surplus rapidly and 
not to elude the need to take measures that structurally support growth: this is the challenge.  
Raising the tax rates is out of the question: it would jeopardize the objective of growth and 
penalize  honest  taxpayers  unbearably;  indeed,  the  rates  ought  to  be  gradually  lowered  as 
headway  is  made  in  reducing  tax  evasion  and  avoidance.  The  only  option  is  to  control 
spending, but with a selective approach that distinguishes between what fosters growth and 
what impedes it. Wise political choices must necessarily be based on a detailed assessment 
of the effects, including the macroeconomic effects, of every expenditure item.  
The more attentive multilateral surveillance of the sustainability of public budgets envisaged 
by the new pact is not to be feared; it can help us. The reforms already carried out, especially 
the pension reform, put us among the countries that require a smaller correction of budget 
balances to ensure long-run stability.  
The new European rule for debt reduction would not be a much tighter constraint for us than 
the one already imposed by the existing rule on structural budget balance. It is estimated that 
                                                 
2   See  Britta  Hamburg,  Sandro  Momigliano,  Bernhard  Manzke  and  Stefano  Siviero,  “The  Reaction  of  Fiscal 
Policy to the Crisis in Italy and Germany: Are They Really Polar Cases in the European Context”, forthcoming 
in Fiscal Policy: Lessons from the Crisis, proceedings of the Twelfth Workshop on Public Finances, Perugia, 
25–27 March 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
achieving structural budget balance would also ensure, ipso facto, compliance with the rule 
on debt under favourable scenarios of economic growth.3 
 Seventeen sovereign countries that share a single currency form a reality without precedent 
in history. The euro is a bold intellectual construction, a courageous and farsighted political 
project. It was, and remains, a prerequisite for economic wellbeing.  
The President of the Republic, in his address to Parliament on 17 March, called European 
integration  “an  extraordinary  historical  invention  in  which  Italy  has  successfully  played  a 
leading role since the 1950s.”  
One hundred and fifty years ago we Italians undertook an equally important construction: our 
country’s  monetary  unification,  which  would  then  consolidate  the  political  unification  just 
attained.  
These  two  historical  events  are  joined  in  an  ideal  continuity.  For  us,  the  present  and  the 
future of the euro are also the continuation of our own long history. 
                                                 
3   See  Ignazio  Visco,  “La  governance  economica  europea:  riforma  e  implicazioni”,  Remarks  delivered  at  the 
University of l’Aquila for the twentieth anniversary of the Economics Faculty, 8 March 2011 (only in Italian). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
