Norman T L Chan: Universal banking – Hong Kong’s perspective 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  opening  session  of  the  Asian  Banker  Summit  2011,  Hong  Kong, 
7 April 2011. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
1. 
I am very pleased to address this important conference this morning as it provides a 
timely occasion for us to take stock of what is happening to our banking industry at a time 
when  the  international  financial  markets  are  recovering  from  the  Global  Financial  Crisis. 
Indeed, the landscape of banking has undergone very significant changes since the eruption 
of the crisis in 2008. And more changes are in store. Some might even argue that banking 
will evolve beyond recognition when compared with what we knew previously. Of course the 
international  banking  reform  package,  ranging  from  the  new  capital,  liquidity  and  leverage 
regime under Basel III, the treatment of Global Systemically Important Financial Institutions 
to  the  use  of  macro-prudential  tools  etc,  will  have  different  implications  for  different  banks 
and  different  jurisdictions.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  discuss  today  the  new  international 
standards that have been and are about to be adopted as these standards have been talked 
about  very  frequently  amongst  bankers  and  regulators.  What  I  would  like  to  do  here  is  to 
share with you our views on the following three issues that have profound impact on the way 
in which the banking industry, including that in Hong Kong, should structure itself: 
 
 
 
Universal Banking vs. Segregated Banking  
Universal Banking vs. Narrow Banking  
Branch vs. Subsidiary Operations.  
Universal banking vs. segregated banking  
2. 
First  let  me  talk  about  “universal  banking”,  which  may  mean  different  things  to 
different  people.  By  “universal  banking”  I  refer  to  a  business  model  in  which  banks  are 
allowed to provide a wide range of banking and other financial services to their customers, 
whether they are mass retail, high net-worth, SMEs or large corporates. In this connection, it 
may be appropriate to regard a universal bank as a one-stop financial supermarket.  
3. 
Hong Kong has a long tradition of this type of universal banking. Notwithstanding the 
experiences of the recent Global Financial Crisis and the ongoing debate and scepticism in 
some jurisdictions, we continue to see merit in the model of universal banking. Why? Let me 
explain.  
4. 
First  of  all,  universal  banking  in  the  form  of  a  one-stop  financial  supermarket 
provides  what  the  customers  need  to  meet  their  rising  demand  for  investments  in  a  wide 
range  of  financial  and  wealth  management  products.  These  customers  can  enjoy  the 
convenience  of  a  one-stop  service,  ranging  from  simple  products  such  as  equities,  unit 
trusts, insurance, gold etc. to the more complex derivative or structured products that meet 
their investment needs. At the same time, universal banking also allows some banks, if they 
have the resources and expertise, to provide corporate or investment banking services to the 
more sophisticated corporate clients in a wide range of areas such as debt finance, equity 
fund raising, mergers and acquisitions and other advisory services.  
5. 
Universal  banking  also  makes  a  great  deal  of  sense  from  a  bank’s  point  of  view. 
Under this model, a bank will be able to better serve the diverse needs of its customers, and 
generate fee and commission income which is not subject to the same kind of credit, maturity 
and  other  risks  associated  with  income  derived  from  lending  and  trading  activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Customers  need  the  services  and  banks  provide  them:  it  does  look  like  a  perfect  match, 
doesn’t it? As always, perfection rarely exists in the real world and there is a catch inherent in 
this  one-stop  financial  supermarket  model.  This  is  related  to  the  different  ways  in  which 
customers  perceive  a  bank  as  a  deposit-taking  institution  versus  a  brokerage  house  or 
investment bank.  
6. 
Because  of  the  easy  access  and  convenience  universal  banks  offer,  they  tend  to 
attract  customers  along  a  very  wide  spectrum  of  financial  sophistication  and  risk  appetite. 
Some of these customers go to banks to conduct very basic banking transactions, such as 
cash  withdrawal,  rolling  over  fixed  deposits,  remittances,  applications  for  loans,  getting 
cheque books and credit cards etc. As universal banks seek to expand fee and commission 
income  in  distributing  investment  products,  there  may  be  a  risk  that  some  banks  or  their 
frontline staff could become overly keen to market products to customers without sufficient 
regard  to  the  customers’  own  circumstances.  Closer  to  home,  the  Lehman  Minibonds 
episode  has  reminded  us  of  the  need  for  banks  to  take  great  care  in  the  marketing  and 
distribution of investment products to customers. It is for this reason that some have argued 
that the banking industry should revert to a simpler model of basic banking and leave the rest 
to brokerage houses and financial advisors. 
7. 
The Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent international debate have prompted 
us to reflect on whether universal banking still remains an optimal model of banking for Hong 
Kong. Our answer is “yes”. But, this is a qualified “yes” because we believe that banks must 
take two appropriate steps to address the potential concerns that I have just highlighted:  
(a) 
Banks should offer their retail customers a high degree of protection with adequate 
regard to their interests or experience in investing in securities or other structured products. 
That is why the HKMA has required banks, in selling investment products to customers, to 
adopt  extra  investor  protection  measures  on  top  of  those  promulgated  by  Hong  Kong’s 
Securities  and  Futures  Commission.  These  extra  protection  measures  include  audio 
recording of the marketing process, segregation of investment corner from the main banking 
hall or counters, and a mandatory 2-day pre-investment cooling off period for vulnerable and 
inexperienced investors.  
(b) 
Banks  must  take  extra  care  in  marketing  and  distributing  investment  products  to 
their  customers.  They  must  remain  vigilant  throughout  the entire  distribution  process,  from 
product  due  diligence,  risk  assessment  of  the  products,  suitability  assessment  of  the 
customers, training for the frontline staff and control and governance of the sales process.  
Universal banking vs. narrow banking 
8. 
Let me move to the second issue, with a different meaning attached to the phrase 
“universal banking”. Here, “universal banking” refers to a business model in which banks are 
allowed to conduct their own proprietary trading and market making in addition to trading on 
behalf of their customers and offering other traditional banking services and products. This is 
another area which has attracted heated debate and a diversity of views. 
9. 
We’ve seen the Volcker Rule in the US and we’ve heard the Governor of the Bank 
of  England  speak  out  in  favour  of  narrow  banks.  Their  concerns  spring  from  the  potential 
ability of the universal banks to leverage their cheaper sources of funds obtained from public 
deposits for risky ventures to raise the return on equity and to meet ever rising shareholders’ 
expectations.  As  banks  expand  their  risk  taking  activities,  both  on  balance  sheet  and  off 
balance sheet, some banks have become much larger and more complex, thereby rendering 
themselves “too big to fail”. 
On the other hand, the proponents of universal banking note that diversification can 
10. 
be beneficial for banks and banking stability. If one area of business underperforms, others 
can make up for it – making the “whole” more resilient. It can also be argued that banks that 
are  diversified  in  terms  of  businesses  or  geographical  operations  are  better  positioned  to 
offer customers the depth and breadth of services these customers require, particularly as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economic activities become ever more specialised and global. Broadening customer access 
to  financial  products  enables  increased  flows  of  savings  through  the  system,  facilitating 
efficient investment and economic growth. These advantages are not to be dismissed lightly. 
11. 
The  HKMA  takes  a  balanced  and  pragmatic  view  on  this  issue.  Rather  than 
mandating the dismantling of banks’ business structure to deal with the potential problems 
arising  from  proprietary  trading  and  overly  aggressive  risk  taking  by  banks,  our  preferred 
response  is  to  ensure  the  proper  risk  capture  and  management  of  those  parts  of  the 
operations  that  benefit  from  low  cost  funding  and  yet  cause  a  disproportionate  amount  of 
risk. As part of our on-going supervision we need to critically assess whether banks really 
understand  what  sort  of  risks  they  are  taking  on  and  seek  to  ensure  that  such  risks  are 
managed properly in order to safeguard depositors’ interests.  
As I said earlier, we have a long tradition of universal banking in Hong Kong and we 
12. 
have not seen our universal banks turn into aggressive trading and sales outfits or principal 
risk-taking hedge funds. But we can definitely see the potential danger. We therefore need to 
ensure  that  our  banks  do  not  take  on  excessive  risks  in  their  chase  for  higher  profits  and 
bonuses. Banks holding customer deposits must keep their responsibilities to their depositors 
foremost  in  their  minds  and  not  allow  their  proprietary  trading  or  i-bank  activities  to 
overshadow  these  responsibilities.  If  they  fail  in  this  regard,  they  will  make  the  case  for 
narrow banking themselves. 
Branch vs. subsidiary operations  
13. 
Another  strand  coming  out  of  the  debates  on  banking  structure  relates  to  the 
question of whether banks should be required to operate in host jurisdictions as subsidiaries. 
There are two angles to be considered here: supervision and resolution. Some jurisdictions 
have taken the view, long before the Global Financial Crisis, that overseas banks operating 
in  their  jurisdictions  should  take  the  form  of  subsidiaries  rather  than  branches.  The  main 
motivation,  as  I  understand  it,  is  that  the  host  supervisors  will  have  a  much  stronger 
regulatory handle, such as capital requirements, prudential limits, auditing, etc, to supervise 
a locally incorporated subsidiary than a branch. In a resolution scenario, many also favour 
subsidiarisation because it provides a clear legal entity structure which is easier to handle 
nationally under an insolvency situation.  
14. 
But subsidiarisation is far from being the panacea for all ills. Many have argued that 
subsidiaries  offer  sub-optimal  use  of  bank  capital,  which  will  be  split  up  and  locked  up  in 
separate  geographical pockets  or jurisdictions.  In  times  of  stress  they  could  not  so  readily 
rely  on  parent  level  support  or  the  home  central  bank.  The  inability  of  subsidiaries  of 
international  banks  to  leverage  on  the  capital  of  their  parents  would  limit  their  lending  in 
many  emerging  market  economies.  This  may  in  turn  have  negative  impact  on  the  trade, 
investment  and  other  economic  activities  of  these  emerging  market  economies.  Besides, 
liquidity  management  would  likely  be  more  efficient  for  a  branch  than  for  a  subsidiary  as 
funds  can  flow  more  freely  within  the  same  legal  entity.  On  resolution,  it  is  true  that  the 
insolvency proceedings for a subsidiary would normally be simpler than for a branch, but in 
practice there could be many complications such as: linkages to other group entities through 
intragroup  guarantees  and  exposures,  service  reliance  and  shared  management,  to  name 
but a few issues, which would affect the ultimate resolvability of a subsidiary when it actually 
happens. 
15. 
After  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  the  subsidiarisation  model  has  actually  gained 
greater  support  in  some  jurisdictions.  This  is  because  some  home  supervisors  of 
internationally  active  banks  feel  that  it  might  be  easier  for  these  international  banks  to 
undertake  “de-risking”  operations  should  trouble  occur  in  overseas  subsidiaries  than  in 
branches.  
16. 
From  Hong  Kong’s  perspective,  we  believe  that  subsidiaries  and  branches  of 
overseas  banks  can  and  do  play  different  roles  in  servicing  the  real  economy.  The  HKMA 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
takes the view that an overseas bank that wishes to undertake retail business in Hong Kong 
should operate in the form of a locally incorporated subsidiary. This is to offer appropriate 
protection to the retail depositors in Hong Kong and to do that the HKMA needs to have an 
effective supervisory handle on every aspect of a retail bank’s operation, especially its capital 
adequacy ratio. We cannot achieve this if the bank operates as a branch in Hong Kong.  
17. 
However,  we  also  recognise  that  subsidiaries  may  not  necessarily  be  an  efficient 
model  of  operation  if  an  overseas  bank  intends  to  undertake  only  corporate  or  private 
banking in Hong Kong. For example, a branch can leverage on the capital of the entire bank 
to finance a loan for a large corporate, which would otherwise be impossible if it operated as 
a subsidiary with rather limited capital in Hong Kong. Likewise, some private banking clients 
may prefer to deal with or book their investments with a branch of an overseas private bank 
rather  than  a  subsidiary  of  that  bank.  So  the  HKMA  keeps  an  open  mind  on  whether  an 
overseas bank operating in Hong Kong should take the form of a subsidiary or a branch. It all 
depends on the business model of the bank concerned. To take it one step further, we are 
prepared to take a liberal view if an overseas bank wishes to engage in both retail banking 
through  a  subsidiary  and,  in  parallel,  corporate  or  private  banking  that  would  more 
appropriately be conducted through a branch. We have had several precedent cases and the 
HKMA is prepared to consider applications on the basis of the merit of the case. 
18. 
While  we  maintain  an  open  mind  on  the  use  of  branches  by  overseas  banks,  we 
have to take steps to mitigate the potential risks arising from cross border contagion. This is 
particularly important given that Hong Kong is a net provider of funds, i.e. our banks collect a 
lot more customer deposits than they lend out locally. Hong Kong therefore has to closely 
monitor intra-group or inter-bank funding that flows from Hong Kong to overseas centres. We 
have seen in the Global Financial Crisis very clearly how wholesale funding through this kind 
of cross border intra-group or inter-bank channels may be susceptible to significant shocks in 
times  of  market  stress. The  problem  could  be  exacerbated  if  the  host  supervisors,  in  self-
defence,  sought  to  ring-fence  domestic  liquidity  by  blocking  the  flow  of  funds  at  the  most 
difficult time. So the HKMA has been in discussion with banks in Hong Kong on how best 
they  could  achieve  a  better  match  between  liabilities  derived  from  Hong  Kong  and  assets 
booked  in  Hong  Kong.  This  should  help  reduce  the  scale  of  and  reliance  on  cross-border 
fund flows, which should contribute to greater financial stability while preserving the flexibility 
of global banks to operate in branch mode in overseas jurisdictions. 
Conclusion 
19. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, I would like to make just one last comment. 
The world’s financial system has become ever more complex and inter-connected. It is safe 
to say that there is no “one size fits all” answer to what kind of business model banks should 
adopt as a universal rule. Each jurisdiction must therefore reflect and determine on its own 
what  kind  of  banking  model  that  would  suit  them  best,  having  regard  to  their  own 
circumstances and needs. No doubt there will be new international standards that all banks 
must  comply  with  in  order  to  make  banks  individually  and  collectively  more  resilient. 
However, robust standards and rules are not in themselves enough to prevent big mistakes 
and crises: they must be supported by sound and forward looking supervision. This is easier 
said than done in a universal banking model, as bankers and traders are often miles ahead 
of  the  regulators  and  supervisors  when  it  comes  to  financial  engineering  and  innovations 
which, as we have found out in the Global Financial Crisis, may not necessarily contribute to 
better risk management of banks and overall financial stability. Recognizing this inherent risk, 
the HKMA, in seeking to nurture the universal banking model in Hong Kong, must continue 
with  its  long  standing  conservative  supervisory  approach  with  even  greater  emphasis  on 
prudence under-pinned by proactive and forward looking supervision. 
20.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  is  a  rather  long  speech  and  I  thank  you  for  your  kind 
attention. Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
