Stefan Ingves: Evaluation of the Riksbank’s monetary policy and work on 
financial stability 2005–2010 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Riksdag  Committee  on  Finance,  Stockholm, 
31 August 2011. 
 The Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) and the people of Sweden must be able to see that 
the Riksbank is doing its job well. It is therefore necessary for them to have good insight into 
our  work  and  for  the  Riksdag  to  be  able  to  make  regular  evaluations  of  this  work.  The 
evaluations  are  also  important  for  the  Riksbank  to  be  able  to  develop  and  improve  its 
analyses.  We  have  already  said  on  several  occasions  that  we  consider  it  an  excellent 
initiative  by  the  Committee  on  Finance  to  regularly  commission  highly-qualified  external 
experts to evaluate our work. Today, when we are to discuss the second evaluation of this 
type, I would therefore like to begin by thanking Professors Goodhart and Rochet for carrying 
out this work on behalf of the Riksdag Committee on Finance. 
We also welcome the Committee on Finance’s decision to give the evaluators the task not 
only  of  assessing  how  we  conduct  monetary  policy,  but  also  how  we  manage  the  task  of 
promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system,  that  is,  what  we  have  interpreted  as  our 
responsibility for financial stability in Sweden. We at the Riksbank prefer to present our more 
detailed views on the evaluation during the consultation rounds, so today I intend to make a 
few more general comments. 
Regarding financial stability – we need clear legislation and efficient institutions 
I do not believe that anyone would still doubt that the risk of a financial crisis is a very real 
risk that we must learn to live with and to manage in the best possible way. It is probably also 
quite clear what is at stake here – a financial crisis could entail substantial costs for society. 
We must therefore learn from the experiences of the crisis and ensure that we are as well-
equipped as possible to face any new crises in the future. This requires in an initial stage 
taking an overall approach to both crisis management and crisis prevention work, something 
that the government’s recently-appointed financial crisis commission has been tasked to deal 
with. Ultimately, the goal is to establish effective legislation and efficient institutions. 
The financial crisis that we have lived with over the past few years has tested institutions and 
legislation  to  breaking  point,  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  This  has  highlighted  some  old 
weaknesses  in  the  legislative  framework,  and  we  have  also  discovered  some  new 
deficiencies.  Even  before  the  Committee  on  Finance’s  evaluation  was  published,  the 
Riksbank  pointed  out  a  number  of  weaknesses  that  require  attention  in  a  proposal  to  the 
Riksdag.1
  It  is  therefore  gratifying  that  Goodhart  and  Rochet  clearly  point  out  largely  the 
same weaknesses. 
The evaluation has had greater scope to discuss these weaknesses in more detail than was 
possible in the Riksbank’s proposal, and it also highlights a number of important principles as 
to  how  one  can  conduct  and  organise  the  financial  stability  work.  I  believe  that  these 
arguments in particular can provide a valuable contribution to discussions in Sweden and to 
our  own  development  work  at  the  Riksbank,  but  perhaps  most  of  all  to  the  work  of  the 
financial crisis committee. 
                                                 
1  Proposal to the Riksdag 2009/10:RB4, “Proposal regarding certain areas that require investigation as a result 
of the financial crisis”. (http://www.riksbank.se/templates/Page.aspx?id=43390). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Something I consider to be quite crucial in this context is that we do not create institutions 
that lack the necessary power to make decisions. By this I mean that in all parts of the work 
on preventing and managing financial crises we should have some institution that is clearly 
responsible and this institution should also have the necessary mandate, tools and resources 
to  handle  this  responsibility.  When  it  comes  to  putting  this  into  practice  I  believe  that 
Goodhart’s  and  Rochet’s  more  theoretical  reasoning  regarding  allocation  of  responsibility 
and institutional solutions could be very useful. But, as they are also careful to point out, the 
principles  they  discuss  must  be  implemented  in  a  way  that  suits  each  country’s  individual 
characteristics. And each country must find its own way. 
Regarding monetary policy – even uncertain forecasts have some value 
When it comes to monetary policy, we are pleased at Goodhart’s and Rochet’s conclusion 
that  the  Riksbank  has  discharged  its  fundamental  duty  –  to  conduct  a  policy  of  flexible 
inflation targeting – well. As I mentioned earlier, we will return with more in-depth views on 
the evaluation during the coming consultation process, but I nevertheless intend to take this 
opportunity to say a few words about some of the recommendations put forward. 
One recommendation in the monetary policy areas is that we at the Riksbank should in future 
express a little more “self-doubt” when putting forward our proposed paths for policy rates. 
We  can  achieve  this  either  by  a  greater  emphasis  on  the  uncertainty  of  interest  rate 
forecasts, or by basing them beyond some horizon on some formula that incorporates the 
market  yield  curve.  The  reason  given  for  this  recommendation  is  that  there  is  no  real 
information in interest rate forecasts that extend further than a couple of quarters ahead. 
We at the Riksbank are well aware of how uncertain interest rate forecasts are in the longer 
run and we have therefore endeavoured to draw attention to this uncertainty. We have done 
so,  for  instance,  by  publishing  uncertainty  bands  around  the  interest  rate  paths  and  by 
repeatedly emphasising the fact that the repo rate path is a forecast and not a promise. Of 
course  we  can  make  further  efforts  to  point  out  the  uncertainty  of  these  forecasts  if 
necessary, but we believe that the market and the general public have already understood 
that the forecasts are uncertain in the longer run and should therefore be taken with a pinch 
of salt. One indication of this, which Professors Goodhart and Rochet also point out, is that 
“the  market  seems  to  have  retained  a,  healthy,  scepticism  whether  the  official  projections 
would be realised” during the period we have been publishing a repo rate path. This applies 
in  particular  to  the  period  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  when  there  was  extreme 
uncertainty surrounding all of the forecasts. 
However, the fact that interest rate forecasts in the longer run are uncertain does not mean 
that we should not make such forecasts. And when we make our own interest rate forecasts 
we should also publish them. By publishing these forecasts we can explain more clearly to 
the  general  public  and  the  market  how  we  view  future  developments  and  how  we  reason 
when making our monetary policy decisions. I find it difficult to see how this could be harmful. 
To instead base long-term forecasts on market expectations of the policy rate is a method we 
have already tried and decided to abandon. If we use market expectations of the policy rate 
as a starting point, it may be difficult to determine how the interest rate is connected to other 
developments  in  the  macro  economy.  Our  own  forecast  for  the  interest  rate  has  the 
advantage that it is produced together with the forecasts for GDP, inflation, employment and 
so on. Moreover, market expectations can vary substantially over time, which can lead to the 
information content in the macro forecasts as a whole declining.  
The  evaluators  also  consider  that  the  Riksbank’s  schedule  for  the  different  stages  in  the 
monetary policy process does not correspond to how the forecasting and policy-making work 
is carried out since the new repo rate path was introduced. In their view, the changes have 
meant  that,  in  practice,  the  actual  interest  rate  decision  has  been  brought  forward.  They 
therefore recommend that the Riksbank should announce the monetary policy decision and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
interest rate path earlier, namely directly after the meeting of the Executive Board that is held 
a couple of days after the second monetary policy group meeting. 
However, we consider this proposal to be difficult to implement. Although the analyses and 
forecasts are largely complete by the second monetary policy group meeting, the monetary 
policy decision is made at the monetary policy meeting and not before then. Any reservations 
against the decision are put forward at this meeting, too, and not earlier. 
In conclusion, let me once again thank Professors Goodhart and Rochet for their valuable 
contribution  to  our  continued  work  on  both  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  We  will 
have  many  opportunities  during  the  course  of  this  work  to  discuss  with  the  Committee  on 
Finance how we can develop and improve our analyses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
