Thomas M Hoenig: Monetary policy cannot solve every problem – 
concerns with zero rates 
Statement  by  Mr  Thomas  M  Hoenig,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, before the House Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy 
and Technology, United States House of Representatives, Washington DC, 26 July 2011. 
 Chairman Paul, Ranking Member Clay and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the 
opportunity  to  discuss  my  views  on  the  economy  from  the  perspective  of  president  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  and  as  a  20-year  member  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).  
The Fed’s mandate reads: “The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the 
Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long-run growth of the monetary and credit 
aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long-run potential to increase production, so 
as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate 
long-term interest rates.”  
The  role  of  a  central  bank  is  to  provide  liquidity  in  a  crisis  and  to  create  and  foster  an 
environment that supports long-run economic health. For that reason, as the financial crisis 
took  hold  in  2008,  I  supported  the  FOMC’s  cuts  to  the  federal  funds  rate  that  pushed  the 
target range to 0 percent to 0.25 percent, as well as the other emergency liquidity actions 
taken  to  staunch  the  crisis.  However,  though  I  would  support  a  generally  accommodative 
monetary  policy  today,  I  have  raised  questions  regarding  the  advisability  of  keeping  the 
emergency monetary policy in place for 32 months with the promise of keeping it there for an 
extended period.  
I have several concerns with zero rates. First, a guarantee of zero rates affects the allocation 
of resources. It is generally accepted that no good, service or transaction trades efficiently at 
the  price  of  zero.  Credit  is  no  exception.  Rather,  a  zero-rate  policy  increases  the  risk  of 
misallocating  real  resources,  creating  a  new  set  of  imbalances  or  possibly  a  new  set  of 
bubbles. 
For example, in the Tenth Federal Reserve District, fertile farmland was selling for $6,000 an 
acre two years ago. That land today is selling for as much as $12,000 an acre, reflecting high 
commodity prices but also the fact that farmland loans increasingly carry an interest rate of 
far  less  than  the  7.5  percent  historic  average  for  such  loans.  And  with  such  low  rates  of 
return on financial assets, investors are quickly bidding up the price of farmland in search of 
a marginally better return.  
I  was  in  the  banking  supervision  area  during  the  banking  crisis  of  the  1980s,  when  the 
collapse  of  a  speculative  bubble  dramatically  and  negatively  affected  the  agriculture,  real 
estate and energy industries, almost simultaneously. Because of this bubble, in the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  District  alone,  I  was  involved  in  the  closing  of  nearly 
350 regional  and  community  banks.  Farms  were  lost,  communities  were  devastated,  and 
thousands of  jobs  were  lost  in  the  energy  and  real  estate  sectors.  I  am  confident  that  the 
highly accommodative monetary policy of the decade of the 1970s contributed to this crisis. 
Another important effect of zero rates is that it redistributes wealth in this country from the 
saver to debtor by pushing interest rates on deposits and other types of assets below what 
they  would  otherwise  be.  This  requires  savers  and  those  on  fixed  incomes  to  subsidize 
borrowers. This may be necessary during a crisis in order to avoid even more dire outcomes, 
but the longer it continues, the more dramatic the redistribution of wealth.  
In  addition,  historically  low  rates  affect  the  incentives  of  how  the  largest  banks  allocate 
assets.  They  can  borrow  for  essentially  a  quarter-point  and  lend  it  back  to  the  federal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
government  by  purchasing  bonds  and  notes  that  pay  about  3  percent.  It  provides  them  a 
means  to  generate  earnings  and  restore  capital,  but  it  also  reflects  a  subsidy  to  their 
operations. It is not the Federal Reserve’s job to pave the yield curve with guaranteed returns 
for any sector of the economy, and we should not be guaranteeing a return for Wall Street or 
any special interest groups.  
Finally, my view is that unemployment is high today, in part, because interest rates were held 
to  an  artificially  low  level  during  the  period  of  the  early  2000s.  In  2003,  unemployment  at 
6.5 percent was thought to be too high. The federal funds rate was continuously lowered to a 
level  of  1  percent  in  an  effort  to  avoid  deflation  and  to  lower  unemployment.  The  policy 
worked in the short term.  
The  full  effect,  however,  was  that  the  U.S.  experienced  a  credit  boom  with  consumers 
increasing their debt from 80 percent of disposable income to 125 percent. Banks increased 
their  leverage  ratios  –  assets  to  equity  capital  –  from  15-to-1  to  30-to-1.  This  very  active 
credit environment persisted over time and contributed to the bubble in the housing market. 
In just five years, the housing bubble collapsed and asset values have fallen dramatically. 
The debt levels, however, remain, impeding our ability to recover from this recession. I would 
argue  that  the  result  of  our  short-run  focus  in  2003  was  to  contribute  to  10  percent 
unemployment five years later.  
That  said,  I  am  not  advocating  for  tight  monetary  policy.  I’m  advocating  that  the  FOMC 
carefully move to a non-zero rate. This will allow the market to begin to read credit conditions 
and  allocate  resources  according  to  their  best  use  rather  than  in  response  to  artificial 
incentives.  
More than a year ago, I advocated removing the “extended period” language to prepare the 
markets for a move to 1 percent by the fall of 2010. Then, depending on how the economy 
performed, I would move rates back toward more historic levels. I want to see people back to 
work, but I want them back to work with some assurance of stability.  
I want to see our economy grow in a manner that encourages stable economic growth, stable 
prices and long-run full employment. If zero interest rates could accomplish this goal, then I 
would support interest rates at zero. In my written testimony, I have included three speeches 
that describe in more detail my position on monetary policy.  
Monetary policy cannot solve every problem. I believe we put the economy at greater risk by 
attempting to do so.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
