Ric Battellino: Recent financial developments 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Annual Stockbrokers Conference, Sydney, 26 May 2011. 
 Introduction  
My talk today is about some of the changes taking place in the financing of the Australian 
economy.  
As  you  know,  after  15  years  of  rapid  growth,  credit  has  been  growing  at  a  much  more 
subdued pace over the past couple of years. In fact, for the first time since the early 1990s, 
banks are finding that credit is growing more slowly than deposits, with the result that they 
are able to repay funds previously borrowed in wholesale markets, including from offshore. 
These developments have been associated with a noticeable increase in national saving and 
a marked reduction in the current account deficit.  
I would like to spend some time today going through these developments.  
Credit cycles  
Over the very long run, money and credit in most economies tend to grow somewhat faster 
than  GDP.  This  is  part  of  the  financial  deepening  that  occurs  as  economies  develop  and 
incomes  grow.  Since  1960,  for  example,  credit  in  Australia  has  increased  on  average  by 
about 12½ per cent per year,  while GDP (in  nominal terms) has increased on average by 
about 9 per cent per year (Graph 1).  
Graph 1  
Credit and GDP Growth  
 
Over  shorter  periods,  however,  credit  shows  pronounced  cycles.  During  periods  when 
optimism is high, households and businesses tend to increase their use of credit, often for 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  acquisition  of  assets.  At  other  times,  typically  in  the  wake  of  economic  downturns, 
borrowers can become very conservative and cut back their demand for credit; lenders, too, 
can become more cautious. 
The  most  recent  cycle  in  credit  began  in  the  mid  1990s  and  extended  through  the  years 
leading up to the global financial crisis. For most of that period the expansion in credit was 
driven by households (Graph 2). Financial deregulation and innovation greatly increased the 
supply  of  credit,  and  the  fall  in  interest  rates  as  inflation  declined  in  the  early  1990s  gave 
households greater capacity to borrow. The rapid expansion in household debt that followed 
was  not  unique  to  Australia,  with  most  developed  economies  experiencing  sharp  rises  in 
household indebtedness. Most of this expansion in household credit, both in Australia and 
offshore,  was  used  to  buy  dwellings  and  was  therefore  accompanied  by  strong  rises  in 
housing prices.  
Graph 2  
Household Credit  
Ratio to GDP 
  
As you know, in many countries the marked expansion in housing credit went on to cause 
severe financial difficulties. Here in Australia, however, this has not happened; in particular, 
household loan arrears remain relatively low (Graph 3). Contributing to this better outcome in 
Australia  was  the  fact  that  the  deterioration  in  lending  standards  was  not  as  severe  or  as 
widespread  as  in  some  other  countries.  Also,  household  incomes  have  continued  to  grow 
solidly, in the context of a strong economy and low unemployment.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 3 
Banks’ Non-performing Housing Loans* 
Per cent of outstandings 
  
However,  within  this  overall  picture  of  resilience,  there  are,  as  always,  pockets  of  housing 
stress. In the early part of last decade, those pockets were heavily concentrated around the 
south-west parts of Sydney. These problems followed the very strong rises in Sydney house 
prices  over  2002  and  2003.  They  were  linked  to  a  sharp  rise  in  loan  approvals,  some 
lowering of lending standards, particularly by second-tier lenders, and increased speculative 
activity. Conditions in that region subsequently improved, helped by a period of stable house 
prices and rising incomes, though the process took a long time and the arrears rate in that 
part of Sydney remains higher than the national average.  
Recently,  it  has  been  parts  of  Queensland  and  Western  Australia  that  have  shown  a 
deterioration in loan arrears, albeit from low levels. As had been the case in Sydney earlier in 
the decade, the recent increase in loan arrears in these states followed a sharp increase in 
housing  loans  and  unusually  strong  rises  in  house  prices  between  2006  and  2008.  Some 
part  of  this  was  justified  by  the  emerging  resources  boom  but,  as  had  occurred  earlier  in 
Sydney,  this  was  accompanied  by  some  lowering  of  credit  standards  and  increased 
speculative activity, with the result that some households over-extended themselves. Adding 
to the stress on household finances was the fact that both these states experienced larger-
than-average  increases  in  unemployment  during  the  2009  downturn,  though  again  from 
relatively low levels.  
Another potential source of vulnerability in the housing market that is often mentioned is the 
many first-home owners who were attracted into the housing market in 2009 by the increase 
in the first-home owner grant. The concern is that some of these may have over-committed 
themselves financially in order to enter the market, and are now vulnerable to rising interest 
rates. This group bears close watching but, so far at least, first-home owners do not seem to 
be disproportionately represented in loan arrears.  
While  the  household  sector  as  a  whole  continues  to  show  a  good  deal  of  resilience  in 
meeting loan repayments, the increase in indebtedness over the past 15 years does mean 
that  households  are  now  significantly  more  sensitive  to  changes  in  interest  rates.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
proportion  of  household  income  devoted  to  debt  servicing  is  relatively  high,  even  though 
housing interest rates are only a little above average (Graph 4). It is therefore not surprising 
that households have become more cautious. Household saving increased markedly in the 
wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  it  has  remained  high  in  the  face  of  the  continuing 
problems in European financial markets and rising global inflationary pressures (Graph 5). 
Graph 4  
Household Interest Payments* 
Per cent of household disposable income 
 4 
 Graph 5 
Household Saving Ratio* 
Per cent of household disposable income 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  current  environment,  it  is  unlikely  that  households  will  have  much  enthusiasm  for 
increasing indebtedness. The most likely scenario is that household borrowing will continue 
to grow at a relatively subdued rate for some time yet. From the Reserve Bank’s perspective, 
this  would  be  a  welcome  development.  It  would  allow  the  period  of  consolidation  in 
household balance sheets to continue and would avoid households adding to pressures in 
the  economy  at  a  time  when  its  productive  capacity  is  already  being  stretched  by  the 
resources boom. 
While most of the growth in credit in the lead-up to the global financial crisis was driven by 
households, a substantial increase in business credit also occurred in the years immediately 
before the crisis. This expansion in lending was mainly to large businesses and, while some 
of it was used to fund real investment, a substantial amount was for financial activity.  
As often happens during a credit boom, a disproportionate amount of the lending that took 
place  over  that  period  came  from  second-tier  lenders.  Business  credit  provided  by  foreign 
banks, for example, rose by about 80 per cent between 2006 and 2008, while business credit 
provided  by  regional  banks  rose  by  60  per  cent  (Graph  6).  A  lot  of  this  was  directed  to 
commercial property.  
Graph 6  
Business Credit by Source 
January 2006 = 100 
  
Since the global financial crisis, the inevitable correction has occurred. Business credit has 
fallen and those lenders that expanded the most have since contracted the most. Similarly, 
sectors  such  as  commercial  property  that  increased  gearing  the  most  have  since 
experienced the sharpest increase in problem loans and the sharpest contraction in credit.  
Through all this, credit to the small business sector has been much more stable; it increased 
by  less  through  the  boom  and  has  continued  to  expand,  albeit  slowly,  since  the  crisis 
(Graph 7). 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 7  
Business Credit by Borrower 
January 2006 = 100 
  
It  is  not  unusual  for  business  credit  to  be  subdued  for  a  time  following  a  period  of  strong 
expansion.  Both  supply  and  demand  usually  contribute  to  this.  For  instance,  businesses 
often look to repay debt, to repair balance sheets that had become stretched during a boom. 
Also lenders that expand strongly during a boom often end up making significant amounts of 
bad loans, and when this becomes apparent they respond by cutting back on new lending.  
Normally, periods of soft business credit are accompanied by soft business investment. What 
is somewhat unusual about the current softness in business credit is that it is occurring at a 
time  when  business  investment  is  at  a  very  high  level.  This  unusual  conjuncture  arises 
largely  from  the  fact  that  the  strength  of  investment  at  present  is  concentrated  in  the 
resources  sector,  and  is  being  funded  mainly  by  the  large  amounts  of  cash  that  resource 
companies are generating from existing operations. As a result, despite the very high levels 
of investment, there has not been the need to resort to substantial borrowing (Graph 8).  
Graph 8  
Business Funding 
Quarterly flow 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 There  are  signs,  however,  that  the  low  point  in  business  credit  growth  is  now  behind  us. 
Substantial  repair  has  taken  place  in  business  balance  sheets  since  the  crisis,  business 
investment is picking up and the banking system is showing greater willingness to lend. On 
average,  recent  monthly  figures  for  business  credit  have  been  somewhat  stronger  than 
earlier  in  the  year.  It  would  be  normal  for  this  pick-up  to  continue  over  the  next  couple  of 
years as the economic recovery strengthens and broadens.  
Implications for bank funding  
What do recent developments mean for bank funding?  
During the period of rapid credit growth that began in the mid 1990s, bank balance sheets 
expanded rapidly. At the same time, deposit growth slowed noticeably, both because of the 
decline  in  national  saving  and  a  shift  in  household  saving  towards  securities  rather  than 
deposits. With aggregate credit growing by 12½ per cent per year on average and deposits 
growing by 10½ per cent per year, banks were left with a noticeable funding gap, which they 
filled by borrowing in wholesale markets, including from offshore (Graph 9).  
Graph 9  
Funding Composition of Banks in Australia* 
Per cent of funding 
 This  funding  model  was  well  suited  to  the  market  conditions  of  the  time.  Banks  had  little 
difficulty  in  raising  funds  in  wholesale  markets,  due  to  the  weight  of  money  seeking 
investments in Australia. In fact, it could be argued that the whole dynamic was driven by this 
flow  of  offshore  money  wanting  to  come  to  Australia  –  i.e.  banks  were  offered  ample 
amounts of funds by foreigners, which they in turn lent domestically, causing an increase in 
spending, a reduction in saving, a slowing in deposits and a widening in the current account 
deficit.  This  is  a  situation  not  dissimilar  to  that  faced  by  the  United  States  over  the  past 
decade,  which  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Bernanke  has  described  in  detail  in  his 
explanation of the global savings glut. 
Two things can go wrong in this environment. The first is that the weight of money can lead 
to an erosion of lending standards as banks try to find more and more borrowers. If this is 
severe enough, it will eventually lead to a financial crisis because loans are made that cannot 
be repaid. This is essentially what happened in the United States. As noted earlier, however, 
here in Australia the reduction in lending standards was relatively slight in comparison.  
The second risk, which is the one most people focus on, is that the flow of offshore money 
suddenly  stops.  The  common  presumption  is  that  there  would  then  be  a  crisis  because 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
banks could no longer fund themselves. People who worry about this usually do so as part of 
a broader concern about countries running current account deficits. This view of the world is 
not new. Its origins lie in the pre-1970s world of fixed exchange rates, since in that regime a 
cessation  of  capital  inflow  quickly  caused  a  crisis.  This  framework  remains  relevant  for 
emerging  market  economies  which  have  relatively  fixed  exchange  rates  and  unhedged 
foreign borrowings, but it is not well-suited for analysing risks in mature economies with well-
developed financial markets and a floating exchange rate.  
Some people claim that the global financial crisis was a vindication of the view that offshore 
borrowing  causes  problems.  But  this  misses  the  point  that  all  banks  were  affected  by  the 
crisis, irrespective of whether they were borrowers or lenders in international markets. In fact, 
the  Australian  banks,  which  many  see  as  being  among  the  largest  users  of  offshore 
wholesale markets, emerged from the crisis in better shape than most. While they benefited 
from a temporary government guarantee, so too did banks in most other countries.  
Another point that is often missed in this debate is that, if there is a loss of offshore funding, 
other things also change due to the ensuing changes in market pricing and consumer and 
business  behaviour.  This  allows  the  financial  system  to  adjust.  For  example,  when  the 
financial crisis hit:  
 
The demand for credit slowed sharply; after growing on average by over 14 per cent 
per year in the three years to mid 2008, it has grown by only about 4 per cent per 
year in the three years since.  
Private saving increased, particularly at the household level. This has narrowed the 
gap between national saving and investment which, as you know, is the counterpart 
to the current account deficit. The current account deficit in the December quarter 
fell to 2 per cent of GDP, and is likely to move lower in the immediate future.  
Households  became  more  cautious,  shifting  their  saving  from  investments  in 
securities  towards  bank  deposits.  Deposit  growth  is  currently  out-pacing  credit 
growth, allowing banks to reduce wholesale borrowings.  
Capital  inflows  into  Australia  did  not  cease  but  switched  to  more  conservative 
investments  such  as  government  bonds.  The  inflow  of  foreign  capital  into 
government bonds during the past year has been more than sufficient to fund the 
current account deficit, and has been accompanied by the private sector (particularly 
the banking sector) repaying offshore capital (Graph 10).  
Graph 10 
Australian Capital Flows 
Net inflows, per cent of GDP  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   8 
 The question that arises is what will happen to bank funding if, as expected, credit growth 
picks up over the next few years? Will it return to the pre-crisis pattern? This seems unlikely 
at  this  stage.  For  one  thing,  credit  growth  is  unlikely  to  return  to  pre-crisis  rates  in  the 
foreseeable  future  so  pressures  on  funding  will  not  be  as  severe.  Second,  changes  to 
supervisory  rules  and  market  conditions  have  made  pre-crisis  funding  patterns  less 
attractive. In addition, if household saving continues at its recent higher level, it will sustain 
deposit  growth.  The  household  saving  rate  could  even  increase  further.  It  is  still  below  its 
historical highs and strong employment and income growth could provide the wherewithal for 
higher saving to co-exist with steady consumption growth. Also relevant will be trends in non-
bank capital inflows. If the current diversified pattern of capital inflow continues, this too will 
add to deposit growth as these inflows find their way into bank deposits. All in all, it is likely 
that banks will be able to maintain the more conservative funding pattern they have put in 
place recently.  
Conclusion  
Let me sum up.  
The  credit  boom  that  began  in  the  mid  1990s  ended  with  the  global  financial  crisis.  The 
Australian  financial  system  weathered  that  crisis  much  better  than  most  and,  while  the 
adjustment  was  not  painless,  the  banking  system  remained  resilient.  It  is  currently 
transitioning through a period of slower growth.  
History  tells  us  that  periods  of  weak  credit  growth  such  as  the  present  one  are  relatively 
short-lived  in  a  growing  economy,  so  some  pick-up  in  credit  growth  is  to  be  expected.  It 
would be wrong, however, to think that this means a return to the growth experienced in bank 
balance sheets in the period since the mid 1990s. That was an extraordinary period, driven 
by  what  was  largely  a  one-off  adjustment  to  household  gearing  following  financial 
deregulation and the sustained fall in inflation. In the economic climate likely to be faced by 
banks  over  the  next  few  years  –  solid  economic  growth  but  with  cautious  behaviour  by 
households and relatively low inflation – it would be reasonable to assume that the rate of 
growth in credit will remain somewhere in the single-digit range. That rate of credit growth 
should  be  able  to  be  matched  by  deposit  growth,  reducing  the  need  to  raise  funds  in 
wholesale markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
