Gill Marcus: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
91st ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 30 June 2011. 
 Dear Shareholders,  
Members of the Board,  
Deputy Governors,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
The business of an ordinary general meeting (OGM) of the Bank is to receive and discuss 
the minutes of the previous meeting, the financial statements for the preceding financial year, 
the report of the Board on the state of affairs and business of the Bank, the auditors’ report, 
to  attend  to  the  election  of  directors  and  to  attend  to  the  appointment  of  auditors  and  the 
approval of their remuneration (this being referred to as the ordinary business of a general 
meeting).  
In  addition,  special  business  of  which  proper  notice  was  given,  may  be  transacted  at  the 
general meeting. This special business would be resolutions proposed by shareholders that 
relate to the ordinary business of a general meeting.  
As in recent times the conduct of special business has been an issue at general meetings, it 
is necessary to record that special business is not any business that shareholders wish to 
raise relating to the Bank and/or criticism of reports or documents presented at the general 
meeting.  It  must  clearly  relate  to  the  ordinary  business  of  a  general  meeting  referred  to 
above  and  must,  more  particularly,  be  framed  as  a  resolution  that  is  capable  of  being 
implemented, if adopted.  
Business framed as criticism or demanding action on behalf of the Bank and which does not 
relate to the ordinary business of a general meeting as referred to above does not constitute 
special business.  
In  addition,  matters  relating  to  legislation  under  which  the  Bank  operates  and  the 
requirements thereof are matters that do not constitute special business and are incapable of 
being implemented by the adoption of a resolution. These are matters that ought to be raised 
with the National Treasury and Parliament.  
Criticism  of  the  reports  and  documents  presented  at  the  general  meeting  does  not  in  the 
normal  course  of  business  qualify  as  special  business,  unless  properly  framed  as  a 
resolution that is capable of being adopted. Any criticism, or for that matter queries, relating 
to  reports  and  documents  presented  at  the  general  meeting  is  properly  dealt  with  and 
addressed  at  the  general  meeting  as  part  of  a  discussion  around  these  reports  and 
documents. And this is the basis on which we intend to conduct the business of this meeting.  
The Bank was founded at a time of great turmoil in the international monetary system and 
amid  vigorous  debates  about  the  appropriateness  of  a  return  to  the  gold  standard.  In  that 
context the Bank was established to ensure that the banknote issue was in line with the gold 
stock;  in  other  words,  the  Bank  had  to  ensure  the  convertibility  of  the  currency  or  the 
maintenance of the value of the currency.  
The early 1920s were also characterised by a high degree of capital flows and exchange rate 
volatility,  and  ultimately  the  1929  collapse  of  Wall  Street  ushered  in  the  worldwide  Great 
Depression of the 1930s.  
Today, we unfortunately find ourselves in a very similar context. The global financial crisis, 
which  is  now  in  its  fourth  year,  and  persistent  global  imbalances  and  volatile  capital  flows 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have  again  put  the  nature  of  the  international  monetary  system  and  the  international 
adjustment  mechanism  at  the  centre  of  the  debate  on  global  reform.  Such  turmoil  and 
periodic systemic crises – in this instance the most devastating since the great depression – 
underline the need for strong central banks to be beacons of stability.  
Our  focus  therefore  continues  to  be  on  stability,  which  includes  price  stability,  financial 
stability  and  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  Such  stability  is  essential  to  providing  an 
environment conducive to economic growth and employment creation.  
Global  developments  have  continued  to  impact  on  our  domestic  economic  conditions  and 
policy  environment.  The  recovery  in  the  advanced  economies,  which  had  appeared  to  be 
more sustained, has become increasingly uncertain in recent months. While some view this 
as a “soft patch” from which countries will emerge fairly soon, there are still significant risks 
emanating  from  some  peripheral  countries  in  Europe  in  particular.  These  risks  have  the 
potential to derail the already slow recovery in the advanced economies and to have serious 
negative global repercussions.  
Although countries such as Greece, Ireland and Portugal are relatively small in the European 
context, the exposure of the banking systems of the rest of Europe to these countries’ debt 
means that in the event of even a partial default, a systemic banking crisis could ensue. And 
notwithstanding the measures taken through initiatives such as Basel III, and an increased 
focus  worldwide  explicitly  on  financial  stability,  the  possibility  of  a  systemic  banking  crisis 
emanating from Europe cannot be dismissed.  
While I do not want to overburden you with numbers, it is important to use some examples 
for  illustrative  purposes.  According  to  the  European  Commission,  the  debt  to  GDP  (Gross 
Domestic  Product)  ratio  of  Greece  is  expected  to  increase  to  166 per cent  in  2012,  from 
142 per cent  in  2010.  Its  fiscal  deficit  is  expected  to  decline  from  10,5 per cent  to 
9,3 per cent.  In  Ireland,  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio  is  expected  to  increase  from  96 per cent  in 
2010 to 118 per cent in 2012. It is argued by some that in the case of Ireland it is more useful 
to  look  at  the  debt  to  GNP  (Gross  National  Product)  ratio,  which  stands  at  around 
150 per cent. The fiscal deficit of 30,3 per cent in 2010 is expected to decline to 8,5 per cent 
in 2012.  
Portugal’s debt to GDP ratio is expected to increase from 93 per cent in 2010 to 107 per cent 
in  2012,  while  austerity  measures  envisaged  are  expected  to  reduce  its  fiscal  deficit  from 
9,1 per cent to 4,5 per cent next year – that is, to be cut in half in two years.  
According to Bank for International Settlement (BIS) data, the total exposure of foreign banks 
to Spain, Greece, Portugal and Ireland was around US$2,3 trillion at the end of 2010, with a 
significant  portion  of  the  exposure  being  to  German  and  French  banks.  There  is  also  a 
difference in exposure to the different countries, for instance the United Kingdom (UK) banks 
have an exposure of US$190 billion to Ireland.  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates that the European banks have an exposure 
to the periphery of around 10 per cent of Europe’s GDP, and about 80 per cent of the capital 
of European banks.  
These  growing  uncertainties  have  resulted  in  periodic  changes  in  risk  perceptions  in  the 
international financial markets, resulting in continued volatility of exchange rates and capital 
flows.  The  tragic  events  in  Japan  earlier  in  the  year  also  underlined  the  fragility  of  the 
recovery in the advanced economies.  
At  the  same  time,  the  strong  recovery  in  most  of  the  emerging  markets,  and  Asia  in 
particular,  coupled  with  unfavourable  weather  conditions  and  political  developments  in  the 
Middle East and North Africa, has put upward pressure on commodity prices, in particular oil 
and  food.  This  has  led  to  an  end  of  the  benign  global  inflation  environment  which  had 
prevailed since the onset of the financial crisis.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
At the risk of over-emphasising the deteriorating situation in Europe and the United States, it 
must be cause for concern when, within the space of a week, three of the world’s leading 
central  bankers  –  Ben  Bernanke  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  Jean-Claude  Trichet  of  the 
European Central Bank (ECB), and Mervyn King of the Bank of England – all explicitly stated 
their concerns that the recovery from the financial crisis will be very slow, that there are real 
risks to the European banking system, and that this situation poses a great threat to financial 
stability.  
It  is  within  this  fragile  global  outlook  that  the  domestic  economic  outlook  should  be 
considered.  Since  March  2010,  domestic  inflation  has  remained  within  the  target  range  of  
3–6 per cent. CPI inflation reached a recent low of 3,2 per cent in September 2010, but has 
since increased to 4,6 per cent in May. This benign inflation environment enabled the Bank 
to reduce the repurchase rate to 5,5 per cent, which is the lowest nominal level of the policy 
rate in over 30 years. Real rates are also significantly below their long-run averages.  
The  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  has  been  maintained,  given  the  relatively 
hesitant  nature  of  the  domestic  recovery.  There  are  signs  that  this  recovery  is  becoming 
more  self-sustained,  following  the  4,8 per cent  annualised  growth  rate  recorded  in  the  first 
quarter of 2011, driven mainly by a strong performance in the manufacturing sector.  
However,  the  fragility  of  this  recovery  is  illustrated  by  the  contraction  in  the  manufacturing 
sector  recorded  in  April  2011  and  the  continued  slow  pace  of  growth  in  the  construction 
sector and in private-sector fixed capital formation. Employment growth has also remained 
subdued.  
Although there are no signs of pressures on domestic inflation generated from the demand 
side of the economy, the inflation outlook is being adversely affected by global commodity 
prices.  As  a  result  of  these  developments,  inflation  is  expected  to  breach  temporarily  the 
upper limit of the inflation target range in the first quarter of next year, and then remain close 
to the upper end of the target range for the rest of the year.  
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  any  indications  of 
second-round effects on inflation emanating from these cost pressures. We will continue to 
give  primacy  to  our  objective  of  price  stability,  and  implement  monetary  policy  within  a 
flexible inflation-targeting framework.  
The policy challenges we face are complex. While data at one level may suggest an upside 
risk to the inflation outlook and a possible change in the interest rate stance, other data may 
well indicate a need for the opposite policy approach. In times of such great uncertainty it is 
important for a central bank to remain focused on its primary responsibilities, but vigilant and 
aware of what is happening in the global and domestic economic environment.  
The financial crisis has focused attention on financial stability issues. In the past most central 
banks had implicit financial stability mandates and the conventional wisdom was that price 
stability would ensure financial stability. The crisis has shown that financial stability should be 
seen  as  a  separate  objective,  and  a  number  of  central  banks  have  been  given  explicit 
financial stability mandates.  
The  Bank  has  also  been  given  a  mandate  to  take  a  leading  role  in  maintaining  financial 
stability. To this end, the Bank’s Financial Stability Committee (FSC) has been reconstituted 
and  given  responsibility  for  macroprudential  oversight  and  policy  implementation.  This  is 
unchartered  territory,  and  work  is  being  undertaken  both  globally  and  domestically  to 
determine the exact nature of such oversight as well as what appropriate policy instruments 
could be.  
Without  being  complacent,  our  view  is  that  at  this  stage  there  are  no  obvious  threats  to 
domestic financial stability: credit extension by banks is subdued and there is no evidence of 
incipient asset market bubbles. However, we remain vigilant as to the possible impact of any 
global financial stability or systemic banking matters that might arise.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The Bank’s microprudential responsibilities have also been impacted by global developments 
with respect to the regulatory and supervisory environment. The Bank, as a member of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee), has been an active participant 
in  the  deliberations  on  banking  regulatory  reform.  Meetings  of  the  committee  have 
culminated in the publication of the global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and 
banking  systems,  known  as  Basel  III,  which  incorporates  the  details  of  global  regulatory 
standards on bank capital adequacy and liquidity.  
The changes should not have a material impact on South African banks which remain well 
capitalised  and  characterised  by  low  leverage  ratios.  The  proposals  regarding  liquidity  are 
likely  to  pose  a  greater  challenge,  and  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  it  is  not  only 
South Africa that faces this hurdle. Given the relatively long phasing-in period allowed, these 
challenges are not viewed as being insurmountable.  
Capital flows to a number of emerging markets moderated in the final quarter of 2010 and 
early  2011.  A  similar  pattern  was  observed  in  South  Africa,  and  between  November  2010 
and  March  2011  there  were  cumulative  net  sales  of  bonds  and  equities  by  non-residents. 
More  recently,  renewed  net  purchases  have  been  experienced  and  year  to  date  the  net 
purchase of bonds and equities stands at approximately R27 billion.  
Despite  this  relatively  volatile  pattern  of  capital  flows  the  Bank,  with  the  assistance  of 
National Treasury, has continued with its policy of Foreign-exchange reserve accumulation. 
In  the  2010/11  financial  year  the  Bank  purchased  approximately  US$10,3 billion  for  this 
purpose.  The  need  to  sterilise  the  impact  of  these  purchases  of  foreign  exchange  on 
domestic liquidity resulted in the Bank reporting an after-tax loss for the second consecutive 
financial year, amounting to a little under R1,2 billion.  
Having  given  a  brief  outline  of  the  global  and  economic  outlook,  let  me  now  address  a 
number of questions raised by various shareholders during the three shareholder road shows 
held in Pretoria, Durban and Cape Town in the run up to this meeting.  
I would also like to thank all shareholders who attended these road shows, and encourage 
others to take advantage of this opportunity for more in-depth interaction next year.  
Question 1 – The losses incurred and explanation of Gold and Foreign Exchange 
Contingency Reserve Account (GFECRA) 
The Bank acquires foreign exchange for reserves accumulation purposes, and in the process 
injects  rand  liquidity  into  the  domestic  money  market.  In  order  for  domestic  money-market 
conditions to reflect the prevailing monetary policy stance as determined by the MPC, such 
liquidity needs to be sterilised (or drained) from the system. This is done, inter alia, by open-
market  operations  conducted  by  the  Bank  by  way  of  issuing  SARB  debentures,  and 
conducting reverse repurchase transactions. These transactions, which effectively amount to 
a borrowing of rands, are undertaken, in terms of cost, at or around the repo rate which is 
currently 5,5 per cent per annum.  
The  foreign  currency  that  is  purchased  is  then  invested  in  different  currencies,  that  is,  in 
US dollars,  euros  and  pound  sterling.  In  the  current  difficult  economic  climate,  these 
investments generally earn low rates of return, currently below 1 per cent per annum.  
This  negative  interest  rate  differential  has  resulted  in  the  R1,16 billion  loss  reported  in  the 
Annual  Report  2010/11.  Unrealised  and  realised  fair  value  gains  and  losses  on  financial 
assets and financial liabilities are also included in the interest income line item and are for 
the account of the Bank.  
The  losses  incurred,  as  in  2009/10,  were  covered  by  drawing  down  on  the  contingency 
reserve, which declined from R9,1 billion to R7,94 billion for the Bank. Once the Bank returns 
to  profitability,  there  will  be  a  need  to  rebuild  the  contingency  reserve,  and  reconsider  the 
level that this should stand at taking account of recent experience.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It is important to point out that the losses were incurred in the execution of the Bank’s public 
duties and do not in any way relate to operational deficiencies or undue risks being taken. 
The Bank has a sound risk management framework, a disciplined budgeting process, and 
prudent expenditure management.  
Gold and foreign exchange contingency reserve account 
The  Gold  and  Foreign  Exchange  Contingency  Reserve  Account  originates  from  sections 
25 to 28  of  the  SARB  Act.  The  GFECRA  consists  of  three  sub-accounts  which  reflect  the 
following transactions:  
(a) 
 
Gold price adjustment account 
All profits and losses on gold holdings arising from price fluctuations and revaluation 
movements are recorded in this account. 
Foreign-exchange adjustment account 
All  revaluation  profits  and  losses  on  foreign  assets  arising  from  exchange  rate 
movements against the rand are recorded in this account.  
Forward exchange contracts adjustment account 
All revaluation profits and losses arising from exchange rate movements against the 
rand  on  outstanding  commitments  in  the  forward  Foreign-exchange  market  and 
foreign currency – denominated liabilities of the Bank are recorded in this account.  
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
All  the  above  amounts  are  for  the  account  of  Government  in  terms  of  the  SARB  Act. 
Settlement of this account is subject to agreement between the Bank and Government. The 
current arrangement is that only transactions that have affected liquidity in the South African 
money market will be settled.  
Question 2 – Reserves management and holding thereof, including the issue of 
US dollar vs gold 
While  South  Africa  follows  the  international  convention  of  reporting  official  reserves  in 
US dollars,  the  portfolios  of  reserves  are  diversified  in  approved  currencies  which 
predominantly  comprise  US dollars,  euros  and  pound  Sterling.  The  notes  to  the  financial 
statements  (Note  29  on  page  98  of  the  Annual  Report)  give  an  indication  of  the  extent  of 
currency diversification.  
Gold  reserves  constituted  approximately  12 per cent  of  total  official  reserves  at  the  end  of 
March 2011.  
The  Bank  has  held  around  4 million  fine  ounces  of  gold  for  some  time,  and  when  such 
holdings are reviewed account is taken of both the cost of acquiring further gold reserves and 
any returns that could be earned from owning more gold.  
The  Bank  has  adopted  a  conservative  and  prudent  approach  to  investing  the  reserves, 
guided  by  a  clear  governance  framework  and  investment  policy.  The  investment  policy 
captures  the  objectives,  rationale  and  the  risk  tolerance  of  the  Bank  for  holding  these 
reserves.  The  inherent  risks  in  reserves  management  are  mitigated  by  well-defined 
investment guidelines.  
Question 3 – Clarification of certain aspects of the remuneration of directors (Note 30 
on page 102 of the Annual Report) 
The remuneration of directors for the year ended March 2011 reflects a general adjustment 
of 6 per cent over the amounts paid for 2010. In addition, the amounts paid in 2011 include:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
     an “arrears adjustment” of 3,1 per cent in respect of the 2009/10 financial year. In 
keeping  with  a  decision  taken  at  the  start  of  the  2009/10  financial  year  that  the 
increase  be  inflation  outcome  linked,  Board  members  were  paid  only  an  interim 
adjustment  of  3,4 per cent,  on  the  understanding  that  the  balance  would  be  paid 
once  the  inflation-outcome  for  that  year  was  known.  Consequently,  the  “arrears 
adjustment”  was  paid  in  the  2010/11  financial  year  with  the  resultant  percentage 
increase distortion;  
payments  for  service  as  chairpersons  and/or  members  of  Board  committees,  and 
changes in the composition and chairpersons of the Board committees between the 
2010 and 2011 financial years. This implies increases in retainers and attendance 
fees;  
the  establishment  of  the  Board  Risk  Committee  on  25  February  2010,  which 
resulted in payments to the Chairperson and members of this committee during the 
2011  financial  year,  compared  to  the  previous  financial  year  when  the  committee 
was in existence for only one month, and hardly any payments were made;  
an  above-average  increase  in  the  remuneration  of  Dr  X  P  Guma  with  effect  from 
29 May 2010 owing to his appointment as Senior Deputy Governor from that date; 
and  
an above-average increase in the remuneration of Prof R W K Parsons for services 
as  non-executive  director  of  a  subsidiary  owing  to  the  fact  that  he  served  for  a 
longer period than before in such capacity during the 2011 financial year. He also 
served  on  one  additional  Board  committee  of  the  subsidiary  during  the  2011 
financial year.  
Question 4 – Code of ethics 
The Code of Ethics was adopted by the SARB Board in February 2010, and has been part of 
internal discussions throughout the Bank. It will be published on the Internet in due course, 
together with a comprehensive value statement that is being developed throughout the Bank.  
Question 5 – Additions to property, plant and equipment 
A question was raised with regard to the additions in plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 
(Note 10.1 page 85), which has increased from R52 million in the prior year to R205 million. 
It  has  been  necessary  to  invest  in  machinery  and  equipment  at  the  branches  and 
manufacturing subsidiaries. Going forward, we expect more such investment to take place to 
ensure  optimal  functioning  and  best  use  of  new  technology  to  maintain  both  quality  and 
performance from the Bank and its subsidiaries.  
Question 6 – Panel process and nominations 
A question was asked as to whether the Bank remains satisfied with the quality of candidates 
available to serve as non-executive directors on the Board. It was also said that the Panel 
process  is  not  transparent  as  to  who  has  nominated  the  candidate,  what  the  quality  of 
candidates is and shareholders have not been given the opportunity to meet and interview 
the candidates for election.  
The Panel was established in terms of section 4(1C) of the Act, which Act further stipulates 
the  process  of  nominating  the  candidates  and  the  review  process.  I  can  confirm  that 
nominations were received during March 2011 from the general public and were collated by 
the Secretariat for circulation to the Panel members.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Panel  met  on  16  April  2011  to  assess  the  nominations  and  to  confirm  the  selected 
candidates  for  consideration  by  the  shareholders.  In  total,  84  nominations  were  received. 
The experience and qualifications of the candidates varied, and included business people, 
academics,  accountants,  lawyers  and  other  professional  persons.  The  Panel  was  satisfied 
with the level of qualifications, skills and business acumen of the majority of the candidates, 
as could be determined from the curriculum vitae (CVs) presented. Three candidates have 
been  identified  and  confirmed  in  each  of  the  categories  where  vacancies  will  arise  on 
1 July 2011, and the Panel is satisfied that these are persons of good standing and have the 
requisite  knowledge  and  skills  to  fulfil  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  a  non-executive 
director.  
From reading the CVs of the nine possible candidates circulated to you, I have no doubt you 
will concur that all nominees are well known in their fields of expertise and reflect the highest 
standards of integrity and professionalism. Moreover, it is the responsibility of the Panel to 
assess the candidates, not that of shareholders. I am not aware of any precedent in the Bank 
where shareholders interviewed prospective nominees. It is also important to point out that 
this  process  allows  for  the  public  at  large  to  make  nominations,  and  therefore  the  pool  of 
participants, both proposers and nominees, has been broadened. This is important as, given 
the  small  number  of  shareholders  of  the  Bank,  nominations  limited  to  them  could  be 
construed as contrary to sound principles of central bank governance.  
Question 7 – King III compliance 
The  Bank  has  been  requested  to  expand  upon  its  King  III  Code  of  Governance  (King  III) 
compliance  and  to  explain  where  it  does  not  apply  the  recommendations  as  set  out  in 
King III,  in  more  detail.  As  discussed  at  the  2010  (OGM),  the  Bank  has  conducted  a 
Bankwide  gap  analysis,  and  steps  are  being  taken  to  address  those  areas  we  regard  as 
having room for improvement. It is necessary to emphasise that King III is a voluntary code, 
and a tool for enhancing governance, which is the approach the Bank has taken.  
Question 8 – Definition of corporate body 
A request has been made to set out clearly the definition and status of the Bank with regard 
to  profitability.  The  SARB  Act  clearly  stipulates  that  the  Bank  is  a  juristic  person,  with  its 
primary objective being to protect the value of the currency of the Republic in the interest of 
balanced and sustainable economic growth. There should be no ambiguity about this matter. 
The Bank does not perform its duties with a profit motive. On the contrary, in the exercise of 
its responsibilities, it may well take actions that are in the national interest but will result in the 
Bank being loss-making.  
It is the obligation of the Bank to act in the best interests of the country, and not in the narrow 
interests of the profitability of the Bank or its shareholders. There are legal limits placed on 
the  rights  of  the  shareholders  of  the  Bank  –  for  instance  a  limit  of  10,000  shares,  a  fixed 
dividend, the election of only some of the non-executive Board members and no role in the 
appointment of the Governor and deputy governors, among others.  
Amendments to the SARB Act 
The amendments to the SARB Act were promulgated in September 2010. In terms of these 
amendments, membership of the Board of the Bank was expanded from 14 to 15. The Board 
has also agreed to use as a guideline the nine-year rule contained in King III for the service 
periods of Board members. As a result, three new non-executive directors will be elected by 
shareholders  at  this  OGM.  There  are  currently  four  vacancies  for  non-executive  directors 
appointed  by  Government.  Once  all  these  appointments  have  been  made,  the  Board  will 
comprise  a  significant  proportion  of  new  members.  While  this  may  raise  challenges  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
continuity,  I  am  confident  that  the  new-look  Board  will  continue  to  maintain  effective 
corporate governance oversight of the Bank.  
Other changes to the Board have come about as a result of the appointment of Mr Lesetja 
Kganyago as Deputy Governor, who assumed office on 16 May 2011. I would like to take this 
opportunity  to  welcome  him  again  to  the  Bank.  He  brings  a  wealth  of  knowledge  and 
experience,  and  his  positive  impact  is  already  being  felt.  I  would  also  like  to  take  the 
opportunity to bid farewell to Senior Deputy Governor Dr X P Guma who has indicated to the 
President of the Republic that he is not available for reappointment when his contract expires 
at  the  end  of  July  2011,  after  10  years  as  Deputy  Governor.  I  wish  to  thank  him  for  his 
service to the Bank. It is also fitting to pay tribute on this occasion to Mr Errol Kruger whose 
career  in  the  Bank  spanned  34  years.  As  Registrar  of  Banks  he  played  a  critical  role  in 
ensuring  the  soundness  of  the  South  African  banking  system.  We  wish  them  both  well  in 
their new undertakings.  
Let us now turn to the formal business of the day, which includes the following matters:  
Firstly,  to  consider  the  minutes  of  the  Ordinary  General  Meeting  of  shareholders  held  on 
8 December 2010.  
Secondly,  to  present  and  discuss  the  annual  financial  statements  and  the  reports  of  the 
Board of Directors and the auditors of the Bank for the financial year ended 31 March 2011.  
Thirdly, to request shareholders to elect non-executive directors, to fill the three vacancies 
on  the  Board  of  Directors  for  persons  with  knowledge  and  skills  in  commence  or  finance; 
labour; and mining.  
Fourthly, to approve the remuneration of the auditors of the Bank for the past audit.  
Fifthly, to appoint auditors for the 2011/12 financial year.  
And finally, to consider any further business duly placed and to be transacted at an ordinary 
general meeting.  
The Office of the Secretary received no requests for special business to be placed on the 
agenda of this meeting from any shareholders other than Mr Duerr. Mr Duerr attempted to 
place some 15 items of purported special business on the agenda of this meeting, including 
5 items which he attempted to place on the agenda of last year’s OGM. None of the items 
qualified  as  special  business  as  contemplated  in  regulation  7.3(d)  read  with  regulation 
12.3 of the Regulations, and Mr Duerr, was in writing, together with reasons, informed of this 
position. The matters addressed above during my speech do, however, cover many of the 
items raised by Mr Duerr as they formed part of the ordinary business of the meeting.  
Notwithstanding  the  above,  I  would  like  to  deal  with  some  matters  relating  to  Mr  Michael 
Duerr.  It  is  unusual  to  single  out  one  shareholder,  but  given  the  extent  to  which  Mr  Duerr 
claims to speak on behalf of all shareholders, and his consistent communication of all issues 
raised  with  the  Bank  to  a  wide  range  of  media,  we  feel  it  is  necessary  to  put  the  record 
straight.  
Mr Michael Duerr has been a shareholder in the Bank since about March 2006. Mr Duerr is a 
shareholder  who  does  not  normally  reside  in  South  Africa,  and  is  therefore  subject  to  the 
legal provisions applicable to shareholders who are not ordinarily resident in South Africa. In 
the  main,  the  legal  implication  is  that  Mr  Duerr  (as  is  the  case  with  all  other  non-resident 
shareholders) cannot vote at any general meeting of shareholders of the Bank. Non-resident 
shareholders,  of  whatever  nationality,  even  if  South  African  nationals,  have  not  been 
permitted to vote virtually since the inception of the Bank, and this is clearly spelt out in the 
SARB Act. Mr Duerr should have been aware of this and other limitations on shareholders at 
the time he bought the Bank’s shares. However, Mr Duerr refuses to accept that the SARB 
Act lawfully prohibits persons who do not ordinarily reside in South Africa from voting, and he 
has  raised  issues  with  regard  to  the  enforceability  of  this  measure  with  the  Bank  on 
numerous occasions.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  his  queries.  We  have  received  more 
We  have  spent  literally  hundreds  of  management  hours  responding  to  often  spurious, 
slanderous  and  sometimes  downright  bizarre  interventions  by  Mr  Duerr.  The  Bank’s  Legal 
Counsel  and  his  team  have  spent  some  385  hours  since  the  middle  of  last  year  just 
responding 
than  60  e-mails  and  other 
correspondence, running to more than 160 pages. Apart from the tone, language, unfounded 
allegations  and  abuse  contained  in  this  correspondence,  there  have  been  no  less  than 
61 demands, often stipulating responses expected within hours. By any standards, this is not 
in the interest of good governance or efficient or effective operations.  
We have reflected the hours spent by the Legal Counsel, but the interaction also takes up 
the  time  of  the  Governors,  the  Secretary  of  the  Bank  and  the  Head  of  Strategy  and 
Communications. We can only conclude that harassment appears to be the actual intention, 
which is most unfortunate and hardly a good reflection on Mr Duerr, who claims that in these 
actions he is the “caretaker shareholder” acting for all shareholders. In this way he ostensibly 
abrogates to himself powers that can never be his, and seeks in the process to disempower 
the vast majority of shareholders by evidently suggesting that he speaks in your name.  
Allow me to quote from some of the public statements that have been made by Mr Duerr.  
On 2 March 2009 Mr Duerr forwarded an article titled “The Central Bank Hunter”, which had 
been published in an overseas publication styled “Börse Online”, to the Bank. It consisted of 
an interview with Mr Duerr in which he, among others, made the following statements:  
(a) 
he had stumbled upon the astonishing fact that the Bank (being a central bank) was 
100 per cent privately owned, and started buying himself into the organisation;  
in order to side-step/circumvent the limitation of half a per cent of the issued shares 
that may be owned by a single shareholder, he ordered shares in the name of family 
members to their personal limit, resulting in his wife, children, parents and parents-
in-law becoming part of the deal;  
his family held about five per cent, his personal friends an estimated five per cent 
and partners who had joined the business owned an estimated five to ten per cent of 
the Bank’s shares;  
this business was not expensive for him, measured against the two million issued 
shares and their value expressed in euros;  
his initial purpose for buying the shares, namely to prevent the erection of a nuclear 
power plant near his property, had been superseded by an approach of achieving 
the maximum possible return on capital from his investment;  
in  his  opinion  it  would  amount  to  R4 206 per share  and  this  would  be  most  easily 
achieved  through  nationalisation  of  the  Bank  as  in  such  an  event  shareholders 
would be entitled to 40 per cent of the reserves of the Bank;  
he was persisting in his attempts to acquire more Bank shares; and  
from his side he wanted to increase the pressure on the central bank and threatened 
to pass on shares under his influence to the Chinese or the Indians. In this vein he 
pointed out that there are many investors who would be prepared to pay millions in 
order to have access to a political lever.  
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
In various correspondence Mr Duerr has behaved in a threatening manner, including laying 
criminal charges against the Bank’s Legal Counsel, which have been dismissed as without 
foundation by the National Prosecuting Authority. To give  a sense of the tone he tends to 
adopt, I quote from his letter to Dr Johann de Jager of 19 November 2010: “Dear ‘old foe’ 
Johann,  this  is  the  only  nickname  you  can  expect  from  me  after  your  seriously  bad 
behaviour, stupidity and arrogance over the last few years …Just delay the AGM otherwise 
you ask for the next fracas, with all the media bells and whistles attached. I hope this finds 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
you well and you have your blood pressure tablets handy. Do you choose the carrot or the 
stick?”.  
Correspondence  from  Mr  Duerr  is  regularly  copied  to  the  media  and  other  parties.  As  an 
example, in submitting questions to me on 17 November 2010, over 80 people from national 
and  international  media,  the  Government,  Parliament  and  members  of  the  legal  fraternity 
were included in the mailing list. This is no doubt part of his efforts to question the integrity of 
the Governor and the governance of the Bank.  
Profit maximisation has never been a motive for holding shares in the Bank. The limits set 
out in law of a fixed dividend and the limited holding of shares and voting rights available to 
private shareholders underline the fact that the Bank – like its counterparts in other countries – 
is a national asset that acts in the public interest. Shareholding in the Reserve Bank is not 
the same concept as shareholding in a JSE-listed commercial enterprise.  
It is a simple but incontrovertible fact that shareholders have an interest in, but do not own, 
the Reserve Bank. Parliament has reconfirmed this in the most-recent amendments to the 
SARB Act, and every shareholder is aware of the numerous legal limitations when he or she 
purchases shares. That is a pretty clear state of affairs. It is accepted and embraced by the 
vast majority of the Bank’s shareholders, from the large commercial banks to individuals from 
many  walks  of  life  for  whom  a  shareholding  is  a  contribution  to  the  entrenchment  and 
enhancement of the Bank’s independence.  
Given the claims made for a distribution of the profits and reserves of the Bank, I take this 
opportunity to refer to the judgement of the Court of Appeal in Brussels regarding the claims 
against the National Bank of Belgium by a group of its shareholders.  
The Court of Appeal in Brussels on 1 June 2011 delivered judgement  in the final pending 
legal dispute between a group of shareholders and the National Bank of Belgium. The Court 
confirmed, in a clear and convincingly motivated judgement, an earlier judgement delivered 
on 30 September 2010 in which it was held that shareholders had no right whatsoever to the 
gold reserves and the profits realised thereon.  
The  appeal  was  dismissed  as  unsubstantiated  and  a  cost  order  was  granted  against  the 
appellants  of  twice  30,000  euro  (or  twice  207 euro per share)  which  was  payable  to  the 
National Bank and the Belgium Government respectively.  
The  judgement  concluded  a  series  of  legal  disputes  instituted  against  the  National 
Bank/Belgium Government by two groups of shareholders, representing a small minority of 
shareholders in the National Bank.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Responsible  shareholders  help  entrench  and  enhance  the  Bank’s  independence.  They 
support its public interest mission. They see in a private shareholding in the Bank first and 
foremost an opportunity to interact with the Bank and gain a deeper insight into the economy. 
They recognise this is not a get rich quick scheme.  
Diversity of stakeholders remains a key intention of the Reserve Bank, of the Government, 
and of all serious shareholders. In fact, the most-recent amendments to the SARB Act have 
significantly  broadened  and  strengthened  our  diversity  and  our  ability  to  act  without  fear, 
favour, or undue influence from any quarter, whether at home or abroad.  
Your  responsible  exercise  of  your  rights  and  duties  as  shareholders  make  a  significant 
contribution to the diversity and independence necessary for us to fulfil our mandate. With 
this contribution you help build the enormous goodwill and trust the Bank enjoys from across 
a wide spectrum of communities in the country.  
In so doing, you help build the South African economy and you contribute to nation building. 
Allow me to express my appreciation for your contribution and to ask that you continue to 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
support the very important work of the South African Reserve Bank, particularly at this very 
crucial time in history.  
To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  all business  included  in  the  agenda  of  today’s  meeting  has 
been transacted.  
I wish to thank President Zuma and the Presidency, the Government and Parliament for their 
continued  support.  The  sound  working  relationship  between  the  Bank  and  the  National 
Treasury  has  continued,  and  I  thank  Finance  Minister  Pravin  Gordhan,  Deputy  Minister 
Nhlanhla  Nene  and  the  staff  of  the  National  Treasury  for  their  ongoing  support.  We  also 
thank Mr Lesetja Kganyago as the former Director General, and are confident that the strong 
ties between the Bank and the National Treasury will continue to bear fruit as we build on the 
firm foundations already in place. We look forward to our continued sound working with the 
new Director General, Mr Lungisa Fuzile, and wish him well.  
Sincere thanks are also due to the members of the Board for ensuring appropriate corporate 
governance in the Bank. We pay particular tribute to the three Board members whose terms 
of office end today, namely Ms Thandi Orleyn, Dr Len Konar and Ms Zodwa Manase for their 
years  of  service  and  support.  Sincere  appreciation  is  also due  to  Senior  Deputy  Governor 
Guma  and  Deputy  Governor  Mminele,  as  well  as  the  entire  management  and  staff  of  the 
Bank for their dedication and commitment in dealing with the issues we have had to face in 
these very challenging times.  
As was the case at the time of the establishment of the Bank, we face a challenging global 
and  domestic  environment.  In  the  90  years  of  its  existence,  the  Bank  has  been  able  to 
navigate successfully through many turbulent periods. Over the years, economic theory and 
policies have also evolved in response to changing circumstances. The Bank is fortunate to 
have skilled and professional staff who will enable it to continue to keep abreast of the latest 
developments  in  the  policy  environment,  and  remain  focused  on  the  implementation  of 
appropriate and sustainable policies in the interests of all South Africans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
