Deepak Mohanty: Indian economy – progress and prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Harvard Business School, Boston, 27 September 2011. 
 The assistance provided by Dhritidyuti Bose and Abhiman Das is acknowledged. 
It is an honour and privilege for me to be speaking at Harvard to such a distinguished 
audience.  I  thank  Professor  Benjamin  Friedman  and  Professor  Tarun  Khanna  for  this 
opportunity. I will be speaking on the Indian Economy. 
India  is  home  to  1.21  billion  people,  which  is  about  17.4  per  cent  of  the  global 
population. However, it accounts for only 2.4 per cent of world GDP in US dollar terms and 
5.5 per cent in purchasing power parity (ppp) terms. Hence, there exists a huge potential for 
catch up. The global welfare too is linked to progress in India as reflected in the keen global 
interest in India. But, India seems to inspire and disappoint at the same time. This is reflected 
in  various  comments  on  the  Indian  economy.  Yasheng  Huang  and  Tarun  Khanna  in  their 
much debated article in July 2003 issue of Foreign Policy had observed: “Can India surpass 
China?  This  is  no  longer  a  silly  question”.  The  July  23rd  2011  issue  of  The  Economist 
observed; “Twenty years ago they said the yardstick against which India should be measured 
was its potential. On that measure, there is much to do.” 
As a fledgling democracy, India’s economic experiment of planned development was 
held  out  as  an  example  to  many  aspiring  low-income  countries  in  the  1950s.  While  some 
countries raced ahead in the development process, India lagged behind. This is evident from 
the fact that it took 40 long years from 1950–51 for India’s real per capita GDP to double by 
1990–91.  But,  1991–92  was  a  defining  moment  in  India’s  modern  economic  history  as  a 
severe balance of payments (BoP) crisis prompted far reaching economic reforms, unlocking 
its growth potential. As a result, in only 15 years, India’s per capita income doubled again by 
2006–07. If the current pace of growth is maintained, India’s per capita income could further 
double by 2017–18, in 10 years time. While acceleration in India’s recent economic growth is 
noteworthy, maintaining the pace, no doubt, will be challenging. 
Against this background, I propose to highlight the key policy reforms since 1991–92, 
review the economic progress made so far and then conclude with some reflections on policy 
challenges in the way forward. 
Policy reforms post-1991 
Macroeconomic  crisis  of  1991  marked  a  turning  point  in  India’s  economic  history  for 
two reasons. First, fiscal deficit driven external payment crisis with a dip in foreign exchange 
reserves  to  below  US$  1  billion  in  July  1991  drew  a  crisis  resolution  strategy  to  restore 
macroeconomic  stability.  Sharp  correction 
fiscal  deficit-GDP  ratio  and  reduced 
monetisation  of  deficits  contributed  towards  restoring  macroeconomic  balance  by  the  mid-
1990s. The reduced dependence of fisc on monetisation enabled the Reserve Bank of India 
to  reduce  its  statutory  pre-emption  of  funds  from  banks,  thereby  freeing  resources  for  the 
private  sector.  Second,  simultaneously  efforts  were  made  towards  wide  ranging  structural 
reforms encompassing areas of trade, exchange rate management, industry, public finance 
and the financial sector. 
in 
An  abiding  objective  in  respect  of  industrial  policy  measures  since  then  has  been  to 
create a competitive environment to improve productivity and efficiency. New industrial policy 
fostered  competition  by  abolishing  monopoly 
the  phased 
manufacturing  programmes,  freeing  foreign  direct  investment  and  import  of  foreign 
technology  and  de-reservation  of  sectors  hitherto  reserved  for  the  public  sector.  These 
restrictions, 
terminating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
measures created a favourable environment for industry to upgrade its technology and build-
up its capacity through imports in order to cater to growing domestic and external demand. 
At present, only five industries are under licensing, mainly on account of environmental, 
health,  safety  and  strategic  considerations.  Only  two  industries  are  reserved  for  the  public 
sector,  viz,  atomic  energy  and  railway  transport.  Reservation  of  industrial  products  for  the 
small  scale  sector  is  still  a  lingering  issue.  However,  the  definition  of  small  scale  industry 
(SSI) has been changed to facilitate modernisation and now only 20 items are reserved for 
manufacturing in the small scale sector. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) up to 100 per cent is 
allowed under the automatic route in most sectors, with a few exceptions. 
The infrastructure sector has been thrown open to the private sector. Considering the 
large  requirements  of  funds  for  infrastructure,  100  per  cent  FDI  has  been  allowed  in  all 
infrastructure  sectors.  There  are  extended  tax  holidays  to  enterprises  engaged  in  the 
business  of  development,  operation,  and  maintenance  of  infrastructure  facilities.  The 
emphasis has been on public-private partnership (PPP) as one of the preferred modes for 
infrastructure project implementation. 
Comprehensive  fiscal  reforms  covered  tax  reforms,  restructuring  of  public  sector 
undertakings  and  improving  fiscal-monetary  coordination  before  eventually  carrying  these 
reforms  forward  under  rule  based  fiscal  consolidation  path  from  2004–05,  which  was 
interrupted  by  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008–09.  Reduction  in  customs  duties  over  the 
years reflected India’s commitment towards converging towards the ASEAN levels over the 
medium-term. 
The monetary policy framework and the associated operating procedures of monetary 
policy  in  India  have  evolved  over  time  with  the  changes  in  the  underlying  macroeconomic 
structure and development of financial markets. A landmark development was the abolition of 
the  system  of  automatic  monetisation  of  fiscal  deficit  from  April  1997,  which  provided 
instrument  independence  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy. 
This,  combined  with  the  introduction  of  auctioning  system  in  the  government  securities, 
enabled the Reserve Bank to switch from direct to indirect instruments of monetary control. 
With  the  opening  up  of  the  economy  and  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector,  the 
stability of money demand function became suspect. The Reserve Bank, therefore, switched 
from  a  monetary  targeting  framework,  adopted  in  the  mid-1980s,  to  a  multiple  indicator 
approach.  Under  this  approach,  various  indicators  such  as  rates  of  return  in  different 
markets,  movements  in  currency,  credit,  fiscal  position,  trade,  capital  flows,  inflation  rate, 
exchange  rate,  refinancing  and  transactions  in  foreign  exchange  –  available  on  a  high 
frequency  basis  –  are  juxtaposed  with  output  data  for  drawing  policy  perspectives.  This 
approach  continued  to  evolve  and  is  presently  in  its  augmented  version,  wherein  forward 
looking  indicators  drawn  from  the  Reserve  Bank’s  industrial  outlook  survey,  capacity 
utilisation survey, professional forecasters’ survey and inflation expectations survey are used 
for macroeconomic assessment. The operating procedure of monetary policy also underwent 
a change with the overnight interest rate emerging as the operating target of monetary policy. 
In the financial sector, the objective was to provide operational flexibility and functional 
autonomy to banks and other financial institutions so that they could allocate resources more 
efficiently. Some of the important initiatives in the financial sector were: reduction in statutory 
preemptions so as to release greater funds for commercial lending, interest rate deregulation 
to  enable  price  discovery,  allowing  new  private  sector  banks  to  create  a  more  competitive 
environment,  dilution  of  government  holding  in  public  sector  banks  and  institution  of 
prudential  norms  such  as  capital  adequacy,  income  recognition,  asset  classification, 
provisioning  and  exposure  norms  to  strengthen  the  health  of  the  banking  system  besides 
improving transparency and disclosure standards. 
The development of financial markets has been regarded as a critical prerequisite for 
improving  the  operational  effectiveness  of  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  During  the 
first  phase  of  financial  sector  reforms,  various  structural  rigidities  were  eased,  so  as  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increase participation in financial markets as well as develop and strengthen inter-linkages 
amongst market segments, and foster competition. The focus of various reform measures in 
financial  market  was  on  ensuring  adequate  liquidity  in  various  segments  of  the  market 
spectrum, and developing the regulatory, legal, institutional and technological infrastructure 
for orderly functioning of market activity. In the second phase of reforms, more sophisticated 
financial  instruments  were  introduced.  Further,  issues  relating  to  the  stability  of  financial 
markets received priority in the policy agenda. 
The key objective of the external reforms was to move to a more open trade regime by 
correcting for the implicit anti-export bias. Moreover, there was a greater recognition of the 
need  to  view  trade  policies,  exchange  rate  policies  and  industrial  policies  in  an  integrated 
manner. In pursuance of this, the administered exchange rate regime gave way to a flexible 
market-determined system. The exchange rate has since been guided by underlying demand 
and  supply  conditions  and  the  broad  principles  of  careful  monitoring  and  management  of 
exchange rates with flexibility, without a fixed or preannounced target or band. 
The  trade  policy  reforms  comprised  withdrawal  of  the  quantitative  restrictions  on 
exports and imports, phasing out of the system of import licensing and lowering the level and 
dispersion of nominal tariffs so as to bring them on par with the East Asian economies. The 
peak customs tariff rate was progressively brought down from 150 per cent in 1991–92 to 
10 per cent by 2008–09. The liberalization of restrictions on various external transactions led 
to  current  account  convertibility  under  Article  VIII  of  the  Articles  of  Agreement  of  the  IMF 
in 1994. 
With  respect  to  capital  account  liberalization,  India  embarked  on  a  gradual  and  well 
sequenced  opening  up  of  the  capital  account.  The  active  capital  account  management 
framework was based on a preference for non-debt creating capital inflows like foreign direct 
investment  and  foreign  portfolio  investment.  The  capital  account  is  virtually  free  for  non-
residents and resident corporates with some restrictions on financial institutions and higher 
restrictions on resident individuals. 
Economic progress post-1991 
The initiation of economic reforms in the 1990s saw India gradually breaking free of the 
low growth trap which was euphemistically called the “Hindu growth rate” of 3.5 per cent per 
annum. Real GDP growth averaged 5.7 per cent per annum in the 1990s, which accelerated 
further to 7.3 per cent per annum in 2000s. A feature of the growth acceleration during the 
period was that while the growth rate of industry and services increased that of agriculture 
fell.  This  was  because  there  was  no  notable  technological  breakthrough  after  the  “green 
revolution”  of  the  mid-1960s  which  saw  sharp  increase  in  yields  of  cereal  production 
particularly in northern part of India. By the 1990s, the momentum of “green revolution” had 
died  down.  Consequently,  the  yield  increases  in  the  2000s  were  much  lower  than  those 
experienced even in the 1990s. 
Notably,  the  decade  of  the  2000s  encompassed  the  inflexion  point  in  the  growth 
trajectory  with  an  annual  average  GDP  growth  of  about  9  per  cent  for  the  5-year  period 
2004–08.  Growth  in  all  the  sub-sectors  of  the  economy,  including  agriculture,  accelerated 
during this period. However, this growth process was interrupted by the global financial crisis. 
Subsequently,  the  average  growth  slowed  down  to  7.8  per  cent  during  2009–11  with  a 
noticeable slow down in both agriculture and industry. 
The growth dynamics altered the structure of the Indian economy with a decline in the 
share of agriculture from 28.4 per cent in the 1990s to about 15 per cent in 2009–11. There 
was corresponding gain in the share of services, including construction, from 52 per cent to 
65  per  cent  during  the  same  period.  What  is,  however,  of  concern  is  that  the  share  of 
industry has remained unchanged at around 20 per cent of GDP. This suggests that India’s 
growth acceleration during the last two decades has been dominated by the services sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The pace of average annual industrial growth had nevertheless picked up from 5.7 per cent 
during  the  1990s  to  9  per  cent  during  2004–08  before  being  interrupted  by  the  global 
financial crisis (Table 1). 
 While the share of industry in GDP remained stagnant, there was noteworthy structural 
transformation  in  manufacturing  over  the  period.  As  a  process  of  restructuring,  while  the 
gross value added in organized manufacturing increased by 8 per cent per annum at current 
prices, employment fell by 1.5 per cent per annum during 1995–2003. Subsequently, during 
2004–09 gross value added growth accelerated to 20 per cent per annum at current prices; 
but significantly, employment also increased by 7.5 per cent per annum. 
With  work  participation  rate  of  39.2 per  cent,  India  had  a  workforce  of 400  million  in 
2009–10. Of this, 53 per cent was in agriculture and the rest 47 per cent in non-agricultural 
activity.  While  the  bulk  of  the  employment  is  in  agriculture  despite  its  shrinking  share,  the 
noteworthy feature of the employment structure has been that for the first time the absolute 
workforce  in  agriculture  declined  in  the  latter  half  of  the  2000s  (Table  2).  The  overall 
unemployment  rate  in  the  economy  also  declined  from  8.3  per  cent  in  2004–05  to 
6.6 per cent in 2009–10. 
Not surprisingly, the growth acceleration was accompanied by a sharp pick-up in the 
rate of growth of gross fixed capital formation which had more than doubled from an annual 
average of 7.2 per cent in the 1990s to 15.7 per cent in the high growth phase of 2004–08. It, 
however, has dropped significantly in the post-crisis period to 5.8 per cent (Table 1). 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The structure of Indian economy also underwent a change during this period in terms 
of openness. The stereotypical view that India is a closed economy has not been borne out 
by  the  openness  of  Indian  economy  which  was  increasing  rapidly.  Exports  and  imports  of 
goods  and  services  have  more  than  doubled  from  23  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  1990s  to 
50 per cent  in  the  recent  period  of  2009–11.  If  the  trade  flows  are  considered  alongside 
capital flows, the rise in openness (measured as current receipts and payments plus capital 
receipts  and  payments)  was  more  dramatic  from  42  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  1990s  to 
107 per cent in the recent period (Table 3) Empirical evidence suggests that with increasing 
openness  of  the  Indian  economy,  the  trade  and  industrial  cycles  were  getting  more 
synchronised with the global business cycle. 
 The high growth phase of 2004–08 was accompanied by sharp increase in exports and 
imports  as  well  as  capital  inflows.  Net  capital  inflows  as  percentage  of  GDP  more  than 
doubled  from  2.2  per  cent  in  the  1990s  to  4.6  per  cent  of  GDP  during  2004–08. 
Subsequently, growth rates in both trade and capital inflows moderated following the global 
financial  crisis.  The  openness  of  the  Indian  economy  has  been  accompanied  by 
improvement in India’s external position as the debt to GDP ratio fell from about 29 per cent 
in the 1990s to 19 per cent in the recent period. The debt service ratio has also declined from 
25 per cent to under 5 per cent during the period (Table 4). 
The openness in the capital account has resulted in two-way movement in capital with 
a sharp pick-up in India’s outward FDI since the mid-2000s (Table 5). Uptrend in outward FDI 
mainly  reflected  the  large  overseas  acquisition  deals  of  Indian  corporates  to  gain  market 
share  and  reap  economies  of  scale  amidst  progressive  liberalisation  of  the  external 
payments regime. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Gradual  improvements  were  also  observed  in  the  fiscal  position  with  fiscal  deficit 
moderating sharply during the high growth phase of 2004–08, which also coincided with a 
period  of  switch  over  to  a  rule  based  fiscal  consolidation  process.  In  fact,  the  high  growth 
phase of 2004–08 saw a primary surplus for the Centre enhancing debt sustainability. The 
deficit  indicators,  however,  have  deteriorated  in  the  recent  period  following  crisis  induced 
fiscal expansion (Table 6). 
 The average saving rate also showed a substantial increase from 23 per cent of GDP 
in the 1990s to about 31 per cent in the 2000s with a peak saving rate of over 33 per cent 
achieved during the high growth phase of 2004–08. Fiscal consolidation helped in lifting the 
overall  saving  rate  as  public  sector  saving  rose  significantly.  The  efficiency  of  capital 
utilisation also improved as the incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) declined to 3.7 during 
the  high  growth  phase  of  2004–08  from  5  in  the  1990s.  Subsequently,  however,  capital 
efficiency has declined in the post-crisis period (Table 7). 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  high  growth  was  achieved  in  an  environment  of  price  stability  as  headline 
wholesale  price  index  (WPI)  inflation  dropped  to  an  annual  average  of  5.5  per  cent  in  the 
2000s  from  8.1  per  cent  in  the  1990s.  There  was  also  similar  drop  in  consumer  price 
inflation.  Subsequently,  however,  in  the  post-crisis  period  the  inflation  trend  has  reversed 
with the headline WPI inflation averaging over 7 per cent and the consumer price inflation 
crossing  double  digits  during  2009–11.  The  uptick  in  food  price  inflation  was  particularly 
sharp during 2009–11 (Table 8). 
 During  this  period,  financial  deepening  of  the  Indian  economy  has  also  increased: 
broad  money  (M3)  to  GDP  ratio  rose  from  an  average  of  50  per  cent  in  the  1990s  to 
85 per cent in the recent period of 2009–11. Credit penetration, measured as credit to GDP 
ratio, also increased from 21 per cent of GDP to about 50 per cent during this period. The 
high growth phase of 2004–08 was accompanied by acceleration in growth of bank credit to 
the  private  sector  to  about  27  per  cent  per  annum  from  about  15  per  cent  in  the  1990s. 
However, during the high growth phase of 2004–08, the average increase in M3 remained 
contained which aided price stability. This was made possible due to deceleration in banks’ 
investment in government securities to about 13 per cent per annum during 2004–08 from 
21 per  cent  in  the  1990s.  Fiscal  consolidation  opened  up  the  space  for  private  credit 
expansion without exerting much additional pressure on monetary expansion (Table 9). 
 Policy challenges 
The draft approach paper for the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012–17) released in August 
2011  targets  an  annual  GDP  growth  rate  of  9  per  cent.  This  is  challenging  but  not 
unattainable.  Why?  Because  India  has  already  achieved  an  average  growth  rate  of  about 
9 per cent during 2004–08 which was interrupted by the global financial crisis. Subsequently, 
average growth has dropped by about one percentage point to 7.8 per cent during 2009–11. 
In  2011–12,  the  terminal  year  of  the  Eleventh  Plan,  growth  is  expected  to  be  about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
8 per cent. Hence, growth will have to be raised by an additional percentage point per annum 
which  is  challenging  because  it  will  require  a  conducive  global  environment  and  policy 
reforms  at  home.  While  there  are  several  tasks  to  be  addressed,  I  will  focus  on  six  key 
issues. 
First, India will have to raise agricultural productivity and diversify agriculture to feed its 
own population. The food entitlement has increased with the public employment guarantee 
programme (MGNREGA) which guarantees for 100 days of employment to one member of 
each  family  in  the  rural  areas.  This  has  also  given  better  bargaining  power  to  labour  and 
consequently the overall wage rates have gone up raising the demand for food. While the 
country  currently  has  sufficient  foodgrains  stocks,  it  is  not  yet  self-sufficient  in  pulses  and 
oilseeds. Further, demand for protein based products like meat, egg, milk and fish as well as 
fruits  and  vegetables  has  increased  substantially  with  rise  in  income.  The  demand-supply 
mismatches  in  the  case  of  these  items  have  resulted  in  rise  in  their  prices.  There  is, 
therefore, a need for another technological breakthrough to give fresh impetus to agriculture. 
At  the  same  time,  greater  emphasis  will  have  to  be  placed  in  the  management  of  supply 
chain  with  investment  in  rural  infrastructure.  The  annual  growth  in  agriculture  has  to  be 
raised to at least 4 per cent from the current trend growth rate of around 3 per cent. 
Second, the fact that 53 per cent of overall work force is still engaged in the agricultural 
sector – whose share of GDP has shrunk considerably – is worrisome. A substantial part of 
this labour force will have to be ejected from agriculture not only to improve the productivity 
in  agriculture  but  also  in  the  overall  economy.  It  is  unconceivable  that  they  can  all  be 
absorbed gainfully in the services sector. Hence, industrial employment will have to expand 
so also the relative contribution of industry. This needs a focused attention as we have seen 
that the share of industry in the overall GDP has stagnated over the last two decades. In this 
direction,  the  Government  has  taken  up  a  major  policy  initiative  to  create  National 
Manufacturing and Investment Zones (NMIZ) to increase the sectoral share of manufacturing 
in GDP to 25 per cent by 2022 and double the current employment level in the sector. Good 
physical  infrastructure,  a  progressive  exit  policy,  structures  to  support  clean  and  green 
technologies, appropriate investment incentives, and business friendly approval mechanisms 
will be the cornerstones of this new initiative. 
Third, to support industrialization and increased economic activity, there is a need to 
step up investment in infrastructure. The assessment of the Planning Commission suggests 
an investment of `45 trillion (US $ 1 trillion) over the Twelfth Plan (2012–17). Given the large 
requirement  of  long-term  funds,  financing  infrastructure  would  be  a  big  challenge. Besides 
budgetary  support,  the  bulk  of  the  funds  has  emanated  from  banks.  However,  channelling 
domestic and foreign financial savings of this scale into infrastructure will require developing 
the  domestic  private  corporate  debt  market.  Apart  from  the  need  for  substantial  financial 
outlays  for  infrastructure,  there  are  several  non-financing  constraints:  particularly  land 
acquisition delays need to be addressed to avoid time and cost overruns. 
Fourth, there is a need for the Government to revert to its rule-based pre-crisis fiscal 
consolidation path without compromising on the quality of fiscal correction. This is necessary 
to obviate the risk of twin deficits and to raise the overall saving rate. This will require further 
reform  in  the  tax  structure  to  ensure  revenue  buoyancy  and  greater  focus  on  quality  of 
expenditure with an emphasis on reduction of subsidy. In this regard, major reforms in the 
pipeline are the introduction of an integrated Goods and Services Tax (GST) by the Centre 
and the States to reduce cascading effect and improve tax compliance and operationalisation 
of a Direct Taxes Code (DTC), to improve allocative efficiency and equity of the direct taxes. 
Fifth,  credit  markets  have,  historically,  played  a  crucial  role  in  sustaining  growth 
through efficient intermediation of funds between savers and investors. Although India has a 
well-diversified  financial  system,  and  several  measures  for  financial  inclusion  have  been 
taken in the recent past, credit penetration continues to be relatively low in comparison with 
several other developed and emerging market economies. The extent of financial exclusion 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is  staggering  with  around  61  per  cent  of  population  having  a  deposit  account  and  only 
10 per cent  of  population  having  a  credit  account.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  embarked  on  a 
plan of making available basic banking services to all habitations of population of over 2000 
by  2012  through  a  combination  of  brick  and  mortar  branches  and  a  system  of  business 
correspondents (BCs). Accelerated economic growth will depend on access to formal finance 
by the bulk of the population and greater credit penetration. 
Sixth, empirical evidence suggests that the threshold level of inflation is in the range of 
4–6 per cent. Hence, without bringing inflation down from the current level it will be difficult to 
sustain  a  high  level  of  growth.  This  will  require  greater  monetary-fiscal  coordination  and 
alleviation of supply constraints, particularly in agriculture. 
Conclusion 
Envisioning India’s emergence as a major economic power in the world, Dr. Manmohan 
Singh in his Union Budget 1991–92 speech that launched wide ranging economic reforms 
had  quoted  Victor  Hugo’s  saying,  “no  power  on  earth  can  stop  an  idea  whose  time  has 
come”. Ever since, there has been no looking back as India launched wide ranging structural 
reforms  and  has  made  significant  economic  progress  over  the  past  two  decades.  India’s 
industrial  environment  has  become  more  competitive  and  open,  infrastructural  gaps  have 
been sought to be bridged through public-private initiatives with both domestic and foreign 
sources  of  funding,  current  account  has  become  fully  convertible  while  capital  account  is 
virtually free for non-residents. The policy environment has become more enabling with rule-
based commitment on fiscal policy and considerable instrument independence for operation 
of  monetary  policy.  As  statutory  preemptions  were  reduced  and  interest  rates  were 
deregulated, banks gained operational autonomy for commercial lending. As a result, India’s 
per capita income, which had taken four decades to double by 1991, doubled thereafter in 
15 years  and  is  likely  to  double  again  in  10  years  by  2017–18.  If  India  could  maintain  the 
current pace of growth it will lift millions out of poverty and enrich the global economy. While 
India  has  come  a  long  way,  maintaining  the  current  pace  would  itself  be  challenging  and 
require continued reform efforts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
