Már Guðmundsson: Fault lines in cross-border banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  delivered  at  
Les Encontres Économiques, Aix-en-Provence, 9 July 2011. 
 My  comments  relate  to cross-border  banking  and  are  motivated  and  informed,  on  the  one 
hand,  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  Icelandic  banks,  and  on  the  other  hand,  by  research  and 
policy work that took place at the BIS, during and after my tenure there.  
The financial crisis revealed major fault lines in cross-border banking. Some emerged at the 
global level, some at the EU/EEA level, and some at the national level. I would like to use my 
10 minutes to take these in turn.  
The main fault line revealed at the global level is the operation of cross-border banks with 
large  foreign  currency  balance  sheets  featuring  significant  maturity  mismatches,  but  with 
limited lender of last resort facilities in terms of foreign currency. The nature and magnitude 
of this phenomenon were not well understood before the crisis.  
In this connection, let me stress that I am referring to maturity mismatches in terms of foreign 
currency and not currency mismatches, which was much better understood and somewhat 
better regulated, due to the experience gained during several past emerging market crises. 
Some  studies  still  confuse  these  two  phenomena,  however,  when  analysing  this  latest 
international financial crisis.  
Maturity mismatches are, of course, the bread and butter of modern banking, although they 
make banks vulnerable to refinancing risk and runs. In the case of solvent institutions, we 
have known theoretically since Thornton (1802), and probably over a century, as a practical 
policy,  how  to  deal  with  that  vulnerability  in  a  domestic  setting:  with  central  bank  LOLR 
operations, later complemented by deposit insurance.  
In  the  current  setting,  it  is  far  from  guaranteed  that  this  process  can  be  replicated  at  the 
international level. Of course, in normal times and with developed capital markets, banks can 
use  foreign  exchange  swap  markets  to  convert  domestic  liquidity  into  foreign  exchange 
liquidity  speedily  and  relatively  cheaply.  However,  this  process  broke  down  almost 
completely  during  the  global  run  on  cross-border  non-US  bank  liabilities  in  the  immediate 
aftermath of the Lehman collapse.  
In a situation like this, the home central bank’s ability to assist banks to acquire the foreign 
liquidity  denied  them  on  the  market  and  thus  avoid  a  failure  of  banks  to  deliver  on  their 
foreign  currency  payments  is  limited  by  the  size  of  its  reserves  or  the  willingness  of  the 
central bank issuing the international currency in question to help. Although the provision of 
foreign  currency  liquidity  through  reserves  was  clearly  important  during  the  crisis,  most 
studies seem to support the conclusion that the dollar swap lines made the crucial difference, 
especially  when  they  were  uncapped  vis-à-vis  some  key  central  banks.  To  a  significant 
degree, this was the domestic LOLR process replicated at the international level.  
Does this mean that we have the solution? At the conceptual level, yes, but at the practical 
level, maybe not. The swap lines are not at present a permanent and a reliable feature of the 
international monetary system; for instance, they have been strongly challenged in political 
discussion in the US. Furthermore, there are important unresolved governance issues, such 
as  who  should  decide  which  countries  get  a  swap  line  and  which  do  not.  It  is  thus  an 
important item on the reform agenda to clarify the extent to which standing foreign currency 
LOLR facilities for solvent cross-border banks can be set up. In the meantime, cross-border 
banking  will  retreat  because  of  this  risk,  and  smaller  countries  in  particular  will  be  more 
reluctant to provide a home base for cross-border banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let me now move to the EU/EEA level. Here the main fault line is the contradiction between, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  area-wide  permission  to  operate  based  on  home  licensing  and  a 
common  regulatory  framework  (the  European  passport)  and,  on  the  other  hand,  national 
supervision,  a  national  safety  net  of  deposit  insurance  and  LOLR,  and  national  crisis 
management and resolution regimes. The underlying principle is the same as in many other 
areas of the EU: an equal and harmonious competitive position throughout the area. In that 
ideal world, the location of headquarters and the size of a banking system relative to that of a 
country should not matter.  
The crisis revealed that this framework is deeply flawed. First, it ignores the FX liquidity risk 
that  I  discussed  earlier.  Banks  from  small  countries  with  independent  currencies  are  more 
exposed to this risk than, for instance, banks within the euro are. Second, country size and 
bank size relative to countries matter for the viability of bailout options. To take an example, 
the balance sheets of Iceland’s three cross-border banks were 10 times Iceland’s GDP, and 
2/3 denominated in foreign currencies. Nationalising them or guaranteeing their debt would 
have turned a failure of private banks into sovereign default and national bankruptcy. Third, 
the design of the deposit insurance system inside the EU violates the insurance principle of 
pooling,  which  calls  for  EU-wide  insurance.  In  many  applications,  it  also  ignores  the 
difference  between  insuring  deposits  in  domestic  currency  and  in  foreign  currencies.  The 
issue here is that there is a link between the ability to stop runs through LOLR operations 
and the ability to insure deposits.  
The bottom line is that we cannot have a level playing field in banking inside the EU/EEA, 
except  perhaps  in  risk-adjusted  terms,  as  long  as  the  EU  passport  is  not  matched  by  EU 
supervision and an EU-wide safety net, which is the logical solution. But is it politically and 
practically  feasible?  I  have  my  doubts.  Potentially,  a  more  practical  solution  would  be  to 
change the European passport system by having two types of bank licences. In that case, 
national authorities would licence domestic banks that would face significant restrictions on 
the  type  and  magnitude  of  cross-border  activities  they  would  be  allowed  to  undertake;  for 
instance,  by  limiting  the  size  of  foreign  currency  balance  sheets  and  maturity  mismatches 
and  not  allowing  collection  of  foreign  currency  deposits  in  foreign  branches.  These  banks 
would then be supervised by the national supervisor, their deposits would be insured by the 
domestic  deposit  insurance  system,  and  the  national  central  bank  would  be  their  LOLR. 
Those  banks  that  want  a  European  passport  would  be  licensed  and  supervised  by  an  
EU authority, however; they would be part of an EU-wide deposit insurance system, and in 
most cases, their LOLR would be the ECB.  
Let me now say a few words about the national level. The key issue here is that, as long as 
global risks and EU flaws are not dealt with, individual countries are forced to take action to 
protect themselves: action that might contribute further to the retreat of cross-border banking. 
These  might  take  the  form  of  restricting  international  activities  of  home  banks  and  placing 
much  more  strict  prudential  limits  on  foreign  currency  maturity  mismatches.  For  example, 
when Iceland lifts its current capital controls on outflows, it will probably impose restrictions 
on both the size and composition of foreign currency balance sheets of home-headquartered 
banks. Some might see such restrictions as capital controls in another form, but I see them 
as prudential rules. In any case, both at the national and at the global level, there is a need to 
monitor imbalances and mismatches in banks’ balance sheets much more closely than was 
the case before the crisis.  
In the absence of global and EU reforms, the size of a national banking system relative to 
GDP will be a matter of concern. This will require tools within a macroprudential framework to 
affect the size of the banking system. Work is needed in this area.  
Let me conclude by saying that, although I have focused on the fault lines and risks in cross-
border  banking  in  my  remarks  today,  we  should  be  aware  that  financial  globalisation  has 
important benefits. This gives us all the more reason to find ways to mitigate the risks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
