Duvvuri Subbarao: Implications of the expansion of central bank balance 
sheets 
Comments by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Special 
Governors’ Meeting, Kyoto, 31 January 2011. 
 At  the  outset,  let  me  congratulate  the  BIS  for  bringing  out  a  very  analytical  and 
comprehensive  paper  on  the  subject.  The  topic  for  the  session  has  been  thrown  into 
prominence by the experience of the recent financial crisis when many central banks were 
forced to adopt an expansionary stance of monetary policy. The expansion of balance sheets 
of central banks has important monetary and financial implications. In normal times, a central 
bank’s  balance  sheet  attracts  little  attention.  The  relevance  of  the  paper  during  the 
turbulence  times  marked  with  the  fears  of  hard  landing  cannot  be  understated.  The  paper 
analyses the huge growth in Asian central bank balance sheets during the past decade, and 
as the trend does not show signs of abating, it throws for open debate the possible global 
implications and policy challenges. 
The analysis of the liabilities side of the balance sheet exhibiting diversity across the Asian 
panorama  is  more  interesting.  Apart  from  currency  and  reserve  money,  liability  items  like 
issuance  of  central  bank  paper,  the  use  of  deposit  facilities  and  changes  in  government 
deposits – all of them have an interesting story to tell. The efficacy of various instruments for 
sterilisation of  large capital  inflows have  also  been  covered  comprehensively  in  the  paper. 
The  challenges  for  central  banks  also  include  managing  these  more  complex  operational 
issues while ensuring that the structure of the assets and liabilities are consistent with central 
banks’ overarching policy objectives. 
Against this background, I will put forward my remarks under the following heads with our 
own experience, wherever, necessary. 
(i) 
Behaviour of Balance Sheets of Advance Economies and EMEs during and after the 
Crisis 
Relative Efficacy of different Instruments in the Context of Sterilisation 
Management of Capital Account 
Behavior of Reserve Bank’s Balance Sheet 
Market Stabilisation Scheme – India’s Unique Sterilization Scheme 
Use of Macro Prudential Tools 
Reserve Management 
Communication Challenges of Holding Foreign Asset 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
Behaviour of balance sheets of advance economies and EMEs during and after the 
crisis 
The quantitative easing in the wake of the global financial crisis led to dramatic changes in 
the size and composition of central bank balance sheets. While both developed economies 
and EMEs resorted to unconventional monetary measures, there were differences in terms of 
their timing, types and magnitudes. 
First, in the advanced economies, the switchover was from conventional monetary tools to 
unconventional measures due to policy rates reaching zero or nearing zero. In contrast, in 
many  EMEs,  unconventional  foreign  exchange  easing  measures  such  as  currency  swap 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
preceded domestic liquidity-easing measures due to the sudden tightening of global liquidity. 
Thereafter, the conventional measures of loosening policy rates followed. 
Second,  to  ease  liquidity,  advanced  countries  resorted  to  measures  such  as  widening  the 
availability of counterparties and extending the maturity of liquidity providing operations. On 
the other hand, central banks in EMEs relied mostly on direct instruments such as reserve 
requirements. 
Third,  the  central  banks  in  advanced  countries  extensively  used  credit  and  quantitative 
easing measures, while they were barely used in the EMEs. As a result of the extensive use 
of credit and quantitative easing, the enlargement in the balance sheet of central banks in the 
advanced countries was far greater than those of the EMEs1. As at end May 2010, central 
banks’ balance sheet of advanced economies amounted to US $ 7 trillion (Hannoun, 2010)2. 
In Bank of England, from an average of size of 4.0 per cent of annual nominal GDP, BoE 
balance  sheet  expanded  to  over  17.0  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2010  (BoE  Quarterly  Bulletin, 
2010Q13).  Fed  has  been  by  far  the  most  aggressive  in  expanding  the  size  of  its  balance 
sheet, increasing it by 134 per cent in April 2009 as compared to a year ago (Sheard, 2009)4. 
In the emerging market economies, the size of the central banks’ balance sheets had already 
expanded  considerably  before  the  crisis  as  central  banks  had  built  up  reserves.  The 
combined foreign exchange reserves of major emerging market economies stood at US $ 5 
trillion in mid-2008 (Hannoun, 2010). Post crisis, the size of assets of some of the EMEs like 
Indonesia, Malaysia and India witnessed a precipitous decline. 
Fourth, the nature of expansion of liabilities of Asian central banks has been more diverse 
than that of assets. Currency and reserve money has risen sharply because of imposition of 
higher reserve requirements in order to curb growth of bank lending. In China and Indonesia, 
greater issuance of central bank paper and use of deposit facilities at central banks showed 
up significantly. 
Relative efficacy of different instruments in the context of sterilisation 
The note from the BIS discusses in detail the efficacy of various instruments for sterilisation. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  various  instruments  have  differential  impact  on  the 
balance sheets of the central bank, government and the financial sector. For example, in the 
case of open market operation (OMO) sales, owing to the difference between international 
and  domestic  interest  rates,  there  is  a  positive  cost  of  sterilisation  in  case  the  domestic 
interest rates are higher than the reserves. This cost is borne by the central bank. Sales of 
government  securities  under  OMO  also  involve  a  transfer  of  market  risks  to  the  financial 
intermediaries,  mostly  banks.  In  the  context  of  an  increase  in  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  or 
reserve  requirements,  the  cost  is  borne  by  the  banking  sector  if  CRR  balances  are  not 
remunerated.  However,  if  the  CRR  balances  are  remunerated,  the  cost  could  be  shared 
between the banking sector and the central bank. The central Government has to bear the 
cost in case of Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS), a unique facility used in India, the details 
of which I will discuss in later part of my remarks. The repo operations have a direct cost to 
the central bank. The foreign institutional investors and the corporate have to share the cost 
of any capital controls used by the country. The extent of capital flows to be sterilised and the 
choice  of  instruments,  thus,  also  depend  upon  the  impact  on  the  balance  sheets  of  these 
entities. 
                                                 
1  
Ishi,  Kotaro,  Mark  Stone,  and  Etienne  B.  Yehoue.  2009.  “Unconventional  Central  Bank  Measures  for 
Emerging Economies”. IMF Working Paper WP/09/226. 
2   Hannoun, H (2010): “The expanding role of central banks since the crisis: what are the limits?”, BIS Speech. 
3   Cross et al (2010): The Bank’s balance sheet during the crisis, BoE Quarterly Bulletin, 2010Q1. 
4   Sheard, P (2009): “Central Bank Balance Sheet Expansion”, Nomura, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  our  case,  in  order  to  sterilize  the  impact  of  additional  liquidity  in  the  system  generated 
through  large  capital  inflows,  open  market  operations  (OMO)  have  been  supplemented  by 
daily  liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF)  to  deal  with  frictional  liquidity.  As  mentioned  above, 
since  2004,  RBI  has  instituted  additional  instruments  of  sterilization  namely  the  market 
stabilisation  scheme  (MSS).  As  and  when  necessary,  RBI  has  also  used  traditional 
instruments like cash reserve ratio (CRR) and statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) to absorb excess 
liquidity  in  the  system.  The  cost  of  sterilisation  is  shared  among  the  Reserve  Bank, 
Government  and  the  banks.  Since  surpluses  of  the  Reserve  Bank  are  transferred  to  the 
Central  Government,  on  a  combined  balance  sheet  basis,  the  relative  burdens  of  cost 
between the Government and Reserve Bank are not of great relevance. However, the direct 
cost borne by the Government is transparently shown in its budget accounts. 
Greater flexibility in exchange rate movements, liberalization of capital outflows, prepayment 
of external debt obligations and modulation of interest rate ceilings on non-resident deposits 
have  also  been  used  to  manage  capital  account  inflows  from  time  to  time.  Given  the 
availability of multiple instruments at its command, the Reserve Bank has the flexibility to use 
these instruments and modulate the liquidity and interest rate conditions amidst large capital 
flows. The use of specific instrument is contextual depending not only on the nature and size 
of flows but also domestic considerations. 
Management of capital account 
When  we  talk  of  large  capital  inflows  and  the  subsequent  impact  on  balance  sheet,  we 
should  be  reminded  that  managing  capital  flows  should  not  be  treated  as  an  exclusive 
problem of EMEs. The burden of adjustment has to be shared. How this burden has to be 
measured and shared raises both intellectual and practical policy challenges. The intellectual 
challenge is that we do not have a good theory that explains the role of capital flows in the 
determination  of  exchange  rates.  We,  of  course,  have  an  established  theory  of  current 
account management and the role of exchange rate as a variable in that. What we now need 
is a theory that encompasses both current and capital accounts and one that gives a better 
understanding  of  what  capital  controls  work  and  in  what  situations.  That  is  the  intellectual 
challenge.  What  is  the  practical  challenge?  The  practical  challenge  is  that  once  we  have 
such  a  theory,  we  need  to  reach  a  shared  understanding  on  two  specific  aspects:  first,  to 
what  extent  are  advanced  economies  responsible  for  the cross  border  spill  over  impact  of 
their  domestic  policies,  and  second,  what  is  the  framework  of  rules  that  should  govern 
currency interventions in the face of volatile capital flows. 
One  option  for  EMEs,  now  more  prominently  discussed  and  even  imposed  by  many 
countries,  is  capital  controls  on  inflows.  Experience  in  this  regard  has  been  mixed. 
Protagonists  of  controls  have  argued  that  capital  controls  are  distortionary,  difficult  to 
implement, easy to evade, and that they become ineffective fairly quickly and entail negative 
externalities.  On  the  other  hand,  proponents  of  capital  controls  contend  that  controls  are 
desirable because they preserve monetary policy autonomy, save sterilization costs, tilt the 
composition of foreign liabilities toward long-term maturities, and ensure macroeconomic and 
financial stability. The challenge for policy makers is to design and implement controls where 
the cost of compliance is lower than the cost of evasion. Refreshingly, the IMF has shed its 
long held orthodoxy against capital controls. The policy note of the IMF published in February 
20105  has  referred  to  certain  “circumstances  in  which  capital  controls  can  be  a  legitimate 
component of the policy response to surges in capital flows”. 
India has experienced both “floods” and “sudden stops” of capital flows. India has followed a 
consistent policy on allowing capital inflows in general and on capital account management 
                                                 
5   Ostry,  Jonathan  D.  and  Others  (2010),  “Capital  Inflows:  The  Role  of  Controls”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in particular. Our position is that capital account convertibility is not a stand alone objective 
but a means for higher and stable growth. We believe our economy should traverse towards 
capital convertibility along a gradual path – the path itself being recalibrated on a dynamic 
basis in response to domestic and global developments. Among the components of capital 
flows,  we  prefer  long  term  flows  to  short-term  flows  and  non-debt  flows  to  debt  flows. 
Historically,  we  have  used  policy  levers  on  the  debt  side  of  the  flows  to  manage  volatility. 
Contrary  to  popular  perception,  we  have  used  both  quantity  and  price  based  variables  to 
moderate  debt  flows.  There  is  a  ceiling  on  the  extent  of  FII  investment  in  sovereign  and 
corporate debt (quantity variable) and there is also a withholding tax (price variable). External 
commercial borrowings (ECB) by corporates come in through both an automatic route and an 
approval route. ECB flows under both the automatic and approval routes are moderated by 
interest  rate  ceilings  (a  price  variable)  and  those  under  the  automatic  route  through  an 
additional ceiling on total quantity (a quantity variable). Non-Resident Indians (NRI) deposits 
are monitored through an interest rate ceiling, a price variable. 
Behavior of Reserve Bank’s balance sheet 
For India, the size of central bank assets (as a percentage of GDP) increased between end 
2001 and end 2007 but declined thereafter during the crisis period. The increase in the size 
during the period 2001 to end 2007 reflected the efforts of the monetary authority to prevent 
the  destabilising  impact  of  large  scale  capital  inflows  on  the  domestic  economy  through 
intervention  in  the  forex  market.  The  Reserve  Bank  subsequently  conducted  sterilisation 
operations to offset the monetary impact of forex accretion. After 2007, unlike the significant 
expansion in the balance sheets of the central banks of several advanced economies that 
resulted  from  their  policy  responses  to  the  crisis,  the  behaviour  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
balance  sheet  was  distinctly  different  since  specific  measures,  such  as,  reduction  in  CRR 
and unwinding of Government’s MSS balances implied corresponding contraction in Reserve 
Bank’s liabilities, even as both measures were the key channels for injecting large liquidity to 
the financial system. Thus, through contraction in the balance sheet size, the Reserve Bank 
could  expand  the  availability  of  liquidity.  On  the  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet  also,  the 
contraction was driven by the decline in foreign assets in sync with capital outflows. The size 
of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  however,  increased  significantly  in  2009–10  
(July–June)6  as  we  exited  from  the  liquidity  enhancing  measures  undertaken  during  the 
period  of  crisis.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  unlike  the  advanced  economies,  India  did  not 
have to use large scale policy stimulus to bail out failing institutions and freezing markets. 
Also, there was no purchase of private sector assets using central bank reserves. 
Market stabilisation scheme – India’s unique sterilization scheme 
Faced  with  large  scale  capital  inflows  since  2003–04,  the  market-based  sterilisation 
operations led to a progressive reduction in the quantum of securities with the Reserve Bank. 
In  view  of  the  finite  stock  of  government  securities  available  with  the  Reserve  Bank  for 
sterilisation,  particularly,  as  the  option  of  issuing  central  bank  securities  is  not  permissible 
under the RBI Act, a new instrument named as the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) was 
introduced  since  April  2004  purely  for  sterilization  purposes  as  the  capital  inflows  surged. 
Under this scheme, the Reserve Bank has been empowered to issue Government Treasury 
Bills  and  medium  duration  dated  securities  for  the  purpose  of  liquidity  absorption.  The 
scheme  works  by  impounding  the  proceeds  of  auctions  of  Treasury  bill  and  Government 
securities in a separate identifiable MSS cash account maintained and operated by the RBI. 
The amounts credited into the MSS cash Account are appropriated only for the purpose of 
                                                 
6   The financial year of the Reserve Bank Balance Sheet begins from July 1 and ends on June 30. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
redemption and / or buy back of the Treasury Bills and / or dated securities issued under the 
MSS. MSS securities are indistinguishable from normal Treasury Bills and Government dated 
securities  in  the  hands  of  the  lender.  The  payments  for  interest  and  discount  on  MSS 
securities are not made from the MSS Account, but shown in the Union budget and other 
related documents transparently as distinct components under separate subheads. 
The  ceiling  for  issuance  is  fixed  of  securities  under  MSS  is  fixed  annually  through  mutual 
consultation  between  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  and  indicated  in  the  Union 
Budget estimates. The use of MSS (as against central bank bills where the cost is borne by 
the central bank) has contributed to the central bank independence since the central bank is 
not dependent on the government for its recapitalisation in the event of making losses and is, 
thus able to carry out its monetary policy operations independently. 
The  introduction  of  MSS  has  succeeded  broadly  in  restoring  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility 
(LAF) to its intended function of daily liquidity management. The MSS has served as a very 
useful instrument for medium term monetary and liquidity management. It has been unwound 
at  times  of  low  capital  flows  and  built  up  when  excess  capital  flows  could  lead  to  excess 
domestic  liquidity.  In  the  face  of  reversal  of  capital  flows  during  the  recent  crisis,  MSS 
balances provided a liquidity buffer which could be unwound to ease liquidity conditions and 
finance the fisc. 
Use of macro prudential tools 
India  like  some  other  EMEs  has  by  now  accumulated  a  rich  experience  in  the  use  of 
macroprudential tools. This has been acknowledged widely including in the ongoing work by 
the CGFS to develop the framework and standards on maroprudential instruments which I 
am sure will popularise the use of macroprudential tools the world over. India’s experience 
with the use of macroprudential instruments is unique. While the recently announced Basel 
III standards lays down counter cyclical capital requirements at the aggregate level, India has 
used a sectoral approach to contain sharp build up of credit in the housing and real estate 
sectors by imposing higher risk weights and provisioning norms. The same tool was used in 
the reverse direction when the boom conditions turned adverse, thus highlighting its feature 
as a countercyclical tool. 
To give some examples of our use of macroprudential tools, during the expansionary phase 
since 2004, the rapid growth in housing and consumer credit was flagged as a concern and 
as  a  temporary  counter  cyclical  measure,  the  risk  weight  applicable  to  these  loans  was 
increased  by  25  basis  points  in  October  2004.  Second,  in  the  context  of  continuing  high 
credit growth, the limitations of the prudential framework in capturing the ex-ante risks of pro-
cyclical nature of bank credit were explicitly recognized in October 2005 which triggered an 
across the board increase in provisioning requirement for standard assets. Third, to counter 
the possibility of an asset bubble in addition to concerns about credit quality led to risk weight 
on banks’ exposure to the commercial real estate (CRE) and capital market being increased 
from 100 per cent to 125 per cent in July 2005. Fourth, given the continued rapid expansion 
in credit to the commercial real estate sector, the risk weight on exposure to this sector was 
increased  to  150  per  cent  in  May  2006.  Fifth,  the  general  provisioning  requirement  on 
standard advances in specific sectors, i.e., personal loans, loans and advances qualifying as 
capital market exposures, residential housing loans beyond Rs.20 lakh and commercial real 
estate loans was increased from 0.40 per cent to one per cent in April 2006 and further to 
two per cent on January 31, 2007. 
Reserve management 
The  BIS  paper  notes  that  large  foreign  exchange  reserves  expose  central  bank  balance 
sheets to significant losses mainly from two sources: losses on holding of reserves due to 
exchange rate appreciation and carrying costs – the difference between the interest rate cost 
of funding the reserves and the return on foreign assets is the carrying cost of reserves. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
guiding objectives of foreign exchange reserves management in India are similar to those of 
many  central  banks  in  the  world  –  safety,  liquidity  and  returns.  In  India,  given  that  the 
domestic interest rates are higher than return on reserves, the carrying cost is positive. This 
cost  has  to  be  traded-off  with  the  benefits  associated  with  higher  reserves  in  terms  of 
confidence  it  provides  to  the  market  and  serving  as  key  ammunition  to  face  crisis.  The 
exchange rate movement of major currencies is exogenously given to any reserve manager. 
The reserve manager has to devise strategies so as to minimise the losses or gain from the 
movement in exchange rate. 
The  foreign  currency  assets  are  invested  in  multi-currency,  multi-asset  portfolios  as  per  the 
existing norms which are similar to the best international practices followed in this regard. The 
broad strategy for reserve management including currency composition and investment policy is 
decided in consultation with the  Government  of  India.  The management  of  risks  – credit  risk, 
market risk, liquidity risk and operational risk and the systems employed to manage these risks 
are  aimed  at  ensuring  development  of  sound  governance  structure  in  line  with  the  best 
international practices, improved accountability, a culture of risk awareness across all operations 
and efficient allocation of resources for development of in-house skills and expertise. 
Although India does not have a deliberate strategy of building up reserves for self insurance, 
our  reserves  got  built  up  as  a  result  of  our  relatively  flexible  exchange  rate  policy.  The 
reserves so built up have been used to contain volatility in the event of capital flow reversals. 
There has been much discussion post-crisis on the cost effectiveness of self-insurance. The 
main refrain has been that accumulation of reserves by EMEs as safety-net entails domestic 
costs while also leading to global imbalances. Be that as it may, in evaluating the level of 
reserves and the quantum of self insurance, it is important to distinguish between countries 
whose reserves are a consequence of current account surpluses and countries with current 
account deficits whose reserves are a result of capital inflows in excess of their economy’s 
absorptive  capacity.  India  falls  in  the  latter  category.  Our  reserves  comprise  essentially 
borrowed resources, and we are therefore more vulnerable to sudden stops and reversals as 
compared with countries with current account surpluses. 
Communication challenges of foreign asset 
Over the last two decades, central banks have moved towards clearer communication and 
greater  transparency.  This  has  been  driven  by  several  motivations.  Central  banks  have 
realized that open and transparent communication enhances policy effectiveness by way of 
achieving expected outcomes. Our communication on foreign assets reflects this philosophy. 
We have, however, progressively moved towards greater disclosure in line with international 
best  practices.  Every  week  we  disclose  the  changes  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  with  a 
week’s lag. Every six months, we publish a detailed report giving details of the objectives, 
risks  and  developments  relating  to  reserve  management  operations.  The  Reserve  Bank  is 
among  68  central  banks  from  around  the  world  to  have  adopted  the  Special  Data 
Dissemination  Standards  (SDDS)  template  for  publication  of  detailed  data  on  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  These  data  are  put  out  on  a  monthly  basis  on  RBI’s  website.  The 
Reserve Bank is also one of the very few central banks which publish market intervention 
numbers in its monthly Bulletin with a lag of two months. 
We do not disclose the currency composition of our reserves and we have been criticized for 
our  lack  of  communication  in  this  regard.  The  reason  we  do  not  disclose  the  currency 
composition is because, as the forex reserves manager, we are like any other commercial 
entity  in  the  market.  The  information  is  market  sensitive  and  disclosure  could  potentially 
impact  our  commercial  interests  adversely.  Disclosure  also  has  wider  implications  for  our 
international  relations.  Furthermore,  market  efficiency  is  in  no  way  affected  by  our  non-
disclosure. Indeed non-disclosure is the norm around the world; a majority of the countries, 
particularly  the  large  reserve  holders,  do  not  disclose  the  composition  of  their  foreign 
exchange reserves. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
