Linah K Mohohlo: The World Economic Forum 2011/12 Global 
Competitiveness Report 
Remarks by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the National Launch 
of  the  World  Economic  Forum  2011/12  Global  Competitiveness  Report,  Gaborone, 
7 September 2011. 
 It  is  an  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  launch  of  the  Global 
Competitiveness Report for the period 2011/12, as compiled by the World Economic Forum 
(WEF), in cooperation with national stakeholders. For Botswana, the launch is spearheaded 
by the Botswana National Productivity Centre (BNPC), which has the responsibility not only 
for  conducting  the  Executive  Opinion  Survey  that  provides  much  of  the  data,  but  also  for 
organising the national launch, more or less in tandem with global launches. I would like to 
take this opportunity to commend the BNPC, for successfully hosting this annual event for 
several  years.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  on  this  occasion,  BNPC  has  broadened  the  scope  of 
activities by convening a workshop. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  You  will  know  that  Botswana  is  cited  as  one  of  the 
most competitive economies in Africa, but, as I will outline shortly, this year’s Report makes 
sobering  reading,  given  the  worrying  indications  that  previous  advantages  continue  to  be 
eroded  as  we  are  failing  to  make  headway  in  key  areas  on  which  future  economic 
development will increasingly depend. 
The  theme  for  this  year’s  Global  Competitiveness  Report  is  “Setting  the  Foundation  for 
Strong Productivity”. I consider this is a timely theme at a time when future prospects for the 
world  economy  appear  increasingly  uncertain.  This  is  reflected  in  major  challenges  facing 
policy makers, as economic conditions have deteriorated in recent months. Although these 
conditions  differ  widely  across  regional  and  national  economies  as  circumstances  vary,  I 
believe the Report is right to stress the need for policy makers not to lose sight of the long-
term  fundamentals  that  underpin  successful  economic  development,  even  in  the  face  of  a 
myriad of shorter term political pressures. For this reason, the emphasis on productivity, as 
the foundation of sustainable economic growth prosperity, is to be welcomed. 
The  World  Economic  Forum  can  itself  be  regarded  as  a  case  study  of  the  benefits  of 
productivity, not measured merely in terms of effort and hard work, but also in terms of its 
effective  deployment  of  resources  to  meet  the  ever  changing  requirements  of  its  growing 
number of clients. 
The Forum is of special professional interest to me, as I have been privileged to work closely 
with it for a good number of years, including presiding over some of its major proceedings. I 
can, therefore, attest to its evolution; and here follows a snapshot of it. The World Economic 
Forum was established in 1971 in Switzerland. It initially focused on the needs of European 
business leaders, but it now has a truly global outreach, encompassing both the private and 
public sectors in more than 140 countries. The Forum has encouraged pursuit of appropriate 
economic, fiscal, trade and social policies by bringing together major corporate and political 
leaders,  NGOs,  multilateral  financial  institutions  and  social  observers.  The  Forum’s  annual 
meeting, that takes place in Davos (Switzerland) is, of course, the most well-known and well 
attended gathering; the regional meetings also have increasingly high profiles. 
Furthermore,  the  Forum  facilitates  policy  discussions  through  a  wide-ranging  research 
programme  that  includes  reports  and  surveys  covering  a  variety  of  topical  issues  such  as 
economic growth, environment, finance, technology, health and social development. Among 
these, the Global Competitiveness Report is the best known, having been first published in 
1979, at which time there was a coverage of only 16 countries. This has successfully given 
birth to a growing family of related reports that focus on specific regions, sectors and issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  objective  of  these  reports  is  to  provide  a  benchmarking  tool  for  policy-makers  and 
business leaders, and the principal means of doing this is through rankings of participating 
countries  according  to  a  range  of  relevant  criteria,  which  are  aggregated  into  an  overall 
index. In this case, the Global Competitive Index (GCI) looks at a wide range of factors that 
contribute  to  performance  of  key  pillars.  The  pillars  are  institutional  effectiveness, 
infrastructure,  macroeconomic  environment,  health  and  education,  markets  for  goods, 
services  and  labour,  financial  development,  technology,  as  well  as  innovation.  Information 
from the Executive Opinion Survey is supplemented with a range of measurable factors. 
Similar  methodologies  are  employed  in  other  rankings  such  as  the  World  Bank’s  Ease  of 
Doing  Business  and  in  Transparency  International’s  reports  on  corruption.  There  are  also 
similarities  with  the  Human  Development  Index  of  the  United  Nations  Development 
Programme (UNDP). I hasten to stress that these various products, which often overlap in 
their coverage, should be seen as complementing, rather than competing with, each other. 
Indeed, in calculating its rankings, the World Economic Forum makes significant use of data 
collected by the World Bank. 
I now turn to the overall results of this year’s Report as drawn from the information contained 
therein. As I highlight my impressions of the main issues, I know you will appreciate that my 
condensed remarks should not be taken as a substitute for a thorough review of the Report. 
I, therefore, commend it to you. 
The Report began to include an Index in 2006, at which point it covered 122 countries, out of 
which Botswana was ranked 57th. For my purposes this morning, I will use, as my base, the 
2008 rankings, when Botswana attained a modest improvement of 56 out of 134 countries. 
Since then, the story has been one of overall decline, to the extent that, out of 142 countries 
covered in the 2011/12 Report, Botswana is ranked 80th. Clearly this is not good news, and 
it is incumbent on all of us to arrest the situation before it degenerates. 
It  is  disappointing  that  we  also  show  signs  of  slippage  among  a  group  of  middle  income 
economies  that  are  classified  by  the  World  Economic  Forum  as  making  transition  from 
resource  dependency  towards  development  that  is  based  more  on  factors  related  to 
efficiency and productivity. Due to their similarities, these economies are close competitors in 
the global export market and in attracting foreign direct investment. They face similar global 
challenges, and have a similar set of policy tools for addressing economic stabilisation and 
structural reforms on their path to the next level of development. In this group of 24 countries, 
Botswana features in the top 10 in less than half of the major categories. I need not remind 
you that Botswana is currently emerging from an economic downturn that has underscored 
the need to diversify the economy away from the dominant mining sector. The fact is that we 
cannot afford any more economic performance slippages. 
Let me highlight some of the key features of the country’s performance. My first observation 
is that, despite the dramatic headline fall, it is remarkable that little has changed in the period 
under  review.  For  half  of  the  12  pillars  covered  by  the  index,  movement  is  less  than  five 
positions  in  either  direction  in  the  three-year  period  to  2011/12,  which  is  of  relatively  little 
importance when considering a cumulative fall of 24 places; this is the difference between 
the 2008/09 overall ranking of 56 and that of 2011/12 (rank 80). 
We can, however, derive confidence in the strength of Botswana’s “public institutions” and 
“relative sophistication of the financial sector”, both of which remain ranked in the top 50. At 
the  same  time,  it  is  a  matter  of  concern  that  the  country  continues  to  make  only  slow 
progress  in  areas  such  as  “innovation”  and  “business  sophistication”,  both  of  which  are 
expected to be key to meeting future developmental objectives. 
Furthermore, it should be acknowledged that, even when the changes have been significant, 
they are not all negative. In particular, it is encouraging that there is significant progress in 
the “goods market efficiency” category, where the rank has improved markedly, from position 
93 in 2008 to 68, although it is a deterioration from last year’s rank of 58. This can be seen 
as a reflection of the early gains from recent initiatives to improve the business climate. Since 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
these  reforms  remain  work-in-progress,  we  should  be  able  to  maintain  momentum  so  that 
further advances can be anticipated with some degree of confidence. 
The  Report  further  indicates  that  the  decline  in  the  overall  ranking  is  concentrated  in  five 
areas. These are: infrastructure, macroeconomic environment, health and primary education, 
labour market efficiency, and technological readiness. I have decided to focus on only three 
of these pillars, in part because the lacklustre rankings are glaring for the three-year period 
to-date. 
First, “infrastructure”: the steep decline from 52 in 2008/09 to 92 is worrying, especially at a 
time when government spending in this particular area has been so extensive. Hopefully, this 
investment  will  soon  bear  fruit  when  the  beneficial  externalities  of  upgraded  roads  and 
improved  electricity  supply  unfold.  Nevertheless,  this  serves  as  a  timely  reminder  of  the 
importance  of  both  investment  and  adequate  provision  for  maintenance.  This  includes  a 
contribution by both the public and private sectors, and is especially important if we are to 
overcome the constraints associated with land-locked economies. 
Second, “macroeconomic environment”: the decline in the ranking is even more pronounced 
than  that  of  “infrastructure”,  from  22  in  2008/09  to  82.  I  would,  however,  suggest  that  this 
probably  exaggerates  any  underlying  deterioration.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  this 
assessment is driven largely, if not entirely, by recent trends in the fiscal budget which, as 
you very well know, has registered substantial deficits in recent years, and this is coupled 
with an accumulation of public debt. We can take comfort in the fact that the Government has 
initiated  a  medium-term  programme  of  fiscal  consolidation  which,  all  things  equal,  should 
help  reverse  the  deficit.  Indeed  the  relatively  small  decline  from  last  year’s  ranking  of 
74 indicates that this may already be taking effect. 
It might further be suggested that the way the index is constructed, using annual data rather 
than period averages, may  make it overly sensitive to short term volatility, which is not, in 
itself, necessarily a sign of deterioration. However, the 2008/09 high ranking of 22 is unlikely 
to  be  regained  while  significant  public  debt  remains  outstanding.  Indeed  the  country’s 
sovereign credit ratings have been experiencing downward pressure for more or less similar 
reasons, as they can no longer rely on the strength of the government balance sheet. 
Third, “technological readiness”: the current ranking of 101 compares with 89 of three years 
ago, which was itself a deterioration from the 2007/08 rank of 71. The slower rate of decline 
from last year’s 99 (to 101) is clearly related to the importance of internet access and usage, 
where  the  country  has  been  lagging  behind.  The  importance  of  usage  cannot  be 
overemphasized;  after  all,  the  Government  has  recently  made  a  significant  investment  in 
improving  available  internet  bandwidth,  but  this  has  yet  to  be  translated  into  widespread 
uptake, especially among households. Finding ways to effectively bridge the digital divide is 
increasingly  recognised  as  having  potential  for  improving  opportunities  for  low  income 
households. In addition, this is an area which is extremely dynamic and improved rankings 
can only be maintained by a business environment that facilitates continuous improvement. 
The rest of the decline in the country’s overall competitiveness is accounted for by the very 
low and deteriorating rankings in “health and education”, at 112 in 2008/09 and now 120. I 
will  not  comment  further  on  this  aspect  of  the  rankings,  not  because  I  do  not  attach 
importance  to  these  issues,  but  because  they  are  so  important  as  to  merit  a  separate 
analysis. 
Distinguished guests: As I approach the end of my remarks, I submit that, overall, the World 
Economic Forum’s 2011/12 Global Competitiveness Report features large movements in a 
few  categories,  and  these  movements  can  be  associated  with  specific  circumstances  at  a 
given  point  in  time  and,  in  some  instances,  there  may  already  be  indications  of  future 
improvements.  To  this  end,  the  headline  movement  of  the  overall  index  could  be  seen  as 
exaggerated. But I should stress that this should not be taken as an excuse for continued 
complacency.  As  it  will  become  clear  in  the  more  detailed  presentations,  the  overall 
assessment portrays a situation characterised by drift and little change. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Similar sentiments have emerged from other reports, such as those of the World Bank and 
more  detailed  sectoral  reviews  undertaken  by  the  World  Economic  Forum.  A  case  can  be 
made that Botswana’s policy tools have become either blunt or outdated or both, compared 
to those of other countries in its league. For an open economy such as that of Botswana, 
benchmarking  performance  against  peer  countries  is  an  unavoidable  imperative.  Indeed  it 
must be recognised that increased dynamism of many of these peer countries risks leaving 
Botswana behind as it may not be easy to catch up. 
It  is,  therefore,  encouraging  that  several  initiatives  are  in  place  to  improve  the  country’s 
competitiveness going forward. The implementation of the Competition Law that was passed 
in 2009 and the formation of the Competition Commission will discourage complacency in the 
private sector. There are also complementary efforts of the Human Resource Development 
Council and the Labour Market Observatory in improving labour skills. For its part, the Bank 
of  Botswana  is  reviewing  a  recent  study  which  proposed  further  reforms  to  enhance  the 
efficiency and broaden activities of the financial sector. It is also hoped that the more open 
and consultative approach, such as that of “Pitso” will result in improvements to respective 
policies. 
These developments provide cautious grounds for optimism. But more remains to be done, 
and  this  may  require  the  Government  to  take  tough  decisions  in  order  to  make  Botswana 
genuinely business-friendly. 
The  Global  Competitiveness  Report  also  contains  a  ranking  of  factors  that  businesses  in 
each country perceive as most problematic. I have yet to see what this year’s Report has to 
say on this, but I do not expect any surprises. There is also the question of attitudes, which I 
have deliberately left unexplored. What I know is that for the last four years at least, the most 
common concern among Botswana businesses was “poor work ethic in the national labour 
force”, closely followed, in some cases, by “an inadequately educated workforce”. So it is not 
hard to see where the main problems lie. But this is not just a matter that affects workers, the 
education system and policymakers; it is as much a responsibility of supervisors, managers 
and,  ultimately,  chief  executive  officers  and  corporate  boards,  to  accept  that  there  is  a 
problem, and then set out to redress it. You will readily agree that Government policy can 
only do so much in such crucial areas. More broadly, I wish to add that a lingering culture of 
entitlement  among  businesses,  and  to  some  extent  individuals  too,  can  further  undermine 
progress. Surely, we can all earn our keep. 
Directors of Ceremonies, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: This concludes my remarks. 
It 
to  declare 
the  World  Economic  Forum’s  2011/12  Global 
Competitiveness Report duly launched. 
I  wish  you  fruitful  deliberations  at  the  workshop,  and  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  your 
attention. 
is  now  my  privilege 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
