Glenn Stevens: Still interesting times 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Chamber of 
Commerce  and  Industry  (Western  Australia)  and  the  Chamber  of  Minerals  and  Energy 
(Western Australia) Corporate Breakfast, Perth, 7 September 2011. 
 It is very good to be with you this morning.  
In the process of deciding a title for this address, I recalled that three years ago I was talking 
in public addresses about the times being interesting, perhaps a little too interesting. That still 
seems to be the case, hence the title.  
As you know, yesterday the Reserve Bank Board met here in Perth. The Board reviewed the 
international and local information to hand since its last meeting, and decided once again to 
leave the cash rate unchanged.  
The  reasons  for  that  decision  were  given  in  the  statement  released following  the  meeting. 
More  information  on  the  nature  of  the  discussion  and  considerations  the  Board  took  into 
account will be published in the minutes of the meeting, two weeks from yesterday. I do not 
want  to  dampen  any  of  your  undoubted  eager  anticipation  for  what  may  be  contained  in 
those minutes. What I will do is say a little more about the sequence of decisions the Board 
has taken over recent months.  
To do that in appropriate context, it is worthwhile first recounting the framework for monetary 
policy  that  has  been  in  operation  since  the  early  1990s  and  that  continues  to  guide  the 
decisions of the Board. So I will say something about that. Then I will describe how the flow 
of recent events, viewed through that framework, has had a bearing on decisions.  
The framework for monetary policy  
The  framework  for  monetary  policy  is  a  medium-term,  flexible  inflation  target.  It  seeks  to 
achieve  a  rate  of  increase  in  the  Consumer  Price  Index  of  between  2  and  3  per  cent,  on 
average, over time. This arrangement has a fair bit of history now. The Reserve Bank began 
to  articulate  it  in  the  early  1990s  and  it  has  been  formally  agreed  between  successive 
Treasurers and Governors, in published statements, beginning in 1996.1 The “on average” 
specification allows the Bank to take account of the fact that it cannot finetune inflation over 
short  periods,  and  of  the  obligation  to  promote,  insofar  as  monetary  policy  can,  full 
employment,  which  is  another  of  the  Bank’s  charter  obligations.  Having  a  numerical  goal 
takes account of the importance of inflation expectations, and seeks to provide an anchoring 
point for them – which is a critical function of any monetary policy regime. It also provides a 
focal point and a measuring stick for monetary policy decisions, which recognises that, in the 
end, monetary policy is really about the value of money.  
We arrived at this framework after a long search – the “search for stability” set out in detail by 
Ian Macfarlane in his ABC Boyer Lectures in 2006.2 The current framework is not necessarily 
the end of history. But it has worked well for a period not far short of two decades now, with 
no obviously superior framework on offer.  
                                                 
1  The first such statement was between Treasurer Costello and Ian Macfarlane in August 1996. We are now up 
to  the  fifth  incarnation  of  this  agreement.  See:  <http://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/framework/stmt-
conduct-mp-5-30092010.html>. 
2  Macfarlane I (2006), The Search for Stability, Boyer Lectures 2006, ABC Books, Sydney. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Sometimes people ask whether a higher target for inflation might not be better, particularly 
when inflation is looking like it will rise and the Bank is running a setting of monetary policy 
designed  to  resist  that.  The  answer  ultimately  hinges  on  how  prepared  we  would  be  to 
accept the things that would go with higher inflation. Higher average interest rates would be 
among  them  –  there  is  no  reason  that  savers,  any  more  than  wage  earners,  would  be 
prepared simply to accept an erosion of their financial position. That is why countries with 
higher inflation generally have higher nominal interest rates. Moreover, whatever structural 
challenges the economy faces would still have to be faced at higher inflation rates. Higher 
inflation wouldn’t make those issues go away, nor make them any easier to cope with (as we 
know from our own history when inflation was high and structural change still had to occur). 
We would simply waste more real resources as everyone sought to protect themselves from 
the higher inflation.  
In supporting the decision process that puts this framework into practice, the Bank carries out 
a great deal of detailed statistical work, tracking several thousand individual data series. It 
conducts  extensive  liaison  with  businesses  and  other  organisations,  usually  speaking  in 
detail to as many as 100 contacts each month. It produces voluminous published analysis of 
these data.  
The  objective  of  these  efforts  is,  at  its  heart,  fairly  simple.  We  are  trying  to  form  an 
assessment about the course of overall demand in the economy and how it is travelling in 
relation to the economy’s supply potential. That assessment in turn informs a judgement as 
to whether inflation pressure in the economy is likely to increase, decrease or stay about the 
same, and how the likely outcomes compare with the announced objective. That judgement 
then informs a decision as to whether monetary policy needs to restrain demand, to support 
it or to be “neutral”. Of course other factors that affect prices – like exchange rate changes, 
changes in the price of oil, and so on – have to be taken into account as well.  
Note that the economy’s supply potential is a key element in the above framework. This is 
not  a  directly  observable  thing:  there  is  no  time  series  labelled  “potential  supply”. 
Assumptions have to be made about the availability of productive factors – labour and capital 
– and about the productivity with which these factors can be used. This is why the current 
productivity discussion is so important. Incidentally, the desire for more productivity is not a 
call for working harder. Australians already work pretty long hours by international standards. 
Productivity per hour, which is what counts, is not improved by adding more hours, but by 
finding ways of making the hours that are already being contributed more effective.  
The  Board’s  decision  each  month,  and  the  reasoning  behind  it,  are  communicated  to  the 
public. These statements are among the most closely scrutinised documents in the country. I 
am often awed by the layers of hidden meaning that people are able to detect in them. But 
the main purpose of these statements, and of all the other communication we do, is simply to 
try  to  make  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  outlook  and  its  actions  as  understandable  as 
possible to the many people who need to make long-term decisions, including households 
and  businesses.  Of  course,  events  and  new  information  often  change  the  outlook,  as  we 
have seen recently.  
Recent developments  
How has the Board evaluated recent developments within the above framework?3  
Throughout  the  past  year  or  so,  the  forecasts  that  the  Bank’s  staff  have  provided  to  the 
Board have suggested that underlying inflation would probably stop falling and then gradually 
rise through the three-year forecast period. The backdrop to this view was that the rise in the 
                                                 
3  The Deputy Governor recently gave a very good account of this in more detail than I can attempt here today. 
See: <http://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2011/sp-dg-230811.html>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
terms  of  trade  was  expansionary  for  incomes  and  investment,  which  would  likely  see 
demand growth remain pretty strong even as fiscal stimulus spending unwound.  
The  exchange  rate  was  working  to  offset  a  good  deal  of  this  expansionary  impact,  by 
restraining  some  parts  of  the  economy  exposed  to  international  trade  but  not  exposed  to 
mining. Nonetheless, given the size of the terms of trade rise, and the fact that the economy 
started  from  a  position  of  reasonably  low  unemployment,  it  was  thought  that  underlying 
inflation was more likely to start to go up than to keep falling. On the evidence we have so 
far, that’s what seems to have been happening.  
Faced with that outlook, the Board judged that it was appropriate for monetary policy to exert 
a degree of restraint. As of the end of last year, the Board’s view was that it had reached that 
position. We believed that we were therefore in a position of being able to maintain a steady 
setting for a while. The post-Board statements I issued each month at successive meetings 
said that the Board viewed the stance of monetary policy as remaining appropriate for the 
outlook.  
Of course, there are always uncertainties surrounding forecasts, and the Bank’s publications 
have been careful to articulate possible risks that we could identify – including things such as 
the possibility of a serious worsening of the situation in international financial markets, driven 
by  sovereign  debt  concerns.  Most  of  these  risks  do  not  come  to  pass,  and  if  they  do 
eventuate  they  don’t  necessarily  unfold  as  we  had  imagined  they  might.  Still,  the  Bank 
makes considerable efforts to think about how things could turn out differently to the central 
forecast.  
By  the  time  of  the  May  Board  meeting,  there  was  evidence  that  the  pace  of  underlying 
inflation had started to pick up. I myself felt that the Board was still well placed to sit still at 
that  time.  We  had  already  put  in  place  a  response  in  advance  of  the  expected  pick-up  in 
inflation  and  it  is  not  necessarily  always  wise  to  respond  to  one  high  (or  low)  figure. 
Nonetheless,  the  updated  forecasts  carried  a  fairly  clear  message:  policy  would  probably 
need to be tightened further, at some point, if things continued to evolve as expected. The 
Bank said that – indeed there was no other credible thing we could have said.  
In the ensuing months, little has changed about the outlook for resources sector investment. 
More  large  projects  have  been  approved  and  the  pipeline  of  future  investment  looks  very 
large.  On  all  the  available  information,  resources  sector  investment  will  probably  rise  by 
another 2 percentage points or more of annual GDP over the next couple of years. Prices for 
important commodities remain high and the nation’s terms of trade are at an all-time high in 
the current quarter.  
At  the  same  time,  it  has  become  clearer  that  precautionary  behaviour  by  households  and 
some  firms  is  exerting  restraint  on  the  pace  of  growth  in  demand,  and  that  the  higher 
exchange rate is diverting more demand abroad. This is putting pressure on trade-exposed 
sectors.  Moreover,  the  sense  that  a  higher  exchange  rate  might  not  just  be  a  temporary 
phenomenon may be leading to a pick-up in the pace of structural change in the economy.  
In net terms, the outlook for the non-resources economy in the near term is weaker than it 
looked a few months ago, and the recovery of flood-affected mining in Queensland is taking 
longer than earlier thought. At the same time, looking at financial variables, credit growth has 
slowed  a  bit  further  and  asset  prices  have  tended  to  decline.  These  factors,  along  with 
ongoing  evidence  that  underlying  inflation  had  turned  up,  were  incorporated  in  the  Bank’s 
outlook as published early last month.  
Meanwhile, the sense of unease about how Europe will manage its problems has increased 
over recent months. We also had the anxiety over the US debt ceiling issue, which became 
acute early in August. Measures of confidence in both economies declined significantly as all 
this occurred. Equity markets fell as investors shifted to the relative safety of bonds issued by 
the major countries – even though S&P had announced a downgrade of the US sovereign 
credit rating.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It  is  too  soon  to  see  much  evidence  of  a  concrete  impact  of  these  events  on  the  global 
economy. Any assessment we make at present is highly preliminary. Moreover, we have no 
way of knowing what events will transpire in financial markets over the months ahead. There 
are any number of hurdles in Europe or the United States that could serve as a catalyst for 
increased anxiety. This state of affairs is likely to persist for the foreseeable future.  
With  those  caveats,  a  few  preliminary  observations  can  be  offered  on  this  episode  in 
comparison with what we saw in 2008.  
First, the focus is more on sovereign creditworthiness as opposed to the state of private bank 
balance sheets per se (though in Europe of course the two are intertwined). In a proximate 
sense,  that  is  the  direct  result  of  the  previous  crisis  and  especially  the  ensuing  period  of 
weak  growth  that  has  had  a  severe  impact  on  government  revenues  in  the  affected 
countries. But, taking a longer-term perspective, some countries, especially in Europe, have 
had fiscal positions that were quite vulnerable to a shock to confidence for some time now. 
High debt levels were sustainable while markets thought they were and hence were prepared 
to offer financing at low interest rates; if people suddenly doubt sustainability and charge high 
interest rates, that same position becomes much less sustainable. So to no small extent, it is 
actually a matter of confidence – confidence that there is a sustainable long-run fiscal path, 
that policymakers know how to get onto it, and that they have the will to do so. In crafting any 
policy response to near-term economic weakness, this is a key point.  
Second, there have been pressures in funding markets for some European banks recently, but 
at this point not to the same extent as in October 2008. Bank capital levels are improved from 
three years ago and leverage is reduced. We have not seen significant funding problems for 
US or UK banks recently; their problems at present seem to relate more to the possible size of 
legal costs arising from pre-crisis lending standards. Overall, we have not, to this point, seen 
the widespread withdrawal of willingness to deal with counterparties that we saw in late 2008.  
Third, a key feature of this episode is that confidence in the euro is a more prominent issue 
than was the case three years ago. Those countries at the so-called periphery’ are paying a 
high price as they play their part in keeping the euro together. But the ultimate outcome is 
going to hinge on the willingness of “core” euro countries to accept socialisation across the 
euro zone of some of the losses associated with countries in trouble. That is really the issue 
that is being debated in Europe now.  
If  there  were  a  major  international  downturn,  an  important  question  would  be  how 
policymakers in major countries would respond. The scope for fiscal policy easing in many 
major countries is hotly debated. Some commentators call for further stimulus, citing faltering 
recoveries, while others point to medium-term debt paths that look very troubling as a reason 
for  fiscal  consolidation.  Both  have  a  point.  The  question  in  major  countries  is  whether  a 
package  combining  short-term  stimulus  with  a  highly  credible  medium-term  path  back  to 
sustainability  could  be  crafted.  It  certainly  does  not  look  easy.  As  for  possible  monetary 
policy  responses,  most  major  countries  would  be  quickly  into  the  realm  of  “quantitative 
methods”, if they are not there already. It is hard to gauge the effects of those measures.  
In  Asia  and  other  parts  of  the  emerging  world,  however,  ample  policy  ammunition  is 
available, both fiscal and monetary, should the authorities have a need to use it. To do so 
credibly would presumably require confidence that the upward trend in inflation seen over the 
past couple of years would be likely to turn down. Of course, a significant weakening of the 
global  economy  would  result  in  lower  commodity  prices  and  generally  lower  underlying 
inflation  pressures.  So  far,  the  decline  in  major  commodity  prices  has  been  fairly  modest, 
though enough to help rates of CPI inflation to moderate a little.  
In  summary,  the  environment  presents  no  shortage  of  challenges,  though  we  should  not 
assume that this is necessarily 2008 all over again. It is reasonable to conclude, at this point, 
that the outlook for global growth is not as strong as it looked three months ago. Forecasters 
are generally revising down global growth estimates for 2011 and 2012, mainly as a result of 
weaker outcomes for the major countries.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Turning back to the implications for Australia, periods of sudden increases in anxiety within 
international  financial  markets  are  moments  when,  if  at  all  possible,  it  is  good  to  be  in  a 
position to be able to maintain steady settings. In the recent few meetings, the Board has 
judged  it  prudent  to  sit  still,  even  though  we  saw  data  on  prices  that  were,  on  their  face, 
concerning. To be in that position of course requires timely decisions to have been made in 
earlier periods.  
Looking ahead, the task for the Board is to assess what bearing recent information, and recent 
international and local events, will have on the medium-term outlook for demand and inflation. 
They probably  won’t have  much effect on the large-scale investment plans in the resources 
sector, but households and firms watching what is happening may continue their precautionary 
behaviour  for  longer  than  otherwise.  This  would  presumably  dampen  demand  somewhat 
compared  with  the  outlook  set  out  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  published  in  early 
August; it may also condition wage bargaining and price setting. If so, that may act to curtail the 
upward trend in inflationary pressures that has, up to this point, appeared to be in prospect.  
At the same time, significant rises in a range of administered prices are still set to occur over 
the period ahead. Moreover, unit costs have been rising quite quickly given the fairly poor 
performance of multi-factor productivity growth over recent years. In fact the experience of 
the  past  year,  as  the  Deputy  Governor  noted  recently,  is  that  while  growth  seems  to  be 
turning out weaker than expected at the end of last year, underlying inflation seems to be 
turning out higher. A key question is whether that is just the vagaries of statistical noise and 
lags, or whether it is telling us that the combinations of growth and inflation available to us in 
the short term are less attractive than they seemed a few years ago. If the latter, the spotlight 
will come back on to supply-side issues.  
Conclusion  
More than at most times in my professional life, Australia’s economy faces a very unusual, 
and  powerful,  set  of  complex  forces.  Major  countries  are  still  coming  to  terms  with  the 
excesses  of  earlier  years  and  experiencing  what  many  have  learned  before,  which  is  that 
after a period of financial distress it is usually a long and difficult recovery. Economic growth 
has been uneven and patchy, and financial concerns keep recurring, with waves of positive 
and negative sentiment sweeping global markets. Australians feel the effects of those swings 
in sentiment.  
Meanwhile, the emerging world continues to expand, and it is not all due simply to exports to 
the rich world, even though the world could still do with some more re-balancing. There is an 
epochal change occurring, and Australians are also feeling that. It is overwhelmingly positive 
for us in net terms, even if our tendency to dwell on the downside is more prominently on 
display at present.  
The future is uncertain, but it always is. What we know is that, as we move into that future, 
whatever it holds, we do so:  
 
 
with our terms of trade at a record high; 
with  more  jobs  in  the  economy  than  ever  before,  and  with  95  out  of  every  100 
people seeking work in a job;  
with  our  banks  sound,  our  financial  system  stable  and  our  sovereign  credit 
respected globally; and 
with  the  capacity  for  macroeconomic  policy  to  respond  sensibly  to  events, 
appropriately guided by well-established frameworks. 
  We have our problems, but with some good sense and careful judgement we ought to be 
able to navigate what lies ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
