Simon M Potter: Improving survey measures of inflation expectations 
Speech  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York, at the Forecasters Club of New York, New York City, 30 March 2011. 
Wilbert van der Klaauw, Giorgio Topa, Robert Rich, Olivier Armantier, Basit Zafar and Joseph Tracy. The results 
from the New York Fed–American Life Panel Survey I will discuss today reflect data collected through mid-March 
2011. Papers containing more detail on the research I have summarized today can be found on the New York 
Fed website. 
 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here today to talk with you about some of the New 
York Fed’s ongoing research on the measurement of household inflation expectations. The 
views expressed are mine and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of  New  York  or  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  That  said,  I  want  to  acknowledge  my 
colleagues in the Research Group who have pushed our research on inflation expectations 
forward. 
Expectations,  and  in  particular  inflation  expectations,  play  a  key  role  in  the  conduct  of 
modern monetary policy. Expectations drive people’s behavior by influencing a wide range of 
economic  decisions  such  as  saving,  investment,  purchases  of  durable  goods  and  wage 
negotiations. These decisions in turn affect real economic activity and actual inflation.  
As a result, inflation expectations represent an important link in the monetary transmission 
mechanism – especially through the term structure of interest rates – and greatly influence 
the central bank’s ability to achieve price stability. It is crucial for a central bank to monitor 
inflation expectations, making sure that they remain well anchored and consistent with policy 
objectives.  Since  the  economy  is  constantly  buffeted  by  unanticipated  shocks,  short-term 
inflation expectations should reflect the effects of these shocks. For example, if energy prices 
increase suddenly due to a supply disruption, short-term inflation expectations should move 
up.  This  is  completely  consistent  with  medium-term  price  stability,  if  at  the  same  time, 
forward inflation expectations – that is, expectations of inflation for after the supply disruption 
ends  –  do  not  move.  This  stability  of  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  face  of 
movements  in  short-term  inflation  expectations  is  the  hallmark  of  sound,  effective  and 
credible monetary policy. 
In standard macroeconomic models it is trivial to measure inflation expectations: under the 
rational  expectations  assumption,  any  economic  agent  in  the  model  could  produce  the 
unique  inflation  expectation  for  any  horizon.  In  the  real  world,  central  banks  must  rely  on 
various  indirect  approaches  to  measure  inflation  expectations:  market-based  measures, 
surveys  of  professionals  such  as  economists  and  market  participants,  and  surveys  of 
households.  All  three  types  of  measures  have  advantages  and  drawbacks.  It  is  therefore 
important  for  a  central  bank  to  use  a  variety  of  measures  that  complement  one  another. 
Before turning to the focus of this talk – the measurement of household inflation expectations – 
I want to provide a quick summary of market-based and professional surveys. 
The difference in yields between nominal and real government debt can be used to derive a 
measure of market inflation expectations for the price index used to protect the holders of 
real government debt from inflation. In the United States, that price index is the consumer 
price index (CPI). Thus, if the nominal 10-year yield is 3.5 percent and the real 10-year yield 
is 1 percent, one crude measure of average CPI inflation expected over the next 10 years 
would be 2.5 percent. Further, if the nominal 5-year yield is 3 percent and the real 5-year 
yield is 0.2 percent, then a crude measure of average CPI inflation expected over the next 
5 years would be 2.8 percent and a crude estimate of the 5- to 10-year forward average CPI 
inflation would be 2.2 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
inflation  compensation  with  slightly  negative  movement 
I say crude because such calculations ignore any difference in liquidity between and within 
the  two  types  of  debt,  any  compensation  investors  require  for  the  uncertainty  of  the  real 
value  of  nominal  coupon  securities  and  a  variety  of  other  issues,  such  as  the  fact  that 
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) are indexed to the CPI with a time varying lag. 
There are numerous ways to measure inflation expectations that take into account liquidity 
differences.  For  example,  Chart  1  shows  estimates  of  the  5-  to  10-year  forward  inflation 
compensation constructed by Barclays, the research staff of the Federal Reserve Board, the 
New York Fed Markets Group and inflation swaps. The differences are produced by differing 
assumptions on the liquidity of various securities and the use of an estimated yield curve to 
produce  the  Board  research  staff  estimates.  No  attempt  is  made  to  remove  the 
compensation for inflation risk in these measures, thus these are estimates of compensation 
for expected and unexpected inflation. 
There are clearly different short-term fluctuations in the various estimates, but they all show a 
similar  pattern  –  with  the  exception  of  the  height  of  the  financial  crisis,  they  have  been 
contained within a range of just below 2.5 percent to just above 3 percent. CPI inflation has 
averaged historically about 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points above the inflation rate for personal 
consumption  expenditures  (PCE),  the  price  index  for  which  the  Federal  Reserve  Board 
members and Reserve Bank presidents provide forecasts four times per year. Estimates of 
the amount of compensation investors require for inflation uncertainty at this forward horizon 
vary from close to 0 percent to more than 1 percent. 
Yield  curve  model-based  estimates  can  provide  a  decomposition  of  the  whole  forward 
structure of inflation expectations. As shown in Chart 2 for the Board research staff measure 
of inflation compensation, the effect of the recent surge in energy prices is centered on short-
term 
inflation 
compensation  from  2013  onward.  Of  course,  the  recent  surge  in  energy  prices  has  also 
increased both short-term inflation and uncertainty around future inflation. Thus, the increase 
in short-term inflation compensation reflects both factors. 
There  are  numerous  surveys  of  economists  and  market  participants  that  give  additional 
information  on  inflation  expectations.  Many  of  you  in  this  room  are  respondents  to  these 
surveys. As with the market-based measures, the surveys produce responses for a specific 
price  index,  usually  the  CPI  and  the  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy.  The  Survey  of 
Professional  Forecasters  (SPF)  also  asks  numerous  questions  about  the  PCE  deflator. 
Compared  with  market-based  measures,  the  surveys  have  the  advantages  of  not  being 
affected  by  varying  market  liquidity  and  not  requiring  any  adjustment  for  inflation  risk 
compensation.  Further,  the  SPF  asks  a  number  of  questions  about  short-run  inflation 
uncertainty. 
These  forecasts  from  professionals  about  core  inflation  and  long-run  average  inflation 
provide additional insight into the stability of forward inflation expectations. Since many of the 
shocks that move around total inflation at high frequencies are removed from core inflation, 
forecasts  of  core  inflation  in  the  short  to  medium  term  provide  an  additional  check  on  the 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  Recently,  with  the  large  increase  in  economic  slack 
produced  by  the  Great  Recession,  there  has  been  considerable  debate  on  the  relative 
strengths  of  slack  to  generate  a  decline in inflation  versus the  power  of  anchored inflation 
expectations to restrain this decline. 
Chart 3 shows some detail on recent behavior of the forecasts for core PCE inflation from 
the SPF and dispersion in long-run CPI inflation forecasts. The first panel shows the average 
of point forecasts since 2007 for the current year and year-ahead core PCE inflation rate. As 
one would expect, the current year forecast is more variable, and for the most part the year-
ahead forecast remains above the current year forecast after the financial crisis, consistent 
with  the  pull  of  anchored  inflation  expectations.  However,  both  sets  of  forecasts  are  still 
below what some have called, based on the Summary of Economic Projections, the mandate 
consistent range of Federal Open Market Committee participants. 
forward 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The second panel of Chart 3 shows a measure of uncertainty for these forecasts. Here we 
can see that uncertainty increased as the financial crisis took hold but has returned to 2007 
levels recently. The third panel shows that disagreement across forecasters also increased 
with the financial crisis and has not returned to pre-crisis levels. Much of this disagreement 
appears to be related to differing views on the strength of standard Phillips curve dynamics 
versus  other  approaches  to inflation  dynamics.  The  final  panel  shows the  disagreement  in 
10-year average CPI forecasts over the last 20 years. As you are aware, one of the great 
successes  of  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  was  a  reduction  in  long-run 
inflation expectations. Indeed, since 1998, the median forecast from this SPF question has 
stayed  within  a  very  narrow  range.  However,  the  amount  of  disagreement  around  this 
median  has  increased  recently.  Much  of  this  increase  is  related  to  lower  forecasts  for  the 
10-year average. 
During the past decade many central banks have begun to explore ways to improve through 
surveys their measurement and understanding of the public’s inflation expectations. At the 
New York Fed in November last year we had a conference where many different aspects of 
this research were discussed. In addition to initiating new surveys and gradually moving from 
traditionally  qualitative  to  more  quantitative  questions  and  measures,  research  is  being 
conducted  to  analyze  the  quality  and  information  content  of  survey-based  measures  of 
consumer inflation expectations. 
In late 2006 at the New York Fed we initiated a major research project to examine a number 
of issues: First, what is the best way to measure the public’s inflation expectations in terms of 
inflation concepts and forecast horizon? Second, how do households form and update their 
expectations of future inflation: to what extent are they based on past inflation experiences 
and what information sources do they rely on? Third, do people act on their expectations and 
if so, how? My remarks today will mainly focus on the first set of issues, but I will conclude 
with some preliminary research on the other two. 
Despite the importance of inflation expectations for forecasting future inflation and economic 
activity and as a key link in the monetary transmission mechanism, surprisingly little is known 
to directly answer these questions. This was partly because back in 2006 when we started 
out,  macroeconomists  had  enjoyed  around  20  years  of  success  with  models  where  these 
questions  were  answered  in  a  simple  and  unambiguous  manner.  As  we  have  learned 
painfully from the financial crisis, the success of these models was much more due to luck 
than deep insight. 
Our relative ignorance was also partly because economists do not receive detailed training in 
the  design of  survey  questions.  One  of  the  issues  that  sparked  our  initial  interest  was  the 
wording of questions. We found most questions on inflation expectations did not directly ask 
about inflation but instead asked about prices. For example, the Thomson Reuters/University 
of Michigan Survey (the Michigan Survey from now on) asks about the change in “prices in 
general” or the Bank of England/GfK NOP survey asks about the expected “change in prices 
in shops generally.” Not being experts in survey design, we decided that we needed a wide 
collaboration to understand the implications of asking about prices in general and whether it 
was possible to ask directly about the rate of inflation. 
We  formed  a  cross-disciplinary  team  among  Federal  Reserve  research  staff,  academic 
economists,  and  psychologists  at  Carnegie  Mellon  University  who  specialize  in  behavioral 
decision-making, as well as risk perception and communication. The initial part of the project 
was structured in three stages. The first two stages – preliminary inquiries conducted through 
phone  and  Internet  surveys  –  gauged  how  individuals  interpreted  the  Michigan  Survey 
questions  and  how  they  would  respond  to  alternative  questions  about  future  inflation.  The 
Internet  survey  also  “piloted”  questions  on  wage  expectations  and  inflation  uncertainty  to 
expand the information currently elicited by the Michigan Survey. These preliminary inquiries 
guided the final formulation of the questions for the third stage – the actual implementation of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
an alternative experimental Internet survey of inflation expectations using a sample panel of 
households drawn from previous respondents to the Michigan survey. 
Reliable  measurement  requires  that  respondents  agree  with  one  another  –  and  with 
economic  modelers  –  on  what  the  survey  questions  mean.  For  the  questions  asked  in 
professional surveys, there is little room for differing interpretations of the inflation concept 
since forecasts for a specific price index are requested. For questions asked of households, 
specific price indexes are not used so respondents vary in their interpretation of the inflation 
concept.  Thus,  their  responses  may  display  disagreement  not  about  expectations  but  the 
concept  of  inflation  being  used.  Indeed,  one  feature  that  the  Michigan  Survey’s  question 
about “prices in general” shares with other surveys is a high dispersion of responses around 
the median. This evidence of disagreement is in part related to observable characteristics of 
respondents  such  as  age,  gender,  education  and  income.  However,  the  differences  in 
responses across demographic groups far exceed the variations in inflation experienced by 
the groups. 
When  we  probed  survey  respondents  about  their  understanding  of  changes  to  “prices  in 
general”  (the  Michigan  Survey  question),  we  found  that  a  significant  fraction  believed  we 
were  inquiring  about  the  prices  they  themselves  recently  paid  –  often  prices  that  had 
increased or decreased markedly, such as those for food or gasoline. This tendency to think 
more  about  prominent  price  changes  in  one’s  own  experience  is  less  common  among 
respondents with higher financial literacy. By contrast, when we asked about expectations for 
the  “rate  of  inflation,”  respondents  tended  to  think  less  about  a  few  salient  price  changes 
specific  to  their  own  experiences  and  more  about  price  changes  across  a  broader  set  of 
items  or  about  changes  in  the  cost  of  living  –  a  result  that  aligns  more  with  economists’ 
definition of inflation as a sustained increase in the overall price level. Asking about the rate 
of inflation directly therefore produces answers more consistent with the concept of forward 
inflation expectations of interest to central banks. 
Chart 4 plots the time series of median responses from our experimental survey to a “prices 
in  general”  question  and  a  rate  of  inflation  question.  One  can  see  that  the  median 
expectation for the rate of inflation question is less variable. We also find that the dispersion 
of responses is significantly larger with the “prices in general” question. Further, in our initial 
investigations  we  had  established  evidence  that  many  respondents  would  prefer  to  give  a 
range rather than a point estimate and that most households were able to answer questions 
about  their  uncertainty  over  future  inflation.  We  had  also  found  our  measure  of  individual 
forecast uncertainty to be positively correlated with the width of any range of responses given 
to the standard point forecast questions. Thus, we added questions eliciting from our panel 
their  subjective  uncertainty  about  future  inflation.  I  will  show  you  an  example  of  such  a 
question in a minute. 
As emphasized above, anchoring forward inflation expectations is crucial for monetary policy. 
In  the  Michigan  survey,  information  on  forward  inflation  expectations  is  generated  by  a 
question asking about “the change in prices in general over the next 5 to 10 years.” Our initial 
exploratory  work  confirmed  that  many  households  were  confused  by  this  wording  but  that 
there was overwhelming evidence that long-term average expectations were being reported. 
Considering  the  rather  elaborate  structure  of  the  Michigan  questions  shown  in  Chart  5,  it 
also appears that small changes in the various challenges could lower the median response 
by a significant margin. Further, asking about the rate of inflation directly produced answers 
more consistent with the concept of forward inflation expectations of interest to central banks. 
Rather  than  replicating  the  Michigan  long-term  inflation  expectation  question  replacing 
“prices in general” with the “rate of inflation” we decided to work with a medium-term explicit 
horizon  and  use  only  a  probabilistic  version  of  the  question.  So  for  example,  in  the  most 
recent fielding of our survey, the panel was asked: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In your view, what would you say is the percent chance that the following things 
may  happen  to  the  rate  of  inflation/deflation  over  the  one-year  period  between 
February 2013 and February 2014? 
Chart 6 gives you the question in full. 
We  have  been  fielding  the  forward  inflation  expectation  question  since  spring  2008,  and 
Chart  7  contains  some  time-series  information  from  the  responses.  We  use  established 
statistical techniques to estimate continuous probability distributions from each individual set 
of  responses.  We  then  find  the  median  of  the  medians  of  the  individual  distributions  to 
represent the average forward expectation and the upper and lower quartiles of the individual 
medians to measure disagreement across respondents. For our measure of uncertainty we 
report the median of the individual inter-quartile ranges. 
As a complement to attempting to improve the measurement of household forward inflation 
expectations,  we  have  also  been  investigating  expectations  about  wage  growth.  Because 
firms and workers may negotiate changes in wages to be in line with their expected rate of 
inflation,  data  on  wage  expectations  are  an  additional  information  source  for  analyzing 
inflation dynamics and the interaction between wage and price determination. Furthermore, 
discrepancies  between  expected  changes  in  wages  and  expected  inflation  may  affect 
households’  financial  decisions.  Despite  the  obvious  importance  of  wage  expectations, 
information on wage expectations is particularly scarce. 
In formulating a question on wage expectations we needed to pose a hypothetical situation to 
gain information of direct relevance to inflation. It is easiest to illustrate this by giving you the 
format and exact wording of the question: 
We first asked individuals who reported to be working for pay how many jobs they had. We 
then informed them that in some subsequent questions we would ask about their MAIN job, 
which we defined to be the job at which they usually work the most hours. We then ask: 
“Suppose that, 12 months from now, you actually are working in the exact same 
[MAIN]  job  at  the  same  place  you  currently  work,  and  working  the  exact  same 
number of hours. Twelve months from now, do you expect your earnings on this 
job,  before  taxes  and  deductions,  to  have  gone  up,  or  gone  down,  or  stayed 
where they are now?” 
For those who said gone up or gone down we then asked: 
“By  about  what  percent  do  you  expect  that  your  hourly  earnings  on  this  job, 
before taxes and other deductions, will have gone [UP/DOWN], 12 months from 
now,  if  you  actually  are  working  in  the  exact  same  job  at  the  same  place  you 
currently work, and working the exact same number of hours?” 
As in the rest of our work we also elicited uncertainty around this wage expectation. Chart 8 
shows a time series of the median response and inter-quartile range to the point prediction 
question  along  with  the  average  uncertainty  as  defined  above.  Given  the  nature  of  this 
question, the inter-quartile range is best interpreted as dispersion rather than disagreement. 
The results around the height of the financial crisis are striking: the median response fell from 
just under 3 percent to just above 0 percent as many more respondents opted for the “stayed 
where  they  are  now”  option.  Moreover,  these  low  median  expectations  of  wage  growth 
appear unaffected by the recovery in economic activity. The dispersion of responses around 
the median is relatively high, although lower than before the crisis. The individual uncertainty 
around  wage  growth  is  lower  than  around  inflation  but  interestingly  does  show  some 
increases  coincident  with  accelerations  in  economic  activity  during  the  recovery  which  we 
don’t find in individual inflation uncertainty. 
Turning to the second set of general questions I started with, knowing how consumers form 
expectations and revise them in response to new information is relevant for many aspects of 
monetary policy. As noted previously, the large cross-sectional variation in inflation forecasts 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
across  survey  respondents  is  inconsistent  with  the  traditional  rational  expectations 
framework  in  which  all  agents  are  assumed  to  share  the  same  information  set  and 
expectations. This has led to alternative models in which this heterogeneity is explained by a 
reliance  of agents  on  different  models  for  forecasting,  the use  of  different  information  sets 
and  different  capabilities  for  processing  information.  While  in  a  full-information,  rational-
expectations  world  there  is  no  role  for  constant  central  bank  communication,  such  a  role 
becomes crucial in a world with learning. 
Since in our survey we have utilized a panel design, we will have the ability to make progress 
in  understanding  how  expectations  are  formed  and  revised  over  time.  Initial  analysis 
suggests  that  the  differences  in  individual  forecasts  are  persistent  and  probably  related  to 
different  forecast  models  and  reference  information  and  not  just  different  experiences.  We 
have  also  found  that  a  respondent  expressing  higher-than-average  uncertainty  in  the 
previous survey is more likely to change their point forecast in the current survey. 
A better understanding of the factors affecting individual inflation expectations will also help 
evaluate  and  predict  the  impact  and  effectiveness  of  central  bank  policy  decisions  and 
communication strategy. Specifically, it will improve the central bank’s capacity to evaluate 
the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  various  communication  tools  and  strategies  designed  to 
keep inflation expectations well anchored. The ability to do so is especially important at times 
such  as  the  current  one,  in  which  central  banks  have  been  expanding  their  toolkits  and 
conducting traditional as well as non-traditional monetary policy. 
The third and final broad question that would benefit from additional research is whether and 
how people act on their expectations. The theoretical link between inflation expectations and 
realized  inflation  and  consumer  decisions  occurs  through  several  channels.  In  addition  to 
affecting future wages and prices through influencing the outcomes of nominal wage contract 
negotiations  and  through  price-setting  behavior  of  firms,  there  is  the  crucial  link  of  real 
interest  rates  (nominal  rates  less  expected  inflation)  with  intertemporal  consumption  and 
investment decisions. In addition, households that fear high inflation are expected to reduce 
the amount of money they hold and keep more of their wealth in real assets such as land or 
gold, which are considered better hedges against inflation. Inflation also raises the effective 
tax rate on income earned from investing and saving. As a result, people may invest less and 
save  less.  However,  at  present  there  is  little  direct  empirical  evidence  of  the  strength  and 
nature of these theoretical links. 
These  are  important  questions,  and  a  variety  of  approaches  can  be  brought  to  bear  to 
answer them. Surveys, field experiments and experiments in the lab can all be very useful to 
further our understanding of these issues, which lie at the heart of the mandate of any central 
bank.  Of  course  many  economists  are  perhaps  appropriately  sceptical  about  whether  the 
results  from  many  experiments  can  be  generalized.  Some  recent  results  from  our  survey 
might reassure some of these economists. Working with the Rand Corporation, which runs 
the Internet survey for our inflation questions, we designed an experiment involving nominal 
future  payoffs  to  assess  whether  the  responding  households  would  behave  in  ways 
consistent with their reported inflation expectations. The results confirmed that on average 
households used a real interest rate based on their reported inflation expectation in choosing 
between the nominal future payoffs. 
Thank  you  for  listening  to  me  today.  I  would  be  happy  to  take  some  questions  on  our 
research on inflation expectations. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Reference 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
