Michael C Bonello: Launch of the Forum for Financial Stability 
Introductory remarks by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the 
launch of the Forum for Financial Stability, Valletta, 23 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I should first of all like to thank you for having accepted our invitation to today’s launch of the 
Forum  for  Financial  Stability.  I  would  also  like  to  extend  a  special  welcome  to  our  guest 
speakers, the Chairman of the MFSA, the Secretary General of the MBA and Mr John Fell, 
Deputy  Director  General  of  the  ECB’s  Financial  Stability  (Directorate  General).  In  my  own 
introductory  remarks  I  shall  attempt  to  provide  a  context  for  the  creation  of  this  Forum,  in 
which I trust your respective institutions will play an active role. 
In this regard it is important to note that central banks have an intrinsic interest in financial 
stability.  Indeed,  this  interest  is  recognized  in  statutory  instruments.  Thus  while  the  Treaty 
states that the ECB’s primary objective is to maintain price stability, it also stipulates that it 
should  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Echoing  this  thinking,  our  own 
Central Bank of Malta Act, while giving primacy to the implementation of the ECB’s monetary 
policy, also enjoins us to ensure the stability of the financial system. 
The concern of central banks with the health of the financial system is explained by the fact 
that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  complement  one  another.  A  monetary  policy  that 
succeeds in maintaining stable prices promotes financial stability by encouraging investment 
and economic growth. Conversely, a stable financial system helps monetary policy achieve 
its primary objective by, for example, ensuring the smooth propagation of the central bank’s 
interest rate signals throughout the economy. 
At this point it is useful to dwell briefly on the meaning of the concept of financial stability. In 
Malta  we  define  it  as  “a  condition  where  the  financial  system  –  comprising  institutions, 
markets and infrastructure is able to: allocate savings to investment opportunities efficiently; 
ensure the rapid settlement of payments; effectively manage potential risks that may harm its 
performance; and absorb shocks without impairing its operations.” 
If  there  was  ever  any  doubt  as  to  the  importance  of  ensuring  the  realization  of  such 
conditions, it can surely no longer be the case after the experience of the past three years. 
The  financial  crisis  has  clearly  underlined  the  vital  role  of  central  banks  in  safeguarding 
financial stability and the importance of adopting a macro-prudential approach to regulation 
and supervision. This thinking lies behind the many initiatives taken recently to strengthen 
the institutional framework for financial stability, most notably in the EU and on which Mr Fell 
will be elaborating later on. 
It is not surprising that in this new emphasis on macro-prudential supervision of the financial 
system, central banks are expected to play a key role. With regard to the situation in Malta, it 
bears recalling that a Financial Stability Office was created in our central bank as long ago as 
2000  when  the  Bank  was  still  responsible  for  banking  supervision.  The  decision  to  add  a 
macro-prudential dimension to our micro-prudential work was motivated by a realization that 
potential  systemic  risks  were  not  being  adequately  monitored.  Our  work  in  this  field  was 
given a boost in 2002 when Malta became one of the first countries to undergo an IMF/World 
Bank Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP). Though the Bank had already built 
up a small stress testing capacity and had undertaken assessments from a macro-prudential 
perspective, the FSAP proved a very valuable learning experience and gave our work a new 
sense of purpose and direction. 
Since then the Bank has endeavoured to build up expertise in this important field by following 
closely developments abroad and through exchanges with other national central banks and 
the  ECB.  We  are  even  now  in  the  process  of  restructuring  our  internal  set-up  and  human 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
resources to take into account lessons learned during the financial crisis and to be able to 
participate  actively  in  the  newly-established  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  its  sub-
structures.  The  financial  stability  function  will  be  composed  of  two  separate  offices,  one 
dealing with surveillance and the assessment of systemic risk, the other focusing more on 
policy, stress testing and crisis management. 
The  importance  of  monitoring  systemic  risks  and  putting  in  place  an  effective  response 
mechanism  has  indeed  been  one  of  the  major  lessons  learnt  from  the  crisis.  The  cost  in 
terms of the destruction of wealth of being inadequately prepared from a macro-prudential 
regulation point of view is still today being counted. The contribution of financial stability to 
sustained economic growth should clearly not be underestimated. 
The  fact  that  Malta’s  financial  system  has  not  been  directly  affected  by  the  global  crisis 
should not, therefore, give rise to complacency. No jurisdiction can be totally immune from 
systemic shocks, whether of domestic or external origin, or from contagion. Both the MFSA, 
from  their  regulatory  and  supervisory  perspective,  and  the  Bank,  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective, are acutely aware of the need to preserve confidence in our financial system. 
Our co-operation, which is institutionalised through formal arrangements, has to date worked 
well.  Indeed,  apart  from  regular  meetings  of  the  Standing  Committee  envisaged  by  the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  we  also  cooperate  through  the  Domestic  Standing  Group 
that  brings  together  the  Bank,  the  MFSA  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Economy  and 
Investment in a forum for crisis management. This mechanism was first tested in 2007 when 
the  financial  crisis  was  about  to  erupt,  and  that  experience  highlighted  the  importance  of 
coordinated  and  timely  action  and  of  the  Ministry  as  a  key  player  in  times  of  financial 
instability.  
Another notable example of coordination between the Bank and the MFSA concerns stress 
testing. We have jointly undertaken a series of “constrained” bottom-up stress tests across a 
number of banks and last year we participated in the EU-wide stress test stress test. This 
year the Bank is assisting the MFSA in the stress test exercise being conducted by the newly 
established European Banking Authority.  
Together,  the  Bank  and  the  MFSA  now  need  to  build  upon  this  positive  track  record.  The 
recent changes in the nature and size of the domestic financial system and in the external 
environment with which it increasingly interacts, in fact, suggest that the time has come for 
the existing model of cooperation to be further refined and strengthened.  
The need to increase the effectiveness of the institutional arrangements for the preservation 
of  financial  stability  is  also  related  to  Malta’s  aspirations  to  consolidate  its  position  as  a 
successful  financial  centre.  The  financial  services  industry  has  grown  considerably, 
particularly  since  EU  membership  in  2004.  Today  there  are  25  licenced  credit  institutions,  
14  of  which  with  a  majority  shareholding  from  other  EU  countries.  But  the  fastest  growing 
sector has been the funds industry, with more than 400 funds registered, many having re-
domiciled from other jurisdictions. There has been a similar growth in the insurance business 
with 50 operators here today. In the process, Malta has become a very important centre for 
captive insurance in the EU. This increased visibility brings with it the responsibility to ensure 
that our financial system does not serve as a channel through which risks are transmitted to 
other countries.  
Against  this  background,  the  step  we  are  taking  today,  which  is  designed  to  intensify  the 
exchange of views between the authorities and the financial services industry and to deepen 
the examination of common concerns, assumes even greater importance. Participation in the 
work  of  the  Forum  for  Financial  Stability  should,  therefore,  prove  to  be  of  mutual  benefit. 
From the point of view of the Central Bank of Malta, it should also enable us to refine our 
analytical work, whose conclusions have since 2009 been published in our annual Financial 
Stability  Report  and  the  mid-year  Update.  The  Report  contains  insights  into  the  main 
vulnerabilities  of  the  domestic  financial  system  and  into  any  latent  risks,  whether  in  the 
system itself or in the external environment. It also assesses the robustness of the financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system and its resilience to particular stress events. By publishing its findings, the Bank aims 
to  foster  a  constructive  dialogue  among  all  stakeholders  with  the  ultimate  objective  of 
strengthening the financial system. 
The quality of the Bank’s assessments, however, depends on access to timely and reliable 
market intelligence. For, while the statutory data submitted regularly by reporting institutions 
is thoroughly analysed, this is insufficient to provide a holistic assessment of emerging risks. 
Financial stability is a forward looking concept. Risks, moreover, may materialise suddenly or 
with little warning. This is where market intelligence plays an important role. We, therefore, 
see the Forum as an important complement to our early warning system, particularly since 
owing to the rapidly changing structure of the financial system and the idiosyncrasies of the 
Maltese  economy,  it  has  proved  difficult  to  construct  a  more  formal  early  warning  system 
model. 
The decision to create the Forum for Financial Stability can also be interpreted as a way of 
institutionalising current arrangements by enabling a more structured dialogue. Through this 
channel, the authorities will be able to convey their conclusions and concerns more directly, 
while  market  players  might  wish  to  offer  their  views  on  financial  stability  issues  and  their 
assessment of market developments. The Bank chairs joint committees with the industry in 
other areas, such as statistics and financial markets, and the experience to date has been 
very positive. I am sure that discussions in the Forum will be equally productive. 
The launch of the Forum for Financial Stability is taking place at a time of radical change in 
the  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment,  especially  in  a  cross-border  context,  both  at 
European and global levels. The feedback the Central Bank of Malta and the MFSA hope to 
receive from the Forum on reform-related issues should, therefore, also prove useful to these 
authorities  in  connection  with  their  participation  in  the  work  of  the  European  System  of 
Central  Banks,  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  and  the  European  Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB), as well as for the purposes of the technical advice given to Government 
in the context of EU discussions on such issues.  
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that the deliberations of the Forum, conducted 
on a confidential basis, will focus attention on the identification of potential systemic risks and 
on  the  promotion  of  effective  risk  management.  I  said  earlier  that  complacency  must  be 
avoided. It has taken several years of hard work at both the political and technical levels to 
put Malta on the map as a reputable financial centre. A rigorous but non-intrusive regulatory 
regime  based  on  international  best  practice  combined  with  easy  access  to  the  single 
regulator has been a major plus. Other contributory factors are a legal framework based on 
common and civil law, 55 double-taxation treaties and a competitive fiscal regime, and, not 
least,  membership  of  the  euro  area.  Malta’s  tradition  of  commercial  banking  based  on  a 
conservative funding model in which loans are entirely financed by retail deposits is a source 
of additional strength. Our banks, moreover, maintain capital and liquidity ratios well above 
the  regulatory  minimum  and  their  resilience  is  confirmed  by  stress  test  results.  We 
undoubtedly have reason to be satisfied. 
There can, however, be no letup. There is need for both a greater awareness about systemic 
risks and for enhanced efforts at risk mitigation and resilience building. We should not forget 
that there is a relatively high concentration of risk on both sides of bank balance sheets, in 
particular  a  significant  exposure  to  the  real  estate  sector,  both  in  the  form  of  loans  and 
collateral held against them. At a time when we are witnessing an increase in corporate non-
performing loans, I reiterate my call for the banks to expand their provisions commensurately 
with this heightened credit risk. At the same time, dividend policies must be mindful of the 
need for higher levels of retained earnings in order to further strengthen capital buffers, also 
in view of the more onerous requirements of Basel III. Finally, I would encourage risk officers 
to  go  beyond  simple  compliance  with  regulations  and  proactively  espouse  prudent  risk 
management practices and good judgement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Before  I  hand  over  the  floor  to  Professor  Bannister,  I  would  like,  on  this  my  last  official 
meeting with the financial community, to express my sincere appreciation to you all for the 
cooperation and understanding I have benefited from over the past twelve years.  
Thank you. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
