Alan Bollard: The implications of the Canterbury earthquakes for the 
Reserve Bank 
Opinion  piece  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  the 
implications of the Canterbury earthquakes for the Reserve Bank, 13 May 2011. 
 As Canterbury’s recovery from its devastating earthquakes progresses, it is timely to assess 
the  economic  damage  in  Canterbury  and  beyond,  and  consider  what  the  Reserve  Bank  
– and monetary policy – should do. 
Prior to the February earthquake, New Zealand’s economic activity had been weaker than 
expected through 2010. Households were already spending less, focusing on reducing debt, 
and  this  had  slowed  business  investment.  By  late  2010,  however,  signs  of  recovery  had 
begun to emerge, notably among exporting firms benefiting from improved overseas demand 
and commodity prices. 
The February earthquake disrupted this recovery. It resulted in significant loss and trauma, 
compounding the effects of the September 2010 earthquake and subsequent aftershocks. In 
addition to the considerable impact on peoples’ lives, there has been substantial damage to 
assets, as well as disruption to economic activity. 
The  total  cost  of  damage  has  been  estimated  at  $15  billion  –  approximately  8  percent  of 
annual  nominal  gross  domestic  product.  That  is  a  very  large  proportion  of  our  economic 
activity,  in  relative  terms  twice  as  big  as  the  impact  of  the  recent  Japanese  earthquake. 
These estimates are very uncertain and could move around a lot. 
The  vast  bulk  of  the  losses  to  residential  and  commercial  property  will  be  covered  by 
insurance  –  via  the  Earthquake  Commission  (EQC)  for  residential  property,  and  private 
insurance  for  both  residential  and  commercial  property.  Unlike  some  other  countries  like 
Japan, there is a high level of reinsurance in New Zealand, meaning the majority of privately 
insured losses will be borne by global insurance companies rather than domestic insurance 
firms.  
The Government will bear the majority of the remaining losses, with an estimated $3 billion in 
damage  to  uninsured  public  infrastructure  and  government  buildings,  as  well  as  the  costs 
being  met  from  the  EQC  reserves.  Fiscal  costs  will  also  include  the  array  of  additional 
government  support  programmes  –  support  to  small  businesses,  clean  up  and  recovery 
costs, and ACC payments. These costs are material and will place pressure on the Crown 
accounts at a time of fiscal consolidation. 
We  see  three  distinct  phases  in  economic  activity  following  the  earthquakes:  disruption, 
stabilisation and reconstruction.  
Economic disruption is most pronounced in Canterbury, but flowing through to other regions. 
Consumer  spending,  tourism  and  residential  investment  can  be  expected  to  have 
deteriorated.  
Most  businesses  with  operations  in  the  centre  of  Christchurch  have  lost  some  production, 
generally  from  the  impact  on  their  workforce.  The  Canterbury  Employers  Chamber  of 
Commerce  estimates  around  30  percent  of  businesses  in  Christchurch  were  materially 
impacted by the February quake.  
However, we may be seeing the first signs of a stabilisation phase, with business confidence 
surveys recovering strongly.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Official Cash Rate cut in March, along with government support programmes, looks like 
it has been helpful in stabilising confidence, and we would expect the deterioration in activity 
to be arrested by mid-2011. 
In  Canterbury,  activity  can  be  expected  to  lift  due  to  resumption  of  business  activity, 
replacement  spending  and  government  support.  But  the  Canterbury  economy  will  remain 
subdued  due  to  wealth  losses,  weakness  in  tourism  and  construction,  and  obstacles 
including damage to infrastructure and capital.  
Nonetheless, recovery in the Canterbury economy, combined with the boost from the Rugby 
World Cup, will result in a marked pick-up pace of overall GDP growth.  
The reconstruction phase is expected to begin in earnest in 2012, with residential and non-
residential  investment  lifting  growth  sharply.  Spare  capacity  and  labour  will  be  absorbed 
rapidly, and inflation pressures will pick up from current low levels, prompting interest rates 
increases.  
The likely drivers of inflation from a reconstruction such as we will see in Christchurch are the 
demand and supply of labour, materials and equipment, and the availability of finance. How 
government policy affects regulatory standards and the rebuild is also clearly important. 
How will the Reserve Bank deal with this? We are guided by our Policy Targets Agreement 
(PTA) with Government that says, in the case of natural disasters, we should accommodate 
any initial inflation effects, such as higher rents or insurance premiums. However, we should 
respond to any medium-term generalised inflationary pressures that are likely to develop, as 
resources are devoted to reconstruction in Canterbury. This means assessing the extent to 
which wages, construction costs and other prices rise nationally, as resources are drawn into 
the Canterbury region.  
At the same time, monetary policy should also look to avoid any unnecessary instability in 
activity,  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates  resulting  from  the  earthquakes.  This 
consideration  was  behind  the  decision  to  reduce  the  OCR  in  March  so  as  to  mitigate  the 
near-term negative impact of the February earthquake. 
It is appropriate for monetary policy to remain supportive, given the continued downside risks 
to economic activity stemming from the Canterbury earthquakes and more broad fragility in 
the New Zealand economy. It is likely that the OCR remains on hold until these downside 
risks pass and the economy begins to recover. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
