Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary and financial stability in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Europe  Festival  Conference  on  “The  state  of  the  Union”,  Florence,  10  May 
2011. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to contribute to this Europe Festival Conference on “The state of 
the Union”.  
Before turning to my assigned topics, which concern the euro and the monetary policy of the 
Union, I would like to start with a few general comments. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  are  challenging  times  for  Europe.  But  the  current  crisis 
does  not  just  affect  Europe,  it  affects  the  whole  of  the  West.  Problems  such  as  the 
sustainability  of  public  finances  and  the  role  of  the  state  in  the  economy,  immigration  and 
burgeoning income inequality, concern not only Europe and the euro area, but the whole of 
the industrialised world. Moreover, this is not a cyclical crisis but a structural one, resulting 
from  the  profound  changes  now  sweeping  the  world.  Hundreds  of  millions  of  people  have 
risen over the survival threshold, over two-thirds of the world’s population has opted for the 
market  economy  model,  and  there  is  a  perception  of  a  lack  of  progress  in  economic  and 
social development and also in civil rights in a large part of the world.  
There is probably no historical precedent for the speed at which these changes are taking 
place. But this is not to say that history is not instructive and no useful lessons can be drawn 
from  it.  To  understand  how  to  face  the  challenges  ahead  of  us,  it  may  be  useful  to 
understand  how  similar  challenges  were  faced  and  overcome  in  the  past,  and  particularly 
how some were able to make progress while others lost ground at times when the pace of 
globalisation accelerated. 
Much has been written recently on this subject. Niall Ferguson and Ian Morris, for instance, 
examine the reasons why the West has “ruled” the world – at least until now.1 In essence, 
they  assert  that  civilizations  developed  and  rose  to  dominance  when  they  were  open  to 
innovations  from  abroad  and  were  able  to  develop  and  use  them  to  their  advantage.  This 
applies to both migratory flows and imports of agricultural or manufactured goods, ideas and 
scientific  innovations,  in  a  context  of  competition.  Those  who  were  closed  to  globalisation 
declined, even if they had achieved a leading position in economic, technological or military 
matters.  
That  is  the  reason  why,  according  to  Jared  Diamond,  a  European,  rather  than  a  Chinese 
explorer,  discovered  America  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  even  though  China’s 
economic development was much more advanced and had a much greater army and navy.2 I 
would like to quote briefly Diamond: 
“Christopher Columbus, an Italian by birth, switched his allegiance to the duke of 
Anjou in France, then to the king of Portugal. When the latter refused his request 
for ships in which to explore westward, Columbus turned to the duke of Medina-
Sedonia, who also refused, then to the count of Medina-Celi, who did likewise, 
and finally to the king and queen of Spain, who denied Columbus’ first request 
                                                 
1   Niall Ferguson, “Civilisation: The West and the Rest”, Allen Lane, 2011; Ian Morris, “Why the West Rules – for 
Now”, Farrar, 2010. 
2   Jared Diamond, “Guns, Germs and Steel”, Norton, 1997. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
but eventually granted his renewed appeal. Had Europe been united under one 
of the first three rules, its colonisation of the Americas might have been stillborn.” 
the  decentralised  decision-making  mechanism 
The  spirit  of  competition  and 
that 
characterised Europe in past centuries explain, for example, why European navigators strove 
to discover new routes; how the foundations of commercial dominance were laid; and how 
scientific discoveries, which often originated abroad, were turned into innovations and new 
production processes. Again, using Diamond’s words: 
“Once  Spain  had  launched  the  European  colonisation  of  America,  other 
European  states  saw  the  wealth  flowing  to  Spain,  and  six  more  joined  in 
colonizing  America.  The  story  was  the  same  with  Europe’s  cannon,  electric 
lighting,  printing,  small  firearms,  and  innumerable  other  innovations:  each  was 
first neglected or opposed in some parts of Europe for idiosyncratic reasons, but 
once adopted in one area, it eventually spread to the rest of Europe.” 
Europe  rose  to  dominance  over  the  centuries  to  the  extent  that  the  positive  effects  of 
competition  prevailed  over  the  negative  effects  associated  with  the  recurrent  conflicts 
between  states  that  stemmed  from  the  inability  to  resolve  the  tensions  generated  by 
competition. The European Union was created precisely in order to ensure that the spirit of 
emulation and competition could operate within a framework of peace.  
There is no doubt that there are currently substantial differences within Europe, with some 
countries demonstrating a strong capacity to adapt to the new global conditions, while others 
are  finding  it  hard  to  implement  the  changes  that  are  necessary  to  maintain  their  level  of 
prosperity and continue to grow. These differences are not confined to Europe. Contrary to 
what  some  observers  say,  I  think  that  the  anti-Europe  movements  that  have  emerged  in 
some  countries  are  a  symptom  of  a  more  general  dissatisfaction  linked  to  the  structural 
factors of the crisis. In the United States too, society is deeply divided on how to face the 
challenges of globalisation.  
Although  European  institutions  provide  an  easy  scapegoat,  they  represent  an  element  of 
extraordinary  strength  in  the  current  circumstances,  not  only  for  Europe,  but  also  for  the 
Member  States,  giving  them  –  I  believe  –  a  great  advantage.  In  a  severe  crisis,  which 
requires prompt action with long-lasting effects on the lives of citizens, the risk of a mistake is 
enormous, particularly if decisions are taken in a monolithic society or there is a tendency to 
share  a  common  mindset.  The  existence  of  European  institutions  does  not  eliminate  the 
possibility of error, but forces together the different cultures and opinions that form the Union 
in  the  decision-making  process.  As  a  result,  decisions  may  be  wiser,  even  if  taken  in  a 
cumbersome way and in a context of deep discord. One example is the decisions to support 
the  three  countries  which  experienced  economic  difficulties.  Opinions  differed  within  the 
Union. Some were tempted to leave the countries to their fate, to pay for the mistakes they 
had made. But others were prepared to help – even unconditionally – thinking that in future 
they might benefit from the same assistance if needed. In each case it was difficult to forge 
an  agreement,  but  finally  a  balanced  solution  was  found  with  a  view  to  creating  the 
appropriate incentives for adjustment.  
Resorting to European institutions does not mean that all decisions need to be centralised at 
the Union level. Maintaining decentralised decision-making and some form of competition in 
some  sectors  can  be  an  important  factor  in  encouraging  less  competitive  countries  to 
emulate more efficient ones. In several European countries, for instance, the reform of the 
labour market to align it with best practice has become a priority in the adjustment process. 
Overall, I believe that Europe has the ability to meet the challenges that the western world 
faces,  if  it  is  able  to  make  full  use  of  its  own  experience  and  institutions.  Changes  are 
nevertheless  needed.  And  this  brings  me  to  the  questions  specific  to  Economic  and 
Monetary Union.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In this regard, I would like to make two main points: first, the global economy is becoming 
increasingly “multipolar” and the euro will have to stand its ground alongside at least three 
– and possibly more – other major international currencies. Second, the euro can only be 
assured  of  a  major  role  in  a  multipolar  currency  world  if  the  architecture  underlying  the 
single  European  currency  is  sufficiently  strong.  The  task  of  achieving  this  cannot  be 
delegated to financial markets and requires appropriate institutional steps.  
The euro in a multipolar world 
When the idea of the single currency was first mooted in the 1980s, the global economy was 
dominated by three countries: the United States, Germany and Japan. Since then, the global 
economy has seen major changes. With the ongoing integration of global markets, we have 
witnessed  the  rise  of  emerging  market  economies.  China,  in  particular,  has  led  to  a 
progressive  shift  in  the  centre  of  economic  gravity  and  is  expected  to  overtake  the  United 
States in terms of GDP at market exchange rates sometime from 2025 onwards.  
The US dollar has remained the main international currency, as a result of the predominance 
of  US  financial  markets  and  also  the  inability  of  several  emerging  economies  to  pursue 
independent  policies  (for  example  by  de-pegging  their  currencies  from  the  US  dollar).  But 
there is little reason to believe that these factors will not change over time. The renminbi, in 
particular, should be in a position to relatively quickly emancipate itself from the dollar and 
become a major international currency if the Chinese authorities were to consistently pursue 
capital account liberalisation, greater exchange rate flexibility and all related policy measures 
in the years to come. The international role of some other emerging market currencies is also 
likely to increase over time.  
We are clearly moving towards a multipolar currency world. The question is whether the euro 
will be one of the poles – so to speak – of the new system. I will not dwell on the advantages 
for  Europe  of  being  one  of  the  poles,  but  rather  I  invite  you  to  reflect  upon  what  would 
happen  if  it were  not.  To  be  sure,  the  euro,  like  any  other  currency,  would  be  affected  by 
economic and political developments in the countries issuing the leading reserve currencies, 
and  would  suffer  severely  from  external  shocks.  Consider,  as  an  illustration,  the  recent 
experience of the Swiss franc, a currency which is renowned for its stability. After the onset 
of the global financial and economic crisis the franc appreciated by 17% vis-à-vis the euro in 
2010 alone, driven by the reallocation of global capital on a massive scale. This has fuelled 
deflationary risks and slowed economic growth. To counter these effects, massive unilateral 
interventions were conducted, leading de facto to a closer alignment of monetary conditions 
with those in the euro area.  
This  points  to  the  conclusion  that  in  a  multipolar  world  having  appropriate  domestic 
macroeconomic policies is not sufficient to absorb external shocks. Unless a country or an 
economic region also has a deep and liquid capital market and its size is sufficient to absorb 
large capital flows, it is bound to become subordinate to the existing poles, or to be squeezed 
between them. The prosperity of the euro area countries is inextricably linked to the success 
of the euro. 
The euro: a unique construct 
The euro is the only major currency that is not issued by a single sovereign state, but by a 
union  of  states.  As  this  is  a  totally  unprecedented  monetary  framework,  it  is  fair  to  ask 
whether  it  has  what  is  needed  to  become  one  of  the  poles  of  the  new  system  –  in  other 
words, is it sufficiently robust to ensure sound economic policies at the euro area level and in 
the individual countries, and does it have a large and deep financial market?  
Decisions  are  about  to be  taken  on  strengthening  the  governance  of  the  euro  area  with  a 
view  to  achieving  these  objectives.  The  aim  is  not  only  to  strengthen  the  institutional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
architecture but also to advance the implementation of the single market. The ECB’s position 
in this respect is well-known.  
Here  today  I  would  like  to  warn  against  an  illusion  which  seems  to  be  spreading  among 
policy-makers in Europe. The illusion is that the economic governance of the euro area can 
be strengthened not by increasing the responsibilities of policy-makers, which would mean 
stronger  European  institutions  and  stronger  rules,  but  rather  by  delegating  to  financial 
markets  the  task  of  selecting  the  appropriate  policies  that  authorities  must  abide  by,  in 
particular with respect to budgetary policies. 
One avenue that has been advocated by some is to make more explicit the conditions under 
which countries, like companies, would not repay their obligations and would restructure their 
debts or even default. The proponents argue that such explicit rules would improve the ability 
of markets to price sovereign risk and, thus, to exert discipline on governments with a view to 
achieving  sounder  fiscal  policies.  This  view  is  predicated  on  the  general  principle  that 
investors should bear the consequences of their decisions.  
Although at first sight this may seem reasonable and fair, it is wrong not only in theory but 
also in practice. The reasons are simple and include the following: 
First, as over 50 years of IMF experience have proven, market assessments of the solvency 
of countries tend to be wrong. In the vast majority of cases, sovereign risk is overestimated 
or underestimated over a long period. This is because sovereign risk does not depend only 
on  debt  sustainability,  but  also  on  the  political  will  to  implement  adjustment  programmes, 
including privatisations and structural reforms.  
Second, at times markets have perverse incentives. In particular, large investors who have 
bought insurance against sovereign default, often without holding the underlying asset, stand 
to  benefit  greatly  from  the  default  and  lobby  in favour  of  it.  They  tend to  encourage  naïve 
governments to believe that debt restructuring can be done in an “orderly way”, distracting 
them from implementing the appropriate policy adjustment. 
Third, default or debt restructuring is a dramatic economic and social event for the country 
which experiences it – I would call it political “suicide” – which leads many into poverty, as 
experience has shown. It is thus rather peculiar for policy-makers to design policies mainly 
with  the  aim  of  punishing  (or  rewarding)  certain  categories  of  investors,  rather  than 
considering the ultimate consequences for the people.  
Finally, if the euro area were to go down the path of leaving it entirely up to the markets to 
decide which countries are solvent and which are not, it would put the euro at a disadvantage 
compared  with  all  other  major  currencies.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  since  mid-
October 2010, when the idea of private sector involvement in programmes to assist countries 
experiencing difficulties was voiced at the highest political level, and in spite of subsequent 
clarification  that  in  fact  no  change  had  occurred  in  prevailing  practices,  some  euro  area 
market segments have severely suffered. The benefits of a deep and liquid financial market 
where  international  investors  feel  safe  to  invest  have  been  jeopardised,  undermining  the 
competitiveness of the euro. 
The  alternative  is  for  policy-makers  to  take  responsibility  and  strengthen  the  economic 
governance framework of the euro area, in at least three ways.  
First,  the  governance  framework  underlying  budgetary  policy  requires  bold  changes,  with 
greater  automaticity  and  stronger  commitment  on  the  part  of  policy-makers  to  ensure  full 
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact.3 
                                                 
3   The ECB published a long article on its views in this regard in the March 2011 issue of the Monthly Bulletin. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second,  further  progress  should  be  achieved  in  the  implementation  of  the  single  market, 
strengthening the “economic leg” of EMU.  
Finally, we need to further integrate regulatory and supervisory institutions for the financial 
sector  at  the  European  level,  either  by  reinforcing  efforts  to  harmonise  practices  across 
Member States, or by further strengthening European authorities.  
A great deal has been achieved over the past few months, but much remains to be done to 
put the Union in a position to meet the challenges which have emerged as a result of the 
crisis. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude by quoting David Marquand’s recent book, “The end of the West”:4 
“The economic crisis itself, like its predecessor in the 1930s, is political, not technical….The 
world’s  economic  blocs  will  have  to  find  painful  answers  to  urgent  problems;  and  the 
allocation of the pain will be a supremely high-political matter. It will raise profound questions 
of distributive justice, of the obligations that the present generation owes to future ones, of 
the  proper  balance  between  the  claims  of  poor  and  rich  nations,  and  of  the  proper 
relationship  between  the  human  and  other  species.  Such  questions  are  quintessentially 
global in character, and the answers will have to be global too. But for the Union’s leaders to 
opt out of the global search for answers would be a betrayal of their citizens. And they will be 
unable to opt in if they cannot speak with one voice and lack the democratic legitimacy to 
carry their people with them.” 
Lastly, I would like to praise the organisers of this Festival of Europe Conference for having 
chosen Florence as the place to debate such important issues related to the future of our 
continent, as I like to think that one of the best way to symbolize Europe is the David (by 
Michelangelo): young, vigorous but also gentle, his gaze fixed fearlessly on the challenge; he 
can triumph, against all odds. That’s the way Europeans should be.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
4   David Marquand, “The End of the West – The Once and Future Europe”, Princeton University Press, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
