George A Provopoulos: The impact of climate change in Greece 
Opening  address  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
presentation of the Report of the Climate Change Impacts Study Committee, Athens, 1 June 
2011. 
 First, I wish to welcome you and thank you for attending today’s event, which will present the 
results of an ambitious initiative undertaken by the Bank of Greece, namely a study of the 
economic, social and environmental impact of climate change in the case of Greece. 
As you all know, environmental issues are not usually a matter of concern to central banks, 
whose  principal  mission  is  to  safeguard  monetary  stability.  It  has  been  my  view,  however, 
that environmental themes deserve more attention, especially in a country not accustomed to 
studying issues of a long-term nature. 
When the Bank of Greece, nearly two years ago, announced its initiative to set up a Study 
Committee, the need for action to deal with the impact of climate change was urgent, though 
not  as  much  as  it  is  today.  In  the  course  of  these  two  years,  we  have  all  witnessed  the 
ongoing  change  in  the  climate  and  its  significant  impact  at  the  global  level,  but  also  an 
economic  crisis  that  prevents  us  from  understanding  the  long-term  benefits  of  investment 
aimed at adaptation to climate change. 
With  the  release  of  this  Report,  the  Bank  of  Greece,  in  line  with  its  broader  role  and  its 
tradition of studying the structural problems of the Greek economy, helps fill a gap as regards 
scientific analysis and information on climate change, on its impact and on ways of dealing 
with it. 
This  Report  represents  a  first  attempt  at  a  comprehensive  study  of  the  impact  of  climate 
change for Greece – in particular of the cost of climate change that would be borne by the 
economy, the cost of implementing adaptation measures, as well as the cost of moving to a 
low-emissions economy, in the context of the global effort to mitigate climate change. 
For the first time and for close to two years, this project brought together teams from different 
scientific  disciplines;  the  teams  included  physicists  of  the  atmosphere,  climatologists  and 
geophysicists,  experts  in  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries,  as  well  as  experts  on  water 
resources,  tourism,  the  built  environment  and  energy,  not  to  mention  economists  and 
sociologists. 
The  findings  of  the  study  document  the  need  for  Greece  to  shield  itself  from  the  risks  of 
climate change and to adopt an appropriate long-term strategy. The climate changes, as they 
unfold,  affect  and  will  continue  to  affect  our  economy  and  society.  However,  the  cost  of 
addressing these changes is but a fraction of the cost that we would have to pay, if we allow 
climate change to continue unabated, without taking any preventive action. At the same time, 
considering that the occurrence of extreme climate events in the future cannot be excluded, 
policies  for  mitigation  and  adaptation  should  be  viewed  as  contingency  measures  against 
such an eventuality and, as such, are advisable irrespective of the results of the cost-benefit 
analysis. 
At first glance, the current adverse economic conjuncture appears to constrain the financing 
of  mitigation  and  adaptation  policies.  To  the  extent,  however,  that  these  policies  can  be 
exploited as an opportunity for new lines of  economic activity and for  growth, they can be 
part of the strategy for an exit from the crisis. In other words, the adoption of mitigation and 
adaptation  policies,  although  appearing  to  be  hampered  by  the  grave  economic  problem 
faced by Greece today, can in fact contribute to its solution. 
The  study  not  only  demonstrated  the  need  for  action  to  deal  with  climate  change,  it  also 
underscored the need to pursue research further. In this light, we, at the Bank of Greece, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
intend  to  continue  with  the  effort  of  both  disseminating  information  and  contributing  to 
research. The extremely useful study presented here today therefore marks only the starting 
point, the first step of an ongoing effort, which will be enriched and expanded as it proceeds. 
The time horizon set in this study extends well beyond the current adverse conjuncture and 
illustrates  how  firmly  we  believe  in  the  future  of  our  economy,  as  well  as  in  the  need  to 
address its problems seriously.  
I  consider  that  a  happy  outcome  of  our  initiative  is  that  it  has  offered  an  opportunity  for 
cooperation to experts from different scientific disciplines, who for the first time joined forces 
in  the  study  of  such  a  complex  problem.  This  constitutes  a  very  positive  example  for  the 
Greek scientific community. 
In closing, allow me one final word. Despite my opening remarks, some may still wonder why 
the Bank of Greece, at a time like this, should concern itself with climate change anyway. My 
answer to them is that the publication of a report analysing the impact of climate change on 
the Greek economy and outlining policy measures to deal with it over the next ninety years is 
also a clear-cut response to the outrageous and ridiculous scenarios recently going around. 
Let me point out that all of the estimates in the study’s cost-benefit analysis are made in euro 
terms. 
Before giving the floor to the other speakers, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to 
all  of  the  distinguished  scientists  who  took  part  actively  in  such  an  ambitious  joint  effort, 
without remuneration but out of sheer dedication to this important project which they were 
called upon to carry out.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
