Guy Debelle: The Australian bond market in 2011 and beyond 
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Debelle,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
KangaNews Australian DCM Summit, Sydney, 15 March 2011. 
 Today I will discuss the current structure of the Australian bond market and talk about some 
trends that might influence its evolution in the coming years. I will focus on the bank debt and 
Kangaroo markets, given the theme of this conference. I will also address some of the issues 
surrounding the implementation of the forthcoming Basel liquidity standard.  
Overview 
To set the scene, relative to the size of the Australian economy, the Australian bond market 
is around the average for developed economies (Table 1). However, unlike in many countries 
around the world today, the private debt market is significantly larger than the public market. 
This  reflects  the  prudent  fiscal  policy  pursued  by  both  sides  of  politics,  at  the  federal  and 
state level, over an extended period of time (Graph 1).  
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Graph 1 
 Structure of the Australian non-government debt market 
The non-government debt market in Australia consists of four categories of issuers: financial 
institutions,  other  corporate  issuers,  asset-backed  issuers  and  non-resident  Kangaroo 
issuers. As can be seen in Graph 2, while all four segments of the market have grown over 
time, the development of the market has not been uniform:  
 
 
Financial institutions have for some time had the largest share of issuance;  
asset-backed  issuance  grew  rapidly  during  the  early  2000s,  but  its  growth  was 
severely affected by the financial crisis;  
corporate issuance has grown steadily over the past two decades;  
more recently, strong demand for Australian-dollar assets has seen rapid issuance 
of Australian-dollar debt by non-residents.  
 I’d like to touch briefly on the main drivers of developments in each of these markets and talk 
about some of the potential factors affecting future issuance.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 2 
 the  past 
few  decades,  constrained 
Financials 
Over much of the past two decades, demand for credit outpaced the growth in deposits, so 
that banks accessed wholesale funding markets to support growth in lending. This outcome 
reflected a number of factors.  
Australia’s  relatively  high  level  of  investment,  and  the  sustained  growth  momentum  of  the 
economy over the past two decades, underpinned the demand for credit. While the source of 
the demand for credit shifted between household and business sectors, from the early 1990s 
recovery  until  the  financial  crisis,  aggregate  credit  growth  was  sustained  at  a  rate  of  over 
10 per cent per annum.  
At the same time, on the supply side, the importance of superannuation in Australia has, for 
much  of 
in  household  deposits. 
Superannuation funds have historically tended to invest in wholesale bank paper rather than 
hold bank deposits. So, compared with other countries, more of the savings of the Australian 
household sector has tended to end up in wholesale bank paper rather than in deposits, with 
the superannuation sector as the intermediary.1 
More recently, however, the demand for credit from households and businesses has slowed 
in  tandem.  For  businesses,  the  reduced  appetite  for  debt  was  initially  due  to  a  desire  to 
strengthen balance sheets. More recently, strong profitability, most obviously in the mining 
sector, is ensuring many segments of the business sector have sufficient internal funding to 
meet their investment needs.  
As  has  been  discussed  in  much  recent  RBA  commentary,2  for  households  the  slowing  in 
demand for credit appears to be driven by a more cautious approach to debt. There are a 
number  of  factors  contributing  to  this.  One  is  that  the  increase  in  household  leverage  that 
occurred through the 1990s and first half of the 2000s in response to the downward shift in 
the  nominal  structure  of  interest  rates  has  run  its  natural  course.  The  slower  growth  in 
the  growth 
                                                 
1   R  Battellino  (2010),  “Financial  Developments”,  Address  to  the  Property  Council  of  Australia,  Brisbane, 
8 October. 
2   For  more  details  see  P  Lowe  (2011),  “Some  Current  Issues  in  the  Australian  Economy”,  Address  to  the 
Committee  for  Economic  Development  in  Australia  (CEDA),  Sydney,  17  February  and,  G  Stevens  (2011), 
“Opening  Statement 
to  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics”,  Canberra, 
11 February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
household wealth, and particularly the large negative shock to equity wealth at the height of 
the crisis, has also contributed to the cautiousness, even though equity wealth has recovered 
and household income growth has remained robust.  
This growing caution of households in the past few years has seen the household saving rate 
pick up substantially, and much of this saving has been in the form  of deposits, given the 
attractive yields on offer. The strong cash position of many businesses is also contributing to 
stronger  deposit  growth.  As  a  result  of  these  factors,  deposit  growth  has  outpaced  credit 
growth for the past two years (Graph 3).  
Graph 3 
 
So banks have experienced a slowdown in asset growth and have funded the assets with a 
greater share of deposits. A consequence of this is that wholesale debt issuance by financial 
institutions  has  declined  to  its  slowest  pace  since  the  mid  1990s.  The  most  pronounced 
slowing has been in the issuance of short-term debt as banks have sought to lengthen the 
average maturity of their funding by increasing the share of long-term debt in total funding 
(Graph 4).  
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 4 
  
There are reasonable grounds to expect these trends may be sustained for some period to 
come. In particular, if one thinks about the composition of growth in Australia in the period 
ahead,  it  is  likely  to  be  investment-intensive.  But  much  of  that  investment  is  likely  to  be 
funded by companies which are cash-rich or tap global capital markets directly. This means 
that the growth in the economy in the period ahead may be associated with less growth in 
business credit than has been the case in the past. It is also likely to boost deposit growth. 
So  banks  may  be  seeing  a  prolonged  period  of  faster  deposit  growth  but  slower  asset 
growth.  
Asset-backed securities 
During  the  period  of  expansion  in  household  balance  sheets,  an  increasingly  significant 
source of funding for financial institutions was the asset-backed securities market. The best 
example of this was residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) which grew rapidly as a 
share of the mortgage market. But as you all know, structured credit products were a major 
casualty of the financial crisis, even in Australia where they continued to perform very well. 
As  a  result,  their  share  of  the  market  has  declined  sharply  over  the  past  three  years 
(Graph 5).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 5 
  
I  have  spoken  at  length  recently  about  the  specific  dynamics  and  challenges  facing  the 
Australian securitisation market,3 so will simply reiterate some of the key points here:  
 
Australian  mortgage-backed  securities  have  performed  well  throughout  the  crisis 
with no investor losing any money in a rated tranche;  
the fundamental quality of local collateral suggests that securitisation ought to be a 
viable funding mechanism in Australia;  
but  securitisation  will  not  return  to  the  levels  seen  in  the  heady  pre-crisis  period, 
given some of the purchasers of the paper pre-crisis are no longer around.  
  The  recent  issue  by  one  of  the  major  banks  demonstrated  demand  is  improving  for  the 
product,  at  a  price  which  was  inside  the  recent  AOFM  supported  deals.  The  Government 
recently announced that it will permit the issuance of covered bonds. It will be interesting to 
see where this product will fit with the existing RMBS. There may be different preferences 
between  the  local  buyers,  who  are  more  familiar  with  RMBS,  and  offshore  buyers,  most 
obviously in Europe, who are more familiar with covered issuance.  
Corporate issuers 
In many respects, the corporate segment has been the quiet achiever of the Australian debt 
market over the past few decades. The stock of bonds on issue from Australian entities grew 
solidly from the mid 1990s until the financial crisis. Although the significance of market-based 
funding as a share of total debt funding for Australian corporates has fluctuated somewhat, 
over  the  long  run,  debt  market  funding  has  grown  in  line  with  the  funding  needs  of  the 
corporate sector (Graph 6). As I just noted, the investment-intensive composition of growth 
over  the  next  few  years  is  likely  to  see  continued  strong  corporate  issuance  by  Australian 
names, particularly resources companies.  
                                                 
3   For  more  details  see  Debelle  (2010),  “The  State  of  Play  in  the  Securitisation  Market”,  Address  to  the 
Australian Securitisation Conference 2010, Sydney, 30 November. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 6 
 Non-resident issuers – Kangaroos and Australian dollar eurobonds 
The fastest growing segment of the Australian capital market over much of the past decade, 
and certainly in recent months, has been Australian-dollar issuance by non-residents – the 
market  of  most  interest  to  the  audience  here  today.  Initially,  much  of  this  issuance  was 
offshore  in  the  Eurobond  market,  but  increasingly  issuance  has  moved  to  the  onshore 
“Kangaroo” market (Graph 7).  
Graph 7 
 
In addition to the shift in the location of market activity, an important compositional shift is 
occurring  with  new  issuance  increasingly  dominated  by  AAA-rated  names  (Graph  8).  This 
probably reflects the increased risk aversion of investors in the post-crisis environment.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Graph 8 
 
Growth in the AAA-segment of the market has been underpinned by rapid growth in issuance 
among  the  supranational  and  sovereign  agencies  (SSA)  group.  SSA  issuance  in  all 
currencies  has  grown  rapidly  in  recent  years,  as  these  borrowers  have  responded  to  the 
large fiscal demands stemming from the impact of the global recession on public budgets in 
a range of jurisdictions. In addition, SSA issuers have displayed a growing tendency to issue 
in Australian dollars over recent years. Last year, Australian dollar issuance accounted for 
more than 8 per cent of SSA issuance in all currencies (Graph 9).  
 Graph 9 
 
This  greater  tendency  to  issue  in  Australian  dollars  has  been  driven  by  both  demand  and 
cost considerations for issuers. On the demand side, it is clear (although hard data are not 
available) that global demand for high-yielding Australian-dollar assets has been growing in 
recent years. An emergent group of international investors, along with the domestic investor 
base,  are  interested  in  purchasing  high-quality  Australian-dollar  assets,  and,  given  the 
relative scarcity of Australian government paper this has created a natural opportunity for the 
SSA issuers.  
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Moreover, there has tended to be a cost advantage to issuing in Australian dollars, owing in 
part to the elevated cross-currency basis swap that has encouraged issuance by supras and 
agencies  in  Australian  dollars.  Equally  as  important  as  the  cost  of  hedging  is  the  large 
amount of foreign issuance by Australian entities that ensures access to a deep swap market 
for SSAs funding in Australian dollars.  
APRA liquidity announcement 
I  would  like  to  finish  with  a  few  remarks  on  the  recent  APRA  announcement  on  eligible 
assets for the forthcoming Basel liquidity standards.4 The APRA announcement stated that 
CGS and semis are the only assets that currently qualify as Level 1 assets and that there are 
currently no Level 2 assets on issue. This outcome reflected an assessment of the liquidity 
characteristics of the various asset classes.  
As outlined in the Basel documents, key considerations in determining which assets qualify 
are  assessments  of  the  depth  of  local  trading  activity  and  the  performance  of  assets  in 
stressed  market  conditions.  Specifically,  the  observed  performance  of  assets  during  the 
crisis – a period indicative of a situation in which banks would need to rely on the liquidity in 
these instruments – was taken as evidence of proven liquidity. The statement did not rule out 
other assets qualifying as liquid assets at a later date, but there will need to be some history 
to support an assessment that a particular market has genuine liquidity.  
As is widely understood, in Australia, the amount of CGS and semis on issue falls well short 
of  the  amount  of  liquid  assets  banks  will  need  to  hold  to  meet  the  liquidity  standard. 
Moreover, it would be counterproductive to require banks to hold such a large share of these 
assets that it would impair the liquidity in these markets.  
Hence,  as  announced  in  December,5  the  RBA  will  offer  the  banks  a  committed  liquidity 
facility to meet the shortfall. The eligible assets that banks will need to hold to access this 
facility are those which are currently eligible for repo with the RBA in its normal operations. 
While a fee will be charged for this facility, I don’t see that affecting the relative demand for 
securities, other than CGS and semis, for the following reason. One can think of the current 
situation  as  an  arrangement  where  a  flat  rate  of  zero  is  charged.  Banks  currently  hold  a 
range of assets to satisfy their liquidity requirements, with each asset having different credit, 
maturity  and  market  liquidity  characteristics.  Our  view  of  how  much  we  are  willing  to  lend 
against each asset under repo are based on these characteristics, and will continue to be so.  
In the future, we are moving to a world where there will be a formalised liquidity facility where 
a flat, positive fee is charged. So that should affect all asset classes equally and should not 
affect their relative attractiveness. So I would not expect this to change bank balance sheet’s 
demand for the non-government assets they hold in their liquidity portfolios. For example, to 
the extent they hold SSAs today, they should still hold them in the future.  
                                                 
4   For more details on the APRA media release, see APRA clarifies implementation of global liquidity standards 
in Australia, 28 February 2011. 
5   For  more  details  on  the  joint  RBA  and  APRA  media  release,  see  Joint  Media  Release:  Australian 
Implementation of Global Liquidity Standards, 17 December 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Conclusions 
In my talk I have described the configuration of the bond market as it stands in early 2011. 
The structure of the market has changed noticeably after the events of recent years. Some of 
the dynamics that have emerged from the crisis may continue to shape the bond market in 
the future. I have highlighted three here today:  
 
First,  the  relative  growth  of  deposits  and  credit  may  be  quite  different  from  that 
observed  over  the  previous  fifteen  years.  This,  together  with  regulatory  and  other 
pressures, will have a material effect on the composition of bank liabilities.  
Second,  while  asset-backed  issuance  was  most  disrupted  by  the  crisis,  there  are 
signs of a re-emergence.  
Third, investors have a much stronger preference for high-quality assets than they 
did in the pre-crisis period.  
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
