Thomas M Hoenig: Do SIFIs have a future? 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  M  Hoenig,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  before  the  Pew  Financial  Reform  Project  and  New  York 
University  Stern  School  of  Business  “Dodd-Frank  One  Year  On”,  Washington  DC, 
27 June 2011. 
 The  views  expressed  by  the  author  are  his  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, its governors, officers or representatives. 
Introduction 
We are approaching the one-year anniversary of the Dodd-Frank Act. With so much of the 
Act’s implementation work unfinished, it is not an anniversary that we can celebrate; rather it 
is an opportunity to take stock. In that vein, I congratulate the organizers of this conference 
for bringing together such an excellent group of individuals to do just that. In particular, I want 
to recognize the New York University Stern School of Business and economics faculty for the 
outstanding research they have done on critical financial reform issues. Their collaborative 
efforts  have  produced  a  series  of  must-read  books  that  have  a  combination  of  rigorous 
economic analysis and practical policy prescriptions that is rarely seen these days. 
Much  of  the  Dodd-Frank  discussion  revolves  around  the  economic  distortions  and 
disruptions  caused  by  the  largest  and  most  complex  financial  companies,  the  so-called 
systemically important financial institutions, or SIFIs. 
As we consider the topic of SIFIs, let me ask the following questions: how can one firm of 
relatively small global significance merit a government bailout? How can a single investment 
bank  on  Wall  Street  bring  the  world  to  the  brink  of  financial  collapse?  How  can  a  single 
insurance company require billions of dollars of public funds to stay solvent and yet continue 
to operate as a private institution? How can a relatively small country such as Greece hold 
Europe financially hostage? These are the questions for which I have found no satisfactory 
answers.  That’s  because  there  are  none.  It  is  not  acceptable  to  say  that  these  events 
occurred because they involved systemically important financial institutions. 
Because  there  are  no  satisfactory  answers  to  these  questions,  I  suggest  that  the  problem 
with  SIFIs  is  they  are  fundamentally  inconsistent  with  capitalism.  They  are  inherently 
destabilizing to global markets and detrimental to world growth. So long as the concept of a 
SIFI  exists,  and  there  are  institutions  so  powerful  and  considered  so  important  that  they 
require special support and different rules, the future of capitalism is at risk and our market 
economy is in peril. 
To  more  fundamentally  address  this  issue,  we  must  go  beyond  today’s  Dodd-Frank.  We 
must  confine  the  use  of  the  safety  net  to  its  original  intent.  We  must  reduce  the  artificial 
complexity of existing financial structures. The rewards of success must be balanced against 
the credible consequences of failure. In achieving such goals, we will enhance the stability of 
the fundamental mechanism through which monetary policy is conducted and the economy 
depends. 
The decline in competition and accountability in banking 
The U.S. economy is the most successful in the history of the world. It achieved this success 
because it is based on the rules of capitalism, in which private ownership dominates markets 
and  individuals  reap  the  rewards  of  their  success.  However,  for  capitalism  to  work, 
businesses, including financial firms, must be allowed, or compelled, to compete freely and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
openly  and  must  be  held  accountable  for  their  failures.  Only  under  these  conditions  do 
markets objectively allocate credit to those businesses that provide the highest value. 
For most of our history, the United States held fast to these rules of capitalism. It maintained 
a  relatively  open  banking  and  financial  system  with  thousands  of  banks  from  small 
community banks to large global players that allocated credit under this system. As late as 
1980,  the  U.S.  banking  industry  was  relatively  unconcentrated,  with  14,000  commercial 
banks and the assets of the five largest amounting to 29 percent of total banking organization 
assets and 14 percent of GDP. 
Today,  we  have  a  far  more  concentrated  and  less  competitive  banking  system.  There  are 
fewer banks operating across the country, and the five largest institutions control more than 
half  of  the  industry’s  assets,  which  is  equal  to  almost  60  percent  of  GDP.  The  largest 
20 institutions control 80 percent of the industry’s assets, which amounts to about 86 percent 
of GDP. 
Here’s  the  irony:  this  marked  increase  in  concentrated  power,  and  therefore,  more 
concentrated risk, reflects past efforts to assure greater economic stability. This might best 
be  described  as  “good  intentions/bad  outcomes”  syndrome.  For  example,  the  Federal 
Reserve  was  founded  following  the  1907  Banking  Panic  and  was  charged  with  providing 
liquidity support to solvent banks that were experiencing funding problems. After the Great 
Depression,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corp.  was  created  to  provide  limited  deposit 
insurance  to  protect  small  depositors  and  to  further  increase  the  resiliency  of  the  financial 
system. 
Then,  over  the  past  30  years,  this  safety  net  has  expanded  far  beyond  its  original  intent. 
More recently, Glass-Steagall was repealed, giving high-risk firms almost unlimited access to 
funds  generated  through  their  new  access  to  the  safety  net.  Finally,  following  a  series  of 
crises during the late 1980s and 1990s, the government confirmed that because of systemic 
impact, some institutions were just too big to fail – the largest institutions could put money in 
nearly any asset regardless of risk, and their creditors would not be held accountable for the 
risk taken. Predictably, the industry’s risk profile increased dramatically. The SIFI was born. 
Is it any wonder then that in the fall of 2008 we experienced the greatest financial crisis since 
the Great Depression? Financial institutions had again become irresponsible in their lending 
practices. They had increased their leverage ratios to unprecedented levels. They became 
“dry kindle” for a financial fire and, with the end of the housing boom, the match was struck. 
Now, with their bailout costs amounting to billions of taxpayer dollars, SIFIs are larger than 
ever. Strikingly, they are arguing that they should not be held to stronger capital standards if 
the  United  States  hopes  to  remain  globally  competitive.  That  assertion  is  nonsense.  The 
remainder of my remarks today will describe how the United States can achieve a stronger, 
more stable financial system in order to secure its future as a global economic leader. 
Proposal to reduce costs and risks to the safety net and financial system 
Following this financial crisis, Congress and the administration turned to the work of repair 
and  reform.  Once  again,  the  American  public  got  the  standard  remedies  –  more  and 
increasingly  complex  regulation  and  supervision.  The  Dodd-Frank  reforms  have  all  been 
introduced  before,  but  financial  markets  skirted  them.  Supervisory  authority  existed,  but  it 
was used lightly because of political pressure and the misperceptions that free markets, with 
generous public support, could self-regulate. 
Dodd-Frank adds new layers of these same tools, but it fails to employ one remedy used in 
the past to assure a more stable financial system – simplification of our financial structure 
through  Glass-Steagall-type  boundaries.  To  this  end,  there  are  two  principles  that  should 
guide our efforts to restore such boundaries. First, institutions that have access to the safety 
net should be restricted to certain core activities that the safety net was intended to protect  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
– making loans and taking deposits – and related activities consistent with the presence of 
the safety net. 
Second, the shadow banking system should be reformed in its use of money market funds 
and short-term repurchase agreements – the repo market. This step will better assure that 
the safety net is not ultimately called upon to bail them out in crisis. 
Consistent with the first principle, banking organizations with access to the safety net should 
be generally confined to the following activities: commercial banking, underwriting securities 
and advisory services, and asset and wealth management services. Underwriting, advisory, 
and asset and wealth management services are mostly fee-based services that do not put 
much  of  a  firm’s  capital  at  risk.  In  addition,  asset  and  wealth  management  services  are 
similar to the trust services that have always been allowable for banks. 
Restricting activities of banking organizations 
In contrast, banking organizations should be expressly prohibited from activities that include 
dealing and market-making, brokerage, and proprietary trading, which expose the safety net 
but have little in common with core banking services.1 
Thus,  banking  organizations  would  not  be  allowed  to  do  trading,  either  proprietary  or  for 
customers,  or  make  markets  because  such  activity  requires  the  ability  to  do  trading.  In 
addition, allowing Within the protection of the safety net, they create expansive risks that are 
difficult to assess, monitor or control. 
Thus,  banking  organizations  would  not  be  allowed  to  do  trading,  either  proprietary  or  for 
customers,  or  make  markets  because  such  activity  requires  the  ability  to  do  trading.  In 
addition,  allowing  customer  but  not  proprietary  trading  would  make  it  easy  to  game  the 
system  by  “concealing”  proprietary  trading  as  part  of  the  inventory  necessary  to  conduct 
customer  trading.  Also,  prime  brokerage  services  not  only  require  the  ability  to  conduct 
trading  activities  but  also  essentially  allow  companies  to  finance  their  activities  with  highly 
unstable uninsured “deposits.” This combination of factors, as we have recently witnessed, 
leads to unstable markets and government bailouts. 
Critics  of  this  proposal  contend  that  institutions  grow  to  be  large  and  complex  because  of 
economies  of  scale  and  scope  and  they  need  the  size  and  related  complexities  to  be 
profitable and to compete globally. They believe firms must have broad, mostly unrestricted 
access to all financial activities to provide one-stop shopping and compete on a global basis. 
Arguments  also  are  given  that  large  banks  and  securities  firms  are  necessary  to  make 
efficient markets for securities trading essential for carrying out monetary policy. 
These arguments are unconvincing and, in fact, mislead. First, yes, it would be unfortunate if 
restricting activities were to drive U.S. banks and jobs to other countries. However, we have 
200 years of banking success in this country to refute that assertion. More recently, under 
Glass-Steagall, U.S. banks and investment banks were highly competitive and successful as 
each  specialized  in  lending  to  or  underwriting  businesses  all  over  the  world.  There  is 
considerable  evidence  that  under  Glass-Steagall  the  United  States  was  at  no  competitive 
disadvantage to Europe, with its mingled merchant banking system. The United States led 
the world – because it had strong, prudently run institutions that knew how to manage money 
in the best interests of the client. 
                                                 
1  This categorization of financial activities is from Matthew Richardson, Roy Smith and Ingo Walter in Chapter 7 
of Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance, edited by 
Viral V. Acharya, Thomas F. Cooley, Matthew Richardson, Ingo Walter, New York University Stern School of 
Business, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Second, there is no strong evidence of unlimited economies of scale and even less for wide 
economies of scope. Although both exist, they are captured at an asset size far less than that 
of SIFIs today. 
Third, large corporations would have ample convenient access to commercial and traditional 
investment banking services inside commercial banking. They would have to go to securities 
dealers to purchase swaps and other derivatives for hedging purposes, something that has 
been done in the past without difficulty. 
Finally, it also seems improbable to me that any country should be willing or able to expand 
its safety net or to expose its taxpayers to the undefined risks of protecting ever-larger and 
more complex banking organizations. Instead, what countries should be focused on now is 
getting back to fundamentals aimed at simplifying highly complex and unstable SIFIs. The 
focus should be on financial stability. 
Reforming the shadow banking system 
A legitimate concern of limiting the safety net is that this could worsen the risk of financial 
instability by pushing activities to the unregulated shadow banking system. Clearly, focusing 
solely  on  the  regulated  banking  industry  and  ignoring  the  unregulated  shadow  banking 
system would not solve the problem and, in fact, might expand the shadow banking sector 
that was an integral part of the financial crisis. 
Much of the instability in the shadow banking system stems from its use of short-term funding 
for longer-term investment. The solution to this instability problem is not to provide a safety 
net  for  the  shadow  banks  and  regulate  them  more  but,  instead,  to  remove  exceptions  in 
which money market instruments are treated essentially as deposits. The current exceptions 
encourage significant short-term funding of longer-term assets. 
First,  investors  in  money  market  mutual  and  other  investment  funds  that  are  allowed  to 
maintain a fixed net asset value of $1 have an incentive to run if they think their fund will 
“break the buck.” Thus, if the fixed $1 net asset value is eliminated and the share values of 
such  funds  are  required  to  float  with  their  market  values,  shadow  bank  reliance  on  this 
source  of  short-term  funding  and  the  associated  threat  of  disruptive  runs  would be  greatly 
reduced. 
Second,  the  potential  disruptions  to  funding  stemming  from  the  repo  financing  of  shadow 
banks  should  be  ended.  One  of  the  sources  of  instability  during  the  crisis  was  repo  runs, 
particularly  on  repo  borrowers  using  subprime  mortgage-related  assets  as  collateral. 
Essentially, these borrowers funded long-term assets of relatively low quality with very short-
term liabilities. 
These  practices  would  be  greatly  reduced  by  rolling  back  the  bankruptcy  law  for  repo 
collateral to the pre-2005 rules. Prior to then, if a repo borrower defaulted, mortgage-related 
collateral could not be immediately taken and sold by the creditors. Returning to these rules 
would  discourage  the  use  of  mortgage-related  assets  as  repo  collateral  and  reduce  the 
potential  for  repo  runs.  Term  lending  through  securitization  would  continue,  probably  at  a 
smaller  scale,  with  more  closely  matched  term  wholesale  funding  provided  by  institutional 
investors such as mutual funds, pension funds and life insurance companies. 
These changes to the rules for money market funds and repo instruments would increase the 
stability of the shadow banking system because term lending outside the safety net would be 
less dependent on “demandable” funding and more reliant on term funding, and the pricing of 
risk would better reflect the actual risk incurred. 
A final note: implications for monetary policy 
Finally, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, I realize that we must consider 
the potential effects of these proposals on the conduct of monetary policy. The impact could 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
be  significant  because,  as  currently  practiced,  monetary  policy  operations  are  channeled 
through  a  limited  number  of  counterparties  called  primary  dealers.  These  dealers  are 
required to participate in all auctions of U.S. government debt and represent a key element in 
the implementation of policy. 
Currently, there are only 20 primary dealers. They are the largest financial firms operating in 
the United States, and most are affiliated with commercial banks. It is with this relationship 
that the changes I propose could affect the conduct of monetary policy. Specifically, given 
that primary dealers could no longer be affiliated with commercial banks, would this inhibit 
market-making in securities, including Treasuries, and therefore interfere with the conduct of 
monetary policy? 
The answer is “no.” It is not necessary that primary dealers be affiliated with banks. It is only 
necessary that they be institutions that deal in U.S. Treasuries and participate in auctions of 
U.S.  government  debt.  Prior  to  the  1990s  merger  boom  among  investment  banks  and  the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act,  it  was  typical  that  half  or  more  of  the  primary  dealers  were  not 
affiliated with commercial banks. Therefore, the fact that primary dealers are not commercial 
banks would have little effect on the Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct monetary policy.  
I would add that although commercial banks could not be primary dealers, they could remain 
a  key  part  of  the  monetary  policy  mechanism.  Recently,  the  Federal  Reserve  gained 
experience  in  using  the  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF).  The  TAF  might  very  successfully  be 
used in conjunction with primary dealer operations to conduct policy well into the future. 
As  you  may  recall,  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  TAF  was  an  important  component  of 
monetary  policy.  For  example,  the  TAF  was  introduced  in  December  2007  with  an  initial 
auction of $20 billion. The facility was then ramped up to almost $500 billion by March 2009 – 
about one-fourth of the assets on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The maturity of TAF 
loans was generally 28 days or 84 days. 
By  broadening  the  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  tools  to  include  the  TAF  to  provide  term 
funds  through  the  banking  system  in  parallel  with  the  primary  dealers,  we  could  greatly 
expand the number of counterparties used in the conduct of monetary policy. Thus, the TAF 
and  primary  dealers  would  provide  deep  markets  for  the  term  portion  of  policy;  primary 
dealers and traditional open-market operations would continue as the means for managing 
day-to-day  operations  and  for  maintaining  the  federal  funds  rate  close  to  the  target.  With 
more counterparties, we enhance competition and enable nearly all banks to play a role in 
the conduct of monetary policy. This would make the largest banks less “SI” and more “FI.” 
Conclusion 
The financial system has become far less competitive and far more volatile with the onset of 
systemically important institutions. Though large firms remain a critical part of our economic 
system  in  the  United  States,  they  should  not  become  so  dominant  that  they  become 
unaccountable  to  our  capitalistic  system.  We  can  make  the  necessary  reforms  to  end  the 
unique status of the SIFI and, in doing so, restore much of our global competitive vigor. Only 
from a position of financial strength can the United States remain the global economic leader. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
