Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Les Echos 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  
Les Echos, France, conducted by Mr Henri Gibier, Mr Jean-Philippe Lacour and Ms Isabelle 
Couet on 10 February 2011 and published on 14 February 2011. 
 You have recently expressed your concern about a return of inflation in the euro area. 
Which  feeling  is  uppermost  today?  Between  concern  about  growth  and  inflation, 
which one prevails? 
The  real  economy  has  had  some  rather  good  surprises  for  us,  quarter  after  quarter.  The 
return of growth was observed in the third quarter of 2009 and since then we have seen that 
the  euro  area  is  doing  a  little  better  than  expected.  The  latest  indicators  since  the  end  of 
2010 confirm this. I emphasise that this does not only relate to Germany but to the euro area 
as a whole. At the ECB, we have not shared the fears of a “double dip” recession, even if our 
talk was cautious. I am sure that because the central bank has been an anchor of stability 
and confidence throughout this very difficult period, it may have played a part in consolidating 
this pick-up. 
So  the  recovery  seems  to  you  less  “chaotic”,  to  take  up  the  term  you  used  on  one 
occasion... 
We  must  always  be  wary  of  quarterly  figures,  as  they  can  be  very  volatile.  We  may  have 
good news and bad news from one quarter to the next. In any case, the new medium-term 
economic projections of our staff will be released in early March. 
The concern has now shifted to price stability... 
Everyone knows that we are inflexible on inflation risks. We have always done what we had 
to do to maintain price stability over the medium term, which is our mission. We are proud to 
have had an average price increase of 1.97% per annum over the first 12 years of the single 
currency, which precisely matches our objective of an increase of close to, but below, 2%. 
Moreover, this result is better than that of all the larger economies of the euro area over the 
past fifty years. It has given us high credibility with regard to price stability over the next ten 
years. We note that inflation expectations are well anchored, and that’s essential. As I said 
during  the  last  two  press  conferences,  the  Governing  Council  still  considers  the  risks  to 
future inflation as balanced, but that they could move upwards in the future. 
Do  you  believe  in  the  possibility  of  second-round  effects  resulting  from  wage 
increases, as we are now seeing in Germany? 
It  is  up  to  each  central  bank  to  avoid  second-round  effects  when  we  see  a  price  shock 
affecting raw materials and energy sources, on which we cannot take action. That’s even our 
fundamental duty. What matters is to prevent other prices from matching those movements, 
which have to remain temporary. In particular, the various economic agents and the social 
partners  must  not  imagine  that  the  correct  inflation  rate  to  take  into  account  is  that  which 
comes from the abrupt rise in energy prices. In the medium term, all economic agents must 
bear in mind that the correct reference is that of less than 2%, close to 2% in the medium 
term, which we’ve made completely credible. That medium-term price stability is our primary 
mandate,  and  we  owe  it  to  our  fellow  citizens.  Let’s  not  forget  that  inflation  affects  in 
particular the poorest and least advantaged members of society. 
The ECB has embarked on a series of non-standard measures to react to the crisis. 
What’s your initial assessment? 
Alongside standard measures relating to the key interest rates, set solely in order to attain 
medium-term price stability, we have been using non-standard tools: they aim to help restore 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy to the economy in a context of certain 
dysfunctional  markets.  As  it  happens,  we  intervened  as  early  as  August  2007,  providing 
unlimited liquidity at fixed rates, because the crisis had led to a dysfunctioning of the money 
market. Today, we are seeing that the interbank market is working better. There are however 
a small number of banks which are still too dependent on the ECB. To solve this problem 
gradually, it is important that they are not encouraged to resort to the central bank rather than 
to  the  markets,  and  that’s  why  the  Governing  Council  is  insisting  that  they  increase  their 
capital and use all the facilities offered to them by the Member States. 
Is your policy of buying the bonds of “peripheral” states on the markets efficient? 
It’s  one  of  the  non-standard  measures  that  we  have  taken  to  restore  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy.  We  make  public  every  week  the  scale  of  our  interventions,  but  not  the 
specific market we are intervening in. In any case, we absorb each week the liquidity that 
was injected as a result of this programme. We do not carry out quantitative easing. But don’t 
forget: our primary mandate is price stability in the euro area as a whole. Interest rates are 
set according to this medium-term objective. And the intervention programme is such as to 
allow the best possible transmission of our policy in the euro area as a whole. 
Why did you say that you would prefer the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) 
to  buy  government  bonds  rather  than  the  ECB,  if  what  is  at  stake  is  restoring 
monetary policy transmission ? 
It is because certain governments, individually, have behaved in an abnormal manner, and 
because all governments have fallen short in their collective supervisory duties that we are 
seeing anomalies in the behaviour of certain markets. The governments have to meet their 
responsibilities.  It  is  for  this  reason,  in  particular,  that  I  have  asked  for  the  EFSF  to  be 
enhanced,  in  quality  and  quantity.  The  possibility  for  the  EFSF  to  purchase  government 
bonds is part of this thinking. 
The euro area has gone through a rocky period because of the sovereign debt crisis in 
certain countries, to the point of doubt being cast on the sustainability of the single 
currency.  Do  you  believe  the  measures  being  taken  concerning  the  EFSF  are 
appropriate to avoid a similar situation arising again in the future? 
The euro is a currency which inspires confidence. It is credible for the next ten years, and 
beyond. Moreover, the situation in the euro area as a whole is in many respects better than 
that in comparable economies. Our current account is in balance, which is far from being the 
case  in  all  major  industrial  countries,  and  our  consolidated  annual  government  deficit  for 
2011,  as  a  proportion  of  GDP,  should  be  half  those  of  the  United  States  and  Japan.  The 
monetary union part of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is working well, thanks to the 
fact that we are constantly on our guard. On the other hand, there is still much to be done as 
regards  economic  union.  This  is  because  some  countries  have  not  had  satisfactory 
budgetary  policies,  and because  the  supervisory  system  in  place  since  the  creation  of  the 
euro  has  not  functioned  correctly.  Our  message  has  always  been  that,  in  the  context  of  a 
single currency without political federation, there has to be an extremely strong framework of 
budgetary stability. We signalled this again most forcefully when in 2005 a number of major 
member  countries,  including  France,  Germany  and  Italy,  tried  to  weaken  considerably  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  by  denouncing  what  they  said  to  be  its  excessive  orthodoxy. 
Having  lived  through  the  recent  challenges,  both  individual  and  collective,  nobody  is  any 
longer suggesting that we should weaken the governance of Europe. The Governing Council 
for its part is in favour of a very considerable strengthening of economic governance in the 
euro area, as indeed it always has been. 
How  can  we  resolve  the  growing  gap  within  the  euro  area  between  those  industrial 
countries  which  have  been  able  to  keep  their  finances  on  an  even  keel  and  those 
which are not very competitive and are sinking into debt? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I am not sure that the euro area really can be split in two like that. To be sure, when you 
have a vast single market to manage, there are bound to be significant differences from state 
to state or from country to country. But you have to remember that the differences you see 
today are the opposite of those that existed five years ago. When the euro was introduced 
Germany was described as the “sick man” of Europe. It has made a remarkable effort, by 
itself,  and  has  since  become  competitive  again.  Germany’s  return  to  growth  benefits  the 
whole  of  the  euro  area.  Other  countries  have  in  the  past  experienced  excessive  nominal 
growth and now have to adjust. The important thing is that the countries of the euro area, 
taken  as  a  whole,  should  remain  around  the  average  in  the  long  term.  The  same 
phenomenon  of  disparity  can  also  be  seen  in  the  United  States,  where  the  differences 
between states in terms of growth or indeed unemployment levels are comparable to those 
we see in the euro area. It is a feature of major continental economies of this size. 
If we look at a specific case, do you think that the issue of Greek solvency has been 
resolved or do new ways need to be found for Greece to reduce its debt? 
A  plan  has  been  put  in  place  by  the  Greek  government.  This  plan  was  approved  by  the 
international community and by Europe. It is currently being implemented and it is this that is 
very important. It is rigorous implementation of the plan which will allow Greece to regain a 
credible level of creditworthiness. 
What do you think of the competitiveness pact proposed by Germany and France to 
avoid further crises of this kind? 
We are in the middle of a process, led by Herman Van Rompuy, President of the European 
Council, and are waiting to see what will come of it. As far as the ECB is concerned, anything 
which  serves  to  strengthen  economic  governance  is  not  only  good  but  also  absolutely 
essential. I would add the hope that the European governments will be minded to strengthen 
the proposals which are currently being scrutinised by the European Parliament because in 
our view they are very insufficient. 
In  wanting  to  strengthen  competitiveness  and  budgetary  orthodoxy,  are  we  not 
condemning Europe to sluggish growth for some time to come? 
Competitiveness is at the root of everything. The euro area is more open to the rest of the 
world than Japan or the United States. We accept global competition. When one member of 
EMU achieves a good level of competitiveness, as Germany currently has, this benefits the 
euro area as a whole. If we wish to improve standards of living and create employment in the 
EMU the only way is through competitiveness. 
A new round of “stress tests” is going to be launched in order to assess banks’ risk. 
What  can  we  expect  from  this  new  exercise,  the  credibility  of  which  has  been 
diminished by what happened in Ireland? Should a State’s risk of default be taken into 
account, something which wasn’t done in the last round of tests?  
These stress tests are currently being very carefully prepared by the relevant institutions. I 
have every faith that they will be rigorous in their preparation. As you know, a State’s risk of 
default as measured by the market is taken into account in the “trading book”. In the “banking 
book”, where instruments are held until maturity, default is not an envisaged possibility.  
Is the ECB better equipped to prevent/anticipate a country’s risk of default now that it 
is at the helm of the new European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB)? 
The ESRB’s objective is certainly not to be a giant rating agency for European countries. Our 
working  hypothesis  is  of  course  that  no  default  of  any  country  of  the  euro  area  should  be 
envisaged.  
The  French  presidency  of  the  G20  is  pursuing  two  very  ambitious  objectives: 
international monetary system reform and the development of measures to curb the 
volatility of the prices of raw materials. Do you think that it will be possible to achieve 
tangible results in these two areas? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
These  are areas  of  great  importance,  which merit  a  substantial  degree  of  attention  on  the 
part  of  the  G20  countries.  On  the  subject  of  exchange  rates,  the  major  emerging  market 
economies  that  are  growing  very  rapidly  and  exhibiting  considerable  current  account 
surpluses should gradually introduce more flexibility into the management of their exchange 
rates. This has already been made public by previous G20 statements. In due course, there 
is the question of these major new currencies becoming fully convertible and freely floating, 
which would lead to a very significant structural change.  
As for raw materials, the issue of the optimal management of rare natural resources has long 
been ongoing. Some of them are not renewable, and we must therefore ensure the long-term 
preservation  of  our  common  heritage,  in  the  best  possible  conditions.  The  demand  for 
agricultural  products  will  increase,  owing  to  the  rising  standards  of  living  in  the  major 
emerging market countries. It is important that we do everything we can to ensure the supply 
of these products increases substantially, both in the medium and long term.  
How much importance should be attached to speculation causing the prices of basic 
foodstuffs to rise?  
We mustn’t confuse very short-term speculation, which probably doesn’t have a significant 
and lasting impact on the medium-term price level, with the phenomenon of change in the 
portfolio allocations of global fund managers who for a long time didn’t invest in raw materials 
at all. Now that raw materials are gradually playing a more important role in asset allocation, 
this could generate a lasting upward pressure on prices. It is a phenomenon that we must 
watch very closely.  
A potential favourite for your successor, the President of the Bundesbank Axel Weber, 
has  taken  himself  out  of  the  running,  citing  a  lack  political  support  from  certain 
governments. Does this mean that the European debate on the subject is still far from 
being settled?  
This is a decision that Axel Weber has taken for personal reasons. I respect that decision. 
The appointment of the President of the ECB  is a very important decision, which is in the 
hands of the heads of state and government.  
Would you be prepared to stay on if necessary? 
The question does not arise! I have a clear mandate, with a time limit.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
