Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: What lies behind the success of the euro? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Investmentforum 2011, Salzburg, 21 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank you for inviting me to this event. 
It  was  the  Austrian  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter  who  stated  that  “a  nation’s  monetary 
system  is  a  reflection  of  everything  that  the  nation  wants,  suffers  and  is.  …  Nothing  says 
what a nation is made of so clearly as what it does in terms of its monetary policy.” 
In the light of this, I would like to explore the ways in which our single currency and our single 
monetary policy have contributed significantly to the growth and stability of our economies. 
Over the last 12 years, the euro has been successful not only at bringing down inflation; it 
has also served as a defensive buffer during the crisis. 
Nevertheless, I would also like to talk about the fact that further efforts are required if we are 
to  safeguard  the  success  of  the  euro.  Efforts  are  required,  particularly  on  the  part  of 
governments, in devising economic and fiscal frameworks, which are of the essence to the 
single  currency.  However,  efforts  are  also  necessary  on  the  part  of  financial  market 
participants  and  supervisors,  given  that  the  maintenance  of  financial  market  stability  is  a 
crucial prerequisite for monetary and macroeconomic stability. 
When it was first launched in 1999 and then when the euro cash changeover took place in 
2002, the euro was met with a certain degree of criticism and scepticism. Today, the euro is 
the single currency for 17 countries, with a total population of 330 million citizens. The euro 
has proved to be a resounding success. Given that the average rate of inflation in the euro 
area for the first 12 years of the currency’s existence stands at just below 2% (show chart), 
the euro is as stable as the deutschmark or the Austrian Schilling were earlier. And this is the 
case despite the testing times for monetary policy experienced of late – as evidenced by the 
recent  financial  crisis  and  the  earlier  turmoil  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  (for  example,  oil 
prices  reached  a  peak  of  USD 145  per  barrel).  Even  by  international  standards,  the  euro 
fares well. Indeed, the regional differences within the euro area in terms of rates of inflation 
and  growth  are  more  or  less  comparable  with  regional  differences  observed  in  the  United 
States.  Furthermore,  the  euro  has  established  itself  as  the  second  international  reserve 
currency  behind  the  US  dollar,  and  investors  trust  the  euro  when  investing  in  euro-
denominated financial products. 
I would like to take this opportunity to: 
 
 
provide you with an insight into our current of the current economic situation; 
explain  how  the  single  currency  has  contributed  towards  the  management  of  the 
financial market crisis; 
offer you an overview of the financial market reforms in the European Union; 
outline what is still to be done to guarantee the stability of the euro over the long-
term horizon. 
 Assessment of the economic situation of the euro area 
Allow  me  to  first  explain  the  ECB’s  current  assessment  of  the  economic  outlook  from  a 
monetary policy perspective. As regards the economic situation of the euro area, there are a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
number  of  positive  signals.  The  economy  is  following  an  upward  trajectory  (show  chart). 
Since its trough in the second quarter of 2009, the economy has made up close to half of its 
recession-induced production losses. The relatively low rate of growth observed until now is 
in  line  with  experiences  of  other  economies  recovering  from  severe  financial  crises.  A 
peculiarity of the current recovery in comparison with previous upturns is the relatively low 
contribution to growth stemming from consumer spending. However, in this area to, there are 
some  positive  signals.  As  regards  private  households,  the  labour  market  situation  is 
stabilising,  which  should  boost  consumers’  purchasing  power  and,  by  extension,  domestic 
demand. The impact of the crisis weighed more strongly on the number of hours worked than 
on  the  number  of  employed.  That  is  why  the  rebound  in  economic  activity  is  also  making 
itself felt more in the number of hours worked than in the rate of unemployment, although the 
latter has been hovering around 10%. 
In  the  near  future,  all  available  forecasts  indicate  that  the  gradual  recovery  of  economic 
activity in the euro area is likely to continue. According to the most recent projections of ECB 
staff (table), the real economic growth rate is expected to stand at between 1.3% and 2.1% 
this year and between 0.8% and 2.8% next year. At the same time, the outlook for growth in 
the  area  of  exports  and  domestic  demand  is  now  predicted  to  improve.  Overall,  the  most 
recent  economic  data  confirms  that  the  underlying  momentum  of  economic  growth  in  the 
euro area is favourable. 
However, as regards economic activity and the medium-term risks to price stability, the surge 
in  oil  prices  is  increasing  cause  for  concern  (show  chart).  In  the  light  of  heightened 
geopolitical uncertainties, the price per barrel of the leading North Sea oil, Brent crude, has 
been ratcheted upwards by around 25% since the beginning of the year, peaking at close to 
USD 117. Rising oil prices have already had a clearly visible effect on the rate of inflation in 
the euro area. This stood at 2.4% in February of this year and will hover markedly above 2% 
in the coming months on the back of persistently elevated oil prices.  
Our assessment is that the risks to medium-term price developments are tilted to the upside. 
In their most recent projections for the euro area, ECB staff see inflation ranging between 2% 
and 2.6% this year and between 1% and 2.4% next year. It must be stressed, however, that 
these projections do not take into account the recent oil price hikes and are based on the 
assumption  that  wage  pressures  will  remain  subdued.  The  question  also  remains 
unanswered  as  to  whether  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  stemming  from  the 
necessary  fiscal  consolidation  measures  of  the  next  few  years  will  rise  more  sharply  than 
currently anticipated. 
Against this background, strong vigilance is, of course, necessary and we are monitoring the 
situation closely. Should there be any signs of inflationary risks over the medium term, the 
ECB is ready and determined to take appropriate action in good time. 
In summary of our assessment of the current situation, it is safe to assume that the cyclical 
recovery  that  is  under  way  stands  on  sound  foundations.  The  oil  price-indiced  increase  in 
inflation is being monitored closely. The fact that this view of the overall economic situation is 
actually rather favourable, ladies and gentlemen, is due not least to the stability of the euro, 
to a monetary policy stance oriented to stability and to the decisive action undertaken in the 
financial crisis to stabilise the banking sector. Let me explain this in somewhat greater detail. 
The financial crisis as a test of the strength of the euro 
The financial crisis has put the euro and the economy of the euro area well and truly to the 
test. During the financial crisis, the Governing Council of the ECB proved its capacity to take 
the necessary steps in a timely manner and its readiness to contribute positively to financial 
stability. 
The speedy intervention of the ECB made it possible to prevent the liquidity and confidence 
crises from spiralling into a systemic crisis. The ECB responded immediately – as early as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
9 August 2007 – to the tensions that suddenly emerged in the money markets. Ever since, 
the  Eurosystem  has  bolstered  stability  in  the  interbank  market  through  extensive  liquidity 
provision. Within the space of only seven months, the ECB lowered its key interest rate by 
325  basis  points  to  just  1%  (show  chart).  In  order  to  provide  further  support  to  financing 
conditions  and  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  system,  the  Eurosystem  has 
implemented  a  string  of  temporary  non-standard  measures  over  the  past  two  and  a  half 
years. 
The financial crisis soon made evident that monetary policy is only able to achieve its goals if 
also  economic  and  financial policies  at  the  national level  live  up  to  their  responsibilities.  A 
large number of governments adopted sizeable measures to strengthen the capital bases in, 
and guarantees for, the financial sector, as well as economic stabilisation measures to curb 
the  real  economic  downturn.  Together  with  the  stabilisation  packages  put  in  place  by  the 
governments, the non-standard measures of the ECB have had a stabilising effect on both 
the  financial  sector  and  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  The  concerted  efforts  have 
contributed to the financial stability and economic recovery in the euro area. 
In recent months, the situation in the money markets of the euro area has improved further. 
On  the  whole,  banks  are  requesting  significantly  less  liquidity  than  before.  Since  last 
summer, an ongoing process of normalisation has been observed in interest rate spreads in 
interbank money markets (EONIA), which have more or less returned to the levels prevailing 
before the onset of the financial crisis in August 2007. These developments are indicative of 
the  increased  trust  among  banks  in  the  euro  area  –  a  development  due  largely  to  the 
decisive action undertaken by the ECB. Looking at other important money markets (such as 
that of the United States or the United Kingdom), we see that there, too, interest rate spreads 
have narrowed at a similar rate. Their central banks had likewise intervened in the form of 
interest rate cuts and extensive non-standard measures. 
The government stabilisation measures come at a price, however. In particular, the financial 
crisis has put public finances under pressure – not only in euro area countries but indeed in 
all  advanced  economies.  This  phenomenon  has  been  most  clearly  manifested  in  surging 
public  deficits  and  government  debt  ratios  (show  chart).  As  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis, 
budget  deficits  in  other  industrialised  countries,  such  as  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United 
States  and  Japan,  have  even  reached  double-digit  levels.  According  to  the  autumn  2010 
economic forecasts of the European Commission, the public deficit for the euro area stood at 
6.3%  of  GDP  last  year,  while  a  decline  to  4.6%  of  GDP  is  projected  for  this  year.  These 
figures far exceed the 3% ceiling laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The deterioration of public finances in a number of euro area member States has impacted 
negatively on investors’ confidence in government bonds issued by these countries, and thus 
to further turbulences in the financial markets. This is also reflected in the sharp increase in 
the  cost  of  provisions  for  losses  on  the  government  bonds  of  a  number  of  euro  area 
countries. The additional distortion has not only given rise to further instability in the financial 
system, but has also had an impact on the ECB’s monetary policy action. 
Allow  me  to  take  a  closer  look  at  two  of  these  aspects:  the  first  is  the  need  for  a  stable 
financial system and the second relates to the safeguarding of the stability of the euro by way 
of stability-oriented economic and fiscal policies. 
Financial market reforms in the European Union 
The  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  that  turbulences  in  the  financial  markets  can  have  a 
massive impact on economic growth. The crisis, which originated in the markets for complex 
financial instruments, rapidly evolved into a crisis encompassing large parts of the financial 
sector. This resulted in a decline of lending to households and enterprises, as well as in a 
drop of 4% in euro area growth in 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Although  the  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  are  multifaceted  and  complex,  far-reaching 
reforms that lead to an improved regulatory framework for, and a better supervision of, the 
financial markets are essential in order to avoid a recurrence of such adverse developments 
in the future. 
There is a general consensus on the necessity of improving the regulatory framework and 
supervision.  The  G20  countries  were  quick  in  striving  for  reforms,  which  have  since  been 
elaborated  further  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB). 
All in all, some progress has already been made in the area of reforms to financial market 
regulation,  with  the  most  notable  advance  being  the  agreement  reached  in  the  Basel 
Committee,  i.e.  “Basel  III”.  The  accord  calls  for  a  strong  reinforcement  of  current  capital 
requirements and the liquidity reserves of financial institutions. Even in relation to previously 
unregulated or lesser regulated financial institutions, such as investment funds and ratings 
agencies, tentative steps are being taken to improve transparency. 
Banks  operate  internationally,  and  financial  flows  have  become  global  in  character. 
Regulatory and supervisory measures, by contrast, are largely taken and coordinated at the 
national level and fail to take these developments into consideration to an adequate extent. 
That  is  why  the  reforms  in  the  field  of  financial  market  supervision  are  much  to  be 
appreciated. The Heads of State or Government have agreed on a new structure for financial 
supervision  in  the  European  Union  (EU),  with  a  view  to  better  preventing  future  financial 
market disruptions. This three newly established European Supervisory Authorities for banks, 
insurance companies and financial markets became operational at the beginning of 2011 and 
are designed to enhance micro-prudential supervision. 
However, the financial crisis has not only reminded us of the fact that banks operate on an 
international scale, but has also taught us that, given close financial interlinkages, disruptive 
developments within an individual credit institution may have for-reaching consequences for 
the financial system as a whole. Risks to the financial system as a whole can emanate from 
individual  institutions,  but  also  from  specific  components  of  the  financial  market  or  from 
financial instruments used. The identification and surveillance of these systemic implications 
are a matter of public interest. In Europe, it was with this in mind that the European Systemic 
Risk  Board  (ESRB)  was  established  with  the  mandate  to  conduct  macro-prudential 
supervision  within  the  EU.  Headquartered  in  Frankfurt  am  Main,  the  ESRB  is  expected  to 
help ensure that we are better able to deal with systemic risks in the future, in particular by 
giving political decision-makers an earlier warning of systemic risks. 
Much  has  thus  been  achieved  with  respect  to  reforming  financial  market  regulation  and 
supervision since the onset of the financial crisis. But the efforts undertaken in this respect 
thus far need to be continued. Let me mention just three aspects that I regard as particularly 
important: 
First,  the  regulatory  net  needs  to  be  cast  wider  and  wider.  The  crisis  has  revealed  the 
significance  of  systemic  risks.  If  we  are  to  better  counter  risks  of  a  systemic  nature,  all 
systemically relevant financial institutions, markets and infrastructures must be regulated and 
treated in exactly the same way. This holds particularly true in the event of more stringent 
regulatory requirements being imposed on the traditional banking sector. Where systemically 
relevant  financial  institutions  are  concerned,  it  is  also  essential  to  continue  to  investigate 
whether  additional  regulatory  provisions  are  needed  and  how  such  institutions  might 
contribute to the costs of dealing with a crisis. 
Second, greater transparency is required as regards over-the-counter trades and activities in 
the non-banking sector. Greater transparency would be possible if more financial products 
were  to  be  traded  on  central  trading  platforms,  such  as  stock  exchanges,  or  settled  in 
clearing houses. Given their growing importance, it is particularly crucial for clearing houses 
to have appropriate risk management schemes in place. Furthermore, the activities of non-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banks  must  become  more  transparent.  This  also  includes  improving  the  quality  and 
plausibility of risk assessments by rating agencies. 
And  third,  the  banks  themselves  must  be  encouraged  to  undertake  reforms  and  to  accept 
responsibility,  in  particular,  for  reviewing  their  individual  corporate  governance  models  as 
regards risk assessment, incentive structures and compensation. 
Safeguarding the future stability of the euro 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me now to turn to the second aspect that is of key importance 
for the stability of the euro, stability-oriented economic and fiscal policies. 
In order to counter the potential systemic implications of the government debt situation in a 
number  of  euro  area  countries  in  a  decisive  and  timely  manner,  the  Heads  of  State  or 
Government in the EU have agreed on the establishment of a permanent European Stability 
Mechanism  (ESM)  to  safeguard  fiscal  stability  in  the  whole  euro.  This  mechanism  will 
supersede the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which will remain temporarily in 
place until June 2013. The ESM will be activated when the financial stability of the euro area 
as  a  whole  is  in  jeopardy.  Member  countries  in  financial  distress  will  receive  financial 
assistance in the form of credit, subject to their fulfilment of strict conditions. 
I regard this decision as an important contribution to keeping the financial system stable, and 
thus to safeguarding the stability of the euro. Nevertheless, the existence of this mechanism 
should not be seen as an inducement to postpone a correction of the stance of economic 
policy for too long and to trust in the help of other euro area countries. 
In  order  to  prevent  this  from  happening,  it  is  essential  that  the  permanent  stabilisation 
mechanism is underpinned by a fundamental strengthening of the regulatory framework for 
compliance with fiscal policy objectives and the need for competitiveness. It is thus crucial 
that the framework for monitoring both the public budgets and economic activity in the euro 
area  is  reformed  in  an  effective  manner.  The  Van Rompuy  task  force  and  the  European 
Commission have put forward proposals on how improvements can be made in these two 
areas.  The  proposals  recommend  a  strengthening  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In 
particular,  it  is  suggested  that  possible  sanctions  for  member  countries  with  excessive 
deficits  should  be  imposed  sooner  than  currently  foreseen.  Next  year,  an  enhanced 
macroeconomic surveillance framework applicable to the euro area will also be implemented. 
This comprises the introduction of an early warning mechanism based on a scoreboard of 
predefined  macroeconomic  indicators.  At  the  same  time,  the  European  Commission  will 
assume responsibility for using these indicators in order to identify potential macroeconomic 
imbalances and excesses, and then reporting thereon to the political authorities. 
The  ECB  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  current  reform  efforts  in  both  areas  are  not  sufficiently 
extensive.  In  fact,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  considers  that  while  the  proposals 
tabled  by  the  European  Commission  may  indeed  go  some  way  towards  improving 
macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance in the euro area, they fall short of the quantum leap 
forward  that  is  needed  in  the  surveillance  of  the  euro  area  and  in  order  to  guarantee  the 
smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union. As regards fiscal surveillance, greater 
automaticity of procedure and the definition of clear and binding regulations for reducing debt 
ratios  are  required.  In  terms  of  macroeconomic  surveillance,  clearly  defined  sanctions  are 
necessary.  Efforts  must  focus  more  clearly  on  the  most  vulnerable  countries  (those  which 
have  suffered  from  losses  in  competitiveness),  in  order  to  ensure  the  sustainable 
effectiveness  of  the  latest  framework.  Moreover,  the  procedure  requires  more  transparent 
and more effective trigger mechanisms. In the future, the stability of the euro, the stability of 
the  financial  system  and  sound  economic  and  financial  policies  will  need  to  be  viewed  as 
inseparable  from  one  another.  The  Monetary  Union  was  designed  to  be  an  economic  and 
monetary union. What we need now is also the second pillar. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The ECB has done what it can by pursuing a stability-oriented monetary policy, by keeping 
the value of money stable and by providing for crisis-related liquidity needs. The other policy 
domains mentioned are now called upon to shoulder their part of the burden and safeguard 
the stability of both the financial system and the single currency over the long term. 
A single market and a common currency also demand well-coordinated economic and fiscal 
policies. This calls for clear rules and mechanisms for monitoring these policies. 
Allow me to now briefly discuss the three key areas which I consider to be vital to the long-
term success of the euro. These elements are: a sound fiscal policy, sustainable economic 
growth and a stable financial system. 
Sound fiscal policy 
1. 
The soundness of public finances was to be guaranteed by the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Unfortunately, however, the rules of the Pact have been ignored all too often – even prior to 
the financial crisis. For this reason, it is imperative that, first, fiscal consolidation efforts at the 
European  level  comply  with  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Second,  the 
foundations of the Stability and Growth Pact are in need of reinforcement. 
Sustainable economic growth 
2. 
Stable  prices  are  a  precondition  to  sustainable  growth  and  the  generation  of  employment. 
Equally important is the competitiveness of euro area member counties. In some euro area 
countries,  excessive  increases  in  unit  labour  costs  and  current  account  imbalances  have 
caused their competitiveness to decline significantly over the past few years. This meant that 
some countries were in a position where they were unable to respond to the crisis with the 
degree of flexibility required, which resulted in weakening economic and productivity growth 
and  a  surge  in  unemployment.  To  combat  this,  economic  reforms  that  foster  growth  and 
employment  on  a  sustainable  basis  are  essential.  Such  reforms  should  be  directed  at 
increasing competitiveness. To this end, flexible labour and product markets are required, as 
well as long-term projects to enhance infrastructure and competitiveness and, above all, the 
promotion of innovation through investment in training and research. 
A stable financial system 
3. 
The financial crisis has illustrated the significance of systemic risks. It has made clear that 
the procedures in place for assessing threats – stemming from the proliferation of individual, 
mutually  reinforcing,  risks  of  relevance  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  or  the  real 
economy  as  a  whole  –  were  inadequate.  The  governments  and  central  banks  have  both 
contributed  to  stabilising  the  financial  system.  Its  lasting  stabilisation,  however,  calls  for 
institutional reforms that lead to a better regulation and supervision. In addition, it is essential 
that consideration be given to the question as to how the private sector itself might be able to 
better protect itself against the consequences of a financial crisis, in order to create stronger 
incentives  for  risk  awareness  and  a  longer-term  perspective  in  economic  activities 
undertaken in the financial sector. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  over  the  past  12  years,  the  euro  has  contributed  significantly  to 
Europe’s economic sustainability and stability. If we succeed in implementing the necessary 
reforms in a decisive manner, then the ECB will be able to guarantee the long-term stability 
of the euro. I am confident that the success story of the euro will endure, to the benefit of all 
EU citizens. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
