Tiff Macklem: Global financial reform – maintaining the momentum 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to 
the G-20 Workshop, Paris, 7 July 2011. 
 Introduction  
It is now almost three years since the financial crisis went viral in the autumn of 2008 and 
threatened  a  complete  meltdown  of  the  global  financial  system.  Thanks  to  the  bold  and 
concerted  actions  of  G-20  nations,  the  financial  system  was  stabilized  and  an  economic 
depression  avoided.  But  the  fallout  was  nonetheless  severe  –  the  worst  global  recession 
since the Great Depression, with almost 28 million jobs lost worldwide. And we continue to 
struggle with the aftershocks of the crisis. 
A  central  pillar  of  the  policy  response  to  the  crisis  was  a  sweeping  reform  of  the  financial 
regulatory and supervisory framework. Launched at the G-20 Leaders Summit in London, the 
multi-pronged  reform  agenda  included  several  key  elements:  enhanced  transparency  and 
disclosure;  higher  prudential  and  liquidity  standards;  a  new  system  of  macroprudential 
oversight; credible and effective resolution regimes for large financial institutions; a broader 
scope for regulation and oversight spanning all systemically important financial institutions, 
markets and instruments; stronger infrastructure for key financial markets; and measures to 
promote adherence to international prudential regulatory and supervisory standards. 
Our challenge as policy-makers is to strike the right balance. We don’t want to undermine 
efficiency or stifle innovation, but we do want to deter reckless behaviour. 
The  regulatory  reform  agenda  began,  appropriately,  at  the  core  of  the  financial  system.  In 
many  respects,  this  was  the  easy  part  since  we  have  considerable  experience  with  the 
regulated  sector.  As  we  move  beyond  the  core  to  consider  issues  of  perimeter  and 
interconnectedness, the intellectual and practical challenges are larger. At the same time, as 
the desperation of the crisis fades from memories, so will the urgency to tackle these issues. 
Our collective responsibility is to ensure that our efforts redouble as the going gets tougher. 
Since  the  London  Summit,  considerable  progress  has  been  made  along  three  fronts: 
standards, tools and enforcement. 
that 
Standards 
The  financial  crisis  revealed  all  too  starkly  that  liquidity  buffers  were  glaringly  inadequate, 
and 
the  banking  system  as  a  whole  was  dangerously  undercapitalized  and 
over-leveraged. The new global standards in the Basel III Capital Accord redress this core 
vulnerability.  They  substantially  increase  the  loss-bearing  capital  that  financial  institutions 
must hold. They establish new liquidity standards and a limit on leverage. These represent a 
significant  strengthening  of  the  global  rules.  The  combination  of  greater  emphasis  on  true 
loss-bearing  capital  –  namely  tangible  common  equity  –  and  increased  minimum  capital 
levels has effectively raised the minimum global capital requirement seven times. 
Moreover, for the largest and most interconnected global banks, this is being supplemented 
with additional loss-absorbing capacity. The Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision 
just agreed on a proposed methodology for assessing systemic importance, the amount of 
additional  required  capital,  and  the  timeline  over  which  this  will  be  phased  in.  These 
additional  measures  will  further  strengthen  the  resilience  of  global  systemically  important 
banks and create incentives for them to reduce their systemic importance over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Tools 
The crisis taught us that while regulating on an institution-by-institution basis is important, it is 
not enough. The risk to the financial system is not equivalent to the average risk to individual 
firms. This was strikingly illustrated in the crisis, as it was individual institutions’ attempts at 
self-preservation that transmitted and amplified stresses throughout the global system. 
Addressing system-wide risks requires new tools, and here, too, there has been considerable 
progress. The countercyclical capital buffer included in Basel III is a giant step forward. The 
Bank of Canada played an important role in the development of the buffer, which provides for 
additional capital to be built up during periods of excessive credit growth in anticipation of a 
future downturn. This broad macroprudential instrument complements other tools designed 
to  contain  financial  imbalances  in  specific  markets.  These  include  mortgage  loan-to-value 
ratios  and  amortization  periods,  as  well  as  countercyclical  margin  requirements.  What 
remains is much work on implementation. In particular, how best to combine, sequence and 
implement these tools, how they will affect financial intermediation, and their implications for 
other policy instruments, including monetary policy. 
to  strengthen 
Enforcement 
New  rules  are  only  as  good  as  their  application  and  adherence.  Last  year  in  Seoul, 
G-20 leaders  endorsed  recommendations 
the  mandate,  capacity  and 
resourcing of supervisors. They also reviewed the powers required to monitor, identify and 
address  excessive  risk-taking,  including  early  intervention.  It  is  imperative  that  these 
recommendations  are  now  translated  into  new  standards  for  supervision  and  implemented 
on the ground. 
International assessment and review are also being strengthened. Financial Stability Board 
(FSB)  member  jurisdictions  are  living  up  to  their  commitments  to  undergo  regular 
assessments under the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Program. And under the FSB’s 
new  system  of  international  peer  reviews,  six  reviews  have  now  been  completed  and 
published.  Building  a  new  system  of  international  peer  review  is  a  major  accomplishment. 
But heavier lifting lies ahead. 
As new, higher standards come into force, ensuring equivalent implementation will become 
increasingly  important.  Three  critical  areas  stand  out:  Basel  III,  resolution  regimes  and 
central  clearing  for  OTC  derivatives.  We  will  need  rigorous  and  effective  assessment  of 
implementation across all jurisdictions to ensure that they are living up to their commitments. 
The goal is to create a race to the top in national adherence to international standards. 
Agreement  on  these  three  elements  –  higher  standards,  new  tools  and  strengthened 
enforcement  mechanisms  –  will  substantially  enhance  financial  stability  at  the  core  of  the 
system.  Agreement  in  these  areas  has  been  hard.  But  the  truly  tough  work  of  consistent, 
rigorous and relentless implementation is just beginning. 
Now that we have largely agreed on the reforms to reduce the likelihood of failure at the core 
of the system, the reform agenda is turning appropriately to two further priorities: expanding 
the perimeter of oversight and regulation, and reducing contagion and harmful international 
spillovers. 
Expanding the perimeter of supervision and regulation 
The  existing  prudential  regulatory 
framework  was  designed  around  banks  whose 
credit-intermediation activities are closely regulated and supervised, as well as backstopped 
with deposit insurance and central bank liquidity. By contrast, the shadow banking sector is 
less  regulated  and  does  not  have  access  to  public  liquidity  support.  However,  like  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
credit-intermediation activities of banks, shadow banking also involves liquidity and maturity 
transformation, and often with some degree of leverage. 
The label “shadow banking” is unfortunate. It is not shadowy. Market-based financing, as it is 
more appropriately called, provides competition for the banking sector and is an important 
source of innovation and diversification. 
And it is also big. In the United States, market-based financing was roughly twice as large as 
traditional bank intermediation at the peak of the credit boom and is still about 25 per cent 
larger today. In several other advanced economies, including Canada, the sector is at least 
as large as the banking sector. 
The  crisis  highlighted  the  systemic  vulnerabilities  market-based  financing  can  pose.  The 
opaque  and  excessively  levered  securitization  of  U.S.  mortgages,  combined  with  undue 
reliance  on short-term  wholesale  funding,  greatly  intensified  the  consequences  of  the  U.S. 
housing collapse. 
With the capital and liquidity standards applied to banks set to increase, we can expect to 
see further incentives for regulatory arbitrage. This has the potential to expand the scope and 
scale of market-based financing activities. 
For all these reasons, the international agenda, under the auspices of the FSB, is turning its 
attention to the perimeter of regulation and shadow banking or market-based financing. The 
FSB’s task force on shadow banking is taking a two-pronged approach. The first prong is to 
cast  a  wide  net  to  ensure  that  data  gathering  and  surveillance  cover  all  non-bank 
credit-intermediation  activities  where  risks  might  arise.  The  second  prong  is  narrower  in 
focus. It concentrates on the subset of non-bank credit-intermediation where risks can arise 
from maturity or liquidity transformation, credit risk transfer, or leverage. 
A  key  characteristic  of  market-based  financing  is  its  diversity,  both  within  and  across 
countries. It involves a wide range of activities with different benefits and risks. At one end of 
the continuum are government-guaranteed, mortgage-backed securities; at the other end are 
highly complex, opaque, leveraged securities. 
The  composition  of  the  sector  in  terms  of  instruments  varies  considerably  across 
jurisdictions,  partly  in  response  to  the  structure  and  regulation  of  the  domestic  banking 
system.  In  Canada,  for  instance,  the  most  prominent  market-based  financing  activities  are 
repurchase  agreements  (repos).  In  the  United  States,  government-sponsored  enterprises, 
money market mutual funds and asset-backed securities represent the major components. 
The dominant players in the sector also differ from one jurisdiction to another. In Canada and 
Australia, for example, a much larger proportion of market-based financing is undertaken by 
regulated financial institutions, compared with the United States. 
The  diversity  across  jurisdictions  of  risk  levels,  composition  and  players  demonstrates  the 
need  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  shape,  reach  and  scale  of  market-based  financing. 
While we have a much better grasp today of the sector than we did before the crisis, we still 
have much to learn. We need to understand the complete chain, from origination through to 
the  final  sale,  with  all  the  links  along  the  way  clearly  exposed,  including  the  links  to  the 
regulated  sector.  This  requires  mapping 
identify  potential  problems, 
inconsistencies and data gaps in the monitoring framework, and to assess the risks to the 
broader financial system. 
In  terms  of  reform,  the  lowest-hanging  fruits  have  already  been  harvested.  These  include 
enhanced disclosure requirements, the new consolidation accounting standard and minimum 
risk-retention  rules.  But  much  more  work  is  needed  to  consider  the  full  range  of  policy 
options. These include: direct regulation; indirect regulation via links to the regulated sector; 
targeting specific products and activities; and various macroprudential measures. 
As  we  consider  the  vulnerabilities  posed  by  market-based  financing  and  the  appropriate 
policy response, it will be important to keep three points front of mind. First, reforms should 
the  sector 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
strike  an  effective  balance  between  the  benefits  of  market-based  financing,  including 
competition, innovation and diversification, and the risks related to regulatory arbitrage and 
systemic vulnerabilities. Second, given important differences in the structure of market-based 
financing  across  countries,  the  best  approach  to  mitigating  systemic  risks  in  this  sector  is 
likely  to  differ  across  jurisdictions.  And  third,  the  best  approach  will  be  the  one  that  is 
adaptable,  since  changes  in  regulation  and  innovation  can  lead  to  rapid  expansion  and 
mutation of market-based financing activities. 
Reducing contagion and spillovers 
Reducing contagion and spillovers when accidents do happen has two critical elements. 
First, resolution. We must be able to resolve institutions, no matter how large, in a way that 
preserves  their  remaining  value  while  ensuring  the  costs  are  borne  by  shareholders  and 
uninsured  counterparties  –  and  not  by  taxpayers.  The  effective  resolution  of  insolvent, 
globally  active  banks  will  require  clear  rules  for  cross-border  resolution.  It  will  also  require 
new instruments and a range of other powers and tools, including an expanded capacity for 
bridge banks and clear recovery and resolution plans. Contingent convertible (CoCo) bonds 
and broader bail-in solutions can also be helpful in providing a kind of pre-packaged priority 
in bankruptcy. 
Resolving firms in crisis is something no one wants to do, but ensuring authorities have a full 
spectrum  of  tools  and  powers  is  critical  if  we  are  to  roll  back  the  moral  hazard  that  has 
distorted incentives for the so-called “too-big-to-fail” financial institutions. 
The second element is the need for central counterparties for OTC derivatives combined with 
trade  repositories.  Globally,  the  notional  derivatives  market  is  immense.  The  amount  of 
notional  outstanding  in  OTC  derivatives  last  year  was  US$618  trillion.  In  Canada,  the 
Canadian-dollar-denominated OTC derivatives market was about $9 trillion, of which a little 
over  $6  trillion  was  in  interest  rate  swaps.  This  is  huge  for  a  country  with  a  GDP  of 
Can$1.6 trillion in 2010. 
The systemic significance of this market was made all too obvious during the financial crisis. 
By  global  standards,  Bear  Stearns  was  a  mid-sized  institution.  But  its  significance  as  a 
counterparty in the OTC derivatives market was such that U.S. authorities were required to 
assist in a transaction to prevent its complete collapse. 
To prevent this from happening again, G-20 leaders have agreed that by the end of 2012, all 
standardized OTC derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading 
platforms,  where  appropriate,  and  cleared  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs).  A  great 
deal of work remains if this goal is to be realized. 
Central  counterparties  for  OTC  derivatives  will  provide  greater  certainty  of  payment, 
mitigating  the  harmful  spillovers  resulting  from  the  failure  of  a  counterparty,  as  well  as 
increased transparency, thereby reducing contagion and maintaining continuous markets in 
times of stress. But CCPs also have the potential to create new single points of vulnerability. 
This calls for the careful design of CCPs, as well as robust regulation and supervision. It will 
also be important to ensure sufficient access to CCPs to avoid limiting competition. This is of 
particular concern in countries that are not host to a large global CCP. 
There are two potential paths to address these design issues. The first is to promote fair and 
open access to global CCPs with shared oversight arrangements, so that strong, large and 
mid-tier derivatives market participants have efficient access to central clearing. The second 
is to build local CCPs that are better aligned with local risks and local market conditions. A 
number  of  jurisdictions  are  pursuing  the  local,  or  onshore  option,  including  Japan,  Korea, 
China,  Hong  Kong,  Singapore  and  Brazil.  Potentially,  these  local  CCPs  could  be  linked 
globally through risk-controlled interoperability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Canada is giving serious consideration to an onshore option. This is not to say we are taking 
the global option off the table, but there are good reasons to consider onshore CCPs. Going 
local  would  give  regulatory  authorities  a  high  degree  of  oversight  and  supervision  over 
systemically important market infrastructure. Authorities would also have much more control 
over  the  design  and  implementation  of  emergency  measures,  including  the  provision  of 
emergency liquidity, and influence over a CCP’s actions in the event of a member’s default. 
Regardless of whether global or local CCPs become the path to central clearing, new kinds 
of  interdependencies  among  jurisdictions  will  be  created.  To  protect  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, authorities must define shared-oversight arrangements across jurisdictions, 
the framework and principles for emergency liquidity support to CCPs, and policies for failure 
resolution. 
This work is under way, but much more needs to be achieved, and the details matter. 
Conclusion 
Since  the  financial  reform  agenda  was  launched  at  the  London  Summit,  the  Pittsburgh, 
Toronto and Seoul Summits have each marked considerable progress. New standards are 
now  agreed  that  will  significantly  enhance  the  resilience  of  regulated  financial  institutions. 
The easy part is done. 
These new rules must now be rigorously implemented in every institution. Supervision and 
oversight need to be strengthened in all jurisdictions. Scrupulous international assessment 
must ensure equivalent implementation of these new higher standards. 
We must agree on and implement a perimeter of regulation and oversight that encompasses 
systemically important financial institutions, markets and instruments. And a new system of 
firewalls needs to be built to prevent the failure of one counterparty in the OTC derivatives 
market from creating systemically perilous knock-on effects. This will all require considerable 
energy. 
But as we move further from the crisis, we risk losing the sense of urgency that brought us 
together at the start. This would be a great disservice to our citizens. 
The  costs  of  the  crisis  were  enormous.  And  the  lesson  from  history  is  that  memories  in 
financial  markets  are  short.  Without  our  collective  determination,  the  under  appreciation  of 
risk and the build up of vulnerabilities in the system will almost certainly return. 
We  have  within  our  grasp  a  new  financial  landscape  with  less-frequent  and  less-severe 
crises, and with institutions, markets and products that better serve the needs of households 
and businesses. If we have learned anything from the crisis, this is an opportunity we cannot 
afford to squander. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
