Mario Draghi: Opening statement to the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Opening statement by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the 
Financial Stability Board, and Candidate for President of the European Central Bank, to the 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 14 June 
2011. 
 I am honoured to appear before your Committee for this hearing, which is part of the process 
of my nomination to the Presidency of the ECB.  
I trust you have read my CV. What I want to emphasize about my record are my professional 
experience in financial matters and as a central banker, and my long-standing commitment to 
the cause of the European construction.  
I  have  served  as  a  member  of  the  Governing  Council  and  the  General  Council  of  the 
European Central Bank since 2006, in my capacity as Governor of the Bank of Italy. I believe 
that  we  have  been  able  to  deliver  very  positive  results,  although  we  were  faced  with 
exceptionally difficult challenges.  
I  also  took  part  in  many  of  the  decisions  leading  to  the  birth  of  the  euro.  In  1991,  in  my 
capacity  as  Director  General  of  the  Italian  Treasury,  I  headed  the  Italian  delegation 
negotiating the Maastricht Treaty. Subsequently, I was actively involved in many of the steps 
that were essential in ensuring Italy’s adoption of the euro, particularly the ambitious fiscal 
adjustment that took place in the 1990s.  
I have gained considerable experience in prominent European and international fora. Here, 
let  me  just  mention  that  since  April  2006  I  have  been  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum, which became the Financial Stability Board (FSB) in 2009. The FSB, which brings 
together  national  and  international  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability  and 
international  standard-setting  bodies,  coordinates  the  work  to  develop  and  promote  the 
implementation of effective regulatory supervisory and other financial sector policies.  
The more detailed information in my CV further clarifies my long-standing professional and 
academic experience in economic, monetary and banking matters.  
Today,  I  would  like  to  concentrate  my  introductory  comments  on  my  assessment  of  the 
experience with EMU and on the main challenges that I believe lie in front of us. 
 Let me first of all say that I am honoured to be considered as a candidate for the Presidency 
of  the  ECB,  because  I  believe  that  EMU,  with  the  euro  at  its  centre,  has  been  a  great 
success, a success that should be preserved for the sake of all the citizens of Europe. Let 
me state that none of the recent events, including the global crisis, call this fact into question. 
The euro has established itself as a credible and strong international currency, trade among 
the euro-area countries has been fostered, financial integration has been given an enormous 
boost. Price stability is now rooted in the conduct of economic agents: in the twelve years of 
the euro, annual inflation in the area has averaged just under 2 per cent, fully in line with the 
definition of price stability adopted by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank 
(ECB).  This  achievement  is  noteworthy,  considering  the  headwinds  the  euro  area  had  to 
weather, including substantial increases in oil and other commodity prices and the financial 
crisis. 
Thanks to the credibility gained over the years, the Eurosystem was  able to keep inflation 
expectations steady during the crisis and to act with the speed and flexibility demanded by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
extraordinary circumstances. Without EMU, the response of the different monetary policies 
could  not  have  been  so  rapid  and  decisive:  it  would  have  been  practically  impossible  to 
achieve a similar level of coordination in the monetary field.  
This credibility must be preserved and I am fully committed to doing so. I believe its roots lie 
in the independence that the Treaty grants to the ECB to pursue its mandate of maintaining 
price stability.  
I also firmly believe that, as a counterpart of its independence, the ECB must ensure that in 
the  exercise  of  its  responsibilities  there  is  the  highest  degree  of  transparency  and 
accountability, first and foremost towards the citizens and their elected representatives in the 
European Parliament. I look forward to pursuing a fruitful, frank and open dialogue with your 
institution. 
We need responsible behaviour and decisions by all the parties involved, in the monetary, 
financial stability and economic fields.  
 Starting with monetary policy, it is of the utmost importance to recall that the credibility we 
have earned will not necessarily last forever; it cannot be taken for granted.  
An important challenge for the ECB is to manage the exit from the still very accommodative 
monetary policy stance and the phasing-out of the remaining non-standard measures. The 
measures  adopted  by  the  ECB  were  crucial  to  restoring  orderly  conditions  on  interbank 
markets,  containing  risk  premia,  and  preserving  credit  flows  to  the  economy  in  the  worst 
phases  of  the  crisis.  We  have  avoided  the  collapse  of  the  financial  system,  supported  the 
functioning of the transmission of monetary policy to the economy and, ultimately, ensured 
price stability, thereby supporting the European economy. However, these measures are by 
their nature temporary. 
There have been a number of signs of normalisation in money markets and in the access to 
market-based  financing  by  most  banks  in  the  euro  area;  the  recourse  to  Eurosystem 
operations  has  declined.  At  the  same  time,  concern  about  the  sustainability  of  the  public 
finances in some euro-area countries has led to strains in a number of banking sectors and a 
small  number  of  institutions  remain  reliant  on  central  bank  liquidity,  accounting  for  a 
substantial share of the overall refinancing volumes.  
The  continued  high  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  macroeconomic  and  financial 
environment requires a careful assessment of the overall situation and outlook. Non-standard 
measures need to be phased out to the extent that they are no longer needed to support the 
functioning of the transmission of monetary policy to the economy; we must make sure that 
liquidity support to the economy is maintained as long as appropriate; but also that we do not 
sow the seeds of future imbalances and create addiction to our liquidity. 
At the same time, the setting of our policy rates must be adjusted with the aim of delivering 
on the ECB’s mandate, – to maintain price stability for the euro area in the medium term – in 
a pre-emptive manner, in order to avoid any deterioration of inflation expectations. 
It must be fully clear that neither the sovereign debt crisis nor the abnormal dependence of 
some banks on central bank liquidity can divert the ECB from pursuing its primary objective.  
 Secondly, challenges to monetary policy come from the area of financial stability.  
The financial crisis and the heightened emphasis on financial stability have raised a number 
of questions on the relationship with monetary policy. It has shown that a closer interaction is 
needed between macroeconomic and macroprudential analyses, although it has also brought 
out that there is no real trade-off between the objective of price stability and the support that 
the ECB can lend to other areas.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  this  respect,  I  believe  that  while  synergies  must  be  exploited  to  the  full,  the  respective 
roles and responsibilities must remain clearly distinct. 
Monetary policy must keep its focus on preserving price stability over the medium term. As I 
just  mentioned,  the  benefits  of  a sound  monetary  framework  have  been  made  more  –  not 
less – evident by the crisis.  
At the same time, monitoring the emergence of monetary and credit imbalances and asset 
price  developments  is  one  important  element  in  a  robust  monetary  policy  strategy;  a 
medium-term orientation is also crucial. The ECB’s monetary policy strategy already goes a 
long way towards taking these concerns into account.  
However,  monetary  policy  is  not  necessarily  the  most  appropriate  instrument  to  deal  with 
credit  or  asset  price  imbalances.  The  use  of  macroprudential  instruments  targeted  on  the 
sources of financial exuberance may be more appropriate. The new European supervisory 
authorities can make an important contribution in this respect. Let me just remark here that 
the ECB plays an important role in the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), to which it 
provides logistical, analytical and administrative support.  
An appropriate management of the interaction between macroprudential and monetary policy 
authorities  will  be  crucial  to  success.  The  institutional  arrangement  adopted  in  Europe 
appears  well-suited  to  address  any  problem  that  may  arise  from  the  management  of 
monetary policy and new macroprudential tools. It will certainly be important for there to be 
dialogue between the two bodies on policy issues that can affect systemic risk. 
 Finally,  let  me  mention  the  challenges  to  the  construction  of  Europe  itself.  The  sovereign 
debt  crisis  is  a  real  test  of  the  solidity  of  European  institutions  and  of  the  political  will  in 
Europe  to  do  whatever  is  needed  to  ensure  the  achievement  of  economic  and  monetary 
integration.  
The  European  surveillance  of  national  budgetary  policies  proved  to  be  inadequate.  For  a 
long  time  exceptionally  favourable  financing  conditions  have  concealed  the  differences 
between member countries’ underlying conditions and economic policies and the absence of 
really binding common rules. The global crisis has accentuated investors’ perception of risk 
and revealed weaknesses in the architecture of the Union.  
The exceptional response of national governments and European authorities limited the risk 
of contagion and safeguarded the area’s financial stability. The financial support granted to 
the  countries  in  greatest  difficulty  allows  them  to  proceed  with  adjustment  sheltered  from 
market  volatility.  It  is  not  a  fiscal  transfer  between  countries  and  it  is  subject  to  stringent 
conditions. 
There  are  no  shortcuts  available:  the  response  to  the  debt  crisis  lies  first  and  foremost  in 
national  policies,  in  the  complete  implementation  of  the  adjustment  plans  that  have  been 
agreed. Solidarity among the member countries in the Union must be matched by a sense of 
responsibility and compliance with the rules.  
Looking  ahead,  I  believe  that  the  steps  that  have  already  been  taken  to  tackle  the 
weaknesses  of  the  European  architecture  are  important.  The  proposals  of  the  EU 
Commission  and  the  Council  reinforce  surveillance  over  budgetary  policies.  They  can  be 
made more ambitious by making procedures more automatic so as to shield them from the 
arbitrary  nature  of  political  negotiations.  The  European  Parliament  is  having  an  important 
influence in this regard. 
The  extension  of  rules  similar  to  those  governing  national  budgets  to  the  surveillance  of 
macroeconomic  imbalances,  with  special  consideration  for  the  state  of  member  countries’ 
external accounts, is also a very welcome development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Above  all,  structural  reforms  aimed  at  boosting  economies’  competitiveness  and  growth 
potential must be a top priority on the policy agenda, not only in those countries hit by the 
debt crisis. In the end, the ultimate objective of EMU, and the measure of its success, is its 
ability to promote growth and economic and social welfare. 
Many of these matters are not the direct responsibility of the ECB, but the ECB can – and I 
believe must continue to – offer objective and independent advice, based on rigorous and 
credible analysis. I hope we will continue exchanging our views on these issues in the future. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
