Subir Gokarn: Striking the balance between growth and inflation in India 
Presentation by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the US-
India  Economic  and  Financial  Partnership:  CII  and  Brookings  Institution,  Washington  DC, 
27 June 2011. 
Inputs from Bhupal Singh, Ashish George and G.V. Nadhanael are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
I. 
The  Indian  economy  recovered  relatively  quickly  from  the  financial  crisis  of  2008,  but 
inflationary pressures emerged even in the early stages of the recovery in late 2009. Over 
the  past  year  and  a  half,  the  challenge  for  monetary  policy  has  been  to  contain  these 
inflationary pressures without disrupting the recovery. The economy grew by 8.5 per cent in 
the  fiscal  year  2010–11,  which  is  close  to  the  five-year  average  pre-crisis,  but  year-end 
headline  inflation  was  over  9 per cent,  well  above  tolerance  limits.  Meanwhile,  global 
developments  have  implications  for  both  growth  and  inflation  trajectories  in  India  over  the 
coming  months.  In  this  presentation,  I  propose  to  talk  about  the  key  global  and  domestic 
factors  that  are  shaping  our  growth  and  inflation  outlook,  as  a  backdrop  to  discussing 
monetary  policy  actions  and  their  impact.  I  will  then  briefly  talk  about  challenges  to 
communication. 
Global forces 
II. 
There  are  widespread  perceptions  and  increasing  concerns  about  the  recovery  in  the 
advanced  economies  losing  momentum.  High  energy  prices  appear  to  be  feeding  into  a 
negative cycle of persistent unemployment and depressed housing prices in the US and UK, 
while the prospect of sovereign default and its real and financial consequences dominates 
the  European  policy  discussion.  In  contrast,  emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs)  are 
showing  symptoms  of  demand-driven  inflationary  pressures,  which  have,  over  the  past 
several months, been exacerbated by rising global commodity prices. Apart from all the other 
things that are going on in the global environment, commodity prices have played a key role 
in  India’s  inflation  over  this  period.  Consequently,  their  likely  trajectory  is  going  to  be  an 
important factor in influencing India’s inflation path. 
Charts  1  and  Chart  2  provide  some  perspective  on  this.  They  display  the  correlations 
between  the  build-up  of  non-commercial  long  positions  in  four  commodities  –  crude  oil, 
copper, cotton and soya beans – and price movements. It appears that that trading positions, 
possibly driven by abundant liquidity, are contributing to recent price escalations, except in 
cotton, where temporary supply disruptions have been the main factor. Significantly, in recent 
weeks, there has been a reversal in long positions, which in turn is associated with softening 
of  prices.  If  this  trend  persists,  it  will  provide  substantial  relief  for  global  inflation 
management,  particularly  for  large  commodity  importers,  including  India.  Further,  although 
hardly  a  desirable  way  to  control  inflation,  slowing  global  growth,  in  addition  to  reinforcing 
these  favourable  commodity  price  trends,  will  also  help  to  moderate  demand  and  keep 
capacity utilization low. This will contribute to moderating inflationary pressures coming from 
traded or tradable goods. 
Domestic growth prospects 
III. 
2010–11  was  a  year  in  which  the  economy  continued  its  recovery  from  the  impact  of  the 
financial crisis. Growth bottomed out at 6.8 per cent in 2008–09, the crisis year, picked up to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
8 per cent in 2009–10 and further to 8.5 per cent in 2010–11. Chart 3 shows two pictures of 
the  growth  trajectory.  With  reference  to  aggregate  and  sectoral  Gross  Domestic  Product 
(GDP)  estimates,  the  trajectory  in  the  graph  suggests  that  the  momentum  is  moderating 
somewhat,  as  the  most  recent  quarters  show  decelerating  year-on-year  growth  rates.  The 
main  contributor  to  this  tendency  is  the  industrial  sector,  which  has  shown  relatively  high 
volatility over the period displayed. It slowed significantly during the crisis, recovered sharply 
subsequently and has recently begun to slow down. 
Looking at the industrial sector a little more closely, the graph displaying trends in industrial 
production provide some clues to its dynamics. The most volatile segments of the index, both 
of which are displayed on the graph, are capital goods and consumer durables. These are 
generally seen as being the most interest-sensitive components of the index and their recent 
trends suggest that the impact of contractionary monetary policy is having an impact. Along 
with softening commodity prices, this trend will contribute to bringing inflation under control, 
by  helping  moderate  demand  pressures.  Of  course,  industry  associations,  including 
Confederation  of  Indian  Industry  (CII),  have  been  consistent  critics  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance,  arguing  that  it  is  slowing  growth  without  really  impacting  inflation,  which  is  being 
driven by supply side pressures. I will address this critique both in the discussion on inflation 
and the one on communication. 
In short, the domestic growth scenario suggests that the growth rate will moderate somewhat 
in  the  coming  year.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  projects  growth  during  2011–12  to  be 
8 per cent in its baseline scenario. From the inflation management perspective, this is not an 
entirely undesirable outcome. If it results in a significant reduction in the inflation rate, it will 
represent a soft landing, which in turn opens up the opportunity for a reversal in the interest 
rate cycle. However, many unknowns stand in the way and ultimately, inflation outcomes will 
determine the monetary stance. 
Domestic inflation dynamics 
IV. 
Over the past year, the nature of inflation has changed in significant ways. Chart 4 provides a 
broad picture of the dynamics. Headline inflation began to accelerate in the second half of 
2009–10, at a time when growth was still relatively sluggish. It stayed high through 2010–11, 
actually accelerating in the last quarter of the year. In the first two months of 2011–12, that 
pattern  has  persisted.  However,  the  relative  importance  of  the  drivers  of  inflation  clearly 
changed  over  the  period  displayed.  Food  inflation  was  the  predominant  contributor  in  the 
early phase, but a resurgence of energy prices in the post-crisis environment began to play 
an increasingly important role. The prices of non-food manufactured products, which the RBI 
views as a reflection of demand pressures, began to rise noticeably in early 2010, but saw 
their rate of increase stabilize and even moderate somewhat in the third quarter of 2010–11. 
However, that pattern was short-lived and the rate of inflation for this category surged in the 
fourth quarter, a momentum that has clearly persisted into the current year. 
The  changing  contributions  of  different  drivers  are  very  sharply  brought  out  in  the 
decomposition exercise displayed in Chart 5. The analysis looked at recent patterns in terms 
of three periods of roughly equal lengths over the past 14 months, beginning April 2010. In 
the  first  period,  food  and  energy,  reflecting  classic  supply-side  forces,  were  the  primary 
contributors  to  inflation.  Non-food  manufacturing  inflation,  which,  to  the  extent  that  it 
represents  demand  pressures,  was  not  insignificant,  suggesting  that  pricing  power  was 
present.  In  the  second  period,  the  weight  of  the  contribution  shifted  dramatically  towards 
commodities other than energy. The contribution from food moderated a bit, as did that from 
non-food  manufacturing,  suggesting  that  the  pass-through  or  “generalization”  risk  was 
moderating. However, this pattern was short-lived. In the last period, energy returned as a 
major  contributor  and  the  sharp  increase  in  the  contribution  of  non-food  manufacturing 
indicated that producers were able to pass on higher input costs without too much difficulty. 
The strength of the pass-through in this period indicated that demand conditions remained 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
quite robust, even as some early signs of moderation were coming through the production 
estimates and feedback from industry. 
I want to put particular emphasis on food price dynamics, as I believe that this is likely to be a 
significant  factor  in  the  medium  term.  Although  the  overall  contribution  of  food  to  inflation 
moderated over the past year, there are structural demand-supply imbalances at work, which 
will keep the pressure up in the absence of large and sustainable increases in supply. This 
phenomenon is demonstrated in the graph in Chart 6. The main point that the graph makes 
is that the prices of protein sources have deviated sharply from their trend in recent years 
and show no signs of reverting to it. By contrast, the prices of other foods have also shown 
periodic  deviations  from  trend,  but  have  generally  reverted.  This  pattern  has,  of  course 
contributed to high volatility, as the Chart also demonstrates. 
Volatility  in  food  prices  does  have  a  welfare-reducing  impact,  but  in  the  current  Indian 
context,  the  much  greater  concern  is  the  long-term  nutritional  impact  of  elevated  protein 
prices. At a time when the combined impact of demographic transition and income increases 
is generating enormous demand for proteins, the supply chain is clearly struggling to meet 
this demand. 
To conclude this part of the discussion, let me bring in the issue of inflationary expectations. 
The  persistence  and  recent  acceleration  of  inflation  has  clearly  increased  the  risk  of 
expectations  becoming  unanchored.  The  RBI  monitors  short-term  expectations  through 
household  surveys.  Recent  surveys  have  reinforced  the  perception  that  household 
expectations are moving up. Food prices play an important role in this process, but whatever 
the  causes,  the  impact  on  wage-setting  in  both  explicit  and  implicit  contracts  cannot  be 
dismissed.  However,  the  relative  stability  of  long-term  (10-year)  yields  on  government 
securities suggest that expectations over this horizon remain anchored. This is reinforced by 
our regular surveys of professional forecasters, which also indicate no loss of confidence in a 
moderate inflation scenario over the medium and long run. 
Monetary policy: actions and transmission 
V. 
The  current  cycle  of  contractionary  monetary  policy  was  initiated  in  the  context  of  two 
important factors. First, there was an enormous volume of liquidity in the domestic financial 
system, as a result of policy responses to the crisis, which also took policy rates to very low 
levels. Second, even as the early signs of recovery were visible, inflationary tendencies had 
also  begun  to  show.  All  this  was  happening  in  a  global  environment  which  was  still  quite 
turbulent and uncertain in late 2009 and early 2010. Chart 7 shows the trajectory of policy 
instruments – the Repo, the Reverse Repo and the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) in the pre-
crisis, crisis and recovery periods. 
In  contrast  to  the  very  sharp  and  quick  actions  on  rates  and  liquidity  that  were  taken  in 
responding  to  the  crisis,  the  recovery  has  been  characterized  by  a  much  more  calibrated 
approach.  This  was  motivated  by  considerations  related  to  the  factors  that  I  mentioned 
earlier. A more aggressive response to the incipient inflationary pressures may have been 
warranted under somewhat more predictable domestic growth and global scenarios, but in 
both  these  respects  the  situation  in  early  2010  was  nowhere  near  stable  or  predictable.  A 
calibrated  approach,  which  was  essentially  a  relatively  frequent  series  of  small  rate  hikes, 
was seen as the best way to balance the potentially conflicting objectives. 
In  the  early  phase  of  the  cycle,  surplus  liquidity  conditions  persisted,  which,  clearly  made 
transmission of policy rates through to transaction rates very sluggish. From this perspective, 
the  early  actions  were  essentially  a  signaling  effort,  accompanied  by  steady  moves  to 
eliminate the liquidity surplus through CRR increases. By the middle of the 2010, the liquidity 
scenario had moved to a deficit and transmission became much stronger. Chart 8 shows the 
immediate impact on the call rate, which is effectively the operating target of monetary policy, 
of a change in the liquidity situation. The strengthening of transmission was visible across a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
variety  of  financial  market  segments.  Charts  9  and  Chart  10  provide  some  illustrative 
evidence of this.  
In  Chart  9,  the  call  and  Collateralized  Borrowing  and  Lending  Operations  (CBLO)  rates,  a 
secured short-term channel of liquidity management, are shown with reference to the repo-
reverse repo corridor. The transmission intensity is quite clear, with the added dimension of 
movement from the lower bound of the corridor to the upper bound, as liquidity conditions 
tightened.  Chart  10  shows  the  yield  on  10-year  government  securities  and  that  on  5-year 
AAA corporate bonds from the same perspective. Transmission is visible here as well. 
Of  course,  the  banking  system  is  by  far  the  more  important  intermediary  in  the  Indian 
financial context and what banks do matters a great deal. Significantly, a similar analysis of 
transmission  through  bank  lending  rates  does  not  suggest  that  it  is  as  strong  as  that  in 
markets.  Chart  11  displays  the  dynamics  of  bank  lending  rates  in  response  to  policy  rate 
changes in both the expansionary and contractionary cycles. The sensitivities do not appear 
to  be  very  strong.  Rates  did  not  come  down  very  sharply  in  the  expansionary  phase  and, 
while  they  are  increasing  in  the  contractionary  phase,  the magnitudes  appear  to be  small. 
Aggregation problems may be masking some of the impact. In the RBI’s consultations with 
industry, the fact that banks are aggressively passing on rate increases is often alluded to, 
which is undoubtedly intended as a complaint, but is entirely consistent with monetary policy 
objectives. 
Finally, in the context of monetary actions and transmission, let me address the issue of real 
rates. One consistent critique of the monetary stance, that it has been behind the curve, is 
based on the criterion that real rates have been and still are negative. Of course, this leads to 
a  usually  inconclusive  debate  on  what  the  deflator  should  be,  but  widespread  perceptions 
that real rates are negative are likely to impact both spending behaviour and expectations. 
This then leads to the more operational issue of whether rates are to be brought into positive 
territory relatively rapidly or gradually. 
Charts  12  and  Charts  13  provide  some  perspective  on  the  real  rate  issue.  As  Chart  12 
shows,  with  the  recent acceleration  in  inflation,  many  real  rates,  measured  in  the simplest 
way of subtracting either current headline inflation or core inflation from the nominal rate, are 
negative  when  the  headline  rate  is  used  to  deflate.  The  picture  changes,  but  hardly 
decisively, if the core (non-food manufacturing) inflation is used. So, going by some of these 
indicators, it may appear that the policy stance is not contractionary enough. However, when 
we look at some other measures of real rates, specifically bank lending rates as depicted in 
Chart  13,  the  picture  is  a  little  different.  Allowing  for  differences  in  risk  and  other 
differentiating prices, real rates are significantly positive. As I said, this is a criterion on which 
the debate in the Indian context is yet unresolved and is keeping some of my colleagues in 
the research departments engaged. The point I would like to make is that, at least in terms of 
a  large  proportion  of  financial  transactions,  real  rates  are  positive.  It  remains  a  matter  of 
judgment whether they are lower than they should be and, if so, how quickly the necessary 
adjustment should be made. 
This judgment is partly related to the issue of expectations. Looking back over the past year 
and  a  half,  the  balancing  act  between  growth  and  inflation  can  also  be  seen  in  a  slightly 
different  way.  There  is  also  a  tradeoff  between  minimizing  the  sacrifice  of  growth  and  not 
letting expectations run out of control as a result of inflation persistence, exacerbated by new 
shocks. 
In the run-up to its recent Annual Policy statement, the RBI made an assessment that this 
had  indeed  emerged  as  a  risk.  Against  a  backdrop  of  firm  and  possibly  rising  commodity 
prices, the prospects of inflation going down soon were seen as not being very high. This 
supported the decision to send a stronger signal of commitment to bringing inflation under 
control. However, in our baseline projections, the cumulative impact of the tightening that has 
been done over the past few quarters – the call rate has moved up by about 450 basis points 
over a little more than a year – is likely to soften both growth and inflation in the second half 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  2011–12.  If  this  trajectory  materialized  as  anticipated,  the  monetary  stance  could  then 
respond  accordingly.  But,  ultimately,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  the  stance  is  going  to  be 
predominantly determined by the actual and prospective inflation outcomes.  
Issues of communication 
VI. 
This is an enormous challenge at the best of times, which becomes even more complex in 
circumstances like the current ones. Let me briefly address two sets of issues, to which a lot 
of thought is being given. 
First, there is the concern with forecasts going wrong. Having been an analyst in my previous 
position,  I  am  quite  used  to  making  frequent  changes  in  forecasts,  as  new  information 
emerges.  The  difference  in  this  position  is  that  actual  decisions,  with  huge  national 
consequences have to be made on the basis of forecasts that might be very short-lived. This 
poses risks to credibility, because actions consistent with one forecast may not be equally so 
with the revised one. Apart from improvements in forecasting methodology, which is really a 
long-term process, there are immediate implications of this problem. One is to make better 
and more explicit assessments of alternative scenarios and then make policy decisions, taking 
into account the risks associated with different scenarios materializing. In effect, this is being 
done, but perhaps the communication strategy around it perhaps needs to be fine-tuned. 
Second, there is the issue of communicating the goals of monetary policy. For a variety of 
reasons, we have chosen not to commit to a formal and explicit inflation target, which has 
many advocates in the country. There is a credibility risk to not being held accountable to a 
single target, but there is also a risk to regularly missing that target, even if it is due to factors 
outside the control of monetary policy. But, that does not mean that some clear and, most 
importantly,  achievable,  goals  should  not  be  articulated.  We  attempt  to  do  this  with  every 
policy statement and look very carefully at feedback and public comments and debate that 
appear to have read messages different from what we intended and how we can sharpen it. 
In this connection, the growth-inflation trade-off and sometimes conflicting perceptions of it is 
a  significant  issue.  Going  by  theory  and  empirics,  the  trade-off  is  essentially  a  short-term 
one, with monetary policy aiming to keep growth at close to its long-term, structural trend as 
possible. Contractionary policy will slow growth down only to the extent that the economy is 
growing beyond its capacity, provoking inflation. It cannot, in terms of this framework, have 
any  significant  impact  on  the  trend  rate  of  growth.  In  fact,  long-term  growth  can  only  be 
helped, not hurt, by low and stable inflation. However, much of the debate tends to view any 
slowdown  in  growth  resulting  from  an  anti-inflationary  monetary  stance  as  a  long-term 
sacrifice,  i.e.,  a  downshift  in  trend.  We  need  to  articulate  the  distinctions  involved  more 
strongly, which has been done rather consciously in recent statements, but again perhaps 
needs to be sharpened. 
Concluding remarks 
VII. 
The  inflationary  situation  is  India’s  most  significant  near-term  macroeconomic  challenge. 
There  are  some  factors,  global  and  domestic,  that  are  clearly  outside  the  purview  of 
monetary  influence.  But,  that  doesn’t  mean  that  monetary  policy  does  not  have  a  role  in 
addressing  factors  that  it  does  influence  –  demand  pressures  and  the  risks  of  inflation 
becoming  generalized  through  expectations  and  price-setting  actions.  To  the  extent  that 
growth  may  be  impacted,  it  must  be  understood  as  a  short-term  tradeoff,  with  positive 
consequences for long-term performance. Finally, the contribution of supply forces, which I 
have highlighted with the example of proteins, but which also exert pressure elsewhere, can 
only be addressed by increasing supply. Measures to do this are an integral part of a long-
term inflation management strategy. 
I would like to thank CII and the Brookings Institution for inviting me to speak at this seminar 
and look forward to listening to the comments of the panelists and the participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
