Linah K Mohohlo: Economic understanding and integration, plus 
transparency and discipline in economic policy 
Acceptance  remarks  by  Ms  Linah  K  Mohohlo,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana,  for  the 
OMFIF  (Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum)  “Lifetime  Achievement  Award”, 
Pretoria, 23 August 2011. 
 It  is  an  honour  and  privilege  to  receive  the  Lifetime  Achievement  Award  from  the  Official 
Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum.  You  will  agree  that  what  we  think  of  ourselves 
may be important, but it is encouraging when observers’ thoughts of ourselves are positive. 
In the circumstances, I am humbled by the generous gesture of the Forum, an organisation 
which  has  now  attained  international  stature  and  influence  in  advancing  the  cause  of 
prudential management of international finance. 
I accept the Award with humility. I accept it on my own behalf and on behalf of colleagues at 
the Bank of Botswana and counterparts elsewhere; because without their support over the 
years, this Award would not have been within reach. 
I would like to take this opportunity to say a few words on the two broad areas contained in 
the  Award  citation:  first,  the  importance  of  supporting  “economic  understanding  and 
Integration”; second, the importance of “transparency and discipline in economic policy”. 
With respect to economic integration, its potential benefits are obvious. Integration enables a 
pooling of resources to improve infrastructure, to facilitate the movement of people, goods 
and services, to align regulations, and to create opportunities and incentives for investors, all 
of  which  together,  accelerate  economic  development.  This  has  been  demonstrated  by  the 
single European market, the current problems of the euro zone notwithstanding, and there is 
no reason why economic integration cannot also benefit Africa. 
However,  enthusiasm  for  integration,  especially  at  the  political  level,  has  not  always  been 
accompanied  by  the  necessary  understanding  of  demands  and  sacrifices.  This  includes 
difficult political decisions and economic trade-offs in establishing mechanisms for effective 
alignment of national economic ambitions with common objectives. 
Indeed, the current European experience provides a salutary warning; the ongoing efforts to 
save the viability of the euro is a reminder that enthusiasm for a political agenda can obscure 
key economic issues. 
We should be grateful, therefore, that in the face of pressure to accelerate Africa’s integration 
process, some enlightened minds have advised caution, taking the view that good intentions 
are  not  enough.  Agreements  on  an  ambitious  timetable  for  milestone  events,  such  as  the 
formal  establishment  of  some  additional  pan-African  institutions,  are  no  substitute  for 
adequately addressing the imperatives of economic integration. 
Similarly,  there  can  be  no  dispute  as  to  the  importance  of  transparency  and  discipline  in 
economic  policy.  It  is  noteworthy  that  lack  of  transparency  in  key  areas  contributed  to  the 
recent global financial crisis. Thanks to discernible improvements in economic governance 
and policy making in some parts of the continent, some African economies were generally 
resilient  during  the  economic  recession.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  pursuit  of  sound  policies 
remains  a  challenge  due,  in  part,  to  the  difficult  international  environment  and  adverse 
weather conditions. 
As  for  my  country  Botswana,  you  will  know  that  its  rapid  economic  transformation  from  a 
poor undeveloped country, dependent on cattle farming, subsistence agriculture and migrant 
workers’  remittances,  to  a  middle-income  economy,  is  itself  the  result  of  a  consistent 
commitment  to  transparency  and  discipline  in  economic  policy.  The  discovery  of  diamond 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
it  be 
forgotten 
that  Botswana’s  commitment 
deposits, immediately following independence from Great Britain, clearly played a pivotal role 
in the transformation, but the role of minerals is only part of the story. 
As  history  has  repeatedly  shown,  no  matter  how  rich  the  endowment,  natural  resources 
cannot,  on  their  own,  develop  a  country  in  the  absence  of  appropriate  and  effective 
institutions.  Nor  should 
to  prudent 
macroeconomic  policies  covered  not  only  the  years  of  diamond-generated  budgetary  and 
balance  of  payments  surpluses;  it  was  maintained  during  difficult  times,  which  include  the 
early  years  of  independence  and,  more  recently,  the  global  financial  crisis  and  economic 
recession. 
While the strength of Botswana’s economic performance has been widely recognised, there 
can  be  no  room  for  complacency  if  this  success  is  to  be  sustained.  After  all,  the  global 
economic recovery is still weak, uncertainties abound, and Botswana remains exposed to the 
vagaries of commodity markets. In such an environment, it is imperative not only to maintain 
macroeconomic stability, but also to take further steps to improve the business environment 
so that more non-mining businesses can be attracted and can ultimately flourish. Up to this 
point, the country has emerged from the economic recession in not-so-bad a shape, and its 
sovereign credit ratings are so far largely unchanged. 
That  said,  there  is  nothing  miraculous  about  Botswana’s  economic  performance.  In  fact, 
other  African  countries  have  increasingly  been  able  to  adopt  similar,  if  not  better, 
macroeconomic policies, and the benefits are self-evident. 
As far as my employer, the Bank of Botswana, is concerned, it has continued to contribute to 
the  country’s  economic  development  since its founding  in 1975,  by  seeking  to  align  fiscal, 
monetary and exchange rate policies. This is facilitated by regular consultations between the 
Government  and  the  Bank,  accompanied  by  operational  and  policy  transparency  through, 
among other avenues, periodic economic briefings. 
When I joined the Bank shortly after its establishment, I did not envisage that, 23 years later 
in 1999, I would head it as Governor and Board Chairman. Nor did I know that during my 
tenure, I would be involved in what I consider a professionally fulfilling wide range of activities 
at regional and international levels. 
Over  time,  I  have  learned  the  importance  of  the  Bank  continuously  adapting  to  evolving 
circumstances. Indeed, the Bank is much changed from when it was first established. While 
still  operating  under  broadly  the  same  mandate  of  promoting  monetary  stability  and 
maintaining a sound financial system, the governing legislation has been subject to a number 
of  reviews;  and  there  have  been  several  reorganisations  to  accommodate  the  evolving 
nature  of  responsibilities.  Monetary  policy  implementation  is  now  benchmarked  against 
international  practice,  and  the  policies  and  guidelines  for  managing  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves  are  regularly  revisited.  Banking  regulation  and  supervision  are  increasingly  risk 
based and, accordingly, financial stability has also assumed centre stage. 
In all these endeavours, I counted and continue to rely on the support of structures at home 
and abroad; this includes colleagues, counterparts and bilateral establishments, such as the 
Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum. 
Director  of  Ceremonies,  Chairman  of  the  OMFIF  Advisory  Board,  Co-Chairpersons  of 
OMFIF, the Forum’s Award Jury, fellow Governors, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I 
end  by  reiterating  my  eternal  gratitude  for  the  generous  acknowledgement  of  my  work,  as 
evidenced  by  the  conferment  on  me  of  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions 
Forum’s Lifetime Achievement Award. 
I embrace it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
