Svante Öberg: My views on the Riksbank and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Svante Öberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting 
with the Swedish Bankers’ Association, Stockholm, 7 June 2011. 
 My  term  of  office  as  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Riksbank  is  drawing  to  a  close  and  I  have 
announced that I will not be available for a new period of office. After almost six years on the 
Executive Board of the Riksbank, it feels natural for me to now reflect on the experiences we 
have had and what these may mean for the future. Earlier in the spring, I presented my view 
of the Riksbank and monetary policy. And now it is the turn of our other important main task, 
namely financial stability.  
In particular, there are three issues I would like to argue for: 
 
The  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority) should be merged 
The Governor’s role should be strengthened  
The Riksbank should have a sufficient foreign currency reserve. 
 
 
I will begin my speech by looking back on the years prior to the most recent financial crisis, 
the  risks  we  saw  –  and  the  ones  we  didn’t  see.  I  will  continue  by  describing  the  financial 
crisis and the measures we adopted during the crisis. I will then address the future and the 
work that is underway as regards reforming the framework of the financial sector. Finally, I 
will take up the three issues I have just mentioned and explain the reasons for my views on 
these issues. For the sake of clarity, let me also add that the opinions I will be expressing in 
this speech are my own. They are not necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Executive 
Board of the Riksbank. 
The years prior to the financial crisis 
When I first arrived at the Riksbank, I did not suspect that we were about to experience one 
of  the  worst  international  financial  crises  of  our  times.  I  had  been  through  two  previous 
crises. The first of these was the deep recession at the end of the 1970s and start of the 
1980s,  when,  through  a  series  of  devaluations,  Sweden  attempted  to  restore  the 
competitiveness  it  had  lost  due  to  the  severe  price  and  wage  inflation  of  the  1970s.  The 
second  was  the  crisis  we  experienced  at  the  start  of  the  1990s.  This  was  a  fairly  typical 
financial crisis, starting with the deregulation of the credit market and leading to a banking 
crisis, a deep recession and large public finance deficits. 
The Riksbank had built up its analytical capacity 
Its experiences in the Swedish banking crisis at the start of the 1990s had led the Riksbank 
to build up its analytical capacity before my time at the bank started. In 1997, the Riksbank 
started to publish a Financial Stability Report twice per year. This describes our assessment 
of the stability of the financial system, as well as various risks and threats to this stability. 
From an international perspective, the Riksbank’s work on stability analysis has been at the 
cutting edge.1 We were the first central bank in the world to publish a stability report, and we 
                                                 
1  See,  for  example,  Allen  et  al.  (2004),  who  have  carried  out  an  independent  assessment  of  the  Riksbank’s 
stability work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
were also among the first to carry out stress tests describing the banks’ resilience to various 
types of shock.2  
Assessing the banks’ credit risk, which is to say the risk that the banks would not recover the 
money they had lent, was an important part of this analysis work. It was just this kind of risk 
that had led to such large losses for the banks in the banking crisis at the start of the 1990s. 
Consequently, the risks we emphasised in the stability reports were primarily associated with 
credit risk. 
We warned of the risks but missed the one that would give us problems 
In the years leading up to the financial crisis, we made overall assessments along the lines of 
“financial stability in Sweden is satisfactory” (Financial Stability Report, June 2008). The four 
Swedish  major  banks  (Handelsbanken,  Nordea,  SEB  and  Swedbank)  were  profitable  and 
hade  enough  capital  to  withstand  possible  shocks.  However,  we  also  pointed  out  risks, 
sharpening our tone when the risks became more apparent, just before the crisis.  
One risk we emphasised at that point was that of overheating in the Baltic countries. Two of 
the  Swedish  banks  had  large  and  growing  operations  in  these  countries,  meaning  that  a 
sudden  slowdown  in  the  economies  of  these  countries  could  have  led  to  significant  loan 
losses  for  the  Swedish  banks.  In  particular,  we  analysed  the  banks’  resilience  towards  a 
sudden economic downturn in the Baltic countries. The stress tests we conducted indicated 
that the banks had enough capital to cope with such a development. 
Another risk we emphasised before the crisis was the rapid rates of increase in household 
indebtedness and in housing prices. One repeated statement was that we did not regard this 
as being an urgent problem, but that the development was not sustainable in the longer term. 
At  this  point,  we  could  observe  that  housing  prices  and  household  indebtedness  had 
increased  by  about  150  per  cent  over  a  ten-year  period.  At  the  same  time,  households’ 
disposable incomes had only increased by about 50 per cent. There may indeed be reasons 
for  household  debt  to  increase  significantly  faster  than  income  for  a  period,  but,  over  the 
longer term, this is not sustainable.  
A third risk we emphasised was that the price of risk was very low in a historical perspective. 
The  low  risk  premiums  could  indicate  that  the  investors  had  not  received  sufficient 
compensation for the risk they undertook in the purchase of various types of assets. Sudden 
price adjustments could result in many investors simultaneously wishing to rebalance their 
portfolios,  for  example  by  divesting  higher-risk  assets  in  favour  of  lower-risk  ones.  In  turn, 
this could create additional turbulence. 
On the other hand, one risk that we did not foresee was the funding problems that the banks 
would face during the crisis. We had certainly emphasised that the Swedish banks’ unusually 
large dependence on market funding was making the banking system vulnerable. But it came 
as a surprise to find that the financial markets would be affected to such an extent that the 
banks would have to borrow extensively from the Riksbank to manage their funding needs. 
The financial crisis 
The  financial  crisis  hit  Europe  with  full  force  in  September  2008,  when  the  US  investment 
bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. The background to the crisis is well-known, so I 
                                                 
2  The Riksbank has carried out stress tests since the start of the last decade. In 2006, we published for the first 
time stress tests in which we tested credit risk among the Swedish banks and reported the results by bank. As 
far as I know, at that time, we were alone among the world’s central banks in openly reporting the results of 
stress  tests  by  bank.  The  United  States  carried  out  stress  tests  of  this  kind  in  2009,  when  the  crisis  was 
already a fact, and the European Union followed suit in 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
will not go into it here. The collapse of Lehman Brothers led to the financial markets ceasing 
to function normally. Certain markets did not function at all. The banks became unwilling to 
lend to one another, which, among other effects, manifested itself in the steep increase of the 
interest rates that the banks had to pay when they borrowed from one another. (Figure 1)  
Figure 1 
Ted spread 
Difference between interbank rate and treasury bill,  
3 month maturity, basis points 
Sources: Ecowin and Bloomberg. 
 The Swedish banks were quickly drawn into the crisis in the autumn of 2008. They certainly 
did  not  have  any  great  exposures  towards  the  markets  and  institutions  that  were  worst 
impacted.  But  they  were  still  affected  by  the  global  shortage  of  confidence.  The  Swedish 
financial markets also functioned much less efficiently than normal. Two factors exacerbated 
the  problems  for  the  Swedish  banks:  the  large  degree  of  market  funding  and  the  high 
exposure towards the Baltic countries. 
More than half of the banks’ funding consists of borrowing on the financial markets and less 
than half consists of deposits from the public. Furthermore, a substantial share of the banks’ 
funding is place in foreign currency. In conjunction with the crisis, a shortage of dollars arose 
around  the  world  and,  when  this  shortage  became  acute,  the  Swedish  banks  were  also 
affected.  They  then  faced  problems  in  obtaining  funding,  particularly  with  longer  times  to 
maturity. These problems rapidly became serious. (Figure 2) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure 2 
The banks’ funding December 2010 
Per cent 
Source: The four major banks’ reports and the Riksbank. 
 At  the  same  time,  the  Swedish  banks’  exposures  towards  the  Baltic  countries  became 
increasingly  onerous.  The  global  financial  crisis  became  the  factor  to  trigger  an  economic 
crisis  in  the  Baltic  countries.  Investors  saw  the  Baltic  as  a  high-risk  region  where  the 
devaluation  of  the  currencies  was  also  expected.  Knowledge  of  these  risks  made 
international  investors  increasingly  unwilling  to  lend  money  to  Swedish  banks.  Even  the 
Swedish banks that did not have any lending activities in the Baltic were affected by this, to a 
certain extent.  
The Riksbank’s measures dampened the negative effects 
When the crisis had finally struck with full power, we acted rapidly and forcefully. Over three 
months, the Riksbank lent an amount corresponding to about SEK 500 billion to the banks. 
This meant that the Riksbank’s balance sheet increased from about SEK 200 billion to about 
SEK 700 billion. We acted in our role as lender of last resort.3 All lending took place against 
collateral.  So  as  to  avoid  restricting  the  banks’  opportunities  to  borrow,  we  eased  the 
regulations for collateral slightly. Among other changes, we accepted more types of security 
than  previously.  However,  these  new  types  of  collateral  were  also  of  very  high  quality.  To 
make it possible for several institutions to use certain of the Riksbank’s lending facilities, we 
also decided to increase the number of counterparties. (Figure 3) 
                                                 
3  The term “lender of last resort” refers to the central bank’s ability to inject money into the financial system. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 3 
The Riksbank’s lending 
SEK, billions 
Source: The Riksbank. 
 We also provided special liquidity assistance to two smaller banks. When the Icelandic bank 
Kaupthing  was  impacted  by  the  problems  in  Iceland,  the  Riksbank  provided  its  Swedish 
subsidiary  with  liquidity  assistance.  Carnegie  Investment  Bank  also  received  liquidity 
assistance when it encountered problems with its funding shortly thereafter. It was against 
this background of unease on the financial markets and the insufficient legislation we had at 
that  point  for  managing  banks  in  distress  that  the  Riksbank  made  the  assessment  that 
defaults  by  any  of  the  banks  could  give  rise  to  serious  problems  for  the  financial  system. 
Under other circumstances, this assessment would probably have been different. 
The  Riksbank  was  also  very  active  in  the  international  cooperation  to  strengthen  financial 
stability  in  our  neighbouring  countries.  Together  with  the  central  banks  of  Denmark  and 
Norway,  we entered into a swap agreement with Iceland’s central bank and, together with 
Denmark’s  central  bank,  we  entered  a  swap  agreement  with  Latvia’s  central  bank  while 
awaiting support from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The Riksbank also entered into 
a swap agreement with Estonia’s central bank. In addition, the Riksbank contributed towards 
strengthening  the  IMF’s  lending  capacity.  Sweden’s  commitments  to  the  IMF  increased 
heavily during the crisis and now amount to a maximum of over SEK 100 billion. In addition, 
the Riksbank entered into swap agreements with the central banks of the United States and 
the euro area to increase our access to dollars and euros. I will return to this later. 
In  parallel  with  our  liquidity  assistance  measures,  we  quickly  reorganised  our  monetary 
policy. The repo rate was lowered from 4.75 per cent in September 2008 to 0.25 per cent by 
July 2009. Furthermore, our assessment in July 2009 was that the repo rate would need to 
be kept at this low level for slightly more than one year. To emphasise this and also to hold 
down  the  longer  interest  rates  charged  to  households  and  companies,  on  three  occasions 
the  Riksbank  offered  one-year  loans  of  up  to  SEK  100  billion  at  interest  rates  of 
0.25 per cent. All in all, the Riksbank earned SEK 2.3 billion on the measures adopted during 
the  crisis  due  to  the  interest  rate  differential  between  deposits  and  loans.  Our  primary 
intention  was  not  to  earn  money  through  our  measures,  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  was 
important not to subsidise the banking system with public funds. (Figure 4) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure 4 
The repo rate 
Percentage points 
Source: The Riksbank. 
 Other authorities also acted to safeguard stability 
The Riksbank was not alone in adopting measures to safeguard the stability of the Swedish 
financial  markets.  Other  Swedish  authorities  also  intervened  to  counter  the  effects  of  the 
financial crisis. The Swedish National Debt Office issued treasury bills to meet the demand 
that  had  arisen  for  liquid  assets.  Finansinspektionen  amended  the  regulations  for  financial 
companies (to make it easier for them to strengthen their capital bases) and for insurance 
companies  (to  reduce  shocks  to  the  bond  markets).  The  government  and  the  Riksdag 
decided to extend the deposit guarantee scheme and to introduce a comprehensive stability 
plan. Important elements in the stability plan were a guarantee programme for the funding of 
banks  and  mortgage  institutions,  a  stability  fund,  and  principles  for  the  management  of 
capital  contributions  to  credit  institutions.  The  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  was  given  a 
central role in this work as responsible authority for the new guarantee system, the stability 
fund, and any capital contributions. 
The extraordinary measures were phased out 
The Swedish economy made a strong recovery in 2010 and the banks no longer needed to 
borrow from the Riksbank to manage their funding needs. The Riksbank thus phased out its 
comprehensive lending to the banks during the summer and autumn of 2010. This phasing 
out  was  comparatively  simple  because,  unlike  many  other  central  banks,  we  had  not 
purchased  any  securities.  When  the  loans  expired,  the  banks  repaid  their  loans,  with  the 
whole  process  taking  place  comparatively  smoothly.  The  repo  rate  started  to  be  raised  in 
July 2010. It has now been raised at six  monetary policy  meetings in a row, to its current 
level of 1.75 per cent, and we expect that it will continue to be successively raised to a more 
normal level.  
Two conclusions 
Now,  after  the  financial  crisis,  I  think  we  can  draw  two  conclusions  on  our  actions  in 
conjunction with the crisis. 
Firstly,  we  did  not  see  the  crisis  coming.  As  I  mentioned  previously,  we  wrote  and  talked 
about the Swedish banks’ increasing risk-taking in the Baltic, the rapid rates of increase in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
household  indebtedness  and  in  housing  prices,  and  the  low  price  of  risk.  We  also  wrote 
about  the  problems  on  the  US  mortgage  market.  But  the  crisis  hit  us  from  an  unexpected 
direction. We hadn’t expected that the banks would face such comprehensive problems in 
obtaining funding on the markets. 
Secondly,  the  Riksbank  reacted  quickly  and  forcefully  once  the  crisis  hit  Sweden.  The 
comprehensive  lending  to  the  banks,  combined  with  the  rapid  and  forceful  lowering  of  the 
repo  rate,  contributed  to  mitigating  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  Swedish  economy.  One 
fortunate  circumstance  was  that  lending  to  the  banks  is  what  a  central  bank  is  always 
assumed to be able to do in its role as lender of last resort. The measures we needed to 
undertake were thus within the framework of our remit. What was unusual this time was that 
the Riksbank also needed to provide the banks with funding in dollars and to provide other 
central banks with euros. I will return to this later. 
The future 
The financial crisis led to a global realisation of the need to reform the regulations governing 
the  financial  sector.  I  will  now  give  an  overall  description  of  some  of  the  work  currently 
underway to reform these regulations. I will start with the international work, continue with the 
Swedish regulations and then address our internal work at the Riksbank. 
Wide-ranging international work on the prevention of new financial crises 
At  present,  comprehensive  international  work  is  underway  to  adjust  the  framework  of  the 
financial  sector.  The  aim  is  to  strengthen  resilience  towards  similar  financial  crises  in  the 
future. This work is being carried out by several different international bodies, for example 
the G20,4 the IMF, the FSB,5 the Basel Committee and the European Union. The first three of 
these are primarily focused on negotiation and agreements dealing with the direction of work, 
while the latter two are focused on the formulation of regulations and decisions concerning 
these. The Basel Committee has agreed to tighten the regulations for banks. The banks will 
be  required  to  maintain  more  and  better  capital  than  under  previous  regulations.  One 
important element of the new regulations is that the banks ought to build up capital in good 
times that they can use to deal with losses in bad times. The banks will also be forced to 
improve their liquidity through longer and more stable borrowing.  
The  European  Union  has  established  a  new  authority,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
(ESRB) and three new supervisory authorities, the European Banking Authority (EBA), the 
European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  authority  (EIOPA)  and  the  European 
Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). The ESRB has the task of preventing crises in the 
financial system.  Its  work  aims  to  identify  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  financial system  and, 
when  necessary,  to  issue  warnings  or  recommendations.6  One  important  element  in  the 
                                                 
4  The  G20  (eng.  Group  of  Twenty)  is  a  group  of  nineteen  major  economies  and  the  Europeiska  unionen. 
Sverige is not included in the G20, but participates indirectly in the group’s work through its membership of the 
EU. 
5  Financial Stability Board (FSB) is an international body that monitors and makes recommendations about the 
global financial system. FSB was established in 2009 and replaced the Financial Stability Forum. The board 
includes  all  countries  in  the  G20,  including  the  EU,  and  Hong  Kong,  Netherlands,  Singapore,  Spain, 
Switzerland and a number of international organizations and groups. 
6  The  General  Board  of  the  ESRB  consists  of  the  central  bank  governors  and  the  heads  of  the  supervisory 
authorities in the European Union. The Riksbank participates actively in the ESRB’s work. The Governor of 
the Riksbank, Stefan Ingves, has been appointed chairman in one of the two advisory bodies in the ESRB, the 
Advisory Technical Committee. This means that he is also included in the Steering Committee that prepares 
the  General  Board’s  meetings  and  monitors  the  ESRB’s  current  work,  and  in  the  Advisory  Scientific 
Committee, which is the other advisory body. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
continued financial stability work is formed by stress tests of the banks. During the financial 
crisis,  both  the  US  and  European  authorities  implemented  and  reported  such  stress  tests. 
Their  aims  were  to  increase  transparency  concerning  the  banks’  risks,  to  increase 
confidence in the sector, and to push the banks into increasing their capital bases. The next 
European stress test will be reported this June.  
for 
is  shared  by 
financial  stability 
The Swedish regulations for the financial sector need to be strengthened 
The Swedish regulations for the financial sector also need to be strengthened. Consequently, 
the Executive Board and General Council of the Riksbank have, in a communication to the 
Riksdag, urged the Riksdag to assign the government to carry out a thorough review of the 
regulations.7 The starting point for this is that we need a cohesive and effective regulatory 
framework that allows us to better prevent and manage crises in the future.  
Firstly, the mandates and roles of the authorities involved are unclear. As the regulations are 
currently  written,  responsibility 
the  government, 
Finansinspektionen,  the  Riksbank  and  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office.  But  it  is  not 
specified  sufficiently  clearly  who  is  to  do  what  or  how  the  exchange  of  information  and 
knowledge  is  to  take  place.  Not  least,  the  Riksbank’s  responsibility  for  financial  stability 
should be clarified. 
Secondly,  we  lack  tools  to  prevent  crises,  a  weakness  that  is  partially  connected  with  the 
unclear allocation of roles. Although Finansinspektionen has the task of promoting stability 
and efficiency in the financial system and has tools that can be used to influence the banks’ 
behaviour,  it  does  not  have  the  explicit  task  of  counteracting  macroeconomic  risks.  At  the 
Riksbank,  we  have  interpreted  the  present  laws  relatively  broadly  to  mean  that  we  are  to 
safeguard the stability of the financial system, while, at the same time, we lack effective tools 
to do this.  
Thirdly,  we  need  a  new  regulatory  framework  specifying  how  the  central  government  is  to 
handle banks in crisis. Today, banks that cannot pay their debts are declared bankrupt – just 
like  any  other  company  in  the  same  situation.  This  is  often  a  lengthy  process  and  bank 
customers  may  have  to  wait  several  years  to  get  their  money  back.  Furthermore,  it  is  not 
enough  for  each  country  to  have  its  own  solution.  Banks  are  increasingly  working  across 
national borders. 
The  government  and  Riksdag  must  also  decide  whether  Sweden  should  have  the  same 
regulations for the financial sector as other countries. Financial crises can lead to very high 
economic  costs  and  there  are  a  number  of  risks  that  are  specific  to  Swedish  financial 
stability,  not  the  least  of  these  being  the  Swedish  banks’  great  dependence  on  obtaining 
funding  on  the  international  capital  markets.  At  the  same  time,  we  know  that  the 
implementation phase of the new banking regulations will be lengthy. Consequently, there is 
reason  for  Sweden  both  to  proceed  more  rapidly  than  planned  and  to  introduce  stricter 
regulations than required by Basel III.  
The Riksbank’s work with financial stability 
Perhaps  the  most  important  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  is  that  we  must  take  a  broader 
approach to understanding and analysing systemic risks. Even if, before the crisis, we and 
other  central  banks  pointed  out  individual  factors  as  possible  threats  to  financial  stability, 
nobody really succeeded in predicting the situation that then arose. The traditional approach 
of analysing institutions, markets and infrastructure separately was not sufficient. During the 
                                                 
7  See the Riksbank’s report to the Riksdag 2009/10 RB:4 “Report on certain areas that require investigation as 
a  result  of  the  financial  crisis”,  www.riksbank.se.  See  also  Economic  commentaries  no.  1,  2010, 
www.riksbank.se. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
crisis,  problems  in  individual  institutions  and  markets  rapidly  spread  and  had  far-reaching 
consequences for completely different markets in other parts of the world.  
The  financial  crisis  also  revealed  the  strong  link  between  the  Riksbank’s  two  main 
assignments – monetary policy and financial stability. Without stability in the financial system, 
it is difficult to conduct monetary policy, at the same time as price stability promotes financial 
stability. Normally, we use different types of measure for each of these two tasks. However, 
during  the  crisis,  we  needed  to  use  both  types  of  measure.  The  crisis  also  showed  how 
important it is that the two departments handling financial stability and monetary policy work 
closely  together.  The  prevention  and  management  of  systemic  risks  requires  both 
macroeconomic competence and knowledge of the financial system. 
Stress tests will continue to form a central part of our work. In the autumn of 2010, we carried 
out tests of the Swedish banks’ liquidity for the first time. These showed that the Swedish 
banks  were  exposed  to  greater  liquidity  risks  than  the  European  banks  against  which  we 
compared them. The greatest problem for the Swedish banks during the financial crisis was 
not  loan  losses,  of  course,  but  a  shortage  of  liquidity.  The  crisis  has  also  shown  that  the 
Riksbank’s fundamental task as lender of last resort can no longer be limited to lending in 
kronor. Consequently, stress tests of liquidity need to be developed so that they also show 
what may happen if the banks are unable to obtain funding in foreign currency. 
We  also  need  to  think  through  how  the  Riksbank  could  achieve  greater  impact  for  its 
analyses and assessments. So far, we have primarily relied on what we usually call moral 
suasion, which is to say making an impact through careful analyses and strong arguments. 
But, despite the risks concerning developments in the Baltic that we drew attention to before 
the crisis, too little was done to prevent the Swedish banks’ rapid credit expansion in these 
countries.  Last  autumn,  we  took  a  step  in  the  direction  of  becoming  clearer  in  our 
communication  by  making  direct  recommendations  in  the  Financial  Stability  Report  to 
participants  in  the  financial  system.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  this  will  lead  to  better 
results. 
Three possible changes 
After my nearly six years at the Riksbank, I think that there is reason for Sweden to think 
through  three  changes  that  may  increase  the  possibilities  of  preventing  and  managing 
financial crises. Ahead of the investigations and deliberations regarding amendments to the 
Swedish regulations that have just started, I shall here present my opinions on these three 
points. At the same time, I would like to repeat that these are just my personal opinions and 
are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Executive Board. These three points are 
the ones I mentioned in my introduction: 
 
 
 
The Riksbank and Finansinspektionen should be merged 
The Governor’s role should be strengthened  
The Riksbank should have a sufficient foreign currency reserve. 
The Riksbank and Finansinspektionen should be merged  
One of the issues we highlighted in our communication to the Riksdag was the allocation of 
roles  between  the  bodies  sharing  responsibility  for  financial  stability:  the  government, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Finansinspektionen, the Riksbank and the Swedish National Debt Office. Personally, I think 
there is good reason to merge the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen.8 
Firstly, a merger of the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen would give us an authority capable 
of acting more forcefully to safeguard the stability of the financial system. Under the present 
system, the Riksbank can only issue recommendations, while Finansinspektionen can issue 
regulations  and  general  guidelines.  Through  a  merger,  the  recommendations  that  the 
Riksbank issues in its Financial Stability Reports, which have no binding effect, could instead 
be formulated as binding regulations.9  
Secondly, and more importantly, there must be cyclical tools in the new regulations taking 
form, such as capital requirements varying over time. Both these and interest rate decisions 
influence the expansion of credit and thus growth and inflation. If these new tools are to be 
handled  by  Finansinspektionen,  this  would  give  us,  in  practice,  two  central  banks,  one 
subject  to  the  government  and  the  other  independent  of  political  bodies.  A  merger  would 
allow us to avoid having two central banks which, under unfortunate circumstances, could be 
pulled in different directions. 
Thirdly,  there  is  the  matter  of  macroeconomic  expertise.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  both 
macroeconomic  expertise  and  knowledge  of  the  financial  system  are  needed  to  manage 
systemic  risks.  Supervisory  authorities  are  traditionally  focused  on  monitoring  individual 
institutions and do not normally have the former type of expertise to any great extent. It may 
also be difficult for a supervisory authority to build up and maintain a level of macroeconomic 
expertise sufficient to make a difference in financial crises that only occur every ten or twenty 
years. But such expertise always has to exist at the Riksbank. 
Fourthly, there is the matter of resources. For many years, Finansinspektionen has had too 
few resources to carry out its tasks. This has been pointed out by the IMF most recently. A 
merger  would  probably  mean 
for 
Finansinspektionen’s tasks. Merging the authorities would also allow us to avoid duplicating 
work and to achieve synergies such as a joint macroeconomic analysis and shared support 
functions  and  databases.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  increased  resources  for  this  activity 
would not have to burden the taxpayers, as the financial sector would fund the activity via 
charges.  
The role played by the state in financial stability is currently being strengthened in several 
areas of the world. In the United States, which frequently has a large number of authorities 
acting within one area, a council with overall responsibility for financial stability has been set 
up. In the United Kingdom, responsibility has been assumed by the Bank of England. The 
new EU authority, the ESRB, has been moved to the ECB. It has its own board and its own 
secretariat, but it will also have the ECB’s resources at its disposal. In the next section, I will 
return to the possible structure of the managerial organisation of such a merged authority.  
Naturally, there would also be objections to merging the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen. 
One of these is that a great deal of power would be gathered in the Riksbank. However, this 
should be weighed against the fact that Sweden would be gaining a powerful actor able to 
safeguard  financial  stability.  Another  objection  is  that  the  Riksbank’s  reputation  may  be 
marred by criticism of decisions in individual cases. I think that this could be avoided if these 
decisions  are  taken  by  a  separate  board  of  committee.  No  doubt  there  are  also  a  great 
number of other issues that would need to be solved in a possible merger, for example the 
resources  would  be  allocated 
that  more 
                                                 
8 
In its most recent report, the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council proposed two alternative methods to strengthen 
macrofinancial supervision. The first of these is based on greater responsibility for the Riksbank, the second 
on a new authority, a financial stability council, or a committee for systemic risks. 
In the most recent Financial Stability Report, we recommended the Swedish banks to retain or increase their 
capital ratios, to reduce their financing and liquidity risks, and to improve their public liquidity reporting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
9 
10 
 possibility  of  appealing  against  decisions  in  certain  cases.  I  think  that,  in  an  unbiased 
investigation, the advantages of a merger would be shown to outweigh the disadvantages. 
The Governor’s role should be strengthened 
The  Riksbank  is  governed  by  an  Executive  Board  of  six  persons,  with  the  Governor  as 
chairman. This is an unusual form of management in Swedish public administration.10 It is 
mostly  justified  in  terms  of  monetary  policy.  But  it  is  not  an  appropriate  way  of  leading  an 
authority. Quite simply, I believe that the managerial structure has been the product of faulty 
logic, right from the start. With the benefit of my years at the Riksbank, I think that the role of 
Governor,  as  head  of  the  Riksbank,  should  be  strengthened  to  correspond  with  the  role 
played  by  a  normal  agency  head.  Of  course,  there  is  a  degree  of  variation  among  the 
managerial  structures  of  the  public  authorities,  but  this  is  not  an  issue  I  intend  to  address 
today. 
Today, there is broad agreement that central banks should be independent of political bodies 
when it comes to monetary policy. Somewhat simplified, this is because it is more popular to 
lower the interest rate than to raise it, and there thus exists a risk that, over time, the interest 
rate  will  become  too  low  and  inflation  too  high  if  the  government  takes  responsibility  for 
monetary policy. 
Furthermore, there is support in economic research for the argument that, in the long run, 
monetary  policy  decisions  taken  by  several  people  are  better  than  those  taken  by  one 
person.  It  is  also  common  in  central  banking  for  monetary  policy  to  be  determined  by  a 
monetary  policy  committee.  My  experience  is  also  that  the  arrangement  with  six  people 
taking  decisions  works  well  for  monetary  policy.  There  are  effective  routines  for  producing 
bases for monetary policy decisions and the reasons behind the different members’ positions 
are clearly given in the minutes from the monetary policy meetings. 
For  these  reasons,  monetary  policy  decisions  should  continue  to  be  taken  by  a  monetary 
policy  committee  at  the  Riksbank  which  is  independent  of  political  bodies.  For  the  same 
reasons,  decisions  on  the  application  of  the  new  tools  for  safeguarding  macroeconomic 
stability  should  also  be  taken  by  this  monetary  policy  committee.  It  is  as  yet  unclear  what 
these will be. They may include capital requirements, liquidity requirements, risk weightings, 
loans ceilings etc. that vary over time.  
But this arrangement doesn’t work well in other areas. When six people, all of whom have 
the individual responsibility of leading the Riksbank, are to decide on issues where opinions 
are divided, the preparatory processes can easily become prolonged. It can also lead to a 
complete inability to act. If one or more members strongly oppose a decision, this can lead to 
the issue not being taken up for decision at all.  
Being six people can be particularly problematic when it comes to financial security. In these 
issues, we have striven to agree. Frequently, of course, we have had to take decisions to 
strengthen financial stability in a reality marked by a financial crisis. In such cases, it would 
not  have  been  appropriate  to  show  disunity  over  the  best  course  of  action.  Reservations 
regarding  such  decisions  could  have  the  opposite  effect  to  that  desired.  Instead  of 
strengthening  financial  stability,  we  could  weaken  it.  Despite  this,  our  concrete  measures 
functioned well during the financial crisis.  
At the Riksbank, we have, in practice, successively moved away from the principle of all six 
members  of  the  Executive  Board  needing  to  be  involved  in  and  decide  on  all  issues.  Just 
                                                 
10  I know of only two other authorities with several heads: the Swedish National Audit Office has three heads, of 
whom one is an administrative head, and the Parliamentary Ombudsmen have four heads, of whom one is an 
administrative head. Like the Riksbank, both of these authorities are under the Riksdag, which does not have 
any extensive experience of appointing and leading authorities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
over ten years ago, the five Deputy Governors were responsible for preparing matters within 
one or more departments. This was changed even before I came to the Riksbank, six years 
ago, when they were given preparatory responsibility for certain specific areas. Eventually a 
management group was formed. This consists of the Heads of Department, with the Head of 
the  General  Secretariat  as  chairman.  It  took  over  responsibility  for  certain  strategic  issues 
and responsibility for coordinating many of the daily operational issues which, previously, had 
largely  fallen  to  the  Executive  Board  to  handle.  Decision-making  responsibility  for  daily 
operational issues has been delegated to the Heads of Department.  
However, two members of the Executive Board remained responsible for tabling proposals 
for decision in issues of monetary policy and financial stability. This was also changed later, 
so  that  these  two  were  no  longer  responsible  for  tabling  proposals  for  decision,  but  only 
acted as spokespersons. When Irma Rosenberg left, the role of spokesperson for monetary 
policy  disappeared,  and  when  Lars  Nyberg  leaves  at  the  end  of  this  year,  the  role  of 
spokesperson for financial stability will also probably disappear.  
The  Executive  Board  has  also  decided  to  assign  the  Governor  to  assume  managerial 
responsibility for the Heads of Department and to monitor the Riksbank’s activities within the 
scope of the fixed budget and operational plan. However, this will not solve the problem of 
the Governor not being head of the Riksbank in the same way as a Director General is head 
of an authority. 
The Riksdag Committee on Finance has stated its intention to review the Sveriges Riksbank 
Act  once  other  issues  it  has  been  assigned  by  the  government  to  investigate  have  been 
cleared up. My suggestion is that the role of the Governor of the Riksbank also be reviewed 
and strengthened at the same time. There are many ways in which this could be done, and 
different countries have taken different approaches.  
One possibility that I think might work well would be to have a Governor who is head of the 
authority and two Deputy Governors who, under the Governor, each take responsibility for 
their  part  of  operations.  This  is  how  it  was  before  the  Executive  Board  was  established. 
Furthermore, as I have already remarked, there should be a monetary policy committee, with 
or  without  external  members,  that  takes  monetary  policy  decisions.  In  addition,  if  the 
Riksbank and Finansinspektionen are merged, there should also be a similar committee or 
board to take decisions of the type currently taken by Finansinspektionen, with the exception 
of  decisions  dealing  with  macrofinancial  stability,  which  should  be  taken  by  the  monetary 
policy committee.11 
This  would  give  us  an  arrangement  similar  to  the  model  presently  being  launched  by  the 
Bank of England.12 Finland also has a similar model, with the financial supervisory authority 
as a part of the Bank of Finland, but with its own board and head.  
The Riksbank should have a sufficient foreign currency reserve 
One issue that we in the Executive Board have not agreed upon is the issue of the size of the 
foreign  currency  reserve.  Previously,  under  the  present  foreign  exchange  policy  with  a 
floating exchange rate, the foreign currency reserve has primarily been intended to support 
                                                 
11  In  addition,  there  should  be  a  financial  stability  council  for  inter-agency  cooperation  and  the  exchange  of 
information. As an alternative for strengthening macrofinancial stability, the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council has 
proposed such a council, and, in its recently concluded mission to Sweden, the IMF advocated a committee of 
this kind. 
12  The  new  committee  for  financial  stability  at  the  Bank  of  England  will  take  responsibility  for  decisions  on 
macrostability, but not traditional supervisory issues, which will also be moved to the Bank of England. The 
new committee partly consists of the same people as the monetary policy committee.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the krona’s exchange rate if necessary. However, it has not been used for this purpose since 
2001, and, when it was used, the results were unfavourable.  
The financial crisis made abundantly clear that the foreign currency reserve was also needed 
to provide the banks with liquidity in foreign currency in the event of a crisis. This is a matter 
of the central bank’s fundamental function as lender of last resort. As I mentioned earlier, it 
can no longer be seen as only concerning liquidity in kronor. Of the four major banks’ lending 
to the public of about SEK 7 000 billion, about SEK 2 500 billion was funded with securities 
issued in foreign currencies, of which about half had times to maturity of less than one year.  
The  Riksbank’s  gold  and  foreign  currency  reserve  was  not  enough  to  meet  the  need  for 
dollars that arose during the crisis. This amounted to about SEK 200 billion and was invested 
in various currencies and different types of asset. During the autumn of 2008, our lending in 
dollars  peaked  at  about  SEK  250  billion.  In  addition,  we  increased  our  international 
commitments to the IMF and concluded swap agreements with the central banks of Iceland, 
Latvia and Estonia so as to be able to give them loans in foreign currency if necessary. The 
Swedish  banks  also  borrowed  significant  amounts  in  foreign  currency  from  other  central 
banks and made great use of the government borrowing guarantee. 
To manage the situation, we were forced to rapidly establish a swap agreement with the US 
central bank (the Fed), which gave us the possibility of borrowing USD 30 billion. The Fed 
concluded  similar  agreements  with  several  other  central  banks  as  it  had  an  interest  in 
ensuring  that  the  European  banking  system  did  not  collapse  as  a  result  of  a  shortage  of 
dollars. We also concluded a swap agreement with the ECB, which gave us the possibility of 
borrowing EUR 10 billion.13 In addition, we also ensured that it would be possible to borrow 
from  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  The  agreement  with  the  Fed  has  now 
expired and it is not likely that we would be able to conclude a similar agreement in the event 
of a new crisis, among other reasons because the Fed has received criticism at home for its 
support to the European banking system. 
The question of a suitable size for the foreign currency reserve led to some long discussions 
among  the  Executive  Board.  It  was  not  easy  to  calculate  how  large  the  foreign  currency 
reserve should be, and different Executive Board members had differing views on the matter. 
Finally,  in  the  spring  of  2009,  we  agreed  to  ask  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  to 
temporarily  borrow  a  further  SEK  100  billion  in  foreign  currency,  thereby  reinforcing  the 
foreign currency reserve to about SEK 300 billion. Including the agreements with the Fed and 
the ECB, the foreign currency reserve thus amounted to about SEK 600 billion in the autumn 
of 2009. Now it has decreased to about SEK 300 billion again and, according to an earlier 
decision, part of this is temporary.14 
I was one of those who considered that the Riksbank’s own foreign currency reserve should 
be greater than SEK 300 billion, and this is an opinion that I still hold. My reason is that the 
Swedish banking system is still highly dependent on market funding in foreign currency. If the 
fiscal problems in Greece lead to the writing off of the Greek national debt, this may lead to 
renewed difficulties for the Swedish banks in obtaining funding in foreign currency.  
One alternative to retaining a good-sized currency reserve in the Riksbank would be for the 
banks  to  reduce  their  dependence  on  market  funding  in  foreign  currency.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier, greater demands will be made on the banks’ liquidity through the Basel regulations. 
But  they  say  nothing  about  requirements  for  preparedness  regarding  liquidity  in  foreign 
currency, something which is particularly important for us in Sweden. Imposing charges on 
                                                 
13  The  agreement  with  the  ECB  is  conditional  to  approval  from  the  ECB  in  every  single  case.  It  was  used  to 
borrow a smaller sum in conjunction with the Riksbank’s swap agreement with Latvia. 
14  In  its  recently  concluded  mission,  the  IMF  concluded  that  the  foreign  currency  reserve  is  sufficient  to  meet 
risks, but this assessment should be reviewed on an ongoing basis with reference to developments in the euro 
area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
the  banks’ market  funding  in  foreign  currency could  possibly  get  the banks  to  reduce  this, 
thereby  reducing  the  need  for  a  large  foreign currency  reserve  and  thus  fund  the  costs  to 
society of the foreign currency reserve.15 However, such charges do not exist at present and 
the effects of any charges are not clear.  
Conclusion 
About a week ago, we published our first Financial Stability Report for the year. In this, we 
report that the Swedish banks’ resilience towards shocks has continued to improve over the 
last six months. However, in large parts of the world, the recovery from the financial crisis 
has proceeded slowly and the financial markets are still marked by great uncertainty. This 
uncertainty is primarily linked to the fiscal problems in Europe. 
The  issues  I  have  addressed  today  are  not  issues  that  have  much  to  do  with  the  current 
situation.  Instead,  they  are  a  few  opinions  on  how  the  regulations  for  the  financial  sector 
should  be  changed  to  reduce  the  risk  of  new  financial  crises  and  to  reduce  the  negative 
consequences  for  Sweden  if  such  crises  should  again  arise  internationally.  In  particular,  I 
have addressed ways in which the Riksbank could play a stronger role in this connection. 
Thank you! 
 
 
                                                
15  My colleague Lars Nyberg has proposed that charges be introduced. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
