Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic diversity on both sides of the Atlantic 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
US Sciences Po Foundation Annual Benefit, New York, 16 June 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you here tonight.  
The past few years have been a testing time for the economies of both the United States and 
Europe. We were faced with the worst financial and economic crisis since the Second World 
War. Still today – on both sides of the Atlantic – we are dealing with the consequences of the 
crisis – for economic growth, for employment and for government finances.  
The  crisis  has  also  exposed  the  United  States  and  Europe  to  a  number  of  asymmetric 
shocks – in which different parts of our economies have had a wide diversity of experience. 
Some  countries  within  the  euro  area  are  the  particular  focus  of  market  attention  at  the 
moment as a result of their sovereign debt issues. 
Some observers have been wondering how diversity can be dealt with in Europe’s Economic 
and Monetary Union (EMU), what it means for monetary policy and whether the variations in 
economic  conditions  are  aggravated  by  product  and  labour  market  rigidities.  It  has  often 
been  argued  that  economic  diversity  or  heterogeneity  is  very  significantly  larger  in  Europe 
than in the United States.  
We at the European Central Bank (ECB) have been looking closely at the degree of diversity 
in the two large, continental advanced economies on either side of the Atlantic. And some of 
the  findings  from  this  comparison  are  quite  interesting.  Because  they  show  that  economic 
diversity within the two currency areas is very similar in many ways. The analysis also shows 
that, in fact, in a large number of respects the two economies are similarly diverse.  
I would like to share some of the key insights of this analysis with you tonight. 
Economic diversity in the euro area and the United States 
I. 
The  United  States  and  Europe  are  often  compared.  This  is  quite  natural.  Americans  and 
Europeans share a common cultural legacy. But our two economies, and I am speaking here 
of  the  economy  of  the  euro  area  on  our  side,  are  also  similar.  Both  are  of  similar  size,  in 
terms of population and in terms of economic output. Both have closely integrated financial 
and product markets. And both have a single currency. 
Let me begin my comparison with an economic indicator that is particularly close to a central 
banker’s heart: inflation. In historical terms, overall inflation has been low and stable in both 
the United States and the euro area since the late 1990s.  
The ECB aims at an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Since the 
inception of the euro, the ECB has achieved that objective. Annual inflation in the euro area 
has been 1.97% on average over the first 12 years. 
Importantly, the standard deviation in inflation across the members of the euro area has been 
around 1%. And it has remained broadly stable at similar levels to those observed in the US 
Metropolitan  Statistical  Areas.  From  that  standpoint  prices  in  the  euro  area  are  broadly 
homogenous and similar to those in the United States.  
My second point of comparison is how diverse the United States and the euro area are in 
terms of economic growth. The results here are similar to that for inflation. First of all, the 
overall growth rates over the first twelve years of the euro were actually quite similar in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
euro area to those in the US, once you adjust for differences in population growth. In both the 
euro  area  and  the  US,  per  capita  growth  was  about  1%  during  1999–2010.  As  concerns 
dispersion within the economies, before the crisis, the standard deviation of growth rates was 
around 2% in both the euro area and the United States. Dispersion rose somewhat during 
the crisis in both currency areas but remained broadly in line with pre-crisis patterns.1 
Allow me to go one step further and compare the sources of this growth dispersion in the 
United  States  and  the  euro  area.  Both  currency  areas  include  regions  that  experienced  a 
significant  boom-and-bust  cycle  over  the  past  decade.  Both  also  contain  regions  that  are 
facing significant structural challenges of a more long-term nature. 
Let me start off with the United States. Here, several states experienced increases in house 
prices that outpaced the national average by a wide margin. The steep house price increases 
probably  contributed  to  above  average  growth  in  these  states,  owing  to  strong  positive 
contributions from real estate, construction and financial services.  
Nevada, Arizona, Florida and California are good examples, where average growth between 
1998 and 2006 exceeded that of most other states. The sharp fall in house prices in recent 
years turned boom into bust. These states experienced the harshest recession among the 
US states.  
At the same time, some other US states have seen a long period of below average growth, 
particularly  the  former  manufacturing  powerhouses  in  the  “Great  Lakes”  region.  Structural 
shifts  in  the  US  economy  towards  services  have  gradually  reduced  the  value  added  of 
manufacturing  relative  to  GDP.  In  the  decade  before  the  financial  crisis,  growth  rates  in 
states  with  a  high  concentration  of  companies  in  manufacturing  industries  other  than 
information and communications technology, such as Michigan and Ohio, were lower than in 
most other US states. Unsurprisingly, GDP growth in these regions remained below average 
during the crisis. 
The euro area also contains examples of these two types of regions. On the one hand, some 
countries  experienced  asymmetric  boom-and-bust  cycles.  Several  euro  area  countries  had 
higher  than  average  growth  in  the  pre-crisis  years.  For  example,  up  to  2006,  growth  in 
Ireland was higher than in most other euro area economies, owing much to large increases 
in house prices.  
On the other hand, a few euro area countries – Portugal for example – experienced growth 
below  the  euro  area  average  in  the  decade  preceding  the  crisis.  This  was  typically  a 
consequence  of  structural  issues  that  could  have  been  tackled  earlier  and  with  more 
determination.  
Just  a  few  years  ago,  this  group  of  countries  included  Germany,  then  labelled  completely 
wrongly the “sick man of Europe”. Yet Germany is now an example of how big the dividends 
of reform can be if structural adjustment is made a strategic priority and implemented with 
sufficient patience. 
In short, the effects of the crisis on the different economies in the euro area follow a similar 
pattern  to  those  in  the  United  States.  The  countries  in  the  euro  area  that  have  been  hit 
hardest are those in which either large asset-bubble driven imbalances unwound or structural 
problems were left unaddressed before the crisis. More specifically, Ireland and Greece, in 
particular, remained in recession in 2010.  
Those countries that have yet to implement more far reaching structural reforms also have 
relatively low growth prospects after the crisis. These relatively low growth rates are linked to 
                                                 
1   The  2010  data  for  US  regions  are  provisional  estimates  published  by  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis  on 
7 June 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
a deterioration of competitiveness, driven by persistent losses in relative competitiveness, for 
example by above average increases in relative labour costs. 
Again, this problem is not isolated to the euro area. Disregarding the most recent countries to 
join the euro area, dispersion of unit labour costs is similar in the euro area and the United 
States, both before and during the crisis.  
It is worth noting that both currency areas include regions with persistently above or below 
average  unit  labour  cost  growth.  Again  leaving  aside  the  most  recent  countries  to  join  the 
euro  area,  Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland,  in  particular,  have  lost  competitiveness  vis-à-vis 
their main trading partners in the euro area. Germany, in contrast, has been able to lower 
relative unit labour costs.  
There have been similar persistent losses and gains in competitiveness in the United States. 
Some  states  have  experienced  large  or  persistent  increases  in  unit  labour  costs, currently 
exceeding  the  national  average  by  as  much  as  20%.  Other  states  have  been  gaining 
competitiveness vis-à-vis the national average over the past decade. 
In  summary,  economic  heterogeneity  in  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  has  been 
broadly similar on a number of measures over the past 12 years.  
Economic governance in the euro area 
II. 
But the crisis has shown us that this should be no reason for any complacency in the euro 
area. Persistent losses in competitiveness on the part of individual members in a currency 
union lead to a build-up of external and internal imbalances. When these unravel, the cost for 
the affected economies can be large. They can also have spillover effects on other members 
of the currency union. 
In any union, an economic governance framework is needed to prevent developments in an 
individual member state endangering the smooth functioning of the union. This is particularly 
true  in  a  currency  union  that  –  in  contrast  to  the  United  States  –  does  not  have  a  large 
federal budget to balance severe asymmetric developments. 
For EMU, the economic governance framework devised in the 1990s has not been correctly 
implemented and, in any case, has proved too weak during the crisis.  
As I speak today, the reform debate is still in progress. Allow me to take a few more minutes 
to  outline  the  reforms  required  to  make  Europe’s  institutions  of  economic  governance 
commensurate with monetary union. 
As you may know, the ECB takes the strong view that there is the need for more speed and 
automaticity  in  the  sanctioning  mechanism.  This  is  particularly  true  for  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact, the EU’s framework for fiscal governance. But it is also the case for the broader 
framework  for  macroeconomic  policy  surveillance.  The  experience  of  recent  months  has 
vividly  demonstrated  the  importance  of  a  timely  correction  of  internal  and  external 
imbalances. 
But faster and more automatic sanctions alone will not be enough. The enforcement tools will 
also  need  to  be  made  more  effective.  The  macroeconomic  surveillance  framework,  in 
particular,  needs  to  provide  clear  incentives  for  sound  policies  in  the  member  states  by 
imposing financial sanctions at an early stage. This also means that there should be no room 
for discretion in the implementation of the surveillance framework.  
At the same time, requirements on fiscal and other macroeconomic policies should be more 
ambitious. To ensure that none of the euro area members are left behind, they have to bring 
national policies in line with membership of a currency union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Finally,  the  implementation  of  sound  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  policies  is  best  ensured  if 
these  are  solidly  anchored  at  the  national  level.  An  effective  way  of  achieving  this  is  to 
implement strong national budgetary frameworks in the members of the euro area.  
Conclusion  
III. 
Let me conclude. The European Union and the Euro area on one side of the Atlantic, the 
United States on the other side not only share the common heritage of their culture and their 
nature of advanced economies. They are not only of similar size. Our economies are also 
showing remarkable resemblance in their diversity – among the 50 states on this side of the 
Atlantic and among the 17 euro area members on the other side. This is true for both the 
euro area and the United States before the crisis and also in their reaction to the asymmetric 
shocks during the crisis.  
Therefore  we  have  a  common  challenge.  That  of  governing,  in  the  best  fashion  possible, 
very large and similarly diversified economies as regards the economic features of member 
countries  and  states.  This  is  naturally  done  in  the  US  through  the  federal  institutional 
framework.  
We  Europeans  need  to  reform  our  economic  governance  framework,  as  I  have  briefly 
outlined here tonight. Here, we would do well to heed the words of Alexander Hamilton, a 
founding father of America’s economic and political union. Just as Hamilton once called to 
his  fellow  Americans,  we  Europeans  should  call  on  our  leaders  to  “learn  to  think  (more) 
continentally”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
