Axel A Weber: Challenges for monetary policy in EMU  
Text  of  the  Homer  Jones  Memorial  Lecture  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, St Louis, 13 April 2011.  
 Introduction 
1. 
President Bullard 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, let me thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. It is a real pleasure and 
a great honour for me to give this year’s Homer Jones Memorial Lecture, all the more so as 
this  lecture  series  is  named  for  such  a  prominent  monetary  economist.  In  his  capacity  as 
research  director  and  senior  vice-president  of  the  St.  Louis  Fed,  Homer  Jones  played  a 
significant role in shaping this institution’s monetarist reputation. 
Four  years  ago,  I  was  invited  to  give  a  speech  in  Paris.  Its  title  −  “From  academic  to 
policymaker” − referred to the fact that I started out as an academic.1 I began that speech by 
mentioning a number of other academics who went on to become central bankers: Mervyn 
King, Ben Bernanke, Janet Yellen, Bill Poole and Otmar Issing, to name but a few. 
I  continued  by  analysing  why  there  are  so  many  academics  in  monetary  policy.  James 
Bullard, by the way, is another case in point, whom I did not mention at the time because he 
was  not  yet  in  his  current  position.  One  of  the  main  reasons  why,  over  the  past  years, 
academic  researchers  have  been  taking  up  leading  positions  at  central  banks  is  that 
monetary  policy  itself  has  been  heavily  influenced  by  the  findings  of  academic  research. 
During the financial crisis, monetary policy and economies across the world have benefited 
significantly from these insights, since they have helped us to swiftly apply the appropriate 
policy responses to contain the crisis. Conversely, the crisis has also raised important issues 
for academic research, in monetary economics as well as in other fields. 
As of next month, after seven years as a policymaker, I shall be taking up the position of a 
faculty  member  of  the  University  of  Chicago  Booth  School.  In  spite  of  this  upcoming 
transition “from policymaker to academic”, my remarks today on the challenges for monetary 
policy in EMU will be given from the policymaker’s perspective. 
The financial crisis and its lessons for monetary policy 
2. 
The crisis has brought the “monetary policy consensus” formed in the years prior to the crisis 
under  scrutiny.2  The  framework  of  monetary  policy  differed  significantly  from  one  central 
bank to another. Nevertheless, across the board their primary objective was price stability – 
defined as a stabilisation of the inflation rate at around 2% across a horizon of approximately 
two years. Steering short-term interest rates was considered a sufficient means of achieving 
this target. Central bank forecasts played a key role in monetary policy decision-making, with 
monetary aggregates increasingly taking a back seat in many forecast models.  
Furthermore,  capital  markets  were  mostly  assumed  to  be  efficient,  meaning  that  financial 
imperfections  and  their  potential  macroeconomic  effects  were  not  taken  into  account. 
                                                 
1   See  A  A  Weber  (2007),  From  Academic  to  Policy  Maker,  CEPR-CEPREMAP  Lectures  on  Policy  Making, 
Paris, 29 May 2007. 
2   See C Bean, M Paustian, A Penalver and T Taylor (2010), Monetary Policy after the Fall, Jackson Hole 2010 
Symposium Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Temporary  inefficiencies,  such  as  asset  price  bubbles,  were  considered  possible,  but  the 
majority  view  was  that  monetary  policy  could  do  little  to  counteract  such  developments. 
Microprudential  supervision  was  regarded  as  a  sufficient  means  of  containing  risks  in  the 
financial  sector.  Monetary  policymakers  should  intervene  only  after  a  financial  crisis  had 
occurred, minimising the macroeconomic damage through resolute interest rate cuts. 
Even though monetary policy proved indispensable and highly successful in containing the 
crisis and in preventing a meltdown of the financial system, events have cast doubt on this 
consensus. The question now is whether, and to what extent, monetary policy should take 
account of financial market developments before a crisis occurs.3 Let me elaborate on some 
aspects of this in greater depth. 
A stronger role for financial markets in monetary policy analysis… 
2.1 
Given the genesis of the crisis, it is undeniable that monetary policy with too short a policy 
horizon can fail to take account of financial imbalances that eventually spill over to the real 
economy, thus jeopardising price stability. So, how should monetary policy incorporate the 
experience of the crisis into its decision-making process? 
In the pre-crisis phase, monetary policy decisions were often based on models in which the 
financial sector  played  only  a  minor  or  no  role  at  all.  Therefore,  an  obvious  and  important 
lesson  from  the  crisis  is  that  the  theoretical  and  empirical  foundations  of  monetary  policy 
must place a greater emphasis on both the banking sector and financial imperfections. 
As regards the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy, the monetary pillar already contains 
major elements of such an approach. In the more recent past, the Eurosystem has stepped 
up its efforts to continually enhance its monetary analysis.4 The aim is to identify irregularities 
in the patterns of a number of variables, since an unusual pattern in loan developments and 
monetary  aggregates  can  provide  valuable  indications  of  excessive  credit  growth.  This 
requires, among other things, an extension of the usual decision-making horizon, as financial 
distortions often build up over a fairly long period of time. As a result, monetary policy should 
become more symmetrical over the financial cycle and can thus make a key contribution to 
financial stability.5  
… but a separate toolkit is needed for financial stability … 
2.2 
However,  this  alone  is  insufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Until  the  crisis,  the  majority 
view had been that asset price bubbles are difficult to identify in a timely manner and that 
interest rates are too blunt a tool to burst such bubbles at an early stage. These reservations 
have not been invalidated by the crisis and, therefore, the debate on how to better prevent 
financial crises turned to the specific incentives within the financial system and the existing 
supervision,  which  focuses  primarily  on  individual  institutions,  as  these  may  have 
encouraged the build-up of debt-financed imbalances. Thus, a greater emphasis should be 
placed on macroprudential analysis and regulation.6 The aim of macroprudential policy is to 
contain systemic risk, thus strengthening the resilience of the financial system as a whole. 
This  is  designed  to  ensure  that  externalities  within  the  financial  system,  notably  the 
                                                 
3   See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), The implications of the financial crisis for monetary policy, Monthly 
Bulletin, March 2011, pp. 53–68. 
4   See L Papademos and J Stark (eds), Enhancing monetary analysis, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 2010. 
5   See  A  A  Weber  (2010),  Comment  on  Jordi  Galí  –  The  Monetary  Pillar  and  the  Great  Financial  Crisis, 
colloquium held in honour of Lucas Papademos, 21 Mai 2010, Frankfurt am Main. 
6   See Deutsche Bundesbank, Approaches to the measurement and macroprudential treatment of systemic risk, 
Monthly  Report,  March  2011,  pp.  37–52;  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  BASEL  III:  A  global 
regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking systems, December 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
interconnectedness  of 
institutions,  can  be  addressed 
procyclicality  and 
appropriately.7 Consequently, existing supervisory tools must be expanded or adjusted so as 
to  prevent  systemic  risk  from  arising  in  future and  to  considerably  reduce  the likelihood  of 
credit and asset price bubbles. 
financial 
… and price stability remains the primary objective of monetary policy 
2.3 
Against this background, monetary policy and its tools must remain focused on price stability 
and  should  not  be  overburdened  with  other  objectives.  In  fact,  the  credibility  of  monetary 
policy depends not only on the clarity of its objectives but also on transparency regarding its 
limitations.  Adopting  financial  stability  as  an  additional,  independent  monetary  policy 
objective  runs  the  risk  of  arousing  unrealistic  expectations  about  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy  tools.  Nevertheless,  central  banks  as  institutions  may  still  be  given  the 
additional task of pursuing financial stability, as long as they also have the appropriate set of 
additional independent tools available to them. Indeed, central banks’ expertise constitutes a 
forceful argument for them continuing to play a prominent role in analysing and assessing 
financial stability. The advantage of having independent tools for price stability and financial 
stability  is  evident  when  there  is  a  need  for  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  to  be 
adjusted in different ways. Nevertheless, as developments in money and financial markets 
are of key importance for both monetary policy and macroprudential policy, there are likely 
interdependencies  between  them  that  should  be  taken  into  account.  For  example,  banks’ 
lending  is  not  only  important  for  the  monetary  transmission  process  but  is  also  a  link  for 
macroprudential policy. This opens up the opportunity for policy decisions in both spheres to 
complement each another, but it also harbours the danger of them counteracting each other 
or even cancelling each other out. 
There is no single answer to the question of how necessary or advantageous a coordination 
of policy areas would be.8 Recent research has provided some initial clues and corroborates 
the view that the inflation rate can be stabilised quite well if macroprudential policy has its 
own tools and works alongside monetary policy.9  
However,  harmful  effects  with  respect  to  inflation  rate  volatility  can  arise  if  monetary 
policymakers ignore the impact of macroprudential tools on the financial markets.10 If central 
banks take decisions regarding both macroprudential and monetary policy tools, additional 
fluctuations in the inflation rate compared with the monetary policy status quo can be virtually 
ruled out, and such fluctuations could even be reduced overall.11  
These  preliminary  results  should be  interpreted  with  caution.  First,  the  underlying  dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  models  only  approximately  reproduce  the  complex 
interactions between the real and the financial sectors. Second, such research is only in its 
infancy;  at  present,  only  a  few  models  allow  a  simultaneous  analysis  of  monetary  and 
                                                 
7   A range of tools aimed at curtailing both procyclicality and network risk is currently under discussion. See BIS 
(2010), 80th Annual Report; G Galati and R Moessner (2011), Macroprudential Policy: A Literature Review, 
BIS Working Paper, No 337. 
8   See  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2010),  Macroprudential  instruments  and  frameworks:  a 
stocktaking of issues and experiences, CGFS Paper 38. 
9   See, for example, D Beau, L Clerc and B Mojon (2011), Macro-Prudential Policy and the Conduct of Monetary 
Policy, Banque de France, mimeo; I Christensen, C Meh and K Moran (2010), Bank Leverage Regulation and 
Macroeconomic Dynamics, Bank of Canada, mimeo. 
10   See,  for  instance,  P  Angelini,  S  Neri  and  F  Panetta  (2010),  Grafting  Macroprudential  Policies  in  a 
Macroeconomic  Framework:  Choice  of  Optimal  Instruments  and  Interaction  with  Monetary  Policy,  Banca 
d’Italia, mimeo. 
11   See P Angelini, S Neri and F Panetta (2010), op cit; C Bean, M Paustian, A Penalver and T Taylor (2010), 
op cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
macroprudential  policy.12  Nevertheless,  the  results  confirm  that  there  should  be  a  clear 
allocation of objectives and tools in order to achieve the aims of both policies. Assuming that 
there  will  be  a  satisfactory  exchange  of 
information  between  both  monetary  and 
macroprudential policymakers in the future, the existing studies give no cause to fear that the 
objective of price stability will have to be compromised. 
Price stability should still be understood to mean low inflation rates 
2.4 
Even  though  the  pre-crisis  consensus  regarding  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective  of 
monetary policy remains valid, it can be asked whether experience of the crisis should have 
implications for the specific form that the objective of price stability takes. Specifically, there 
have  been  concerns  that  the  credible  commitment  to  ensure  a  low  rate  of  inflation  might 
restrict the leeway for monetary policy stabilisation, since, in the event of the massive interest 
rate  cuts,  the  lower  bound  for  nominal  interest  rates  would  be  hit  quite  quickly.  Two 
competing approaches have been suggested to deal with this alleged shortcoming: A higher 
inflation target,13 and a switch to targeting the price level or, more precisely, the price-level 
path.14 Neither of the two alternatives convinces me. 
As regards a higher inflation target, it is not only the substantial and ongoing welfare losses 
accompanying a rise in the inflation target that argue against this proposal but also, above 
all, the loss of credibility for monetary policy associated with such a discretionary measure.15 
The resulting destabilisation of inflation expectations would make it significantly more difficult 
for  the  central  bank  to  achieve  its  (possibly  higher)  inflation  target  and  to  safeguard 
macroeconomic stability. 
Compared with a strategy of inflation targeting, price-level targeting does display a number of 
advantages, at least in theory. It opens up the option of influencing private sector inflation 
expectations and thus of combating deflationary risks in the event of a crisis. However, it is 
doubtful whether a change in the target specification in the event of acute deflationary risk 
would  be  suitable  for  achieving  the  desired  positive  effect  on  private  sector  inflation 
expectations.16  A  more  serious  problem  is  that  a  strategy  of  price-level  targeting  is 
associated with a few additional drawbacks compared with optimal monetary policy, casting 
doubt on whether such a change of strategy would be beneficial.17  
All  in  all,  this  means  that  neither  raising  the  inflation  target  nor  switching  to  price-level 
targeting would be appropriate from an economic stability point of view. Instead, this problem 
must  be  tackled  at  root;  the  existing  wrong  incentives  and  regulatory  loopholes  must  be 
eliminated in order to make crises less likely and less severe. It is, in any case, questionable 
whether the leeway available to monetary policy at the lower bound of the nominal short-term 
money market rates actually was that limited. Central banks’ experience of the effectiveness 
                                                 
12   See also D Beau, L Clerc and B Mojon (2011), op cit. 
13   See J C Williams (2009), Heeding Deadalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound, Brookings Papers 
on  Economic  Activity  2,  pp  1–37;  O  J  Blanchard,  G  Dell’Ariccia  and  P  Mauro  (2010),  Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42, pp 199–215. 
14   Eggertsson and Woodford already proposed price-level targeting in connection with the deflation experienced 
in  Japan;  see  G  B  Eggertsson  and  M  Woodford  (2003),  The  zero  bound  on  interest  rates  and  optimal 
monetary policy, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp 139–211. 
15   See  A  A  Weber  (2010),  Der  IWF  spielt  mit  dem  Feuer  (The  IMF  is  playing  with  fire),  Financial  Times 
Deutschland, 25 February, 2010 (available in German only). 
16   See C Walsh (2010), The future of inflation targeting, University of California, Santa Cruz, mimeo. 
17   See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Price-level  targeting  as  a  monetary  policy  strategy,  Monthly  Report,  January 
2010, pp 31–45; C Gerberding, R Gerke and F Hammermann (2010), Price-level targeting when there is price-
level drift, Deutsche Bundesbank Research Centre, Discussion paper, Series 1, No 23/2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of unconventional measures during the crisis give no cause for viewing the lower bound of 
the interest rate as a binding restriction on the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
 Particular lessons for monetary policy in the euro area 
3. 
All the issues I have been talking about up to now concern more or less all central banks and 
every monetary policymaker. For the remainder of my speech, I would like to focus on the 
particular challenges for monetary policy in the euro area. These arise from the sovereign 
debt  crisis,  which  is  the  major  challenge  for  economic  and  monetary  union.  The 
circumstances surrounding the debt crisis are aggravating the conduct of the Eurosystem’s 
common monetary policy, which is geared towards maintaining price stability in the euro area 
as a whole. 
Heterogeneity as a challenge for monetary policy 
3.1 
One  of  the  aggravating  factors  is  heterogeneity  in  terms  of  growth,  inflation  and 
competitiveness.  With  regard  to  the  euro-area  countries’  economic  performance,  we  are 
currently observing a widening divergence. Broadly speaking, there is a considerable growth 
gap  between  the  core  and  the  periphery,  or  to  put  it  more  precisely,  some  peripheral 
countries of the euro area. 
In  my  view,  the  economic  heterogeneity  of  the  euro  area  is  a  non-issue.  Why  should 
heterogeneity be a problem for the single monetary policy? After all, the dispersion of growth 
rates,  as  measured  by  the  weighted  standard  deviations  of  quarterly  growth  rates,  is  not 
significantly greater than in the first years of EMU. With regard to inflation variance, we see 
even lower values than then. Furthermore, the US economy is characterised by considerable 
heterogeneity, too, and that does not impede the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy, either. 
And in much the same was as the FOMC is focused on the US as a whole, the Governing 
Council of the ECB has to take a euro-area-wide perspective: While national developments 
have to be taken into consideration, monetary policy cannot be tailored to the specific needs 
of individual member states.  
The  real  problem  with  heterogeneity,  and  that  is  a  concern  to  me,  is  that  a  number  of 
countries have obviously failed to meet the obligations and requirements of a currency union. 
The persistent problems of countries in refinancing their debt are only the symptoms of the 
problems,  not 
financial  crisis  has  revealed  unsustainable 
developments in some member countries – developments which were already in existence 
before  the  crisis:  too  much  public  spending,  unproductive  use  of  capital  inflows,  losses  of 
competitiveness.  Those  were  just  some  of  the  shortcomings  which  had  been  carelessly 
neglected,  not  least  by  the  financial  markets.  Painful  adjustment  processes,  including 
structural reform and budget consolidation, are essential to restore the ability of the countries 
concerned to live up to the demands of the single monetary policy. 
the  problem 
itself.  The 
3.2 
Fiscal stabilisation measures were necessary but they undermined the basic 
founding principles of EMU 
Ensuring financial stability in the euro area required and justified fiscal aid for Greece and the 
establishment  of  a  temporary  stabilisation  mechanism.  Nevertheless,  these  particular 
measures have undermined the foundations of EMU. 
The establishment of EMU was based on principles that were deemed necessary in order to 
make the euro a stable currency. According to the principle of subsidiarity, economic policies 
other than monetary policy remain the responsibility of national governments. With regard to 
fiscal  policy,  rules  and  institutional  arrangements  were  established  to  ensure  sound  fiscal 
policies  in  the  member  states.  Furthermore,  a  “no  bail-out”  clause  stipulated  national 
responsibility of each country for repaying its own public debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Rules for sound public finances are of particular importance in a monetary union since the 
incentives  for  excessive  borrowing  are  even  greater  in  a  monetary  union  than  they  are 
anyway. Excessive borrowing can also place a strain on the conduct of a stability-oriented 
monetary  policy.  Unsound  public  finances  are  the  Achilles  heel  of  a  monetary  union  of 
independent states. 
Purchases of government bonds for monetary policy purposes, for example, harbour the risk 
of  blurring  the  boundaries  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  particularly  given  high 
government deficits and debt levels. This might harm the credibility of monetary policy. A little 
earlier I said that monetary policy must remain focused on price stability and should not be 
overburdened with other objectives. This principle applies not only with respect to financial 
stability, but also fiscal policy. 
During the financial crisis, the Eurosystem – like the central banks of other major economic 
regions – took unconventional monetary policy measures on an unprecedented scale. The 
ample provision of liquidity was effective in offsetting the consequences of the abrupt decline 
in market liquidity, in maintaining monetary policy transmission, and, ultimately, in helping to 
prevent  the  real  economy  from  sliding  into  a  prolonged  depression.  On  the  other  hand, 
unlimited provision of central bank liquidity  to banks without a sustainable business model 
cannot be a long-run solution. Again, monetary policy should not act as a substitute for tasks 
of  other  policy  areas.  In  particular,  monetary  policy  should  not  and  cannot  persistently 
replace the repair of banks’ balance sheets. The phasing-out of non-standard measures has 
to be continued; the objective is to return to the pre-crisis operational framework which has 
proven its effectiveness and flexibility during the crisis. 
Economic governance in the euro area needs reform 
3.3 
Since  the  fiscal  stabilisation  measures  in  favour  of  euro-area  peripheral  countries  have 
undermined the basic principles of EMU, it is obvious that there has to be a fundamental and 
far reaching reform of economic governance in the euro area. The European leaders agreed 
that the fiscal rules have to be tightened since their application in practice had proven to be 
too  weak.  They  agreed,  secondly,  that  macroeconomic  imbalances  should  be  addressed 
earlier  and  more  effectively.  The  crisis  demonstrated  that  sound  public  finances  are  a 
necessary,  but  not  sufficient  condition  for  financial  and  economic  stability.  Ireland,  for 
instance, was among the least indebted countries of the euro area before the crisis erupted.  
Finally, the leaders agreed to establish a permanent stabilisation mechanism since it is an 
illusion to believe that a reform of economic governance might prevent the reoccurrence of 
fiscal crises in the future. 
In  March,  the  leaders  agreed  on  what  they  view  as  a  comprehensive  package.  The 
measures  it  contains  certainly  represent  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  but  they  are  not  a 
“quantum leap towards strengthening the institutional framework of EMU”18 which is required 
to reinforce economic governance in the euro area. Ultimately, the future success of EMU 
will hinge crucially on the member states’ willingness to comply with the tighter set of rules. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Tomorrow,  it  will  be  17  years  ago  to  the  day  since  Helmut  Schlesinger,  one  of  my 
predecessors  as  President  of  the  Bundesbank  held  the  Eighth  Homer  Jones  Memorial 
Lecture.  In  his  speech  on  “On  the  Way  to  a  New  Monetary  Union”  he  explained  to  the 
                                                 
18   European Central Bank (2010), Reinforcing economic governance in the euro area,  
 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/reinforcingeconomicgovernanceintheeuroareaen.pdf, p. 4. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that  economic  convergence  between 
audience in St. Louis the historic dispute between “monetarists” and “economists”.19 In the 
particular  context  of  European  monetary  integration,  these  terms  had  a  totally  different 
meaning to our general understanding. “Monetarists”, he explained, “believed that monetary 
integration  has  to  start  first  and  that  economic  and  political  integration  would  follow.” 
“Economists”,  however,  “believed 
the  national 
economies must occur before … a monetary union.” 
The “monetarists” prevailed, but they erred in their belief that the introduction of the single 
currency would automatically act as a locomotive for the political union of Europe. There is 
no political union so far and there is little expectation that this might change significantly in 
the  foreseeable  future.  Therefore,  national  executive  and  legislative  branches  will  remain 
responsible for economic and fiscal policies over the medium to long term. Intergovernmental 
fiscal transfers beyond  the rather  moderate and earmarked payments from the  EU budget 
(approximately 1% of GNP) are hardly acceptable; overburdening the financial solidarity of 
the people might jeopardise the idea of European integration. 
The  “economists”,  on  the  other  hand,  had  a  point  in  demanding  more  economic 
convergence. Their worries were, by the way, taken into account by the implementation of 
convergence  criteria  that  have  to  be  fulfilled  before  a  country  can  join  the  euro  area.  The 
underlying problem of the current crisis is,  however, not a lack of convergence ex  ante or 
heterogeneity per se; rather it is the lack of willingness on the part of a number of member 
states to meet the requirements of the membership in a monetary union. If they fail to correct 
these  deficiencies  swiftly  and  thoroughly,  stability  oriented  monetary  policy  in  EMU  will 
become  increasingly  difficult,  all  the  more  so  as  monetary  policy  has  been  profoundly 
challenged by the financial crisis. 
The major lessons that central bankers in the euro area and elsewhere should take to heart 
are  the  following:  Firstly,  monetary  policy  has  to  consider  the  implications  of  financial 
instability for price stability; monetary and credit aggregates can provide helpful information 
in  this  regard.  Secondly,  since  the  policy  rate  remains  too  blunt  a  tool  to  tackle  financial 
imbalances, the objective of financial stability requires its own, macroprudential set of tools, 
whereas maintaining price stability should remain the primary objective of monetary policy. 
Thirdly, price stability should continue to be seen as a stable and low inflation rate. 
Finally, without stability oriented prudent fiscal policy monetary policy will find it increasingly 
difficult to ensure price stability at low interest rates. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
19   See  H  Schlesinger  (1994),  On  the  Way  to  a  New  Monetary  Union:  The  European  Monetary  Union,  The 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 76, No. 3, May June, pp. 3–10. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
