Njuguna Ndung’u: Transformation of banks in Kenya 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  during  the 
Inaugural  Session  of  the  11th  Bank  Human  Resources  Conference  2011  of  the  Indian 
Institute of Banking and Finance, Nairobi, 28 April 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests; 
The Chief Executive Officer, Indian Institute of Banking and Finance; 
Members of the Institute; 
All Protocols Observed; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted and honoured to have been invited to preside over the opening ceremony of 
this  Conference  organized  by  the  Indian  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance.  At  the  onset, 
kindly  allow  me  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  participants  attending  this  important 
Conference. 
The  theme:  “Managing  Transformation  for  achieving  Growth”  is  indeed  compelling. 
Growth  is  driven  by  fundamental  factors,  but  key  among  them  is  the  transformation  of 
markets  and  institutions  to  guard  the  market  and  define  appropriate  incentives.  One  such 
market is the financial market guided and regulated by several institutions. Today, I will share 
my thoughts on how the Central Bank has transformed the banking sub-sector as a means of 
transforming and deepening the financial sector in line with Kenya’s development goals. Let 
me parade at least seven of them:  
1)  
Rollout of branch networks to provide financial services to remote and lower 
income areas:  
The expansion of branch networks in the financial services industry has registered 
significant growth over the last 4 years and is well distributed across all regions in 
both rural and urban centres. Currently, we have 1064 branches from 740 in 2007.  
Allowing  mobile  phone  financial  services  to  provide  a  new  technological 
platform:  
This entails approval for banks to leverage on mobile phone technology to present 
convenience  and  lower  costs  to  their  customers  without  compromising  quality  of 
service.  Through  mobile  phone  banking,  customers  are  now  able  to  perform  their 
transactions “anytime, anywhere’’. Mobile phone money transfer has evolved from 
the  initial  concept  of  transferring  money  from  one  individual  to  another  to  include 
other  functions  such  as  payment  of  utility  bills,  disbursement  and  repayment  of 
loans, payment of salaries and deposit mobilization.  
Introduction of Agent Banking mechanism:  
This  is  the  “banking  beyond  branches’’  model  where  commercial  banks  are 
allowed  to  engage  third  parties  to  provide  certain  banking  services  to  increase 
outreach of the banks to the vast under-banked and unbanked Kenyan populace. In 
a nutshell, Agency Banking enables banks to leverage on additional cost effective 
distribution  channels  to  offer  financial  services.  So  far  5552  Agents  have  been 
approved and are providing financial services.  
Credit Reference Bureaus (CRBs):  
Through  licensing  of  Credit  Reference  Bureaus,  the  CBK  has  enabled  credit 
providers  to  collect,  collate,  analyse  and  disseminate  credit  information.  Credit 
information sharing provides an opportunity for individuals and businesses to rely on 
 2)  
 3) 
 
4)  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 5) 
 
6)  
 
7) 
 
their credit history (information capital) to support the process of collateralization and 
even change the collateral technology in the country. 
Individuals will also be able to use their positive credit history to negotiate for better 
terms and conditions from their banks. On the other hand, banks will benefit from 
the mechanism since it will address the problem of information asymmetry and by 
extension the problem of non-performing loans which has in the past threatened 
the stability of the banking sector. The traditional challenges of the moral hazard and 
adverse selection can hinder financial sector growth. As a result, credit appraisal by 
bank staff will greatly benefit from credit information sharing. What staff need to do 
is appreciate how the mechanism operates, its benefits and embrace it as a tool to 
enhance relationship with their clients.  
Lowering the cost of doing business through Currency Centres:  
CBK believes that through cost reduction, banks will be able to extend credit to the 
productive sectors of the economy at reasonably cheaper costs. Consequently, CBK 
has  in  partnership  with  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association,  established  currency 
centers in towns outside the Central Bank branch networks.  
Licensing Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions (DTMs):  
The Central Bank is also actively pursuing a policy of licensing DTMs as a means of 
reaching  out  to  all  segments  of  the  market.  DTMs  are  free  to  choose  to  be 
Nationwide or Community Based.  
Capacity Building through HR training and development:  
CBK assists industry players empower their employees to embrace strategies aimed 
at making the banking sector safe, efficient, effective and all inclusive. The strategic 
initiatives include:  
a)   Playing  a  leading  role  in  the  Human  Resources  Sub-committee  of  the 
Monetary Affairs Committee of East African Central Banks – Through this 
forum partner central banks are addressing emerging HR issues by revising 
the  frameworks  governing  HR  policies  and  strategies  such  as  recruitment, 
retention policy and succession plans among others, in line with international 
best practice.  
b)   Facilitating  capacity  building  through  the  Kenya  School  of  Monetary 
Studies  (KSMS)  –  The  KSMS  was  established  to  provide  capacity  building 
programmes for the financial sector in Kenya and the Region and I am happy 
to note that the School has offered relevant programmes in Banking and IT at 
Certificate and Diploma levels for over 10 years. We believe that by partnering 
with  the  Indian  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance,  new  programs  and  new 
initiatives can be developed in future.  
c)   Advanced  Academic  and  Management  Development  Programs  –  The 
KSMS has responded to new demand-driven capacity needs of the financial 
services  sector  by 
introducing  advanced  academic  and  management 
development courses, including the following programs :  
(i)   A  Masters  degree  in  Banking  and  Finance  through  a  grant  from  the 
African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF);  
(ii)   Postgraduate  Diploma  in  Financial  Management  in  collaboration  with 
Moi University targeting the Eastern and Southern Africa Region;  
(iii)   Academic programmes through a collaborative agreement with the Jomo 
the 
Kenyatta  University  of  Agriculture  and  Technology, 
financial services and other related disciplines; and lastly,  
targeting 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(iv)   A  Multilingual  Diploma  in  Business  Sciences  and  Islamic  Financial 
Services approved by the Ministry of Higher Education.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Moving forward, CBK and the industry players are in the process of 
developing a national strategy for financial education and consumer protection in Kenya as 
another avenue of taking financial inclusion to the next frontier. The starting point for financial 
education is at the level of individual players – the agents for disseminating the knowledge. 
I would like to commend the Indian Institute of Banking and Finance for organizing annual 
conferences like this which present an opportunity for banks to not only share experiences 
but to also exchange ideas on innovations and other emerging issues that require bank staff 
to prepare themselves to handle. This is an important platform to also inform the regulators 
the emerging challenges and opportunities not only for growth but further improvements on 
capacity for growth.  
I urge other similar institutes such as the Kenya Institute of Bankers to embrace the idea as 
an  avenue  to  bring  together  HR  practitioners  and  policy  makers  in  the  banking  sector  to 
share ideas on innovations that require proactive HR training and development. This is an 
important avenue to transform institutions and create capacity for growth. Successful banks 
are those that proactively prepare their staff to cope with the ever evolving trends in 
the global financial scene. 
With  these  few  remarks,  let  me  wish  all  participants  of  the  11th Bank  Human  Resources 
Conference, fruitful deliberations and a joyous stay in Kenya. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
