Andrew Bailey: The outlook for financial regulation in the UK 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of 
the Bank of England, on a regional visit to Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 10 January 2011. 
 Andrew Bailey will become the deputy chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) on its creation. 
Thank you to Linda Urquart for inviting me to speak today and Morton Fraser for allowing us 
to use your venue. I would also like to thank Will Dowson, the Bank’s Agent for Scotland for 
the assistance that he has given me, and for the work that he does to ensure that the Bank is 
well connected to the UK’s most important financial centre after London. Will worked for me 
when he first joined the Bank as a graduate entrant, and I can assure you, drawing on that 
experience, Will is an excellent person to ensure that the Bank and you as our contacts in 
Scotland are well informed and understand the relevant developments that affect each of us, 
and of course that we in the Bank understand the state of the economy in Scotland and the 
financial sector here. 
It is quite right that first and foremost our Agents support the needs of monetary policy and 
the MPC. The information that they gather from you, their contacts, makes a real difference 
to the monetary policy process. There is a parallel in our responsibilities for ensuring financial 
stability. In an important financial centre like Edinburgh, we need to be well connected, and 
to  understand  your  assessment  of  the  threats  to  financial  stability  and  we  need  to  explain 
what  we  are  doing  to  tackle  these  threats.  Our  market  intelligence  function  under  my 
colleague  Paul  Fisher  plays  an  important  role  here,  and  is  in  frequent  contact  with  the 
Scottish financial community. 
This contact will be even more important under the new arrangements in which the Bank will 
be  responsible  for  macroprudential  policy  and  its  focus  on  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system, with a new policy making body, the Financial Policy Committee, or FPC. Alongside 
and  feeding  into  the  Bank’s  macroprudential  role  will  be  our  new  responsibility  for 
microprudential supervision of deposit takers, insurers and major securities dealers, also in a 
new body, the Prudential Regulation Authority, or PRA. 
It is therefore a period of major change at the Bank, and we are taking very seriously our role 
in building a system of regulation in the UK that must meet the very reasonable expectations 
of the public for a safer and sounder financial system. The overarching objective for the Bank 
is to put the stability of the financial system at the heart of the mission of financial regulation. 
We are now in the fourth year since the financial crisis started in the middle of 2007. The 
Scottish banking system took a pounding during the earlier stages of the crisis. That was not 
just deeply regrettable for the institutions concerned, but also it damaged a proud and long 
tradition of sound banking in Scotland. It pained me, in my role as the person responsible for 
resolving a number of these problems, to see the lack of regard for the basics of a well run 
bank, the foundations which must be there to be sound and successful. I have spent the last 
seven years also responsible for the Bank of England’s banking operations, and I know from 
this  experience  that  unless  you  really  understand  your  balance  sheet  and  its  risks,  the 
systems and control environment that supports the balance sheet, and you have the basics 
needed well covered – the reconciliations work, the right management information available 
promptly – you aren’t doing your job. It isn’t sexy or headline grabbing, but it is surely what 
the  good  Scottish  bankers  of  the  past  taught  us  to  do,  and  what  I  hope  is  back  with  the 
current generation. 
The  financial  crisis  has  moved  on  since  those  earlier  days.  Over  the  last  twelve  months, 
concerns with both sovereign states and their banking systems have intensified in other parts 
of  Europe.  Recently,  the  IMF  and  European  authorities  have  moved  to  put  in  place  a 
substantial  package  of  support  for  Ireland.  This  intensification  of  concerns  has  raised  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
threat of contagion from these countries, and the consequent financial market developments 
that have affected several other European countries have added to the risk of a spill-over to 
the largest European banking systems, including our own. 
So far, the threat has been limited. An important reason for this is that banks have done the 
right things over the last two years, namely to focus on their resilience by refinancing debt at 
longer maturities and raising their buffers of capital. It is hard work in an environment that is 
still affected by the crisis, but there is no doubting that it is the right thing to have done and 
continue to do. Sound banking is about having a strong capital base and a funding profile in 
terms of maturity that can withstand the sorts of shocks in the world that will happen from 
time  to  time.  It  is  not  about  expanding  your  bank  rapidly  and  funding  the  growth  in  the 
overnight money market. 
This need for adjustment also explains why at the Bank we are sticking firmly to the plan to 
allow the Special Liquidity Scheme to run-off on time a year from now. Over the last twelve 
months,  banks  have  taken  the  necessary  steps  to  move  towards  that  goal.  It  is  all  about 
getting  the  banking  system  into  a  position  where  it  can  demonstrate  robust  capital  and 
liquidity  buffers,  and  to  do  so  by  facing  up  to  the  discipline  of  the  market  rather  than  the 
support of the authorities. The Edinburgh fund managers are an important part of that market 
discipline. In a market economy, you are in the front line of defence and discipline. 
Now, I cannot say that the UK is insulated from the risks we observe in other parts of Europe. 
As our most recent Financial Stability Report, published just before Christmas, made clear, 
“the  United  Kingdom  is  only  partially  insulated  given  the  interconnectedness  of  European 
financial  systems  and  the  importance  of  their  stability  to  global  capital  markets”.  As  the 
Report  also  made  clear,  there  are  other,  probably  more  medium-term  risks  posed  by 
evidence of low bond yields in many advanced countries and signs of an intensifying search 
for yield as capital flows into alternative assets, including into emerging markets. 
Against this backdrop of risks, it is in the collective interest of banks to continue to build up 
progressively their capital and liquidity resilience so that they support not only themselves, 
but also the stability of the financial system as a whole. The Basel III agreement, and the 
reform programme of the G20 and the Financial Stability Board set up under the G20, will 
provide the supporting framework by which the authorities will back up the discipline of the 
market to achieve and maintain financial stability. 
This brings me back to the reforms in the UK. At their heart lies the objective of putting the 
stability of the financial system at the centre of the regulatory mission. You may say, “surely 
that’s not new”. I would disagree – our overriding objective must be to create a consensus of 
public opinion which will enable financial stability to be embedded as a public policy objective 
in  the  same  way  that  in  the  wake  of  the  1970s,  low  inflation  came  to  be  adopted  as  a 
necessary condition for stable economic growth. 
Too  often,  I  hear  people  say  that  achieving  financial  stability  needs  somehow  to  reflect  a 
balance  with  other  objectives,  such  as  competition,  consumer  protection,  and  the  like.  I’m 
sorry, but while these objectives are of course very important, the best way to achieve them 
is by establishing a stable financial system. Of course, there are judgements to be made on 
what constitutes financial stability, but those are not judgements that should be a product of 
murky compromises with other objectives. 
The assessment of the failures of monetary policy in the 1970s should stand as a clear guide 
as to why we must establish a strong understanding of financial stability as the driving public 
policy objective for the financial system. The absence of a consensus for low inflation in the 
1970s as an objective of public policy led to – and I will tell you the source of this assessment 
at the end – policy making which lacked the courage and conviction to do what was needed 
to achieve an objective which in itself was not always accepted as necessary. Policymakers 
did not persist with actions when criticised (criticism will of course happen), they tended to 
give  too  much  weight  to  perceived  political  constraints  and  too  little  weight  to  the  cost  of 
failure to achieve the objective of policy. They talked tough, but didn’t match their words with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
actions, and their actions in response to criticism tended to be of the “do something” variety. 
And the result was? A policymaking process and institutions with low credibility in the eyes of 
the public, a very dangerous place to be. Now, I haven’t made this up, you can read it in one 
of the best accounts of the failings of monetary policy in the 1970s, the history of the Federal 
Reserve by Allan Meltzer. 
The reason for drawing this point out is that if the reforms are to work, we must have a clear 
consensus  that  financial  stability  is  a  goal  which  will  enable  other  things  that  improve  the 
welfare of the public to be achieved more easily. 
So, what does this mean for important aspects of the regulation of the financial system? For 
microprudential supervision, the proposal is based on the so-called Twin Peaks model which 
separates prudential supervision (one peak, to be in the PRA) from conduct of business and 
consumer  and  investor  protection  (the  other  peak,  to  be  in  the  Consumer  and  Markets 
Authority). One of the very important features of this approach is that it doesn’t mean one 
peak is less important than the other, that is not a consequence of financial stability being a 
necessary condition for good conduct of business. Rather, it should enable each regulatory 
body to be focussed on its own objective, because it requires different skills and experience 
to  undertake  the  two  peaks.  Of  course,  great  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  ensuring  the 
boundary  between  the  two  peaks  is  robustly  defined,  and  there  is  effective  and  efficient 
cooperation between the two authorities. But, my view is that done properly it will improve the 
system of regulation.  
As  far  as  microprudential  supervision  is  concerned,  we  are  clear  that  it  should  not  be  a 
regime in which firms cannot fail. A successful industry of any sort needs to have means by 
which  unsuccessful  firms  can  fail  without  an  unacceptable  cost  to  the  public,  and  where 
appropriate  means  by  which  firms  can  recover  from  serious  problems  without  having 
recourse  to  a  formal  resolution  process.  Banking  still  suffers  from  the  too  big,  too 
complicated, too interconnected to fail problems. This has meant that public money has had 
to  be  used  to  prevent  disorderly  failures.  Achieving  a  regime  in  which  orderly  failures  can 
occur  without  recourse  to  public  money  is  a  vital  part  of  the  redesign  of  regulation.  This 
objective is recognised internationally in the work of the G20, the Financial Stability Board, 
and  in  the  European  Union.  One  important  way  in  which  this  work  has  started  is  with  the 
development of recovery and resolution plans for major banks. But there is a lot more to do 
in  order  to  embed  a  credible  approach  to  ensuring  failures  can  be  handled  into  the 
framework  of  prudential  regulation.  In  my  view,  it  is  vital  that  we  do  this,  and  thereby 
introduce greater market discipline into the behaviour of banks by making clear to investors 
that failure is possible, and can be handled without unacceptable disruption. 
Last, but certainly not least, the new framework of regulation needs to be clearly accountable 
to the public through Parliament and that accountability will depend on a clear understanding 
of  the  objectives  of  supervision.  Alongside  accountability  goes  transparency,  so  that  all 
interested parties can see what we are doing. 
There is no doubt the agenda is challenging, but we have very good reasons for sticking at it. 
I will be part of the new senior management responsible for prudential regulation, and I look 
forward to having another opportunity to update you as our work moves on. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
