Eric S Rosengren: Two key questions about the economic recovery 
Remarks  by  Mr  Eric  S  Rosengren,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  at  the  New  England  Mortgage  Expo,  hosted  by  the  Connecticut 
Mortgage Bankers Association and The Warren Group, Boston, Massachussetts, 14 January 
2011. 
 I’d  like  to  thank  the  conference  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  with  you  today.  The 
beginning of a new year is a good time to discuss the outlook for the economy. I will also try 
to answer a couple of the key questions that most everyone seems to be asking about, in 
relation to this recovery.1  
As  I’m  sure  you  know,  over  the  past  several  weeks  we  have  been  getting  economic  data 
consistent with a somewhat happier new year. A recovery that has been anemic for the past 
year and a half looks to be increasingly supported by private spending as 2011 begins. The 
Blue Chip forecast for 2011 has increased 4 tenths over the previous month, to 3.3 percent.  
And I am slightly more optimistic than the Blue Chip; my own forecast is for growth of 3.5 to 
4.0 percent over 2011. This is certainly an improvement, but – soberingly – would still leave 
the unemployment rate close to 9 percent at the end of this year, a rate far above anyone’s 
estimate of full employment.  
Given  the  evidence  of  substantial  excess  capacity  and  a  quite  low  core  inflation  rate,  it  is 
absolutely appropriate that monetary policy – and indeed fiscal policy – have been deployed 
in a way that encourages a more robust recovery. Going forward, it is my view that monetary 
policy  must  continue  to  focus  on  addressing  both  elements  of  the  Fed’s  mandate  –  price 
stability, and growth supporting a return to full employment in the medium term.  
Today  I  am  going  to  focus  on  two  questions  that  seem  to  be  at  the  forefront  of  most 
discussions of the recovery.  
The  first  question  is,  what  role  will  housing  play  in  the  recovery?  As  the  most  interest-
sensitive  component  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  housing  has  traditionally  been  an 
important sector of the economy for generating recovery. I will be highlighting the fact that, 
despite some improvement in factors fundamental to a housing recovery, I expect housing 
will not provide as much support to this recovery as it has in previous ones. My sense is that 
residential  investment,  consumer  durables,  and  services  related  to  housing  will  be  less 
robust  than  is  usual  in  many  recoveries,  thus  playing  a  role  in  what  I  think  will  be  only  a 
gradual improvement in the economy and employment.  
To  put  it  plainly,  these  housing-related  headwinds  are  part  of  why  I  do  not  expect  growth 
greater than 4 percent this year. And while 4 percent is not terrible, at that rate it will still take 
a very long time to get back to full employment.  
The second key question is, how concerned should we all be about a flare-up in inflation – and 
aren’t the measures the Fed has taken inflationary? Many have expressed concern that Federal 
Reserve policy actions that expanded our balance sheet dramatically will cause inflation. I firmly 
believe that in the short run inflation is likely to remain quite low – and that in the longer term we 
have the tools, and the steadfast commitment, to address inflationary pressures.  
Indeed, while monetary policy works with lags, I would note that it has been more than two 
years since the Fed’s balance sheet expanded dramatically. Since that time, core inflation 
                                                 
1   Of course, the views I express today  are  my own,  not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of 
Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
has fallen and core inflation measures using the CPI or PCE indexes are at something like 
50 year lows.  
Today  I  will  briefly  address  the  role  of  the  low  inflation  rate  for  the  economy  and 
policymaking. In doing so, I will discuss why inflation concerns have not materialized to date, 
and why I expect core inflation to remain below 2 percent over the next several years.  
Question 1: Housing and the economic recovery 
The  economic  recovery  officially  began  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009,  according  to  the 
organization  responsible  for  dating  our  recessions  –  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research  (NBER).  Despite  being  a  year  and  a  half  into  the  official  recovery,  the  recovery 
period has been so tepid that there has been very little improvement in the percentage of the 
population employed (see Figure 1). The percent of the population employed in December 
was 58.3, close to the low of this cycle and below the 59.3 percent employed in July of 2009, 
when the recovery officially started. For context, the number was around 63 percent when 
the recession began. The recent stability of the employment-to-population ratio reflects the 
poor labor market performance of the current recovery. We are simply not generating enough 
jobs to reduce the number of unemployed persons. Nor are we, by the way, providing job 
opportunities for the so-called “discouraged workers” who have given up looking for work. 
What  we  call  final  sales  –  growth  in  GDP  excluding  inventory  replenishment  –  has  grown 
quite slowly over the past year and a half.  Figure 2 shows that the growth to date has been 
substantially slower than during the 1982 recovery, and is tracking quite closely to the weak 
recovery experienced in the early 2000s. As many economists anticipated, the recovery has 
been tepid given the fact that it comes in the wake of a collapse in a housing bubble with 
resulting financial market turmoil and disruption. 
The largest GDP component is consumption, and consumption has not grown very quickly. 
As Figure 3 shows, in the current recovery, growth in consumption has been much slower 
than in the 1982 recovery and has, unfortunately, tracked the anemic initial recovery from the 
2001 recession. While the 2001 recession damaged many a household’s finances, through 
an  abrupt  decline  in  stock-market  wealth,  the  current  recovery  has  been  hampered  by 
households  trying  to  rebuild  their  finances  given  sharply  diminished  housing  wealth  in 
addition to declines in the value of their other investments.  
While there have been concerns about business fixed investment, Figure 4 shows that this 
component  of  GDP  has  grown  quite  well  relative  to  the  last  two  recoveries  –  although 
somewhat  slower  than  the  1982  recovery.  Despite  the  concern  over  economic  uncertainty 
voiced by many businesses, investment has been growing.  
The  real  laggard  in  this  recovery  has  been  housing.  While  housing  is  a  relatively  small 
component  of  GDP,  it  can  be  quite  volatile  –  and  often  grows  rapidly  during  an  economic 
recovery.  In  addition,  purchases  of  appliances,  home  furnishings,  and  housing-related 
services  are  impacted  by  slowed  housing  activity.  Given  the  problems  that  flow  from  the 
bursting of the housing bubble, Figure 5 shows that residential fixed investment is roughly 
where  it  was  at  the  trough  of  the  recession  –  and  thus  not  providing  its  more  usual 
contribution to growth in the early stages of a recovery.  
Just how moribund the housing market has been is shown in Figure 6. Both housing starts 
and building permits have leveled off, but are showing no signs of a significant recovery yet.  
Interest rates are quite low by historical standards, while the equity component of household 
net worth is improving, as shown in Figure 7. And we have seen some positive improvement 
in real disposable income. Given all that, one would normally anticipate that housing would 
be improving.  
However, lower interest rates are only helpful if credit is available. Figure 8 shows that the 
number of purchase loans to prime borrowers has been declining, while the subprime market 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is dormant.2 The left side of Figure 9 shows the distribution of all home-purchase loans by 
credit score in 2006 (before the financial crisis) and in 2010.3 It is striking how the distribution 
of purchase mortgages has changed.  Credit standards have tightened, as evidenced by a 
shift to borrowers with higher credit scores. Given what has happened to housing prices, and 
unemployment, lenders are presumably more cautious in lending. Far fewer loans are going 
to  borrowers  with  credit  scores  below  625,  and  many  more  purchase  loans  are  going  to 
borrowers with credit scores above 750.  In 2006, about 15 percent of the purchase loans 
were to borrowers with credit scores below 625, but by 2010, this fraction had fallen to only 
3.5 percent.  
The decline in loans to borrowers with sub-625 scores has not completely resulted from the 
decline in subprime lending.  The right side of the figure shows the credit-score distributions 
among prime loans, and a similar rightward shift in the distribution is apparent.  From 2006 to 
2010, the share of prime purchase loans going to borrowers with sub-625 credit scores fell 
from  8.5  to  3.5  percent.   At  the  same  time,  the  share  of  prime  purchase  loans  going  to 
borrowers with scores above 750 rose from about 35 percent to about 41 percent. 
While I am certainly not advocating going back to the loose lending standards of, say, 2006, I 
think  we  should  be  aware  of  how  changes  in  the  distribution  have  implications  for  the 
housing recovery. In particular, I would suggest that current lending standards are another 
reason the housing sector’s role in the recovery is likely to be weaker than usual.  
In addition to the challenge of availability of credit to borrowers with low credit ratings, housing 
has another issue. Both the homeowner and rental vacancy rates are quite high, as shown in 
Figure  10  –  although  there  has  been  recent  improvement  in  these  rates,  and  hopefully  the 
trend  is  now  downward.  High  vacancy  rates,  of  course,  place  downward  pressure  on  home 
prices and rental rates, and serve as another headwind to a housing recovery. 
So  again,  all  in  all  and  despite  some  improvement  in  factors  fundamental  to  a  housing 
recovery, I expect that housing will not provide as much support to this recovery as it has in 
previous ones.  
But  now  I’d  like  to  turn  to  the  second  question,  and  perhaps  leave  you  feeling  a  bit  less 
discouraged when we’re through. 
Question 2: Inflation, policy, and the economic recovery 
A  second  key  question  involves  the  concerns  about  Fed  actions  stoking  inflation.  This 
question is not a distinct and separate issue from the one we just discussed – the strength of 
the recovery. In fact they are crucially related. If housing-related growth is not going to boost 
the  recovery  this  time  around,  we  may  need  policy  –  particularly  monetary  policy  –  to 
continue playing a stimulative role.  
But it is important to look at possible costs of stimulative policy, as well as benefits. If inflation 
were  to  become  a  problem  that  would  certainly  fall  in  the  costs  column.  But  if  analysis 
                                                 
2   Figures 8 and 9 are based on data from McDash Analytics LLC, a subsidiary of Lender Processing Services, 
Inc.  The  McDash  data  contain  loan-level  data  from  mortgage  servicers,  and  cover  more  than  half  of  all 
outstanding mortgages in the United States. The number of servicers contributing to the McDash dataset is 
growing over time, so the decline in purchase loans depicted in Figure 8 probably understates the true decline 
in lending to a small extent. The 2010 distributions reflect data through November 2010. 
3   The share of subprime loans in the McDash data is generally smaller than the true subprime share of U.S. 
mortgages. To create Figure 9, subprime loans in the McDash data were "upweighted," so that the adjusted 
12 subprime share matches the true subprime share in a benchmark year (2006). The benchmark figure used 
for the weighting is based on the top panel of Figure 1B in Mayer and Pence (2008): “Subprime Mortgages: 
What,  Where  and  to  Whom?”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  Paper  No.  2008-29,  Board  of 
Governors  of 
the  Board  of  Governors  website  at 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/FEDS/2008/200829/200829pap.pdf. 
the  Federal  Reserve  System  –  available  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
suggests  that  inflation  is  not  likely  to  be  a  problem,  then  we  can  more  comfortably  align 
policy to continue supporting the recovery. 
Some  observers  and  analysts  have  voiced  great  concern  that  the  nascent  economic 
recovery, combined with the actions of the Federal Reserve that have expanded its balance 
sheet,  will  lead  to  significant  inflation.   However,  Figure  11  provides  a  variety  of  different 
measures of core inflation; core CPI, core PCE, trimmed core CPI and trimmed core PCE. It 
is striking how much all four series have declined. In fact many of these series are at their 
historical lows.  
Figure 12 shows the different measures of core inflation in the top panel, and the Federal 
Reserve’s  balance  sheet  in  the  bottom  panel.  In  the  fall  of  2008,  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
balance sheet expanded significantly – but that period also corresponds to the emergence of 
disinflation  (a  reduction  in  the  inflation  rate)  in  the  U.S.  While  monetary  policy  works  with 
lags,  why  has  the  unprecedented  increase  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet 
corresponded  with  continued  significant  disinflation?  The  answer  is  that  both  have  been 
reacting to an unprecedented financial shock, which resulted in significant excess capacity in 
the economy.  
When the Federal Reserve purchases assets and expands its balance sheet, it necessarily 
injects more reserves into the banking system. The key question is what banks do with those 
reserves.  Reserves  held  by  the  banking  system  that  are  not  used  to  provide  credit  to 
businesses  will  have  little  bearing  on  either  real  spending  or  inflation.  The  2009  line  in 
Figure 13  shows  that  the  expansion  of  bank  reserves  has  not  generated  increases  in 
lending.  As  with  the  1991  recovery,  where  a  credit  crunch  impeded  expansion  of  bank 
lending, there has not been an expansion of lending during this recovery. This is particularly 
noticeable if we look at business lending, in Figure 14. Commercial and industrial loans are 
substantially lower than at the recession trough.  
Of course, those who worry about the inflationary consequences of our balance sheet may 
be looking to the future. As the economy improves, banks may use their reserves to rapidly 
expand  business  lending  –  increasing  economic  activity  and  putting  upward  pressure  on 
inflation.   But  as  Chairman  Bernanke  has  emphasized,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  at  its 
disposal a variety of tools that will allow it to remove reserves from the banking system once 
economic conditions get closer to normal. Thus the fear that our large balance sheet and the 
large stock of reserves in the banking system will cause inflation – either now or down the 
road – seems misplaced to me. 
While we have been experiencing disinflation generally, it is not the case for all prices. As 
Figure  13  shows,  some  prices  have  risen  rapidly.  Energy  prices  in  particular  have  been 
rising, in response to robust growth in emerging markets. But outside of energy prices, most 
prices have shown little increase, and in fact a number of the major categories in the CPI 
index have experienced declines in prices.  
To be clear, the Fed certainly cares about increases in energy prices, for two reasons. First, 
higher  energy  prices  could  potentially  bring  about  long-lasting  increases  in  the  overall 
inflation rate. The Fed therefore monitors energy prices closely, given our mandate to keep 
overall inflation low and stable. Second, rising energy prices act as a tax on households and 
businesses, who often find it difficult to reduce their consumption of energy in the short run.4  
With regard to the first concern, our research suggests that the lasting effect of energy prices 
on overall inflation has been surprisingly small in recent years. For evidence, consider the 
enormous  surges  in  oil  prices  in  mid-2008,  which  were  followed  by  significant  declines  in 
core inflation, as I mentioned earlier.  
                                                 
4   The first effect would lead Fed policy to be slightly less accommodative while the latter effect would lead it to 
be slightly more accommodative. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  second  concern  remains,  however.   In  sum,  my  primary  concern  about  rising  energy 
prices is not so much that they will lead to higher inflation, but that they will subtract from 
household income and thus weaken the economy. 
Financial  markets  are  also  not  expecting  sharply  higher  rates  of  inflation.  The  difference 
between  the  10  year  Treasury  rate  and  the  10  year  inflation-protected  Treasury  security 
(TIPS) rate provides a measure of the expected average inflation rate over the next decade. 
As  shown  in  Figure  16,  the  average  expected  inflation  rate  by  this  measure  is  still  below 
what the markets expected prior to the recession and the necessary expansion of the Fed’s 
balance sheet. 
Concluding observations 
Thankfully,  we  are  seeing  signs  that  the  economy  is  experiencing  a  more  self-sustaining 
recovery. However, it is important not to lose sight of how much excess capacity remains. It is 
likely to take at least four years to return to full employment from the current unemployment rate 
of 9.4 percent.  It is also likely that measures of core inflation will remain well below 2 percent 
over the same period. This suggests that the signs of improvement we have seen so far are not 
worrisome, but are most welcome.  A sustained period of the economy growing well above its 
potential – not just for a few quarters – is exactly what we need.  
The current level of accommodation from monetary and fiscal policy is appropriate. However, 
once the economy has significantly improved, both fiscal and monetary policy will need to be 
much  less  accommodative.  Getting  this  balance  right  will  be  one  of  the  main  policy 
challenges over the next several years. I am confident that the Fed’s Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) will meet the challenge. 
Finally, I’d like to note that even with some early signs of economic improvement, a number 
of risks remain. As I have highlighted today, the housing market remains fragile and is not 
likely to contribute to economic recovery in its traditional way – and this is part of why I do not 
expect growth to exceed 4 percent in 2011. Furthermore, in many areas of the country the 
impaired  balance  sheets  of  borrowers,  high  foreclosures,  and  high  vacancy  rates  imply  a 
long  time  before  local  housing  markets  normalize.  State  and  local  governments  remain 
significantly  challenged  by  the  aftershocks  of  the  financial  crisis  and  recession.  And  many 
state and local governments continue to have both short-run and long-run fiscal challenges.  
Finally, the large fiscal deficits of many governments accrued during the recession will need 
to  be  addressed.  And  as  Figure  17  shows,  financial  markets  are  concerned  that  many 
countries  will  be  forced  to  make  very  painful  fiscal  choices  –  in  economies  with  already 
significant challenges – or risk default. 
Yet while risks like these remain, the economy is in a much better place than it was one or 
two  years  ago.  Fiscal  and  monetary  policy  responded  aggressively,  and  in  my  view 
appropriately, to avoid what would have been a much more severe outcome, absent action.  
There will be a time when these aggressive actions need to be reversed, but first we need to 
get the economy on a much more solid footing. Even with a relatively robust recovery, it will 
take several years before we attain full employment and an inflation rate close to a long-run 
expectation  of  2  percent.  Taken  together  there  has  been  clear  room  for  –  and  indeed  an 
imperative  for  –  policy  actions  like  those  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  pursuing.5  Going 
                                                 
5   For  additional  perspective,  see  Vice  Chair  Janet  Yellen's  remarks  of  January  10,  where  she  discusses  the 
rationale, design, and effectiveness  of the  Federal Reserve's asset-purchase  program; and concerns about 
inflation  or  adverse  imbalances  resulting.  The  text  is  available  on  the  Board  of  Governors  website  at 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20110108a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
forward our focus must be on policies that return the economy to a place that meets both 
elements of the Fed’s mandate. 
Thank you. 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   13
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
