Pentti Hakkarainen: Bank of Finland and its activities and the Finnish economic 
outlook 
Speech by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Honorary 
Consulars meeting, Helsinki, 9 June 2011. 
 Dear Honorary Consulars, 
Welcome to the Bank of Finland. I appreciate the opportunity to give a presentation to you. 
Let me first tell you about the Bank of Finland and its activities. Then I will move on to the 
Finnish economic outlook. 
Bank of Finland and the Eurosystem 
The  Bank  of  Finland  has  an  interesting  history.  We  got  a  central  bank  already  before  our 
country’s independence. The Bank of Finland is the fourth oldest central bank in the world. 
In 1811 Tsar Alexander I of Russia establishes the Bank of Finland under the name of “Office 
of  Exchange,  Lending  and  Deposits  in  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Finland”  (Slide  3).  In  1865 
Finnish markka is tied to the silver standard, and, in practice, Finland exits from the Russian 
monetary system. In 1999 the euro area is born. The euro becomes the official currency of 
the euro area. The Bank of Finland becomes a part of the Eurosystem 
The Bank of Finland acts as Finland’s central bank, national monetary authority and member 
of the European System of central banks and the Eurosystem (Slide 4). 
The  Eurosystem  covers  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  euro  area  central  banks.  It 
administers the world’s second largest currency, the euro. There are over 300 million people 
living  in  the  euro  area  and  from  the  beginning  of  2011  the  area  covers  17  countries. 
Therefore,  the  Bank  of  Finland’s  strategies  are  related  to  both  domestic  and  Eurosystem 
objectives. 
The  main  objective  of  the  Eurosystem  and  Bank  of  Finland  alike  is  price  stability,  which 
means  maintaining  a  moderate  rise  in  consumer  prices.  Price  stability  creates  the 
prerequisites  for  a  sound  economy.  In  order  to  meet  this  objective,  the  Bank  of  Finland 
participates in the preparation and decision-making process of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy as well as implementing the policy in Finland. A broad research base provides a solid 
background to the Bank’s expertise in these tasks. 
In  addition  to  monetary  policy  and  research,  the  Bank  of  Finland  has  three  other  core 
functions:  financial  markets  and  statistics,  banking  operations  and  the  maintenance  of 
currency supply. There are approximately 460 persons working at the Bank of Finland and 
an additional 210 in association with it at the Financial Supervisory Authority (FIN-FSA). 
The  Bank  of  Finland’s  scope  of  activities  cover  four,  clearly-defined  core  tasks:  monetary 
policy and research, financial supervision, banking operations as well as the maintenance of 
currency supply (Slides 5, 6 and 7). 
Monetary policy and research 
The key objective of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy is the maintenance of price stability 
throughout the euro area (Slide 8). The decisions relating to the policy are centralised, being 
taken  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  implemented  at 
member country level by the individual national central banks. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
As  a  member  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  is 
therefore one of those deciding on the interest levels set for the euro area and at the same 
time for Finland, too. 
The  Bank  of  Finland  assesses  the  impact  of  the  single  monetary  policy  on  the  Finnish 
economy  and  takes  it  into  account  in  the  setting  of  domestic  economic  policy.  The  Bank 
publishes a macroeconomic forecast twice a year. 
The Bank’s influence in the Eurosystem is based on internationally recognised high-quality 
research (Slide 9). The three main approaches taken by the Bank’s research activities are 
the modelling of monetary policy, the future of the financial services sector and analyses of 
economies in transition (primarily China and Russia). 
Financial supervision 
The  Bank  of  Finland  promotes  financial  sector  stability  and  efficiency  using  thorough 
macroprudential  analyses  and  through  the  maintenance  of  contingency  management 
procedures (Slide 10). The Bank’s crisis management preparedness is based on up-to-date 
information on the condition of the banking system and financial markets and the functioning 
of their respective infrastructure. When needed, the Bank of Finland acts as a lender of last 
resort to the banks. 
The  Bank  of  Finland  bears  responsibility  for  oversight  of  the  financial  system  and 
macroeconomic supervision. The Finnish Financial Supervision Authority (FIN-FSA), on the 
other hand, is the main authority responsible for supervision of banks, insurance and pension 
insurance  companies  as  well  as  other  insurance  sector  companies,  investment  firms, 
management  companies  and  the  stock  exchange.  The  operations  of  the  FIN-FSA  are 
95% financed by the supervised entities, while the remaining 5% is financed by the Bank of 
Finland.  Administratively  the  FIN-FSA  cooperates  with  the  Bank  of  Finland  and  otherwise 
operates entirely independently. 
The Bank produces a range of statistics, analyses and risk assessments to serve decision 
makers.  Compilation  of  statistics  is  a  function  that  supports  the  central  bank  in  the 
preparation of monetary policy and analysis of the stability of the financial market. 
Banking operations 
The Bank of Finland is the banks’ bank (Slide 11). It implements the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy in Finland through its own monetary policy operations in cooperation with its Finnish 
counterparties, generally banks. 
The Bank of Finland safeguards the domestic financial system’s liquidity management and 
handles payment transfers between banks. Banking operations also covers the management 
of  the  Bank’s  own  financial  reserves  (such  as  currency  reserves)  and  the  prudent  and 
lucrative investment of the Bank’s share of ECB capital. 
Maintenance of currency supply 
The Bank of Finland is responsible for currency supply management in Finland and works to 
improve  the  quality,  efficiency  and  security  of  the  currency  supply  system  (slide  12).  The 
Bank issues new euro bank notes and coins in Finland. It is also responsible for ensuring the 
authenticity  and  quality  of  the  money  in  use  in  the  country  by  removing  counterfeit  and 
damaged notes from circulation. 
The  Bank  of  Finland  has  ongoing  cooperation  with  companies  specialized  in  banking  and 
cash distribution services. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
The Bank of Finland and the Eurosystem 
Finland’s monetary unit is the euro. All EU countries that have adopted the euro belong to 
the euro area (17 countries, 1 January 2011). The central banks of these countries, together 
with the European Central Bank (ECB), form the Eurosystem (Slide 13). 
The Bank of Finland is Finland’s national central bank and a member of the Eurosystem. It 
participates  in  the  preparation  and  decision-making  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  is 
responsible for monetary policy implementation in Finland (Slide 14). 
The Eurosystem operates under the leadership of the European Central Bank. The highest 
decision-making body of the Eurosystem is the Governing Council of the ECB. The Governor 
of the Bank of Finland participates in monetary policy decision-making as a member of the 
ECB  Governing  Council  (Slide 15).  Each  of  members  is  in  the  meetings  as  a  person,  not 
advocating any issues for his or her institution or country. 
The Eurosystem’s objectives are price stability and support for general economic policy. Its 
main principles are independence, accountability and transparency (Slide 16). The monetary 
policy stance is set for the euro area as a whole, not for any single country. 
Dear Guests, 
Let me know move to the economic outlook of Finland. We are in the midst of preparing our 
next economic forecast next week, but before that comes out, let us see the general outlook 
without foretelling any of the content of the forecast. The Bank of Finland’s forecast will be 
available on 15 June 2011. 
Economic outlook of Finland 
The Finnish economy will grow relatively briskly in the immediate years ahead. In 2011 the 
pace  of  growth  will  rise  to  almost  4%,  but  in  2012−2013  it  will  be  much  slower.  The 
pre-recession level of output will be regained during the course of 2012, somewhat earlier 
than estimated half a year ago. Export growth will be bolstered by stronger global demand for 
capital goods towards the end of the forecast period. 
Industrial and construction confidence indicators (Figure 17) suggest that companies have 
positive expectations of the future. Especially the construction sector has recovered strongly 
from the recession. 
Consumer confidence levels recorded in Finland in 2010 reached a record high, even though 
the  euro  area  debt  crisis  did  at  times  cause  uncertainty  among  Finnish  consumers. 
Consumer purchasing power was bolstered in by an increase in household incomes, cuts in 
income  tax,  the  improved  employment  situation  and  low  interest  rates.  The  stronger 
confidence and continuation of low interest rates continued to encourage the taking out of 
new housing loans. 
The  Finnish  economy  is  recovering  quite  strongly.  In  2010  the  growth  boosted  by  both 
domestic demand and exports (Figure 18). The robust economic growth of GDP seems to 
continue in 2011. In the first quarter of 2011 GDP growth was about 5.5%. 
Private consumption has grown steadily since the second quarter of 2009, but slowed down 
in the first quarter of 2011. Housing construction growth was exceptionally brisk in 2010, and 
growth is expected to moderate in 2011. Construction of other buildings picked up towards 
the end of the year 2010 but remains still weak at the beginning of 2011 (Figure 19). 
During the course of 2010, Finnish exports of goods began to benefit from growth in export 
markets (Figure 20). In 2011, the structure of growth is expected to still be unfavorable for 
Finland’s capital-goods-weighted export structure. In 2012–2013, global demand for capital 
goods will begin to accelerate, and boost Finnish exports. The recovery of industrial output 
has progressed at a very different pace in different industries. The chemical industry started 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3
to  recover  early  from  the  recession,  and  metal  industry  output  began  to  grow  during  the 
course of 2010. Forest industry output is not expected to return to pre-recession levels due to 
cuts in production capacity. Electronics industry output is still almost 20% below the level of 
2008. 
The operating environment for businesses in Finland improved significantly in 2010 due to a 
considerable  strengthening  of  demand  in  Finland’s  export  markets.  Strengthening  demand 
for the products of export companies and increasing output volumes will gradually raise the 
level of corporate fixed investment. 
Now, let me take up some major factors affecting our economy’s outlook. 
The financial crisis hit Finland, even though it took place outside our country, and we lost a 
lot of our total production (Figure 21). GDP fell by about 8 % in 2009. According to the March 
2011 Bank of Finland forecast, the pre-recession level of output will be regained during the 
course of 2012. The recession has caused a contraction in the GDP share of industry, and 
conversely an increase in the share of services sectors, which are characterised by slower 
productivity growth. Over the longer term, this shift will weaken the growth potential of the 
economy. 
As regards the structure of growth in Finland, in 2010, the strengthening of export demand 
boosted the growth impact of net exports (Figure 22). It will remain strong, but in 2012–2013, 
the significance of net exports will decline as import growth picks up. Private consumption 
supported  growth  in  2010  and  will  continue  to  do  so  throughout  the  forecast  period  
2011–2013.  Despite  strong  growth  in  housing  investment  in  2011,  the  growth  impact  of 
private investment was zero. Private investment is expected to pick up and support growth 
throughout the forecast period. The annual GDP growth will slow down to 2,7 % in 2012 and 
to 2,5 % in 2013 (Figure 23). 
The  unemployment  rate  will  continue  to  be  fairly  high,  averaging  7%  in  2013  (Figure  24). 
Employment  did  not  decline  very  much  during  the  recession  considering  the  depth  of  the 
collapse  of  output.  The  explanation  is  the  use  of  temporary  layoffs  and  employers’ 
willingness  to  retain  skilled  work  force.  Similarly,  the  post-recession  growth  in  output  has 
generated relatively few new jobs. 
Inflation measured by HICP (harmonised index of consumer prices) has risen to above 3% in 
the first 4 months of 2011 (Figure 25). The acceleration in inflation is mainly due to rise in 
the world market prices of energy and food. In Finland there is an additional impact from the 
hike in energy taxes as of the beginning of 2011. According to market expectations, oil price 
will decline. Average wage growth in Finland is expected to remain at around 3 %. 
Last, but not the least important topic; public finances. We have had fairly good balance in 
our government finances, and compared with the other European countries in general, our 
public debt has been kept at a fairly low level. However, due to the economic recession we 
saw somewhat concerning development starting. Looking into the coming years we have to 
curb the current pace of incurring of the public debt. 
In  the  absence  of  new  fiscal  policy  measures  during  the  forecast  period,  the  general 
government deficit will contract only slightly and the general government debt will continue to 
grow during the forecast period (Figure 26). 
Let me conclude by saying that, in general, the recent developments in the Finnish economy 
have  been  mixed.  On  one  hand,  economic  growth  has  strengthened  and  surveys  indicate 
strongly improved confidence in the future. On the other hand, the rapid growth has touched 
only  some  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  new  areas  of  concern  have  emerged  both 
internationally  and  domestically.  The  key  challenge  for  economic  policy  is  to  restore  the 
sustainability of the public finances in Finland. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  your  attention  and  successful  meetings  in  Helsinki  during  the 
following days. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
        BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 5
       6 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
      BIS central bankers’  speeches 
  7
   8 
   BIS central bankers’  speeches
     BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 9
      10 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
      BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 11
     12 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
     BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 13
     14 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
   BIS central bankers’  speeches 
   15
     16 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
