Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Lessons for monetary policy from the recent crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the roundtable “L’euro e la crisi internazionale”, Milan, 19 January 2011. 
 Introduction 
The financial crisis has been a very challenging period for policy-makers worldwide, not least 
for  monetary  authorities.  Central  banks  have  lowered  interest  rates  to  levels  close  to  zero 
and implemented a broad range of unprecedented non-standard policy measures.  
The  recent experience offers,  I  think,  five  lessons  from  which  monetary  policy-makers  can 
learn. Let me list them upfront, before turning to each of them – in that order – in my remarks 
today.  
1. 
Central bank independence remains critical to delivering price stability, particularly 
during crises.  
A  clearly  defined  objective  of  price  stability  is  essential  to  firmly  anchor  inflation 
expectations, which can act as an automatic stabiliser during a crisis. 
Monetary  policy  should  be  oriented  to  the  medium  term.  Trying  to  fine-tune 
monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of  indicators,  such  as  output  gaps  and  measures  of 
core inflation, which are either subject to ex post revisions or are misleading, may  
– and often does – induce an excess short-termism and entail serious risks. 
Monetary and financial variables should be a key input in the assessment of medium 
to long-run risks to price stability, particularly during financial crises. 
Finally,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  complementary.  The  new  macro-
prudential function and monetary policy reinforce each other. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Central bank independence remains critical 
1. 
The value of central bank independence is the first, lasting lesson. Of course, central bank 
independence  is  a  sine  qua  non  of  effective  monetary  policy,  at  all  times  and  under  all 
possible  circumstances.  If  a  central  bank  is  not  independent,  policy-makers  from  other 
quarters  have  strong  incentives  to  pass  on  to  the  bank  problems  and  responsibilities  for 
which  they,  in  fact,  are  to  be  held  accountable.  This  –  always  –  leads  to  a  blurring  of 
responsibilities  and  potentially  to  a  loss  of  trust,  which  ultimately  undermines  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy.1 
But  in  times  of  crisis  the  value  of  independence  rises  even  further.  In  perturbed  market 
conditions  central  banks  may  have  to  implement  extraordinary  measures,  both  in  terms  of 
reducing  policy  rates  to  unprecedented  levels,  and  in  terms  of  unconventional  liquidity 
measures. If these measures – untested as they are – are to be expected to exert any impact 
on  economic  decisions,  they  have  to  be  seen  by  market  participants  as  the  result  of  an 
autonomous decision by the central bank. They ought to be seen as being consistent with its 
overall policy framework, rather than the result of pressures from the fiscal authorities. The 
reason is simple. If a central bank comes under pressure in times of crisis, and succumbs to 
that pressure, it is unlikely to behave differently in good times. Therefore, if the central bank 
                                                 
1   See Kydland F. and E. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473–492; and Barro R. and D. Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion and 
Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp.101–121. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
is externally constrained to take exceptional measures during a crisis, it will not be able to 
resist the  same  pressures  when  the  crisis ends.  This  may  disanchor  inflation  expectations 
and thus undermine the effectiveness of the measures implemented during the crisis.  
The ECB has made no exception. The financial crisis that has shaken the global economy for 
two full years has meant that we had to explore new avenues of monetary policy intervention. 
We all had to experiment with new tools, as conventional instruments had been blunted and 
damaged  to  some  extent  by  the  financial  collapse.  True,  the  activation  of  new  tools 
sometimes has brought us closer to the lines that separate the different spheres of policy-
making responsibilities from each other – lines we previously considered as remote.  
However, the fact that during a crisis the central bank broadens its range of tools does not 
imply that it is compromising its objective and its independence in pursuit of its mandate. In 
the case of the ECB, the institutional framework for the single monetary policy establishes 
the ECB’s independence in choosing the instruments necessary to achieve its mandate of 
price  stability.  We  cannot  modify  our  mandate.  But  we  can  choose  the  instruments  which, 
from time to time, we consider most efficient in attaining our objective. This is the essence of 
“instrument  independence”,  a  fundamental  cornerstone  of  the  contemporary  theory  and 
practice of central banking, and a critical precondition for central banks’ success in taming 
inflation and keeping it low and stable over the last 30 years.  
Because of the crucial role of banks in the real economy of the euro area, in the autumn of 
2008 we started to provide liquidity in unlimited volumes and with longer maturities to banks. 
In  June  2009  we  launched  a  programme  to  purchase  euro-denominated  covered  bonds 
issued by euro area resident banks. The aim was to jump-start this market, which represents 
the bright side of securitisation, and yet had suffered considerably in the crisis. By May 2010 
persistent and excessive government borrowing and accounting frauds had unleashed a debt 
run  on  Greece.  Market  uncertainties  had  spread  to  other  issuers  and  a  localised  loss  of 
confidence had soon developed into a generalised market paralysis: a virtual seizing-up of 
the market for government paper, for any signature except the most credible.  
In these conditions, the ECB decided to intervene again, through a new Securities Markets 
Programme. The purpose of these interventions was – and still is – genuinely a monetary 
policy one. The market for government paper plays a central role in the financial system of 
any  developed  economy,  and  constitutes  a  crucial  link  in  the  upstream  portion  of  the 
transmission mechanism that channels monetary policy impulses to the real economy. This is 
due to the power of collateral in the contemporary financial world. The presence or absence 
of collateral in money  market transactions, and the quality of the collateral used to secure 
money market transactions determine whether the transmission mechanism starts to function 
or  is  blocked,  whether  it  is  foreseeable  and  dependable,  or  uncertain  and  unreliable.  The 
perceived  quality  of  collateral  influences  the  scale  of  market  spreads  over  and  above  the 
overnight rate at which the central bank lends to banks. And money market spreads are the 
first  asset  prices  whose  orderly  adjustment  is  so  important  in  ensuring  that  the  monetary 
policy  intentions  of  a  central  bank  are  conveyed  to  the  broad  economy.  In  addition,  one 
should not neglect the fact that government securities provide the basis on which all private 
debt instruments are priced.  
I would take the argument one step further. I suggest that the central bank should use its 
independence to remind the other main policy actors at all times, even during crises, of their 
responsibilities.  It  should  not  act  in  a  way  which  may  create  disincentives  for  the  other 
authorities.  The  fiscal  and  supervisory  authorities  are  key  players.  When  implementing  an 
accommodative policy in response to a potential seizing-up of financial markets, the central 
bank  should  not  shy  away  from  calling  on  the  fiscal  authority  to  implement  a  credible 
medium-term budgetary adjustment. I would even consider this to be a pre-condition for the 
central  bank  to  enact  such  a  policy.  Otherwise  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  fiscal 
framework may contaminate monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fiscal 
On a more general note, an accommodative liquidity policy entailing atypically low interest 
rates  needs  reinforcing  safeguards.  On  the  one  hand,  it  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  a 
healthy  fiscal  framework:  such  a  framework  removes  one  prime  source  of  instability  and  
–  where  instability  persists  nonetheless  –  it  broadens  the  scope  of  action  open  to  central 
banks.  
This has been a key point for the ECB especially over the last 12 months and will continue to 
be in 2011. We have emphasised several times that it is the task of the political authorities to 
ensure  a  credible 
framework,  composed  of  appropriate  national  budgetary 
programmes, a rigorous surveillance framework at the euro area level and a stable safety net 
underpinning the stability of the euro area economy.  
The ECB has also repeatedly called on the governments of the Member States to make a 
leap  forward  in  improving  the  institutional  framework  underlying  the  euro  area.  We  have 
made  concrete  proposals  over  the  last  few  months  on  ways  to  improve  the  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic surveillance underlying the Stability and Growth Pact and to address crises, 
if  they  occur.  A  lot  has  been  done  but  there  is  a  need  to  complete  this  work,  as  we  have 
stated  recently,  to  protect  the  system  against  market  instability.  We  have  also  repeatedly 
called  for  a timely  consolidation  of public  finances,  in  contrast  to  some  commentators  and 
academics.  Had  this  consolidation  started  earlier,  rather  than  under  the  pressure  of  the 
markets, it would have been less painful.  
The same pressure needs to be exerted on the supervisory and fiscal authorities in charge of 
ensuring  the  solvency  of  financial  institutions.  An  unconditional  supply  of  liquidity  by  the 
central  bank  to  address  systemic  problems  may  create  disincentives  to  recapitalise  and 
restructure  the  fragile  parts  of  the  system,  and  thus  delay  the  recovery.  The  provision  of 
liquidity  should  thus  be  conducted  in  a  way  that  maintains  the  incentives  for  financial 
institutions  and  supervisors  to  take  all  the  necessary  measures  to  restore  normality  as 
quickly  as  possible.  This  is  why  extraordinary  measures  have  to  be  implemented  within  a 
framework which foresees a timely exit when conditions allow. 
A clearly defined objective of price stability is essential 
2. 
The second lesson taught by the crisis is that a clearly defined objective of price stability can 
act as an automatic stabiliser when uncertainty becomes destabilising. This is always true, in 
both  good  times  and  bad.  In  fact,  well-anchored  expectations  in  the  euro  area  were 
instrumental  in  avoiding  large  interest  rate  hikes  before  the  crisis,  when  commodity  prices 
rose sharply. At the height of the crisis, however, they became a policy instrument in their 
own right. Thanks to well-anchored inflation expectations we were able to avoid deflationary 
spirals  and  reduce  real  interest  rates  in  tandem  with  nominal  rates.  Note  that  if  inflation 
expectations are well anchored, and impervious to transient shocks to actual inflation, there 
is no need to manipulate key parameters of the monetary policy frameworks, i.e. no need to 
increase the inflation target or to move to price level targeting in order to resist deflationary 
risks  in  times  of  macroeconomic  distress.2  Opportunistic  manipulations  of  the  monetary 
policy  framework  of  course  damage  the  foundations  on  which  that  framework  rests.  So, 
being able to rely on the rebalancing effect of inflation expectations is a superior option. But 
firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations  also  make  policy  commitments  unnecessary.  These 
commitments  concerning  the  future  course  of  the  policy  rate  are  viewed  as  providing  one 
effective  instrument  for  introducing  a  stimulus  when  the  room  for  reducing  the  nominal 
interest rate is exhausted. But they come at a price. Policy commitments cannot be effective 
unless  they  materially  constrain  future  options.  Again,  being  able  to  rely  on  firm  inflation 
                                                 
2   See  Blanchard  O.,  Dell’Ariccia  G.  and  P.  Mauro  (2010),  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy”,  IMF  Staff 
Position Note, No 10/03; and Svensson L. (2001), “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of 
Escaping from a Liquidity Trap”, Monetary and Economic Studies, 19, Bank of Japan, pp. 277–312. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
expectations offers a way to reduce real rates and provide a stimulus without incurring the 
limitations of policy commitments.3 
Monetary policy should be oriented to the medium term 
3. 
The third lesson concerns the risks associated with a monetary policy aimed at fine-tuning 
short-term  objectives.  Experience,  especially  prior  to  the  crisis,  has  revealed  the  risks  of 
designing policy on indicators and variables which are not sufficiently robust. Let me give a 
couple  of  examples,  starting  with  the  output  gap.  As  the  literature  has  clearly  shown,  the 
empirical proxies used to capture the output gap are subject to constant revisions.4 There is 
evidence that for the period 2002–2004 the output gap estimates in the United States were 
ex  post  significantly  smaller  than  the  real-time  estimates.5  Policy-makers  who  base  their 
decisions mainly on such assessments of the cyclical position can be seriously led astray. 
The  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  was,  for  instance,  to  a  large  extent  due  to  measurement 
errors in the real-time estimates of the output gap combined with an overreaction to output 
gap  measures  when  assessing  the  state  of  the  economy.6  The  same  applies  to  the  low 
interest rates implemented for a prolonged period in the middle of the last decade.7 
Core  inflation  measures  are  another  example.  These  can  give  misleading  signals  in  the 
event of persistent changes to relative prices. This is not so much a lesson that we can learn 
from the crisis, but a phenomenon that the crisis has exposed as one of the main factors of 
the pre-crisis Great Moderation. Examples abound. For example, technological innovations 
concentrated  in  the  production  of  the  goods  included  in  the  core  inflation  basket  can 
persistently push down selected prices. There is also evidence that globalisation has been 
depressing prices for core CPI products due to increased global competition in the tradable 
goods sector8, while at the same time prices for energy and food products have been pushed 
up  by  the  demand  of  those  emerging  economies  that  were  opening  up  to  the  global 
economy.9  In  these  conditions,  too  much  emphasis  on  core  inflation  can  distort  policy 
inference. Core inflation can provide policy-makers with a downwardly biased assessment of 
overall price pressures and – mistakenly – suggest a pro-cyclical policy course.  
In a globalised world, the destabilising mechanisms that such distortions of perspective can 
activate  are  manifold.  Today  increased  trade  and  capital  flows  make  monetary  policy 
                                                 
3   See Eggertson G. and M. Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34, pp.  139–211; and Walsh  C. (2010), “Using Monetary  Policy to 
Stabilize Economic Activity,” in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, 2009 Jackson Hole Symposium, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 245–296. 
4   See  Orphanides  A.  and  S.  van  Norden  (2002),  “The  Unreliability  of  Output-Gap  Estimates  in  Real  Time,” 
Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics  84,  pp.  569–583;  and  Orphanides  A.  and  S.  van  Norden  (2005),  “The 
Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and 
Banking, 37, pp. 583–601. 
5   See  Bini  Smaghi  L.  (2010),  “Could  monetary  policy  have  helped  prevent  the  financial  crisis?,”  Bank  of 
Canada, Toronto 9 April 2010. 
6   See  ECB  (2010),  “The  “Great  Inflation”:  Lessons  for  monetary  policy”,  Monthly  Bulletin,  May  2010;  and 
Orphanides  A.,  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  and  the  Great  Inflation,”  American  Economic  Review,  92, 
pp. 115–120. 
7   See  Taylor  J.  (2007),  “Housing  and  Monetary  Policy,”  in  Housing,  Housing  Finance,  and  Monetary  Policy, 
Proceedings of Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
8   See Chen N., Imbs J. and A. Scott (2009), “The dynamics of trade and competition,” Journal of International 
Economics, 77, pp. 50–62. 
9   See Rogoff K. (2006), “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
The  New  Economic  Geography:  Effects  and  Policy  Implications,  pp.  265–305;  and  Pain  N.,  Koske  I.  and 
M. Sollie  (2006),  “Globalisation  and  Inflation  in  the  OECD  Economies,”  OECD  Economics  Department 
Working Paper, No. 524. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
decisions  in  systemically  important  countries  tightly  interact.  In  fact,  monetary  policy 
decisions  in  industrialised  countries  find  in  the  exchange  rate  arrangements  of  important 
emerging  market  economies  a  potentially  potent  multiplier.  For  example,  the  currently 
accommodative  monetary  policy  of  industrialised  countries  generates  more  liquidity  at  the 
global level than if emerging market economies’ currencies were free to float. Limits to the 
sterilisation of international capital inflows under currency pegs lead to generalised liquidity 
spillovers  on  a  global  scale.  At  the  same  time  the  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  by 
emerging  market  economies  leads  to  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates  in 
global  economies.  This,  in  turn,  intensifies  the  trends  in  asset  and  commodity  prices,  thus 
potentially  leading  to  further  imbalances  and  global  inflation.  When  setting  their  policies, 
monetary policy-makers in industrialised countries should take this dimension into account.  
Monetary policies aimed at fine-tuning short-term objectives also run a serious risk that they 
will 
long.  Exiting  an  extraordinarily 
accommodative  mode  too  late  can  sow  the  seeds  of  future  imbalances.  As  the  economy 
recovers from an exceptionally deep recession, real-time output gap estimates and estimates 
of structural unemployment or the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) 
are  particularly  uncertain.  Structural  unemployment  is  likely  to  have  significantly  risen 
because of the mismatch between the skills of workers that lose their jobs in sectors that are 
downsizing,  and  the  skills  of  workers  required  in  the  expanding  sectors  of  the  economy. 
While emphasis on output gap measures can instil the conviction that unemployment could 
be reduced by monetary means, it becomes an illusion if the problem is due to a structural 
mismatch  of  skills  or  labour  market  imperfections.  Structural  policies  are  the  only  policy 
instrument that can address structural unemployment.  
too  much  policy 
forbearance 
induce 
too 
for 
4. 
Monetary and financial variables are a key input in the assessment of price 
stability 
The fourth lesson that I draw from these difficult times is that this crisis has certainly proved 
that  the  conventional  wisdom  of  the  last  decade  –  that  money  does  not  matter,  even  for 
monetary  policy  –  is  wrong.  I  guess  I  do  not  need  to  emphasise  this  to  alumni  from  the 
University of Chicago! 
Money and credit aggregates do contain important information that allows policy-makers to 
overcome  the  pitfalls  related  to  some  economic  indicators.  When  inflation  is  rendered 
dormant  by  a  sequence  of  favourable  supply  side  shocks,  this  creates  an  environment  in 
which  central  banks  might  find  it  extremely  difficult  to  raise  interest  rates,  even  if  such  a 
response were justified by bullish financial markets and by signs of economic overheating. In 
these  conditions,  incorporating  monetary  and  financial  imbalances  in  the  policy  process  
– whether in the form of a monetary pillar or in the form of a leaning-against-the-wind attitude – 
can help support a pre-emptive policy even in the face of subdued or falling inflation. The 
reason is simple. Monetary and credit imbalances which form alongside and – I would say – 
in symbiosis with an asset price trend indicate that price stability might be endangered over 
the  medium  term.  Reacting  to  the  monetary  side  of  this  symbiosis  may  prevent  larger 
problems from occurring subsequently.10 
In  addition,  monitoring  credit  growth  can  also  be  useful  to  identify  other  sources  of 
unsustainable credit developments, even if some of them cannot necessarily be eliminated 
by monetary policy tools, and would instead require action of a macro-prudential nature. After 
years  of  forgetfulness,  macroeconomic  theory  seems  to  have  caught  up  with  reality  and 
                                                 
10  See Fahr S., Motto R., Rostagno M., Smets F. and O. Tristani (2010), “Lessons for monetary policy strategy 
from  the  recent  past,”  paper  presented  at  the  6th  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
18–19 November 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
shifted  attention  to  credit  and  leverage  as  critical  parameters  that  a  central  bank  should 
consult regularly to measure the pulse of the economy.11 
The  ECB  consistently  used  these  parameters  even  when  they  were  derided  as  relics  of  a 
defunct  monetary  doctrine.  They  proved  useful.  They  gave  information  about  financing 
conditions and the financial structure, as well as about the condition and behaviour of banks, 
when  these  sources  of  information  were  critical  to  the  assessment  of  the  health  of  the 
transmission  mechanism  and,  more  broadly,  the  state  of  the  business  cycle.  And  this 
dimension  of  monetary  analysis  has  proved  particularly  valuable  in  shaping  the  ECB’s 
response to the financial crisis. There is indeed evidence for the euro area that without duly 
taking  the  monetary  analysis  into  account,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  would  have  been 
distinctly higher at times of financial exuberance and would have fallen deep into negative 
territory  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  market  collapse,  starting  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  The 
economy as a whole would have been more volatile.12 
On a more general note, by including monetary analysis in their monetary strategy, central 
banks  can  ensure  that  important  information  stemming  from  money  and  credit,  typically 
neglected in conventional cyclical forecasting models of the economy, is considered in the 
formulation  of  monetary  policy  decisions.  There  is  compelling  empirical  evidence  showing 
that at low frequencies, that is over medium to longer-term horizons, inflation shows a robust 
positive association with monetary growth.13 
Complementarity between price stability and financial stability 
5. 
The  fifth  lesson  from  the  financial  crisis  is  that  ensuring  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  for 
financial  stability.  To  be  sure,  the  conventional  wisdom  prevailing  before  the  crisis  was 
twofold. First, stabilising inflation would do the job. As inflation is – according to the pre-crisis 
consensus – a summary statistic for the state of the economy, for demand pressures, then 
any  exuberance  in  financial  markets  would  not  be  policy-relevant  unless  it  exerts  upward 
pressures on inflation. Second, and partly as a consequence, central banks should only pick 
up the pieces after the bubble has burst, and the costs of doing this relative to a policy of 
resisting the bubble while it is forming would not be large.  
Both these prescriptions have turned out to be major mistakes. For one thing, inflation and 
financial exuberance are often negatively – not positively – correlated, so that concentrating 
a  central  bank  on  inflation  only  means  biasing  the  assessment  of  the  risks  to  the  macro-
economy  from  a  longer-term  perspective.  And,  cleaning  up  the  economy  in  the  wake  of  a 
financial  collapse  can  be  exceedingly  costly.  This  raises  the  question  of  whether  central 
banks  should  be  given  the  task  of  ensuring  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  and 
possibly given additional tools to do so.  
The interlinkages between financial stability and price stability and between monetary policy 
and  prudential  supervision  have  become  more  evident  as  a  result  of  the  crisis.  Monetary 
policy can affect systemic risk via a number of  channels. First, being mandated to a price 
stability objective, a central bank sets in place the necessary conditions for financial stability. 
                                                 
11   See Adrian T. and H. S. Shin, (2010), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 398; and Brunnermeier M. and L. Pedersen (2010), “Market Liquidity and 
Funding Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22, pp. 2201–2238; and Geanakoplos J. (2010), “Solving 
the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy 
Review, pp. 101–131. 
12   See Fahr S., Motto R., Rostagno M., Smets F. and O. Tristani (2010), “Lessons for monetary policy strategy 
from  the  recent  past,”  paper  presented  at  the  6th  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
18–19 November 2010. 
13   See  Benati  L.  (2009),  “Long-run  evidence  on  money  growth  and  inflation”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series, 
No 1027. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Economic  history  tells  us  that  without  price  stability  financial  stability  is  certainly  absent. 
Either inflation hedging might take the most improvised and destabilising forms, or the central 
bank itself – going through cycles of go-stop policies – might become an independent source 
of macroeconomic instability and thus financial volatility. We all remember that a long span of 
time of unanchored inflation expectations and poor inflation records encouraged all sorts of 
self-made strategies of inflation hedging in the 1970s in many industrialised countries. Italy’s 
housing  market,  for  example,  received  a  formidable  boost  from  Italians’  attempt  to  insure 
against sustained losses in purchasing power. But as soon as monetary policy in the 1980s 
changed paths and embarked on decisive stabilisation, and inflation risks subsided, house 
prices started to plummet, making the disinflationary recession more painful. So, lack of price 
stability  generates  financial  volatility  and  financial  volatility  aggravates  macroeconomic 
uncertainty. 
A  second  channel  through  which  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  financial  stability  is 
through its lender-of-last-resort function. When financial markets become dysfunctional and 
the monetary transmission channels are no longer working properly, monetary policy has a 
role to play in supporting the liquidity conditions of solvent and illiquid banks. I mentioned this 
before – when I described the ECB’s reaction to the crisis.  
Third, more recent analysis has drawn attention to a channel through which monetary policy 
might also – unintentionally – influence the perception of risk by financial markets and thus, 
ultimately,  the  assumption  of  risk  by  financial  agents:  the  so-called  risk-taking  channel.14 
Financial institutions apparently increase their leverage during booms and reduce it during 
recessions.  Thus,  contrary  to  common  assumptions,  financial  institutions’  leverage  is  pro-
cyclical; the expansion and contraction of balance sheets amplifies, rather than counteracts, 
the credit cycle. Protracted loose monetary conditions can foster excessive risk-taking and, 
consequentially, produce a build-up of financial imbalances. If not accurately controlled, this 
channel can add to the pro-cyclicality of financial markets. 
Now, you have two ways to counter financial pro-cyclicality. The first is through a monetary 
policy  regime  that  is  not  centred  exclusively  on  inflation,  but  leans  against  the  wind  of 
financial imbalances. What does this mean? It means, for example, implementing a tighter 
policy in the face of financial exuberance than would be justified by the same inflation outlook 
in more tranquil market conditions. It means tolerating a downdrift in inflation in exchange for 
some more insurance against greater and more disruptive risks to price and financial stability 
in the longer run.  
The second way to counter financial pro-cyclicality is through macro-prudential supervision, a 
new perspective of macroeconomic control. Macro-prudential supervision aims to support the 
stability of the financial system as such and seeks to dampen its pro-cyclicality by eliciting 
regulatory and supervisory instruments. From the central bank’s perspective, this implies that 
macro-prudential supervision is relevant to the extent that it has an impact on the functioning 
of the transmission mechanism through which a central bank seeks to influence the outlook 
for price stability.  
It is clear that the two policies are complementary. But, does one of them make the other 
redundant? I don’t think so. Let me advance my own view about the correct way to organise 
the  interaction  between  the  two.  A  leaning-against-the-wind  approach  in  monetary  policy 
prevents  a  risk-less  interest  rate  –  the  floor  to  all  borrowing  costs  in  the  economy  –  from 
becoming  pro-cyclical.  Macro-prudential  policies  make  sure  that  the  leverage  that  the 
economy creates at that floor interest rate and the spreads that are paid by risky borrowers 
                                                 
14   See Adrian T. and H. S. Shin, (2010), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Reports,  No  398;  and  Maddaloni  A.  and  J.-L.  Peydró,  “Bank  Risk-Taking, 
Securitization,  Supervision,  and  Low  Interest  Rates:  Evidence  from  the  Euro  Area  and  U.S.  Lending 
Standards”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
over and above the floor interest rate set by the central bank do not become an additional 
pro-cyclical source of volatility for the financial system and the economy as a whole.  
How  about  the  other  dimension  of  supervision:  micro-prudential  policies?  Note,  first,  the 
difference  between  macro  and  micro.  Macro-prudential  supervision  aims  at  limiting  the 
likelihood of failure of significant portions of the financial system, or systemic risk. It follows 
that  the  macro-prudential  supervision  stresses  the  possibility  that  actions  that  may  seem 
desirable  or  reasonable  from  the  perspective  of  individual  institutions  may  result  in 
unwelcome  system  outcomes.  Micro-prudential  supervision,  instead,  aims  at  limiting  the 
likelihood  of  failure  of  individual  institutions.  While  the  two  policies  have  clearly  a  different 
scope, ultimately the micro-prudential sphere provides the instruments that can be activated 
in response to macro-prudential risks.  
An  issue  which  has  attracted  attention  in  the  past  is  whether  central  banks  should  be 
entrusted  with  supervisory  powers  –  the  instruments  –  or  whether  those  powers  should 
remain within a separate body. My take on this dispute is the following. The experience of the 
crisis  tends  to  suggest  that  having  the  micro  and  macro-prudential  instruments  well 
integrated among other functions within the central bank might be desirable.  
Why? Because it always makes good sense to coordinate objectives with instruments. And it 
looks  to  me  natural  that  such  coordination  might  best  be  performed  by  the  central  bank. 
Independent  bodies  are  better  able  to  deal  with  the  necessary  exchange  of  information 
between the monetary and supervisory functions, and can build any Chinese wall between 
the two that may be needed to avoid conflicts of interest. Progress has been made since the 
eruption of the crisis in several countries, with the supervisory powers being transferred from 
a separate institution, which in many cases was insufficiently independent from the political 
authorities, to the central bank. 
But organising the coordinating role in the euro area context remains a complex undertaking. 
This is due not only to the fact that, national supervisory authorities are sometimes part of the 
national  central  banks,  while  in  other  cases  they  are  separate  institutions.  It  is  a  complex 
environment  because,  even  in  a  hypothetical  situation  in  which  all  supervisory  authorities 
were integrated in the central banks, this function would still be exercised at the level of the 
national jurisdiction. In other words, in a monetary union the need for coordination is twofold: 
coordination  between  the  macro  and  the  micro  functions,  and  coordination  between  the 
authorities exercising the micro function locally.  
Some  progress  has  been  achieved  with  the  creation  of  the  three  European  supervisory 
authorities  (for  banking,  markets  and  insurance)  and  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board, 
which comprises the central banks and the three European agencies. The ESRB will be able 
to  make  recommendations,  while  implementation  remains  the  responsibility  of  the  national 
authorities.  This  crisis  has  shown  the  need  for  more  than  just  increased  cooperation,  but 
rather  institutions  able  to  take  timely  and  effective  decisions.  This  is  the  direction  that 
European integration will have to take going forward. 
I thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
