Malcolm Edey: Basel III and beyond 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Basel III Conference 2011, Sydney, 24 March 2011. 
 Thanks very much for the opportunity to speak to you today.  
At the end of last year, as you know, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision released 
its new set of prudential standards known collectively as Basel III. It was a major re-think of 
the existing minimum standards for international banking.  
Unlike its two forerunners, this was an agreement in which Australia participated.1 One of the 
early responses of the international regulatory bodies to the financial crisis was to make their 
membership  structures  more  representative.  In  the  case  of  the  Basel  Committee,  the 
membership  was  widened  in  mid  2009  to  encompass  27  jurisdictions,  a  major  expansion 
from  the  original  G10  membership.  Australia  is  represented  on  the  Committee  by  the 
Reserve Bank and APRA.  
I’ve been asked to speak today about what might lie beyond Basel III. It’s a good question 
because it recognises that there’s more to financial regulation than just the Basel accord.  
I’ll try to address some of that in a moment, but before I do it’s worth recapping why we have 
a  Basel  process,  why  we  specifically  have  a  Basel III  accord,  and  what  it  is  intended  to 
achieve.  
The origins of the Basel Committee go back to 1974, when regulators from the G10 countries 
began meeting at the offices of the BIS to share information about their approaches to bank 
supervision.  The  original  Basel  capital  accord  (what  we  now  call  Basel I)  was  reached  in 
1988, and it was a relatively simple affair. The main document was a mere 13 pages long2, 
compared to the many hundreds of pages that later comprised the second and third Basel 
packages. The centrepiece of Basel I was the minimum capital standard, set at 8 per cent of 
risk-weighted assets and calculated on a common basis.  
One preliminary question we could ask is: why was there a need for that kind of agreement, 
rather than just having a series of national approaches? Obviously the Australian regulators 
weren’t  parties  to  formulating  Basel  I,  but  I  think  we  can  see  it  as  having  two  interrelated 
rationales.  
First, financial stability can be thought of as an international public good. All countries benefit 
from  the  stability  of  the  world  financial  system  as  a  whole,  they  all  experience  some  cost 
when the system is unstable, and so they all have an interest in promoting sound minimum 
standards. That’s one important rationale for a coordinated approach.  
Secondly, there is the rationale of avoiding a competitive lowering of standards. If we think of 
this in a domestic context, the principle is well understood. In the long run, we might expect 
market discipline to ensure that banks maintain high standards of balance-sheet quality and 
risk control. But in the short run, we know that if a bank tries to expand quickly by lowering its 
standards, it can be highly destabilising for the system. A bank that tries to do that will either 
gain market share at the expense of more prudently run banks, or else force the other banks 
to follow suit, thereby lowering standards for all. To some extent, what is true of individual 
banks can also be true of jurisdictions. And so the Committee took the view that there was a 
collective interest in agreeing to a set of minimum standards to be applied by all its members.  
                                                 
1   That is, Australia participated officially as a member of the committee. 
2   There were an additional 12 pages of annexes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As I said, Basel I was a relatively simple affair. Basel II, which was announced in 2004 and 
became effective in 2008, was a much more complex and nuanced agreement. In essence, it 
was  intended  to  broaden  the  scope  of  risk  coverage,  and  to  bring  in  some  flexibility  to 
accommodate  differences  in  banks’  business models  and  in  the  sophistication  of  their  risk 
management. Among other things, Basel II:  
 
introduced the three-pillar structure into the prudential framework, those pillars being 
the  minimum  capital  standard,  supervisory  oversight,  and  disclosure.  So  the 
framework was expanded beyond a simple reliance on the minimum capital ratio;  
it  introduced  a  framework  of  capital  requirements  to  cover  operational  and  other 
risks. In that way it recognised that credit quality wasn’t the only source of risk that 
needed to be backed by capital;  
and  it  allowed  flexibility  for  sophisticated  banks  to  determine  some  of  their  capital 
requirements using model-based inputs rather than fixed weights.  
  That  said,  the  central  principle  of  having  a  minimum  capital  standard  for  all  internationally 
active banks remained at the core.  
When we talk about the Basel standards, it’s important to keep in mind that these standards 
were  always  conceived  of  as  being  only  a  minimum.  Individual  jurisdictions  have  always 
been free to exceed them, and it’s to be expected that a good national regulator would tailor 
the  standards  to  local  conditions  and  supplement  them  with  effective  supervision.  In 
Australia’s case, I think we have been well served by our prudential regulator APRA taking a 
more conservative and hard-headed approach than required by the international minimum.  
Clearly,  the  Basel I  and  Basel II  standards  didn’t  prevent  the  GFC,  and  neither  did  the 
existing web of nationally-based regulations in the major economies.  
So what went wrong?  
This  isn’t  the  occasion  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  what  caused  the  financial  crisis.  But 
regulators around the world drew a number of important lessons from it:  
 
banking  systems  needed  more  capital,  and  better  quality  capital,  to  withstand 
losses;  
they needed to be made more robust to liquidity risk;  
loan underwriting standards needed to be improved;  
governance  arrangements  for  banks  and  financial  regulators  needed  to  be 
improved;3  
various  forms  of  conflict  of  interest  needed  to  be  eliminated  or  better  managed. 
Examples  of  that  included  the  originate-and-distribute  lending  model  that  went 
seriously off-track in some countries, and the role of rating agencies in advising on 
structured securities. It also included badly structured remuneration practices in the 
industry;  
and  there  needed  to  be  more  scope  for  regulatory  regimes  to  act  against  the 
build-up of financial excess.  
   Not  all  of  these  are  matters  for  the  Basel  Committee.  There  are  a  number  of  different 
international bodies working on these things in their different spheres of influence, including 
the  G-20,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  international  insurance  and  securities 
                                                 
3  
I am referring specifically here to the regulatory systems in the United States and Europe, where there was 
perceived to be a need for greater coordination among regulatory agencies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regulators. But since this is a conference about Basel III, I’ll focus mainly on the work of the 
Basel Committee.  
Basel III is about applying the lessons learned from the crisis to the way we regulate banks. 
Its core is a revised set of standards for capital and liquidity.  
On capital, the key elements are:  
 
 
more and better-quality capital required to meet the basic minimum;  
a  capital  conservation  buffer  that  sets  rules  for  managing  capital  above  the 
minimum;  
a time-varying countercyclical buffer, aimed at mitigating the effects of the credit cycle;  
and  an  unweighted  capital  ratio  (or “leverage  ratio”)  to  act as  a  backstop  to  all  of 
that.  
 For the liquidity standard, there are two main elements:  
 
a liquidity coverage ratio, which requires banks to hold enough liquid assets to meet 
a 30-day stress scenario;  
and a net stable funding ratio, which requires banks’ long-term assets to be matched 
by stable sources of funding.  
 These were the main elements of the package announced in December last year.  
Earlier speakers today will have talked about these things in some detail, and I don’t want to 
repeat that. Instead I’m going to use the remainder of my time to focus on some areas where 
work still needs to be done.  
The  first  point  to  make  here  is  that  there  is  a  lot  of  work  coming  from  the  international 
regulatory bodies that’s still to be completed. By that, I mean work that groups like the Basel 
Committee have started but not yet finished, and also areas where the Australian regulators 
have work to do in determining our response to the new international standards.  
Let me go through a few of them.  
The liquidity standard 
It’s well understood now that the liquidity coverage ratio, in the form originally proposed in the 
Basel process, couldn’t have been applied in Australia. Australian governments simply don’t 
have  enough  debt  outstanding  for  banks  to  hold  to  meet  the  standard  in  that  form. 
Incidentally,  this  is  a  problem  that  other  countries  would  love  to  have.  The  Australian 
government’s  gross  debt  to  GDP  ratio  is  not  much  more  than  10 per  cent,  compared  with 
numbers  of  the  order  of  80 to  100 per  cent  projected  in  the  next  few  years  in  the  United 
States  and  the  major  European  economies.  There  are  some  other  countries  in  a  similar 
position to ours, but not many. To accommodate cases like these, the Basel standard allows, 
among other options, an alternative treatment whereby banks can count a committed facility 
with their central bank towards meeting the requirement.  
I think this is now widely understood and accepted as a sensible solution for the Australian 
case. But there are still a number of details yet to be worked out. APRA has indicated that it 
will require banks to make all reasonable use of their own ability to maximise liquidity before 
relying on the RBA facility. And they’ve indicated that they will be consulting with banks as to 
how  compliance  with  that  principle  will  be  monitored.  The  terms  of  the  RBA  liquidity 
commitments haven’t yet been determined. That includes the fee. What we have made clear 
is that, to meet the objectives of the international standard, the fee will need to be market 
based, and it will be designed to leave banks with broadly the same incentives as exist in 
other jurisdictions where the alternative treatment is not needed.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Since the international LCR requirement doesn’t come into effect until 2015, there’s plenty of 
time to work through these details and to undertake appropriate consultation. There is even 
more  time  for  that  in  the  case  of  the  stable  funding  ratio,  where  implementation  isn’t 
scheduled until 2018 and the details of the proposed Basel standard are less well developed. 
So these are both areas where further work will be ongoing.  
The counter-cyclical capital buffer 
The  Basel III  package  provides  for  an  additional  layer  of  capital  to  be  set  by  national 
regulators based on the state of the credit cycle. The intention is that regulators would adjust 
the  buffer  so  as  to  have  a  countercyclical  influence,  raising  it  in  good  times,  and  then 
releasing it to support lending when credit is tight. To avoid regulatory arbitrage, the standard 
includes  a  system  of  mutual  recognition,  which  would  have  the  effect  of  ensuring  that  the 
capital  charge  is  based  on  the  location  where  the  lending  occurs,  rather  than  the  home 
jurisdiction of the lender.  
The buffer proposal also specifies a standard quantitative indicator to assist in deciding when 
to activate it. Glossing over the technical detail, this would be based on the ratio of aggregate 
credit to GDP. When that ratio is sufficiently above trend, it would be a signal to raise the 
buffer, and when it’s below trend, to lower it. In that way, it would allow surplus capital to be 
released to the system when most needed.  
I  know  there  has  been  some  scepticism  about  this  kind  of  rule-based  approach,  and  it’s 
important to recognise that the Committee’s proposal leaves a lot of scope for flexibility and 
discretion at the national level.  
In my view, that’s going to be very much needed.  
Having worked in the monetary policy area for many years, the indicator approach proposed 
here  reminds  me  of  an  analytical  device  known  as  the  Taylor  rule.  The  economist  John 
Taylor, some years ago, made the observation that a well-designed monetary policy would 
respond systematically to deviations of inflation and output from their normal values. It’s a 
relationship  that  can  easily  be  verified  in  the  data.  Taylor’s  work  sparked  an  army  of 
researchers to try to estimate “optimal” Taylor rules for setting the policy interest rate. It’s all 
useful analytical work, but it’s not a field that is open to definitive conclusions because the 
world is simply too complex to be summarised in that way. No-one would think of reducing 
the actual decision-making process to a mathematical formula, least of all one devised by an 
international committee.  
If that’s true for monetary policy, then it’s much more true for financial stability policy, where 
the complexities are even greater. There’s nothing in financial stability policy, for example, 
that corresponds to the core monetary policy objective of a numerical inflation target, or the 
single  instrument  of  a  policy  interest  rate:  financial  stability  policy  has  a  wide  range  of 
instruments  at  its  disposal,  and  there’s  no  single  summary  indicator  of  aggregate  financial 
risk.  
So I think we’ll need to avoid too much focus in this area on the simple formula.  
Having  said  that,  I’m  not  against  the  idea  of  the  prudential  regulator  varying  the  capital 
requirement  in  response  to  changing  circumstances4,  presumably  with  some  co-ordination 
with the central bank. But I suggest this is an area where it will take some time for national 
policy  approaches  to  develop,  and  it’s  one  where  too  much  effort  at  international 
standardisation isn’t going to be helpful.  
                                                 
4  
In fact, the Basel II principles under Pillar II already allow scope for this to occur. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Systemically important banks 
Another area of ongoing international work is on systemically important financial institutions, 
known by the acronym SIFIs. This gets at the question of how to regulate institutions that are 
too big to fail – or, as some would prefer to call it, too important to fail, or too interconnected 
to fail. The focus on this question really arose from the experience of the United States, the 
UK and some other European countries during the crisis, when significant public funds were 
committed  to  rescuing  failing  institutions.  Understandably,  those  countries  would  like  to 
reduce the risk of that happening again.  
One obvious line of approach is that, if an institution is considered too important to fail, then it 
should  be  made  safer  and,  therefore,  less  likely  to  fail.  On  that  front,  it  is  proposed  that 
institutions  judged  to  be  systemically  important  should  be  subject  to  an  additional  layer  of 
required capital. Work on this is currently being done in both the Basel Committee and the 
FSB.  
Another  line  of  attack  (and  this  isn’t  mutually  exclusive  with  the  first  one)  is  to  reduce  the 
prospective impact of failure if it does occur. This leads into proposals for banks to come up 
with business resolution plans, or so-called “living wills”, which are supposed to ensure the 
orderly  continuity  of  core  functions if  a  bank  fails.  It’s  very  important,  of  course,  that  there 
should be good preparation for stress events, and I know a number of regulators are now 
pursuing this with their banks. How far it’s possible to push this idea of living wills remains to 
be  seen,  but  I  wouldn’t  see  it  as  a  panacea.  And  given  the  differences  in  national 
circumstances,  I  think  this  is  another  area  where  too  much  effort  at  international 
standardisation isn’t going to be helpful.  
When  we  talk  about  having  an  international  approach  to  regulating  systemically  important 
institutions,  there’s  an  interesting  question  as  to  how  that  group  of  institutions  should  be 
defined. I am firmly of the view that they should be defined by their global importance, not 
their  relative  importance  within  their  own  national  systems.  The  purpose  of  a  global  SIFI 
policy (to use a cumbersome expression) is to limit international spillovers, where the failure 
of  a  major  bank  can  affect  the  system  as  a  whole  because  of  its  global  scale.  Individual 
countries can and do have their own SIFI policies for institutions that are large in domestic 
terms. APRA for example has a well-articulated framework for calibrating its standards and 
its intensity of supervision according to the circumstances of each institution.5 But in my view 
the international efforts on SIFI regulation need to focus firmly on systemic importance at the 
world level, and that means focusing on the small number of very large players that can have 
a global impact if they fail.  
Is there too much internationalisation?  
So  far,  I’ve  spoken  about  things  that  are  already  reasonably  well  advanced  on  the 
international  regulatory  agenda.  One  big  question  that  I  think  hasn’t  got  the  attention  it 
deserves is: Is there too much internationalisation in the banking industry?  
When we talk about banks being too interconnected to fail, an important dimension of that is 
international  interconnectedness.  It’s  reasonable  to  ask  the  question:  if  banks  are  too 
interconnected in that sense, should they be made less interconnected? One way that that 
might be done is through greater use of subsidiary structures by banks that operate across 
borders.  
I don’t want to overstate the case for this because I recognise it’s a complex issue. But I can 
think  of  a  number  of  advantages  for  that  kind  of  model  from  the  point  of  view  of  financial 
                                                 
5   See Probability and Impact Rating System (APRA November 2010) and Supervisory Oversight and Response 
System (APRA November 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
stability. In particular, all of the key policy tools for managing financial distress are located at 
the  domestic  level.6  Liquidity  provision  to  banks  is  a  currency-specific  tool,  and  is  the 
preserve of the national central bank that issues the currency. Bankruptcy laws, resolution 
powers, bank regulatory regimes, and the fiscal powers that might be needed in a crisis all 
operate at the domestic level.  
The  effect  of  subsidiarisation,  at  least  in  principle,  would  be  to  ring-fence  the  national 
operations of cross-border banks within separate legal entities in the countries where they 
operate. There’s a good argument that that kind of structure would simplify the management 
of  financial  stress  events.  It  might  also  reduce  concerns  about  cross-border  arbitrage  of 
differences in capital regulation.  
I am aware that there are also arguments on the other side. In some instances, ring-fencing 
might  not  be  a  realistic  option,  or  host  countries  might  prefer  foreign  banks  to  enter  as 
branches  in  order  to  benefit  from  the  full  support  of  the  parent.  Some  would  argue  that 
concerns about cross-border resolution could be better addressed in other ways.  
Another point is that the subsidiary structure is likely to be more expensive to operate. But 
I’m not sure we should view that on its own as a decisive argument against it. A lot of the 
post-crisis  regulatory  changes  will  add  to  the  cost  of  financial  intermediation,  but  they  are 
being done anyway to reduce systemic risk. The point is that the costs and benefits need to 
be carefully weighed.  
So there are arguments on both sides. I’m not today seeking to present a firm view, but I 
think it’s an area that hasn’t been sufficiently debated, and so I simply raise it as one that 
deserves further attention.7  
Supervision and lending standards  
I started out by saying that there’s more to financial regulation than just the Basel Committee. 
There’s also more to financial stability than just having good regulations. The best possible 
set  of  regulations  won’t,  on  its  own,  stop  the  next  crisis,  for  the  simple  reason  that  every 
crisis is different, people innovate around regulations, and you can’t regulate against foolish 
behaviour.  
I don’t want that to be interpreted as a counsel of despair. Good regulation obviously makes 
a difference, and the effort to improve our regulatory regimes, and keep them up to date, has 
to be made. But we also need other things that are hard to convert into rules (and I’m talking 
about the international scene here): we need bankers and investors who don’t take silly risks, 
supervisors who are prepared to ask tough questions and step in when they see excess, and 
good-quality  implementation  of  the  rules  that  we  already  have.  I  think,  by  the  way,  that 
Australia  has  been  well  served  by  its  prudential  regulator  on  this  front.  But  it  would  be  a 
shame if, in the international debate, those basics got lost in all the focus on re-writing the 
rules.8  
                                                 
6   This leaves aside the special case of Europe, where the supranational entity operates in some respects as a 
single jurisdiction. 
7   For a more detailed discussion, see Fiechter et al: Subsidiaries or Branches: Does One Size Fit All? IMF Staff 
Discussion Note 11/04, 7 March 2011. 
International regulatory bodies are clearly aware of the issue. See for example Intensity and Effectiveness of 
SIFI Supervision (FSB 2 November 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
8  
6 
 End-piece 
I want to conclude, if I may, by saying a few words about the current situation. As you know, 
the Reserve Bank released its half-yearly Financial Stability Review earlier today.  
As  usual,  we’ve  given  an  account  of  the  various  uncertainties  that  exist  around  the  global 
financial  system.  The  tragic  events  in  Japan  are  a  new  element  in  that  picture,  as  is  the 
instability  in  North  Africa  and  the  Middle  East.  It’s  going  to  take  some  time  before  the 
implications of all that can be assessed.  
But, acknowledging the uncertainties, the world financial system over the past half year has 
generally been improving. Australian banks are in good shape, and they came through the 
crisis profitable and well capitalised. They have strengthened their liquidity positions and their 
use of deposit funding. Australian businesses have reduced their gearing. Households have 
raised their saving rates.  
When we think about what the post-crisis environment might look like, it seems unlikely that 
we’ll be going back to the days of consistent double-digit growth in credit that we saw in the 
pre-crisis  years.  That  growth  was  driven  in  part  by  factors  that  can’t  be  repeated  –  the 
deregulation  of  the  financial  system  in  the  1980s,  and  the  transition  to  low  inflation  in  the 
1990s. In the post-crisis environment, borrowers and investors are more cautious than they 
were,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  That’s  likely  to  mean  less  demand  for  leverage  and  less 
growth in private balance sheets, even when the economy itself is growing strongly. If those 
trends  continue,  I  think  it  will  be  good  for  financial  stability,  but  it  will  also  mean  that  our 
lending  institutions  have  to  get  used  to  lower  rates  of  expansion  than  were  typical  in  the 
pre-crisis years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
