Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Eurozone, European crisis and policy responses 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Goldman  Sachs  Global  Macro  Conference  –  Asia  2011,  Hong  Kong, 
22 February 2011. 
 I wish to thank Huw Pill and Isabel Vansteenkiste for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible 
for the opinions contained herein. 
1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at this distinguished gathering here today. 
We are certainly living in “interesting times”, as the Chinese say. Slightly “too interesting, for 
too  long”  I  would  add.  Over  the  past  few  years,  we  have  all  witnessed  a  global  financial 
crisis, which has caused profound changes in the outlook for the global financial system and 
global economy. 
This morning, I will focus on one manifestation of the broader financial turmoil: the sovereign 
debt crisis experienced by some euro area countries. In my remarks, I will first discuss the 
origins of this crisis, and then draw some comparisons with the emerging market experience 
– particularly in Asia. After reviewing how the European authorities have responded to the 
crisis, I will conclude with some remarks on the outlook for the euro area. While we certainly 
face  considerable  challenges  at  present,  I  am  confident  that  Europe  will  emerge  stronger 
from  the  current  episode,  not  least  because  some  of  the  existing  gaps  in  the  institutional 
framework for Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) will be filled. In the end, this will make 
the whole structure more stable and robust. 
Origins of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe 
2. 
It  is  striking  that  those  countries  which  experienced  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  in 
2010 – notably Greece and Ireland – were among the best performers in terms of growth in 
economic  activity  within  the  European  Union  (EU)  over  the  decade  preceding  the  crisis 
(charts 1 and 2). Indeed, Ireland was called the “Celtic Tiger”, drawing a parallel with the fast-
growing “Asian Tigers” in earlier decades. 
While  prima  facie  a  paradox,  the  relationship  between  strong  pre-crisis  growth  and  the 
severity  of  the  crisis  itself  reveals  much  about  the  origins  of  the  underlying  economic, 
structural and institutional weaknesses that lie at the heart of recent events. 
The introduction of the euro in 1999 led to a sharp fall in real interest rates especially in the 
so-called peripheral countries of the euro area, as nominal interest rates converged to low 
German  levels  (Chart  3).  In  addition,  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy’s  commitment  to 
maintain price stability was bolstered by the institutional changes associated with Monetary 
Union (Chart 4). The resulting improvements to the growth outlook were further supported by 
the completion and deepening of the EU Single Market and the prospect of structural reforms 
underpinning national competitiveness in this integrated market. 
In this context, the outlook for income growth in the peripheral countries was widely believed 
to  have  been  transformed  for  the  better.  As  a  consequence,  demand  for  credit  expanded 
rapidly: households and firms in the periphery sought to borrow, so as to reap the available 
growth  opportunities  via  investment  and  enjoy  the  benefits  of  prospective  wealth  gains 
immediately.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  surge  in  the  demand  for  borrowing  was  met  with  a  relaxation  of  the  credit  supply 
(Chart 5).  Financing  conditions  eased  significantly  as  real  rates  fell.  Country  risk  premia 
diminished,  as  peripheral  countries  adopted  a  credible  and  stable  currency.  Spreads 
between  government  bond  yields  of  euro  area  countries  narrowed  to  very  low  levels. 
Financial institutions could borrow more easily abroad, as currency risk diminished. Deeper 
and  more  integrated  capital  markets  facilitated  greater  opportunities  for  cross-country 
diversification. And greater competition spurred rapid adoption of financial innovations, with 
securitisation and risk transfer markets playing an important catalytic role in expanding the 
loan supply.1 
Credit growth surged dramatically. No doubt part of the rapid expansion of credit was justified 
on  fundamental  grounds.  After  all,  studies  by  the  European  Commission  during  the  1980s 
and  1990s  had  promised  a  sizable  growth  dividend  from  the  Single  Market  and  Monetary 
Union.2 But, in an environment of large-scale structural change in peripheral economies and 
their  financial  systems,  distinguishing  the  impact  of  improved  fundamentals  from  that  of 
“bubble-like” behaviour proved a formidable challenge. 
Indeed, with the considerable benefit of hindsight, there can be little doubt that a significant 
component of credit growth served to create and nourish financial and economic imbalances 
that  have  ultimately  proved  unsustainable,  most  notably  in  the  housing  market.  Where 
mortgages had once been scarce or expensive, they became cheap and readily available. 
House prices boomed (Chart 6). Institutional and psychological factors fuelled an asset price 
bubble in real estate. 
Supported  by  the  dynamism  of  the  real  estate  market,  the  peripheral  economies  grew 
rapidly. But the growth achieved was not balanced: sectors of the economy associated with 
the housing boom – construction and financial services – grew disproportionately (Chart 7), 
drawing  resources  away  from  other  activities,  raising  concentrations  in  loan  books  and 
increasing macroeconomic vulnerability to sector-specific shocks. Rapid economic growth led 
to  increased  demand  for  imports,  while  strong  wage  growth  put  pressure  on  the  price 
competitiveness of the tradable sector. Large deficits on the current account of the balance 
of  payments  therefore  emerged  (Chart  8).  Inflows  of  financial  capital  from  abroad  –  the 
proverbial “hot money” – were needed to finance the current account deficit.  
Such unbalanced growth also had important consequences for the fiscal accounts (Chart 9). 
The  housing  boom  (and  its  positive  impact  on  broader  economic  activity  and  spending) 
increased  tax  revenues,  dramatically  in  some  cases.  These  “windfall”  increases  in  tax 
revenue were treated as structural rather than cyclical in nature, as the housing boom was 
prolonged  and  appeared  to  survive  the  cyclical  weakness  in  activity  in  mid-decade.3  In 
Greece, tax windfalls allowed successive governments to obscure a fundamental weakness 
in the fiscal system, which was only later revealed when the public accounts statistics were 
improved.  In  Ireland,  the  windfalls  supported  the  implementation  of  a  pro-cyclical  fiscal 
policy,  as  governments  used  revenue  strength  to  justify  tax  reductions  and  higher  public 
spending.  Massive  implicit  liabilities  towards  the  financial  sector  were  accumulated  as 
banking sectors grew rapidly. 
                                                 
1   See:  Altunbas,  Y.,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marques-Ibanez  (2009).  “Securitisation  and  the  bank  lending 
channel”, European Economic Review 53(8), pp. 996–1009. 
2   See: Cecchini, P. et al (1988). The European challenge 1992, Aldershot: Gower Publishing; and Emerson, M. 
et al (1992). One market, one money: An evaluation of the potential benefits and costs of forming an economic 
and monetary union, Oxford University Press. 
3   See: Morris, R. and L. Schuknecht (2007). “Structural balances and revenue windfalls: The role of asset prices 
revisited,” ECB Working Paper No. 737; and Kanda, D. (2010). “Asset booms and structural fiscal positions: 
The case of Ireland,” IMF Working Paper No. 10/57. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Ultimately,  the  real  and  financial  imbalances  created  by  these  dynamics  proved  to  be 
unsustainable.  The  global  financial  crisis  in  2007–08  was  the  crucial  triggering  event 
(Chart 10). First, the onset of global recession led to a deterioration in growth performance, 
rendering  the  fiscal  and  financial  burdens  imposed  by  past  behaviour  unsupportable. 
Second, the financial tensions led to a disruption of domestic financial intermediation, with 
severe consequences for both private and public financing.  
In  Greece,  the  banks  –  which  were  reasonably  strong  in  a  “stand-alone”  sense  –  were 
undone by revelations about the weakness of public finances. In Ireland, causation ran in the 
opposite direction: the bloated and failing domestic banking system imposed an intolerable 
burden on what, prior to the crisis, had been a superficially strong fiscal position. Regardless 
of  the  causation,  the  consequences  were  the  same:  as  confidence  eroded,  the  inflow  of 
foreign  capital  dried  up.  Subject  to  a  “sudden  stop”  in  external  financing,4  the  European 
sovereign  debt  crisis  –  itself  inextricably  linked  with  problems  in  the  financial  sector  – 
erupted, forcing Greece and Ireland to seek financial assistance from the European Union 
and IMF.  
What can we learn from the emerging market crises of the past thirty years? 
3. 
The  developments  I  have  just  described  might  give  those  of  you  living  in  emerging 
economies  a  sense  of  déjà  vu.  And  indeed  it  has  become  commonplace  to  draw 
comparisons  between  recent  events  in  Europe  and  the  periodic  financial  crises  seen  in 
emerging market economies (EMEs) over the past three decades: Latin America’s debt crisis 
in the 1980s; the Mexican tequila crisis of 1994; the Asian financial crisis in the second half 
of the 1990s; and the Argentine crisis of 2001. 
Extensive  economic  literature  has analysed  these  events and  identified  important  roles  for 
many  of  the  phenomena  I  have  just  described.5  It  is  therefore  useful  to  explore  parallels 
between the emerging market experience and what we are currently seeing in Europe. Here 
in  Hong  Kong,  it  is  natural  to  focus  on  the  Asian  experience  in  the  mid-  to  late-1990s, 
although events in Latin America are also useful to bear in mind. 
To set the stage for a discussion of policy responses, allow me first to set out what I see as 
the key similarities and key differences between these episodes. 
Similarities between euro area and EME experiences 
The accumulation of financial imbalances and vulnerabilities prior to the crisis is an important 
feature of both the European and Asian experience. Over-optimistic expectations of longer-
term  growth  performance  stimulated  a  surge  in  credit  expansion  and  economic  activity, 
associated with massive inflows of capital from abroad (Chart 11).6 The risks associated with 
these  capital  inflows  were  under-appreciated  by  investors  and  therefore  under-priced  by 
markets, in part because the aggregate and systemic consequences of a “sudden stop” in 
such flows were neglected in the decisions made by individual investors (Chart 12). Rating 
agencies  acted  in  a  pro-cyclical  manner,  also  failing  to  adequately  assess  systemic  risk 
(Chart 13). 
                                                 
4   See: Calvo, G.A. (1998). “Capital flows and capital market crises: The simple economics of sudden stops”, 
Journal of Applied Economics 1(1), pp. 35–54. 
5   The literature is too large to offer a complete list of references. For a summary, see: Edwards, S. (ed.) (2000). 
Capital flows and the emerging economies: Theory, evidence, and controversies, University of Chicago Press. 
6   See:  McKinnon,  R.I.  and  H.  Pill  (1997).  “Credible  liberalisations  and  overborrowing,”  American  Economic 
Review 87(2), pp. 189–193. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The inflationary consequences of strong growth led to a loss of competitiveness, as the real 
exchange  rate  appreciated  (Chart  14).  The  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments 
shifted into deficit, creating a dependency on the inflow of foreign capital (Chart 15).7 And the 
rapid  pace  of  economic  growth  obscured  the  underlying  weakness  of  public  finances,  in 
some cases abetted by creative accounting practices, such as shifting government liabilities 
off the balance sheet.  
The case of Ireland seems particularly close to Asia’s experience in the 1990s: while public 
finances  appeared  relatively  strong,  a  vast  external  debt  was  being  accumulated  by  the 
banking system. The implicit government liabilities towards the financial sector arising from 
deposit  insurance  schemes  and  the  need  to  manage  systemic  risks  were  neither  fully 
recognised nor appropriately priced (Chart 16). 
By contrast, the Greek experience appears closer to that of Latin America. In these cases, 
fiscal indiscipline, in part initially obscured by creative accounting practices, lies at the heart 
of the accumulation of financial imbalances, rather than a build-up of external debt on bank 
balance sheets. Argentina’s crisis in 2001 is a case in point, although the experience was 
shared by many Latin American countries in the 1980s (Chart 17). 
A  further  important  similarity  between  the  emerging  market  experience  and  that  of  the 
peripheral euro area countries is that the external debt is denominated in a currency which 
the  national  authorities  do  not  completely  control.  In  emerging  markets,  so-called  “original 
sin”  –  that  is,  a  lack  of  credibility  created  by  poor  macroeconomic  discipline  in  the  past  – 
implied that external debt was overwhelmingly denominated in US dollars.8 In the euro area, 
debt is denominated in euros. Although this is obviously the currency of euro area countries, 
the single monetary policy aims at price stability across the euro area and thus cannot take 
account  of  national  priorities  deriving  from  fiscal  or  financial  weaknesses  in  peripheral 
countries. 
By implication, neither in the emerging markets nor in the euro area periphery can the real 
value  of  the  external  debt  burden  be  eroded  by  inflation  or  devaluation.  Any  attempt  to 
devalue  would  simply  raise  the  domestic  burden  of  the  external  debt.  Of  course,  this  was 
precisely the point: by issuing debt in a currency which they could not control, the national 
authorities  in  the  euro  area  “tied  their  own  hands”.  Before  the  crisis,  they  obtained  a 
credibility gain that would lower overall funding costs and thus reduced the probability of a 
crisis. But when a crisis occurs, the external value of the debt burden cannot be reduced by 
devaluation.  
Differences between euro area and EME experiences 
While many of the experiences of the euro area periphery and the EMEs are similar, there 
are also important differences. 
First, in general terms, Europe is more advanced both economically and institutionally than 
Asia  (even  if  there  are  notable  exceptions,  such  as  Singapore,  Hong  Kong  and  Korea).9 
Advanced economies have higher “debt tolerance,” because of their stronger institutions, a 
more favourable composition of debt and a more stable fiscal revenue base (less dependent 
on a small set of goods, such as commodities).  
                                                 
7   See: Dornbusch, R., I. Goldfajn and R.O. Valdés (1995). “Currency crises and collapses,” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity 2, pp. 219–293. 
8   See: Eichengreen, B., R. Hausmann and U. Panizza (2005). “The pain of original sin”, in B. Eichengreen and 
R. Hausmann (eds.) Other people’s money, Chicago University Press, pp. 87–102. 
9   One  measure  of 
Competitiveness Report. 
institutional  quality 
is  reported 
in 
the  World  Economic  Forum’s  annual  Global 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Thus while the dynamics of financial crises may be similar, the level of debt at which they 
occur may be different. Of course, this can be a mixed blessing. The ability to accumulate 
more exposures may permit the pre-crisis boom to last longer. But it may also mean that the 
subsequent downfall is deeper. 
The second difference is that, by having a national currency, even if it is rigidly pegged to an 
external anchor, as in the case of Argentina’s dollar currency board prior to 2001, the EMEs 
retain  scope  to  devalue.  By  contrast,  the  European  periphery  countries  have  adopted  the 
euro; they no longer have a national currency and therefore can no longer devalue, at least 
against their main trading partners within the euro area. Ruling out devaluation has pros and 
cons.  
On  the  one  hand,  the  eradication  of  devaluation  risk  eliminates  one  element  of  financing 
costs that may rise rapidly in a financial crisis, even if the currency risk simply morphs into a 
credit  risk.  Moreover,  ruling  out  devaluation  avoids  “beggar-thy-neighbour”  competitive 
devaluations that can trigger trade wars and protectionism, and weaken the growth outlook 
(Chart 18). And, without a devaluation option, peripheral euro area countries cannot fall into 
a  vicious  debt-devaluation  spiral.  Devaluation  increases  the  real  value  of  the  outstanding 
foreign currency-denominated debt burden in domestic currency terms and may thus worsen 
the  economic  and  fiscal  outlook  of  a  country  under  stress.  Any  resulting  loss  of  market 
confidence may trigger further weakening of the domestic currency, thereby exacerbating the 
problem and creating a steady downward spiral of devaluation and rising debt burden. 
On the other hand, devaluation offers some scope to improve external price competitiveness 
and thus boost growth via better export performance. The benefits of any such devaluation 
will be greater for countries that have an export-based model of economic growth, relying on 
price competitiveness to build market share. This is typical of the “Asian Tigers”, but may be 
less relevant for mature European economies where export performance is driven by other 
factors,  such  as  quality  or  branding.  For  peripheral  euro  area  countries,  which  cannot 
devalue,  the  way  to  improve  competitiveness is  via  domestic  wage  restraint  and  structural 
reforms to boost productivity. In an environment where domestic debt overhangs are large, 
the  former  approach  runs  the  risk  of  creating  a  debt-deflation  spiral:  domestic  nominal 
incomes are driven down, while the nominal debt remains unchanged, thereby increasing the 
real burden of previously accumulated financial imbalances.10 Yet Europe’s sovereign crises 
have erupted in the context of a worldwide recovery, led by strong growth and a potential for 
inflationary  pressure  in  the  emerging  markets.  Such  a  situation  contrasts  with  the  global 
disinflationary environment of the Latin American crisis in the early 1980s, and the cyclical 
slowdown affecting Asia in the mid-1990s. Because of the inflationary pressure in some of 
their  many  export  markets  in  the  emerging  world,  euro  area  countries  are  more  likely  to 
regain price competitiveness now than other crisis-hit countries were in the past. 
The  third  difference  between  the  euro  area  and  the  EMEs  is  that  European  countries 
generally have more sophisticated domestic financial markets than was the case during the 
Asian financial crisis. In particular, government debt plays several important roles: sovereign 
yields are the basis for the pricing of many other instruments; government bonds are widely 
used  as  collateral  in  private  repo  markets;  and  public  debt  is  an  important  asset  in  the 
balance sheets of domestic banks and the wealth holdings of the private sector. As a result, 
euro  area  countries  cannot  afford  to  implement  a  sovereign  default  without  suffering  as  a 
consequence  of  such  a  default  a  major  breakdown  of  their  financial,  economic  and  social 
structure.  There  is  no  post-war  example  of  a  government  in  an  industrialised  economy 
restructuring its debt. For a euro area sovereign to seek to restructure its debt would be a 
huge leap into the unknown. This aspect is frequently omitted by financial analysts in their 
                                                 
10   The classic reference is Fischer. I (1933). “The debt-deflation theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica 1(4), 
pp. 337–357. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
newsletters or by commentators or academics in their short op-eds. And this is the reason 
why  they  do  not  get  the  point  right  when  they  state  that  default  and  restructuring  is 
unavoidable in the euro area. 
The  fourth  difference  is  that,  given  the  much  greater  depth  and  intensity  of  financial  and 
economic  integration  in  Europe,  the  strength  of  contagion  across  financial  institutions  and 
markets is potentially more significant within the euro area today than was the case in Asia in 
the 1990s. That is not to say that there was no contagion in the 1990s. But the cross-border 
exposures within the euro area are an order of magnitude greater than was the case for such 
intra-regional cross-holdings in Asian EMEs. This means that the potential for spillovers and 
a systemic area-wide crisis is much higher and has to be factored into the policy responses. 
Of  course,  greater  economic  integration  in  Europe  has  been  accompanied  by  greater 
institutional  cooperation.  Although  now  supplemented  by  the  (still  untested)  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative,  the  framework  for  economic  policy  cooperation  in  Asia  involves  less  deep  and 
intense  collaboration  than  in  the  European  Union.  The  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro 
area is the acme of Europe’s economic integration. And the situation in the 1990s in Asia 
was much less developed than now. Several Asian countries (notably Malaysia at an early 
stage) introduced capital controls in the face of the financial crisis, something which cannot 
be done in Europe given the depth of financial integration and the commitments made to the 
free movement of capital within the Single Market in the EU Treaties.  
Policy responses to the crises 
4. 
The  much  deeper  set  of  economic  and  institutional  linkages  within  the  EU  and  euro  area 
today compared with those that existed in Asia in the mid-1990s has important implications 
for the policy responses. 
In particular, the lack of a regional framework in Asia placed the responsibility for addressing 
the  financial  crisis  in  the  1990s  immediately  and  squarely  on  the  international  financial 
institutions, notably the IMF. By contrast, the close cooperation between EU countries has 
meant  that  the  IMF  has  played  a  less  prominent  role  in  the  recent  crisis,  even  though  it 
makes  a  significant  contribution  to  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  adjustment 
programmes implemented in Greece and Ireland. 
I am sure that the density of the EU framework of integration and cooperation has played a 
very positive part in tackling the crisis. Via both inter-governmental mechanisms (such as the 
European  Financial  Stability  Facility,  EFSF)  and  supranational  initiatives  (such  as  the 
European  Financial  Stabilisation  Mechanism,  EFSM),  the  EU  and  its  Member  States  have 
created  an  important  source  of  external  financial  support  for  the  domestic  adjustment 
programmes  introduced  by  Greece  and  Ireland.  The  availability  of  this  support  has  also 
bolstered and underwritten consolidation measures implemented at national level.  
The financing programmes have imposed strict conditionality on the recipient countries. They 
insist upon the implementation of essential measures, namely fiscal consolidation, financial 
sector restructuring and broader structural reform. While the EU is an equal partner with the 
IMF in imposing such conditionality, the EU countries that have provided financial support to 
countries in distress have insisted on IMF involvement because of the credibility this lends to 
the  conditionality  of  the  programme.  Its  involvement  in  Asia  would  be  much  more  difficult. 
Note that the EU component of the financial support does not enjoy preferred creditor status 
– a situation unthinkable in other parts of the world. Given the depth of economic ties and 
trust  between  countries  within  the  euro  area,  a  sense  of  “common  destiny”  is  felt  by  all, 
leading  to  this  exceptional  level  of  support.  As  a  result,  creditors,  in  particular  official 
creditors, are therefore more closely bound into the success of the programme and have a 
strong incentive to ensure that the programme’s conditions are fulfilled, thereby underpinning 
its success. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Aside  from  their  role  in  fiscal  consolidation,  the  European  authorities  have  also  offered 
support to the financial systems of the most adversely affected countries in the euro area. 
This has been done via EU/IMF programmes to support restructuring and recapitalisation of 
crisis-hit  banks;  and  through  ECB  measures,  notably  its  framework  for  “enhanced  credit 
support”.11 By introducing a variety of operational facilities, the Eurosystem has ensured that 
liquidity  continues  to  flow  to  the  peripheral  countries,  preventing  a  seizing-up  of  financing 
flows in those hardest hit and a significant disruption to the European financial system as a 
whole.  
Indeed,  one  of  the  most  important  contributions  made  by  the  EU  framework  has  been  to 
ensure that the policy responses to the financial crisis have taken a sufficiently Europe-wide 
–  or  at  least  euro  area-wide  –  perspective.  Given  that  the  responsibility  for  financial 
supervision  and  fiscal  sovereignty  remains  at  national  level  in  the  EU,  at  the  peak  of  the 
financial crisis there was a natural tendency for Member States to resort to national solutions. 
A  number  of  countries  succumbed  to  this  temptation,  in  the  process  imposing  costly 
externalities on other Member States. For example, providing government guarantees for all 
bank  liabilities  in  one  jurisdiction  prompted  outflows  of  deposits  from  other  jurisdictions, 
requiring similar guarantees to be offered elsewhere. This may have resulted in an overall 
level  of  intervention  that  was  unnecessarily  intrusive  and  undesirable  in  terms  of  the 
incentives created in the financial sector. In short, the existence of considerable externalities 
and  scope  for  significant  spillovers  within  a  financially  integrated  region  like  the  euro  area 
may have led to individually reasonable actions resulting in a collectively inferior outcome. 
Recognising these concerns, the EU institutions have stepped in to ensure that an area-wide 
perspective, internalising these externalities, is adopted. As we have seen, coordinating both 
public and private behaviour to achieve a favourable outcome in a multiple equilibrium setting 
requires both clear and credible programmes at national level, and support and coordination 
at EU level. After a somewhat hesitant start, the European Union is now moving towards a 
stronger institutional framework to support this approach. 
Looking beyond the horizon of existing programmes, the crucial longer-term macroeconomic 
and  financial  discipline  requires  further  institutional  change  and  integration,  notably  an 
enhanced  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  and  more  effective 
system  of  macroeconomic  surveillance  across  EU  Member  States.  The  creation  of  the 
European Systemic Risk Board to conduct macro-prudential surveillance and the three new 
European Supervisory Agencies for the financial sector also aims to improve the quality and 
coordination of financial regulation and supervision. 
Having  said  that,  the  main  responsibility  for  dealing  with  the  weaknesses  underlying  the 
sovereign  debt  and  associated  banking  crises  remains  at  national  level.  It  is  important  to 
recognise  that  the  relevant  EU  Member  States  now  fully  understand  and  accept  this.  In 
contrast to the experience in Asia in the 1990s or Latin America in the 1980s, there is little 
attempt to blame the sovereign crisis on foreign investors. Responsibility cannot be shifted 
offshore: the countries most immediately affected know that they have to act. 
With  the  support  of  the  EU  and  IMF,  these  countries  have  embarked  on  ambitious 
programmes  of  consolidation  and  structural  reform  to  correct  their  domestic  financial  and 
economic  imbalances.  As  I  have  already  said,  the  origins  of  the  intertwined  financial  and 
sovereign crises lay in institutional and economic frailties in the most afflicted countries. It is 
mainly up to these countries to correct these weaknesses and cure the problem. 
A key element of the resolution of the Asian crisis in the mid- to late-1990s was a deep and 
fundamental restructuring of the domestic financial sectors. This was implemented in what, at 
                                                 
11   Trichet,  J-C.  (2009).  “The  ECB’s  enhanced  credit  support”,  Address  at  the  University  of  Munich  annual 
symposium, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2009/html/sp090713.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
that  time,  was  seen  as  a  relatively  abrupt  manner.  The  conditionality  imposed  on  IMF 
financial support was associated with the application of “shock therapy” to Asian countries’ 
financial sectors: losses had to be written down immediately, banks were closed or sharply 
restructured and many institutions were sold to foreigners, arguably at “fire sale” prices. 
Within  the  euro  area,  various  buffers  –  not  least,  the  Eurosystem’s  provision  of  liquidity 
support – have tempered the stresses in the financial system. This reflects the recognition 
that,  within  such  a  deeply  economically  and  financially  integrated  region,  “shock  therapy” 
adjustments may, through spillovers, weaken the financial system in other parts of the euro 
area. However, we must also ensure that such liquidity support to the banking sector does 
not delay or hinder the fundamental reforms required to address the underlying weaknesses 
the financial crisis has revealed. 
In  the  end,  the  crisis-hit  countries  have  no  alternative:  they  have  to  make  fundamental 
reforms to their banking systems, involving substantial restructuring and, in some cases, very 
significant downsizing. Liquidity support can help to reduce adjustment costs by smoothing 
the transition. But those costs should not be used as a pretext for delay. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Financial markets are testing the strength and resilience of the euro area and the willingness 
and ability of the euro area authorities to preserve the integrity and stability of the euro as a 
currency. 
The institutional response to their challenge has been swift, strong and resolute. As regards 
monetary  policy,  the  Eurosystem  has  implemented  a  set  of  measures  that  ensure  the 
provision  of  liquidity  to  the  euro  area  financial  system,  including  to  the  banks  of  those 
peripheral countries that are currently subject to the greatest market scrutiny. 
With  respect  to  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  imbalances,  euro  area  governments  are  now 
strengthening  the  rules  for  fiscal  and  broader  economic  policy  coordination.  They  have 
created and are refining facilities that can provide external financial support to those Member 
States  facing  the  most  intense  pressures  in  sovereign  debt  markets.  These  developments 
aim  to  correct  the  deficiencies  in  the  institutional  architecture  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union exposed by the financial crisis. These facilities need to have sufficient resources as 
well  as  the  flexibility  to  contain  market  pressures  and  coordinate  the  public  and  private 
sectors so as to achieve a sustainable and mutually beneficial outcome in an environment 
where several equilibria may be possible. 
The Asian experience in the mid- to late-1990s demonstrates that radical reform can lead to 
a sustained recovery – one achieved largely without restructuring public debts. Indeed, one 
can  argue  that  Asia  has  emerged  from  its  financial  crisis  stronger  than  before:  the 
institutional  weaknesses  which  contributed  to  the  build-up  of  financial  fragilities,  but  were 
masked by high growth rates during the pre-crisis boom have been addressed.  
Similarly, Europe will emerge from its current travails stronger if the weaknesses revealed by 
the recent financial crisis are properly identified and corrected through institutional innovation 
and reform. I am confident that this will be the case.  
Seen  from  this  continent,  the  recent  crisis  in  European  sovereign  debt  markets  may  be 
interpreted  as  a  failure  of  the  euro.  But  in  Europe,  the  crisis  is  viewed  differently.  The 
problems we face today are the result of a flawed implementation of a fundamentally good 
idea. The bumpy ride of Economic and Monetary Union is largely the fault of the driver, not 
the vehicle. He has to learn from his mistakes and get some more practice – then he’ll be a 
better  driver.  As  for  the  vehicle,  it  needs  better  brakes,  for  even  the  best  of  drivers  can 
occasionally make mistakes. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1 
Real GDP per capita growth between 1997–2007 
 
Note: Growth rate shown in the chart is the percentage  increase between 1997 and 
2007. 
Sources: Eurostat and Haver Analytics. 
Chart 2 
Real GDP developments since 1996 
Note: Quarterly; 2000Q1=100. 
Source: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 3 
Ex-post real interest rates 
Note:  Series  calculated  as  ten  year  benchmark  bonds  minus  annual  HICP  inflation. 
Annual averages. 
Source: ECB staff calculations. 
 Chart 4 
Break-even inflation rates 
Note: Last observation refers to 14 February 2011. Daily. 
Source: ECB staff calculations. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  10 
 Chart 5 
MFI loans 
MFI loans to households – MFI loans to non-financial corporations 
 
Note: Last observation refers to 2010Q4. Quarterly; year-on-year % change; not adjusted 
for securitisation. 
Source: European Central Bank. 
Real residential property prices in selected euro area countries 
Chart 6 
Note: Quarterly; 1998Q1=100. 
Source: Hiebert and Vansteenkiste (2010). 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Growth in real housing construction works between 2000–2007 
Chart 7 
 
Note: Growth rate shown in the chart is the percentage increase between 2000 and 2007. 
Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. 
Current account balances in selected euro area countries 
Chart 8 
Note: 2009; % of GDP. 
Source: Haver Analytics. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  12 
 General government budget balance in selected years 
Chart 9 
Note: % of GDP. 
Sources: Haver Analytics; European Commission. 
Chart 10 
Consequences of the global financial crisis 
Household credit growth (annual % ) – General government budget balance (% of GDP) 
Source: Haver Analytics, European Central Bank and Eurostat. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
Chart 11 
Credit growth to the private sector 
Note: annual averages of monthly growth rates. 
Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF. 
Chart 12 
EMBIG spreads in the run-up to the Asian crisis 
Philippines – Malaysia 
Note: in bp. 
Source: Haver Analytics and JP Morgan. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  14 
 Sovereign credit ratings of selected East Asian countries 
Chart 13 
Sources: Moody’s based on a linear conversion of the ratings (with Aaa equal to 100 and 
Caa equal to 5). 
 Chart 14 
Average estimated real effective exchange rate  
overvaluation as of late 1996 
Note: in percentage. 
Source: Average values by estimates of Chinn (1998), Goldstein (1998), Tornell (1998) and 
Berg and Pattillo (1998). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
Current account balances in East Asia and the euro area 
Chart 15 
East Asia (1996) – Euro area (1999) 
Note: % of GDP. 
Source: Haver Analytics. 
Chart 16 
Fiscal costs of recapitalisation as % of GDP 
Note: high scenario. 
Source: IMF (1999). 
  16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 17 
Argentina public sector debt as % of GDP 
Share of foreign currency denominated debt in 2001: 97.59% 
Source: Haver Analytics. 
Chart 18 
Exchange rates vis-à-vis the USD for selected  
emerging Asia countries 
Note: 02/01/1997=100. 
Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
