DeLisle Worrell: The frontier of practice in international criminal law 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
University of the West Indies’ (UWI) Course in International Crime, Bridgetown, 17 January 
2011. 
 This  course  is  an  example  of  what  Barbados  needs  to  do  in  order  to  keep  up  with  the 
evolving challenges of globalisation. Globalisation is not new to us: the Barbados we know 
today was born of the global outreach of an expansionist English nation, and its economy 
grew through international commerce in sugar, slaves and consumption goods. What is new 
is  the  nature  of  Barbados’  economic  interface  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Very  little  now 
remains  of  the  sugar  economy  of  the  last  three  centuries.  What  we  have  today  is  an 
economy  driven  by  international  commerce  in  services,  principally  tourism  services,  with 
international business and financial services (IBFS) in second place. 
The  international  business  and  financial  services  sector  is  Barbados’  most  recent  foreign 
currency diversification initiative. Our success in this activity is a result of an emphasis on 
quality  –  of  regulation,  of  legislation,  and  of  official  administration.  In  order  to  maintain 
internationally acceptable quality we must constantly upgrade our performance in all these 
aspects – improving the adequacy of regulation, the appropriateness of legislation, and the 
processes  and  skills  which  enable  government  and  private  firms  to  provide  an  efficient 
professional service. 
The anti-money laundering (AML) framework, and the way we execute that framework, are 
crucial aspects of our quality control. We must constantly upgrade that framework to keep 
abreast of best international standards; we must take measures to equip official entities with 
the knowledge and skills to execute their responsibilities in a transparent, even-handed and 
expeditious  fashion.  Practitioners  must  fully  understand  and  implement  measures  and 
procedures,  which  will  ensure  that  their  operations  satisfy  a  demanding  international 
standard, all the while offering their clients a service that is competitive in price and quality. 
This  course  put  on  by  UWI  will  help  all  participants  to  remain  current  on  the  latest 
developments in international criminal law, so that we can enhance our standing among our 
competitors in the market for international business and financial services. 
The UWI is fortunate to have the benefit, as lecturer for this course, of one who has been 
writer,  teacher  and  service  provider  in  this  field  from  its  inception,  in  the  person  of  Bruce 
Zagaris.  Bruce’s  CV  speaks  for  itself:  he  has  a  B.A.,  J.D.,  and  LL.M.  from  The  George 
Washington  University,  Washington,  DC,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  universities  in  the 
US. Since November 1978, he has practiced law in Washington, D.C., where he is currently 
a  partner  with  Berliner  Corcoran  &  Rowe.  He  has  served  as  a  consultant,  counsel  and 
lobbyist for fourteen governments, including our own, on various subjects, many relating to 
aspects of international criminal or enforcement law. His work for governments has included 
negotiating,  advising  and  providing  public  relations  support  on  international  enforcement 
agreements.  Bruce  has  served  as  a  consultant  to  the  U.S.  Agency  for  International 
Development, the British High Commission, and UN projects on anti-money laundering and 
organized crime. Bruce’s work for private banks and corporations has involved counseling on 
prevention  strategies,  on  complying  with  anti-money  laundering  requirements,  on  the 
development of due diligence procedures, and on compliance with transnational corruption 
laws. 
Bruce has served as an expert witness and/or consultant on several occasions. The list of 
particulars  is  a  long  one.  He  has  handled  transfer  of  prisoner  applications  and  advised 
accused and convicted persons of the operation of applicable treaties and the pros and cons 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of  applying  under  them.  He  has  been  active  in  civil  prosecution  on  behalf  of  victims  of 
transnational crimes and torts. 
Bruce has testified before Congress in the US on the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery 
Act, on the U.S. Government’s efforts to combat international tax evasion, on Mutual Legal 
Assistance  Treaties,  and  on  a  National  Gambling  Impact  Study.  Bruce’s  work  with  the 
Executive  Branch  of  the  US  Government  includes  advising  on  strategy  for  dealing  with 
international organized crime, as well as writing, advising and lecturing on money laundering, 
international tax enforcement, and financial investigations. He has lectured to U.S. diplomats 
and staff, as well as to foreign governments and officials. 
Since  1985,  Bruce  has  edited  the  International  Enforcement  Law  Reporter,  a  monthly 
publication which discusses developments in international criminal and related enforcement 
law matters. It can be viewed at http://www.ielr.com. He has written extensively on issues of 
international criminal law, in a wide variety of publications. Bruce has appeared on many of 
the  leading  international  media  networks,  and  has  been  interviewed  and  quoted  in  the 
international press. 
To cap it all, Bruce Zagaris has been an advisor on international criminal law to a succession 
of Barbadian Government administrations, and has been, and continues to be, of invaluable 
assistance  to  us  in  that  capacity.  Beyond  this,  he  is  a  friend  of  Barbados,  one  of  a 
distinguished  list  of  international  luminaries  whose  informal  support  and  advice  has  done 
much to assist this small nation in making its way in a changing world. 
With  Bruce  Zagaris  as  lecturer,  this  week’s  course  takes  us  to  the  frontier  of  practice  in 
international criminal law, which is where we need to be, in order to be most competitive. Our 
heartfelt thanks to Bruce; we really do appreciate his willingness to put his expertise at our 
disposal, and the committed support he has given us, over the years. We look forward to a 
rewarding week with him. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
