Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 19 January 2011. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  January 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
The  global  economic  recovery  is  proceeding  at  a  somewhat  faster  pace  than  the 
Bank had anticipated, although risks remain elevated. Private domestic demand in 
the  United  States  has  picked  up  and  will  be  reinforced  by  recently  announced 
monetary and fiscal stimulus. 
European growth has also been slightly stronger than anticipated. However, ongoing 
challenges associated with sovereign and bank balance sheets will limit the pace of 
the  European  recovery  and  are  a  significant  source  of  uncertainty  to  the  global 
outlook. 
Some emerging markets have begun to implement more restrictive policy measures 
in response to overheating in their economies. The effectiveness of these policies 
will influence the path of commodity prices, which have increased significantly since 
October. 
The recovery in Canada is proceeding broadly as anticipated, with a period of more 
modest  growth  and  the  beginning  of  the  expected  rebalancing  of  demand.  The 
contribution of government spending is expected to wind down this year, consistent 
with announced fiscal plans. Stretched household balance sheets are expected to 
restrain the pace of consumption growth and residential investment. 
In  contrast,  business  investment  will  likely  continue  to  rebound  strongly,  owing  to 
stimulative  financial  conditions  and  competitive  imperatives.  Net  exports  are 
projected  to  contribute  more  to  growth  going  forward,  supported  by  stronger  U.S. 
activity and global demand for commodities. 
However,  the  cumulative  effects  of  the  persistent  strength  in  the  Canadian  dollar 
and Canada’s poor relative productivity performance are restraining this recovery in 
net exports and contributing to a widening of Canada’s current account deficit to a 
20-year high. 
Overall,  the  Bank  projects  the  economy  will  expand  by  2.4  per  cent  in  2011  and 
2.8 per cent in 2012 – a slightly firmer profile than had been anticipated in October. 
The Bank continues to expect that the economy will return to full capacity by the end 
of 2012. 
Underlying inflationary pressures remain subdued, reflecting the considerable slack 
in  the  Canadian  economy.  Core  inflation  is  projected  to  edge  gradually  up  to 
2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed. 
Inflation  expectations  remain  well-anchored.  Total  CPI  inflation  is  being  boosted 
temporarily by the effects of provincial indirect taxes, but is expected to converge to 
the 2 per cent target by the end of 2012. 
Despite  improvements  in  the  outlook  for  the  global  and  Canadian  economies,  the 
risks to inflation remain elevated. There are two main upside risks, relating to higher 
commodity  prices  and  the  possibility  of  greater-than-projected  momentum  in  the 
Canadian household sector. 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   The two main downside risks relate to Canadian competitiveness and the possibility 
of weaker-than-projected household expenditures in Canada. 
In addition, challenges in Europe continue to be a significant source of uncertainty 
for the global outlook. A comprehensive solution to the sovereign debt and financial 
stability issues in a number of countries will be required. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  its  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, 
consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target  in  an  environment  of 
significant  excess  supply  in  Canada.  Any  further  reduction  in  monetary  policy 
stimulus would need to be carefully considered. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
