Erkki Liikanen: Monetary policy under resource mobility  
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Bank  of 
Finland  200th  Anniversary  Conference  on  “Monetary  Policy  Under  Resource  Mobility”, 
Helsinki, 5 May 2011. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to this conference on Monetary Policy Under 
Resource Mobility. 
The conference has been arranged to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the establishment of 
the Bank of Finland in 1811. 
The Bank of Finland is the fourth oldest central bank still in operation; the Swedish Riksbank, 
the Bank of England and Banque de France are our seniors, in that order. 
It comes as a surprise to many that Finland’s central bank is much older than the country’s 
political  independence.  The  explanation  for  this  is  that,  once  Finland  had  been  conquered 
from Sweden by the Russian Empire, the Tsar granted the newly constituted Grand Duchy of 
Finland real autonomy from the start. The Bank of Finland was established as part of this 
national administration. 
In  the  1860s,  the  Bank  of  Finland  was  transferred  under  the  auspices  and  control  of  the 
Finnish Parliament, where it remains to this day. 
When Finland obtained her independence in 1917, the country had already had its national 
bank of issue for over a century. We had already had a national currency unit for more than 
fifty  years.  Still,  I  do  think  that  the  story  of  the  Finnish  currency  is  above  all  the  story  of 
integration, and the story of a quest for stability. Finland’s currency was born out of the desire 
for  stability  in  the  aftermath  of  the  great  commercial  crisis  of  1857.  This  global  crisis 
destabilized the Russian rouble. In Finland, the depreciation of the rouble raised demands for 
the re-establishment of the silver standard, even by unilateral action in Finland, if necessary. 
In  1860,  a  national  monetary  unit,  the  markka,  was  granted  to  Finland.  The  markka  was 
originally  defined  as  a  quarter  of  the  paper  rouble,  but  five  years  later  it  was  made 
convertible to silver. Thus, the Finnish currency was linked to the north European silver area, 
which consisted of the currencies of the Scandinavian countries and Germany. 
The goals of stability and international integration were seen as two sides of the same coin. 
So,  when  the  gold  standard  emerged  as  the  international  monetary  system  in  the  1870s, 
Finland joined it in 1878. 
The gold markka was defined as the exact equivalent of the gold franc. Finland became a 
member  of  the  franc  zone,  which  included  the  Latin  Monetary  Union  and  some  other 
countries which had adopted a monetary system identical to France. 
The early European integration of Finland came as a surprise to many. One of them was the 
famous German musician and conductor, Hans von Bülow. He travelled to Helsinki from St 
Petersburg in 1883 and wrote to his wife: 
“How are you? We are terribly well despite a severe cough and restless sleep – I 
have received the Russian New Year with great strength. But am I still in Russia? 
Here  they  follow  the  European  calendar,  speak  so  much  German,  Finnish  and 
Swedish, and also no longer count in roubles, but in markkaa and penniä, which 
have just the value of the French francs and centimes – also the postage stamps 
are different, as you see...” 
The  link  to  the  franc  proved  very  durable.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  markka  vis-à-vis  the 
franc remained stable until the First World War, 36 years later. This period was the time of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  great  industrial  takeoff  in  Finland.  The  country  began  to  catch  up  with  the  wealthier 
countries  of  Europe.  Capital  imports  were  a  crucial  ingredient  in  this  takeoff.  Railroad 
construction, in particular, was financed with bonds floated in Germany and France. 
The  same  drive  for  integration  and  search  for  stability  also  characterizes  the  later 
development  of  Finnish  monetary  policy.  The  arrangements  varied  –  the  interwar  gold 
standard,  the  sterling  bloc  in  the  1930s,  the  Bretton  Woods  system  –  but  monetary  and 
exchange  policy  was  always  seen  as  a  way  to  promote  the  country’s  participation  in  the 
international  division  of  labour,  and  so  to  overcome  the  very  limited  range  of  natural 
resources in Finland. 
The other side of the same coin was that the export-oriented growth policy of Finland relied 
much  on  devaluations  and  financial  repression,  especially  after  the  Second  World  War.  In 
terms  of  economic  growth,  the  results  were  good,  but  the  structure  of  the  economy,  and 
especially the financial sector, remained weak. 
Finland  successfully  caught  up  with  the  world’s  most  advanced  economies.  But  it  also 
experienced a traumatic financial crisis in the early 1990s. 
When money markets and capital movements were deregulated in Finland in the 1980s, the 
country was not ready. There was a backlog of demand for credit, inflation was too high and 
the  banks  were  undercapitalized.  A  credit  bubble  emerged,  fuelled  by  short-term  capital 
imports and rather reckless risk-taking in the banking sector. The result is familiar from many 
other countries today: a large current account deficit, a heavily indebted and uncompetitive 
economy and an overextended banking sector. 
Then, the Soviet economy collapsed at the start of the 1990s. This had a significant impact 
on Finnish export industry and triggered a severe economic and banking crisis, which was at 
that time the most severe in the OECD countries since the Second World War. 
Dear colleagues, friends, 
The choice of title for this conference – “Monetary policy under resource mobility” – reflects 
the central theme in the history of the Bank of Finland. It is also a central theme for all other 
central banks. 
The central bank works right at the nexus between the domestic economy, on the one hand, 
and  global  markets  and  policies,  on  the  other.  Central  banks  have  their  responsibilities  at 
both national and international level. When the world changes, the central banks are among 
the first to feel the changes; they work inside the changes as it were, and they may even be 
able to manage them. 
At  this  time,  the  world  economy  is  undergoing  profound  changes  that  pose  formidable 
challenges for both central banks and economic researchers. We are witnessing a process of 
great convergence. In a few years’ time the combined output of the emerging economies will 
surpass the output of the advanced economies when measured in purchasing power parities. 
It is not only about production of goods and services. 
It  is  also  about  capital.  The  emerging  economies  have  become  major  sources  of  savings, 
and  the  equilibrium  –  or  lack  of  it  –  of  global  supply  and  demand  hinges  on  how  the 
surpluses of some countries are channelled to other countries and used there. 
It is also about technology, which now spreads from country to country faster than before, 
narrowing  productivity  differentials  and  eroding  the  competitive  position  of  many  traditional 
centres of know-how. 
It is also about labour, as evidenced by migration flows and migration pressures across many 
borders in the world. 
I am very proud to note that our programme for tonight and tomorrow is filled with the world’s 
most distinguished academics and central bankers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We will start tonight with a session devoted to what we can learn from the economic history 
of globalization and global shifts. 
The topic will be introduced by professor Barry Eichengreen of the University of California 
at  Berkeley,  and  we  are  also  very  lucky  to  have  three  very  special  discussants,  each  of 
whom  has  an  excellent  vantage  point  over  the  global  shifts  that  we  are  talking  about: 
Masaaki  Shirakawa  (Bank  of  Japan),  Sergey  Ignatiev  (Bank  of  Russia)  and  Miguel 
Fernández Ordóñez (Bank of Spain). 
When the recent financial crises erupted in 2008, there was an emerging consensus in the 
world on the good strategies for central banks. This consensus emphasized the objective of 
price  stability,  which  could  be  pursued  by  a  suitably  informed  interest  rate  policy  and  the 
careful  management  of  inflation  expectations.  Now,  in  the  current  situation,  some  new  (or 
old)  questions  have  been  raised:  for  instance,  how  should  central  banks  relate  to  the 
objective of financial stability without compromising their commitment to price stability?  
Tomorrow, we will start with a monetary policy session presided over by the new president of the 
Bundesbank, Jens Weidmann. Professor Carl Walsh of the University of California at Santa 
Cruz will be the main speaker in that session, and three central bank governors – Athanasios 
Orphanides, from Cyprus, Mark Carney from Canada and Agustín Carstens from Mexico – 
will comment. 
The globalization of financial markets is not a new thing in itself, but during the most recent 
wave  of  globalization  the  volume  of  finance  channelled  through  international  financial 
markets has grown tremendously. At the same time, the stability of national economies has 
become absolutely dependent on the stability of the international financial markets. 
It is clear, then, that the world needs a global approach to financial stability. We are seeking 
a new balance between market discipline, transparency and stricter regulation of the conduct 
of financial institutions and market participants. 
In our second session tomorrow a panel will deal with some of the financial market issues. 
Three well known governors will participate in the panel: Stefan Ingves from Sweden, Yves 
Mersch from Luxembourg and Nout Wellink from the Netherlands, as well as a renowned 
researcher, Professor Bengt Holmström of MIT.  
The luncheon address will be given by Governor Mervyn King of the Bank of England, who, 
among his other distinctions, holds an honorary degree from the University of Helsinki. 
The  world  still  faces  tremendous  gaps  in  living  standards  between  countries,  and 
opportunities gaps between generations in many countries. Even in the advanced countries, 
the economic adjustment seems to be leaving large parts of the population, especially the 
young, with disappointingly few opportunities to realize their human potential. 
The narrowing of these gaps in living standards and opportunities requires economic growth. 
But  it  has  to  be  growth  which  is  consistent  with  the  new  divisions  of  labour  in  the  world 
economy, and which is sustainable in the context of scarce natural resources. 
In  a  market  economy,  economic  transformation  and  reallocation  is  the  business  of  the 
financial markets. But what kind of financial markets can support and promote such growth? 
How can it be regulated in the global context? What kind of international monetary system 
can  provide  the  infrastructure  for  it?  And  what  does  it  require  of  the  central  banking 
community? 
Tomorrow  afternoon  is  dedicated  to  the  issues  of  Finance  and  Economic  Growth.  The 
Keynote  speech  will  be  delivered  by  Janet  Yellen,  vice  chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board. 
The final panel will include Governor Stanley Fischer from the Bank of Israel and professors 
Philippe Aghion from Harvard and Martin Hellwig from the Max Planck Institute in Bonn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I am thrilled by the prospect of learning from this set of the world’s foremost minds, gathered 
here today, and am looking forward to many stimulating and fruitful exchanges. 
Once more, let me extend to you all a very warm welcome. Let the conference begin! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
