Paul Tucker: Macro and microprudential supervision  
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at  the  British  Bankers’  Association  Annual  International  Banking  Conference,  London, 
29 June 2011. 
 Introduction: redrawing the Social Contract for banking. 
The past month has been pretty busy. It has seen the publication of the draft legislation for 
reforming the UK’s regulatory architecture; the launch of the high-level blueprint for banking 
supervision under the future Prudential Regulation Authority; the Chancellor’s comments on 
the Vickers Report; and the first meeting and decisions of the Financial Policy Committee, 
the  UK’s  new  macroprudential  body.  That’s  just  in  the  UK!  There  is  plenty  going  on 
internationally too. Next month the G20 Financial Stability Board will publish two consultative 
papers:  one  on  the  greater  loss  absorbing  capacity  needed  by  systemically  important 
financial institutions, and the other on overhauling resolution regimes to cope with distress at 
SIFIs. 
It is understandably hard for the banking system and the market to make sense of how all 
this  fits  together.  I  therefore  want  today  to  organise  it  in  terms  of  redrawing  the  Social 
Contract between banking and the rest of society. 
Traditionally,  the  Contract  was  as  follows.  As deposit  takers,  banks  are  permitted  to  issue 
money,  enabling  them  to  profit  by  providing  liquidity-insurance  services  to  the  rest  of  the 
economy. They earn a spread between the rate paid on transactions deposits and the rate 
charged on loans that, on average, more than compensates for credit risk. But the maturity 
mismatches  inherent  in  bank  balance  sheets  makes  them  susceptible  to  runs  and  so  to 
collapse.  And  their  role  in  the  economy’s  payments  and  credit  system  makes  their  failure 
especially  costly.  In  consequence,  sound  banks  have  long  had  access  to  liquidity  from 
central  banks;  and 
industry-wide 
deposit-insurance  schemes  that  mutually  guarantee  the  value  of  transactions  deposits. 
Those state-sponsored measures reduce the probability of unwarranted failure, but they also 
increase the private returns to bankers and their shareholders by transferring some risk to 
the state. The final part of the Contract is, therefore, that banks’ business should be subject 
to regulation and supervision, so that the state can influence the risks that banking poses to 
the wider economy.   
In pretty well every dimension, that Social Contract was found wanting.  
The  regulatory  regime  was  revealed  to  be  riddled  with  design  faults.  Supervisors  in  many 
countries  did  not  compensate  for  those  regulatory  flaws.  And  they  even  drifted  away  from 
focusing  on  the  soundness  of  the  system  as  a  whole,  to  a  narrower  interest  in  consumer 
protection: a perverse development as consumers’ most basic financial need is the safety of 
the banking system. 
Central banks’ liquidity-insurance facilities were also found in need of running repairs. And in 
some centres, notably the US, it turned out to be necessary for the monetary authorities to 
extend liquidity temporarily to non-banks.  
Neither liquidity from central banks nor the availability of deposit insurance was enough to 
sustain confidence in ailing banks or to contain the economic costs of failure. Many banks 
proved  to  have  fundamental  problems  of  solvency  or  viability.  But  a  number  of  countries, 
including most painfully the UK, were exposed as lacking regimes for absorbing the failure of 
even  middle-sized  banks.  And  no  country  was  in  a  position  to  cope  with  the  failure  of  its 
largest and most complex banks and dealers. 
they  are  also  compelled  by 
the  state 
join 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The profits from maturity transformation and leverage had been enjoyed, but the authorities’ 
framework-regulation, supervision and crisis-management – had been found wanting. Partly 
because banking has evolved beyond the simpler structures contemplated when the existing 
regulatory framework was conceived.  
It  is  timely,  therefore,  to  review  progress  in  redrawing  the  banking  Social  Contract.  In 
particular,  I  shall  describe  the  work  underway  to  return  banking  supervision  to  its  historic 
mission of systemic stability, and of the new Financial Policy Committee role in that. 
Liquidity insurance and shadow banking 
On  central  banks’  provision  of  liquidity  insurance,  the  Bank  of  England  launched  new 
permanent facilities in a series of steps from October 2008 onwards. Through our Discount 
Window, we stand ready to lend against a very wide range of collateral, including portfolios of 
raw  loans  meeting  published  criteria.  Publication  of  use  of  the  Window  is  delayed  and  is 
confined to aggregate, average use over a quarter, so I trust there is no need for use to be 
stigmatised.  Following  practice  in  the  USA,  we  encourage  banks  to  pre-position  collateral 
with us. It is only prudent to do so. Banks’ boards, as well as their supervisors, should take 
an interest in this as part of ensuring banks have sensible contingency funding plans. The 
Bank  also  holds  a  monthly  auction of  funds  against  a  reasonably  wide  range  of  collateral. 
The size of those auctions could be increased to cope with stressed markets, and we are 
ready to do so where desirable.  
Access  to  our  liquidity-insurance  facilities  remains  confined  to  banks,  as  monetary 
institutions.  But  as  I  noted  earlier,  non-banks  –  including  money  funds  and  finance 
companies – turned to central banks for liquidity during the 2007–08 crisis. The prevalence of 
non-bank banks as they used to be called, or shadow banks as they are now known, was a 
deep faultline in the international financial system. Things cannot be left where they are. The 
status  quo  was  deeply  unsatisfactory,  and  if  we  do  nothing  it  will  be  made  worse  by  the 
re-regulation  of  the  banking  system,  which  creates  powerful  incentives  to  reinvent  the 
economic  substance  of  banking  beyond  the  perimeter  of  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision. The authorities internationally, led by the FSB and with the active involvement of 
Adair Turner and myself, are debating how to tackle the phenomenon of “shadow banking”. A 
preliminary, but I hope substantive report will go to G20 Ministers and Governors in October. 
And in the UK, we will be helped by the FPC’s responsibility to advise the government on 
when the perimeter of regulation needs to be altered.  
Deposit insurance and resolution  
The  reforms  of  Deposit  Insurance  are  hardly  less  important.  In  the  UK,  there  is  a  push 
towards the deposit insurer, the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, being able to pay 
out within 7 days. The Bank attaches very high priority to this indeed. There is still work to be 
done. It will entail costs for banks. The weaker standard of 20 days being contemplated by 
the EU is a serious mistake. That will eventually become apparent when, somewhere in the 
EU, depositors in a failed bank protest that they are suffering severe hardship from being cut 
off from their current account for weeks. Those are circumstances in which there would be 
calls for the state to step in to prevent the closure of ailing banks. 
This  highlights  the  biggest  hole  in  the  old  Social  Contract  –  the  absence  of  a  regime  for 
resolving  distressed  banks  in  a  way  that  avoids  both  taxpayer  support  and  systemic 
disorder. How to go about doing this was the principal subject of my speech here two years 
ago. Much has happened since. Next month, the G20 Financial Stability Board will publish a 
consultative  document  on  the  resolution  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions 
(SIFIs). It will cover resolution instruments; cross-border co-operation; and steps needed to 
reduce obstacles to resolution inherent in the organisation and practices of firms themselves. 
I will confine myself today to just a few words on the third of those planks. However good the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resolution  instruments  given  to  the  authorities  by  their  legislatures,  and  however  much 
progress  we  make  in  tightening  up  cross-border  co-operation,  formidable  obstacles  to  the 
resolution  of  the  big  global  firms  will  persist  so  long  as  their  organisational  structures  and 
practices  remain  so  complex.  Indeed,  one  useful  way  of  thinking  about  the  ICB’s 
recommendations  on  ring-fencing  UK  retail  banking  is  to  make  it  easier  to  apply  different 
resolution tools to different parts of the business. Whether or not other countries adopt that 
approach,  it  will  be  necessary  everywhere  for  firms  to  document  and  simplify  intra-group 
transactions,  and  to  ensure  that  IT  and  other  services  provided  by  one  group  company  to 
another could be sustained for a period if they were separated in the course of resolution. It 
is striking that supervisors almost everywhere allowed such spaghetti to develop, especially 
given  the  key  lesson  of  the  BCCI  saga  –  legislated  for  in  the  EU  –  of  not  to  allowing 
unsupervisable structures.  
In the UK, the emphasis on resolvability has informed the review of banking supervision that 
we have been undertaking with FSA colleagues.  
Microprudential supervision and resolvability 
Traditionally, bank supervisors worked to reduce the probability of firm failure. They did so, of 
course, because of the costs of failure. Yet they did not spend much time working out how to 
handle a firm’s failure in the event of prophylactic supervision proving insufficient. That was a 
major  problem  in  the  very  conception  of  prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  going  back 
decades.  
In future in the UK, a core role of supervisors will be to work backwards from what would 
happen  at  the  point  of  failure.  A  bank’s  resolvability  and  the  likely  consequences  for  the 
system  if  it  failed  will  be  incorporated  into  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority’s  planned 
risk-assessment  framework,  which  will  replace  ARROW  as  Hector  Sants  has  explained. 
Recovery and Resolution Plans – or “living wills” – will be required to ensure that failure does 
not lead to avoidable disorder. 
In  pursuing  this,  the  supervisors  will  need  to  work  closely  with  the  team  in  the  Bank  who 
operate  the  UK’s  Special  Resolution  Regime.  That  should  be  helped  enormously  by  the 
planned  new  Proactive  Intervention  Framework  or  PIF,  a  major  reform  involving  each  firm 
being “Staged” for internal purposes by the prudential supervisors. My personal expectation 
is that it would be an odd world if there weren’t quite a few firms at Stage 2 even in a more 
benign  economic  and  financial  environment.  And  as  a  bank’s  PIF  ranking  rises,  the 
Resolution team will progressively become more engaged with it. The details of this need to 
be worked on by Hector and me with our teams, but it will be a big change from the past.  
A central element of the new Social Contract for banking is that firms must be fit to fail in an 
orderly  way.  Working  backwards  from  that  ultimate  objective  will  necessarily  change  the 
dialogue between banks and their supervisors.  
Microprudential and macroprudential 
This  is  consistent  with  the  government’s  plan  that  the  statutory  objective  of  banking 
supervision should be recast in terms of firms being sufficiently safe and sound to ensure the 
stability of the system. That is a profound change.  
Supervisors  will  need  to  focus  on  the  big  issues.  Analysing  bank  balance  sheets  and 
businesses. Applying judgment. To my mind a great bank supervisor is forensic; is capable 
of  substituting  their  judgment  for  those  of  management;  but  is  wise  enough  to  do  so  only 
where  necessary;  and  has  the  personality  to  conduct  the  regulatory  relationship  without 
unnecessary conflict.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In another return to the distant past, the supervisor cannot treat firms as islands. They are 
part  of  a  system.  So,  at  the  very  least,  supervisors  will  need  to  look  laterally  across  peer 
groups  of  firms  for  oddities,  and  stress  test  firms’  resilience  against  short-term  and 
longer-fuse  threats  from  the  environment.  They  will,  therefore,  need  to  draw  on  market 
intelligence on industry trends from the Bank’s Markets area; insights from the operators and 
overseers of the clearing, settlement and payment systems; and analysis from the finance 
and  monetary  researchers  in  the  Bank.  Conversely,  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  
will  –  and  already  has  –  drawn  on  briefings  from  the  supervisors  as  well  as  the  Bank’s 
existing staff. In other words, this is going to be about making connections, pulling together a 
varied  range  of  inputs.  A  measure  of  the  Bank’s  success  when  prudential  supervision 
transfers will be how well we knit them together. The Court of the Bank will play an important 
role in ensuring that the executive of the Bank delivers on this. 
What  all  this  amounts  to  is  framing  microprudential  regulation  and  supervision  to  deliver 
macroprudential objectives.  
Experience around the world demonstrates that it is hard to keep supervisors focused on the 
stability of the system as a whole.  
The  UK’s  Financial  Policy  Committee  is  designed  to  achieve  that.  By  creating  a  new 
institution within the Bank of England, the government is ensuring that stability does not fall 
by the wayside, into the gap between monetary policy at one end of the spectrum and the 
regulation of firms at the other. As the Governor of the Bank said recently at the Mansion 
House,  an  important  part  of  the  FPC’s  role  will  be  to  steer,  to  orient  the  work  of  the 
microsupervisors  in  the  light  of  the  assessment  of  short-term  and  longer-term  risks  to 
stability. That was in evidence at the FPC’s very first meeting, a fortnight ago. 
The Financial Policy Committee’s first decisions 
The  decision  and  Record  of  that  meeting  were  published  last  week.  They  increase 
transparency around financial stability policy, and are instructive for what lies ahead.  
It will have been no surprise that the Committee regards the current economic and financial 
environment as presenting very real risks to stability, with the euro area’s problems foremost 
amongst them. The Committee decided to advise the FSA to find out more about the banking 
system’s exposures, to disclose more, and to get the banks themselves to disclose more. As 
part of that, FSA will be looking more closely at banks’ forbearance policies and practices. 
That is not just about internal systems and controls, important though they are. It is, centrally, 
about  forming  judgments  on  the  adequacy  of  provisions.  As  such  it  is  a  step  towards 
supervisors  satisfying  themselves  about  the  broad  robustness  of  bank’s  asset  valuations 
and risk weightings – a vital element of assessing capital adequacy.  
Crucially,  beyond  that,  the  Committee  asked  the  regulators  to  ensure  that,  in  the  quarters 
ahead, banks should build their capital resources by retaining more than usual of their profits 
when profits are buoyant. Although the FPC does not yet have statutory powers, this was a 
sizable step away from the role played by the Bank over the past decade or so. It is not a 
sermon. It is a plan.  
To  give  it  teeth,  the  Committee  considered  whether  or  not  to  set  quantitative  limits  on 
distributions and/or qualitative guidance on what should be treated as “buoyant” profits. But 
given the highly varied circumstances of UK banks, we concluded that it is more sensible in 
the first instance for FSA to work out the details in its supervision of individual firms. These 
will be meaningful discussions, and FSA will report back to FPC on progress.  
That measure is being taken in order to make the UK banking system more resilient, and so 
better able to maintain credit supply, in the face of threats that could crystallise any time over 
the next year or so.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  FPC  also  looked  at  whether  any  developments  in  markets  might  pose  a  longer-term 
threat to stability. We were struck that a renewed Search for Yield is already evident in some 
markets, and that this is reflected in innovations that could add to the complexity and opacity 
of  the  system.  The  drift  of  Exchange-Traded  Funds  away  from  their  original  bearings  is 
striking.  The  Bank  team  have  briefed  various  international  bodies,  including  the  Financial 
Stability Board, on this over the past year. Compared with their vanilla forebears, there are 
now  ETFs  incorporating  leverage,  active  management  and  synthetic  structures.  As  FPC 
discussed, it is important for the European Securities Markets Authority to act to ensure that 
its  regime  for  investment  products  does  not  fall  further  behind.  HMT  and  FSA  lead  those 
negotiations for the UK.  
More  locally,  FPC  asked  the  FSA’s  bank  supervisors  to  ensure  that  banks’  liquidity 
management takes proper account of any maturity mismatches associated with using ETFs 
as a direct or indirect source of funding. Although the main bank sponsors of synthetic ETFs 
are not currently UK banks, there is a signal here for UK banks – and, in fact, one for our 
international peers too. As I explained at last Friday’s FPC press conference, this is part of a 
bigger issue around the use of collateral swaps or other similar transactions for funding. The 
authorities  have  not  done  enough,  in  my  personal  view,  to  encourage  robust  practices  in 
repo and securities lending markets. That is likely to form part of the FSB’s work on shadow 
banking.  
The broader point here is that the FPC will try to nip incipient problems in the bud. If only 
someone had taken action to contain the mutation of securitisation a decade ago.  
On each of these fronts, the FPC is acting through the microregulator, the FSA. That is partly 
because  the  legislation  has  not  yet  passed,  and  so  the  statutory  powers  lie  with  the  FSA. 
But, more basically, it is because macroprudential interventions will nearly always involve the 
systematic application of microregulatory instruments in the interests of the resilience of the 
system as a whole.  
In the future, that will sometimes involve the Financial Conduct Authority as well as the PRA. 
What is different between the macroprudential regime we now have and the past is that the 
FPC will be steering and, once the legislation is complete, Recommending and sometimes 
Directing the microregulators to take action. That is a major change in the UK’s regime. 
And it will occasionally mean Taking Away The Punchbowl, leaning against excess. No set of 
static  regulatory  requirements  will  suffice  for  all  seasons.  The  FPC  will  be  ready  to  alter 
regulatory  requirements  dynamically,  so  far  as  the  constraints  of  EU  legislation  are 
consistent with actions to preserve stability.1 
Conclusion 
The new Social Contract for banking insists on resolvability and on the health of the system 
as a whole. In doing so, the goal is to move towards a financial system that is able to keep 
lending even during dark times.  
Rapid payout from deposit insurance; liquidity provision against wider collateral; constraints 
on shadow banking to limit regulatory arbitrage; simplification of SIFIs’ internal structures and 
practices  to  aid  resolvability;  powers  for  resolution  agencies  to  reconstruct  the  capital 
structure  of  a  distressed  bank  or  dealer,  to  avoid  the  disorder  of  orthodox  liquidation;  a 
capital surcharge for SIFIs; the FPC temporarily raising capital or liquidity requirements in the 
face  of  stability-threatening  exuberance  –  these  will  all  be  parts  of  the  new  Contract.  It  is 
unfinished  business,  but  the  shape  should  be  clear  by  the  time  of  the  G20  Heads  of 
Government Summit in November. 
                                                 
1  See Tucker P M W, “Macroprudential policy: building financial stability institutions”, April 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
As you can see, the lessons of the crisis fall into two broad groups: Repairs and Revolutions. 
The  changes  in  capital  and  liquidity  regulation,  however  big,  are  essentially  repairs.  They 
improve on what was there before.  
There are revolutions on two fronts. Resolution regimes. And macroprudential regimes. As I 
have  explained  today,  both  will  have  a  profound  influence  on  supervision.  Indeed,  it  is  no 
exaggeration  to  say  that,  in  the  UK,  the  approach  of  the  future  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority to banking supervision is being framed by the needs and goals of resolution and 
macroprudential oversight.  
Supervisors will focus to a much greater extent than ever before on coping with failure and 
on the stability of the system. That will become apparent in the years ahead.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
