Jean-Claude Trichet: La gouvernance de la zone euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at the  Notre 
Europe  Séminaire  en  Hommage  à  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  in  the  session  “Quel  bilan 
pour l’Union Economique et Monétaire”, Brussels, 4 April 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  Notre  Europe  and  the  Egmont  Institute  for  the  invitation  to  this 
conference today in honour of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa.  
Tommaso was a man of culture, a man of vision and a man of action. I had the privilege, 
during a great number of years, to work close to him in different positions and then to work 
with him in the Executive Board of the European Central Bank. In the Executive Board he did 
marvels, particularly in the area of international relations where his tireless activity permitted 
many advances, in the domain of payment systems in which he had acquired in Basel the 
best global expertise, and in the crucial dimension of financial stability where his diagnosis 
on our global and European institutional weaknesses proved unfortunately to be prophetic.  
But,  overall,  Tommaso  was  a  European,  a  militant  of  the  European  Union’s  historical 
endeavour. And although it is with a heavy heart, it is inspiring to speak on a subject that was 
so dear to him and so central to his life’s work.  
Let  me  also  remind  us  that  I  am  in  the  purdah  period,  and  nothing  I  will  say  can  be 
interpreted in terms of future monetary policy.  
We all know that the Chinese leader Zhou Enlai, when asked in 1971 about the impact of the 
French revolution, famously replied that it was “too early to tell”. 
What  Zhou  Enlai  confirmed  in  this  comment  is  the  difficulty  of  making  assessments  of 
historical  processes  at  a  particular  point  in  time.  There  is  always  a  risk  of  being  too 
influenced  by  the  circumstances  of  the  present.  This  can  lead  to  judgments  that  lack  an 
appropriate, encompassing perspective.  
The same remarks apply when assessing EMU at a particular point in time.  
To avoid the trap of being over-influenced by the present, a broader framework for assessing 
EMU  is  needed.  To  this  end,  I  would  like  to  draw  on  a  framework  put  forward  by  French 
historian Fernand Braudel. 
In  his  seminal  study  of  the  development  of  social  structures  in  Europe,  Braudel  identified 
three levels of time which are necessary to understand historical change. The first level was 
the  longue  durée:  the  deep  processes  over  long  periods  that  shape  the  structures  of 
economy and society. Such a long term perspective is important to assess EMU because a 
key objective is to further the historic project of European integration. 
The second level of time was the époque: the trends that define a particular period of history. 
This  medium-term  perspective  is  also  relevant  because  the  Treaty  has  set  aims  for  EMU 
which are best assessed over the medium-term – most notably ensuring price stability. 
The third level was l’histoire événementielle: the events of the day that shaped the course of 
current affairs. This near term perspective is significant because the litmus test of any union 
is how it responds to unforeseen stresses and challenges – and EMU has experienced just 
such circumstances together with all advanced economies since 2007. 
Such  a  textured  approach  may  give  a  more  comprehensive  picture  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. I will discuss each level in turn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The longue durée 
Let me start with the long-term perspective, the longue durée. For Braudel the longue durée 
concerned  the  slow  and  subtle  effects  of  deep  social  and  economic  changes.  It  is  an 
important  perspective  because  EMU  is  part  of  a  historical  process  to  deepen  economic 
integration in Europe, and thereby, as Montesquieu famously argued, to make the countries 
of Europe “reciprocally dependent; and their union is founded on mutual necessities.” 
It would be fair to say that this ambitious aim has been achieved. The ideas for the start of a 
European Community, presented as early as in the speech of Robert Schumann in 1950, for 
an  economic  and  monetary  union  laid  out  in  the  Werner  Report  in  1971  and  then  in  the 
Delors Report in 1988 have become reality. Going further back, a single market with a single 
currency represents – to various degrees – the fulfillment of the visions of thinkers like Victor 
Hugo  in  the  19th  century,  Immanuel  Kant  in  the  18th  century,  Hugo  Grotius  in  the  17th 
century,  and  Erasmus  in  the  16th  century.  EMU  has  brought  economic  gains  and  thereby 
help lay the foundations for “perpetual peace” in Europe.  
This wish for deeper integration is not only a philosophical pretension but also evident in the 
attitudes  of  European  citizens.  Surveys  indicate  that,  on  average  in  euro  area  countries, 
more  than  80  per  cent  of  euro  area  citizens  are  in  favour  of  greater  policy  coordination 
between countries to overcome the crisis. This suggests that European integration has led 
Europe’s  citizens  to  fundamentally  reappraise  the  value  of  cooperation  in  difficult  times. 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  constitutes  the  avant  garde  of  this  long  term  historical 
process. 
It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  this  long  term  perspective,  looking  beyond  the  ongoing 
economic and financial challenges in the euro area. EMU is an unprecedented achievement 
in  history  of  sovereign  nations.  Euro  area  countries  have  voluntarily  chosen  to  share 
sovereignty for the sake of common goals.  
The “époque” 
Let me now turn to the epochal view. The epoch in Braudel’s view is a period of time over 
which  medium  term  trends  can  be  meaningfully  assessed.  The  medium  term  for  central 
banks, as regards the definition of price stability, is a duration of several years. Therefore the 
12 years since the launch of EMU is an appropriate length of time to allow for a review of 
whether medium term goals have been met. 
As regards Monetary Union the first aim is price stability, the primary mandate of the ECB. 
The ECB Governing Council has defined price stability as an annual increase in consumer 
prices of below 2%, but close to 2%, over the medium term. Since the launch of EMU the 
average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. This is a better performance 
than  any  large  European  economy  over  the  last  50  years.  It  has  also  helped  the  euro 
establish itself as the second-most important international reserve and transaction currency, 
trusted by financial markets.  
This  has  been  possible  because  the  ECB’s  actions  were  enshrined  in  a  medium-term 
oriented  monetary  policy  strategy.  Our  definition  of  price  stability  is  the  needle  in  our 
compass and has guided the steady course of monetary policy over the last 12 years. 
On a consolidated basis the euro area performed well in terms of growth and employment, 
also in an international comparison. Adjusted for differences in population growth, per capita 
GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  over  the  last  decade  has  been  almost  the  same  as  in  the 
United  States,  at  about  1%  per  year.  As  regards  the  dispersion  of  real  GDP  growth  rates 
across euro area countries, they are comparable to the equivalent dispersion between the 
states  of  the  U.S.  On  employment,  the  euro  area  made  significant  progress  as  well,  with 
overall employment increasing by 14 million during the first twelve years, compared with a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increases 
labour  costs, 
in  public  and  private  debt  and 
rise  in  employment  of  about  8  million  in  the  United  States.  And  the  overall  yearly  public 
finance deficit is presently about half of that in the U.S. or in Japan. 
However, the crisis has revealed that not all of these gains in all countries were sustainable 
or  balanced.  Some  euro  area  countries  did  not  follow  rules  for  the  conduct  of  national 
economic  policies.  Between  1999  and  2008  significant  fiscal  and  broader  macroeconomic 
imbalances appeared. 
In  a  stability-orientated  economic  and  monetary  union,  countries  have  to  keep  their  fiscal 
house in order. Fiscal and broader macroeconomic policies have to keep domestic demand 
in  line  with  rates  of  sustainable  growth  and  price  stability.  Otherwise  the  result  will  be 
escalating  unit 
in 
competitiveness. 
So if I sum up the “époque” from the start of the euro until the global crisis, during the first 
nine years of the euro I would say that we could observe a remarkable success of monetary 
union as a whole and a much less flattering behaviour of the economic union, both because 
a number of countries were not respecting individually the rules of the Stability and Growth 
Pact, and also because all member countries collectively did not exert the surveillance, which 
was commanded by the Pact. 
In that sense, the global crisis, which intensified in 2008, has acted as revelatory. It marks 
the end of the first “époque”.  
More than before, from now on it appears absolutely essential that all euro area countries 
adhere to the ambitious fiscal consolidation plans to which they have committed in front of 
their peers and restore the confidence of firms, households and investors in the soundness 
of  public  finances.  Fiscal  consolidation  is  an  essential  first  step  on  the  path  back  to 
sustainable and balanced growth in the countries concerned, and ultimately to achieve the 
objectives of the Treaty and the expectations of European citizens. It is equally essential that 
all euro area countries create a strong surveillance of their competitiveness indicators and of 
their imbalances as a second “pillar” of their governance.  
losses 
L’histoire événementielle 
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  near-term  perspective,  l’histoire  événementielle.  For  Braudel  this 
period  of  time  concerned  “events,  politics  and  people”  and  how  their  real  time  activities 
shaped the course of history. This is a significant perspective because EMU is a “community 
of destiny” that is responsible for taking measures to ensure the best interests of its citizens. 
Thus  an  assessment  of  EMU  has  to  take  into  account  how  it  responds  to  and  manages 
challenges. 
The  severe  challenges  since  2007  and,  more  particularly,  since  the  intensification  of  the 
crisis, in September 2008, have provided EMU, as well as all advanced economies, with the 
toughest global test since at least 65 years. 
EU policy makers have so far responded to these testing times effectively. 
The ECB has been fully faithful to its primary mandate, price stability, in deciding on interest 
rates,  its  standard  policy  measures.  And,  taking  into  account  that  the  financial  crisis  was 
hampering the normal transmission of its monetary policy, it has decided a number of non-
standard measures to help restore a more normal function of this transmission.  
Member States also took important measures. No systemically important financial institution 
in  the  euro  area  was  allowed  to  fail.  All  euro  area  countries  undertook  ambitious  fiscal 
consolidation. Two stability facilities with a total volume of €500bn were established.  
And  these  achievements  have  to  be  set  in  context.  Observers  often  compare  EMU  with  a 
unitary state like the U.S. and Japan and expect similar policy responses. Yet EMU remains 
a union of sovereign states that has its own logic for addressing challenges. This leads to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
outcomes that are not always linear. Seen in this light, EMU’s response seems all the more 
impressive. 
Indeed,  one  should  not  exaggerate  the  differences,  as  regards  diversity  of  economic 
behaviour of member economies, between a full fledged political federation like the US and 
the  Euro  area.  As  I  mentioned  before,  the  difference  between  the  fastest  and  slowest-
growing  U.S.  states  is  not  of  a  different  order  of  magnitude  as  that  between  euro  area 
countries.  For  instance,  between  Oklahoma  and  Nevada  there  was  a  13%  difference  in 
growth  in  2009;  between  Slovakia  and  Ireland  the  difference,  which  was  the  highest  that 
year,  was  around  9%  in  2008.  The  same  is  true  of  employment.  In  2009  the  largest 
difference  in  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  was  between  Spain,  with  18%,  and  the 
Netherlands, with 3.7%; for the U.S. between Michigan, with 13.6%, and North Dakota, with 
4.3%.  
But, that being said, if a lot has been done in Europe a lot remains to be done in the domain 
of  economic  governance.  The  problems  with  the  economic  pillar  of  EMU  that  I  described 
above  result  from  weak  governance.  The  solution  to  these  problems  involves  resolutely 
strengthening economic union by a major change in its governance. As I said, we need to 
make  a  “quantum  leap”  by  both  reinforcing  the  fiscal  pillar  of  governance,  which  is  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  by  creating  a  new  pillar  of  governance,  namely  a  strong 
surveillance  of  competitiveness  indicators  and  imbalances.  There  is  a  third  pillar  of 
governance  of  the  Economic  Union  in  the  EMU,  which  is  as  important  for  the  European 
Union as a whole as it is for EMU: the structural reforms embedded in the “Europe 2020” 
strategy. These structural reforms are essential to elevate the growth potential of the single 
market of Europe as well as of the single market with a single currency. 
The Council has recognised the need for stronger rules for fiscal policy and the necessity of 
a new surveillance framework for macroeconomic imbalances. But in my view, it does not go 
far enough.  
The  proposals  currently  on  the  table  should  be  strengthened  to  reach  this  very  significant 
jump towards closer economic union that is required. The ECB strongly believes that more 
ambitious  reforms  are  needed  for  the  euro  area  and  it  is  convinced  that  the  Trialogue 
between  the  Council,  the  Commission  and  the  Parliament  will  permit  the  Parliament  to 
significantly improve the texts that were presented to it. 
This  is  much  more  than  a  simple  procedural  concern.  Stronger  economic  governance  is 
essential  to  support  the  fundamental  construction  of  EMU.  A  union  with  a  centralised 
monetary  policy  but  decentralised  economic  policies  needs  appropriate  mechanisms  to 
balance the independence of countries and their economic interdependence.  
Conclusion 
It is essential when discussing Economic and Monetary Union to take an appropriately broad 
view. EMU is a major step in a major long historical process that cannot be judged solely on 
the basis of passing events, of l’histoire événementielle.  
That said, how the euro area responds to the challenges of the “époque” it is currently facing 
together with all other advanced economies, will influence the historical trajectory of Europe. 
The  key  question  is  whether  governments  can  put  in  place  a  very  significantly  reinforced 
governance of their economic union in order to reap the full benefits of the single currency. 
This will determine whether the new “époque” which is ahead of us after the crisis is a time of 
economic and financial stability, of sustained growth and of sustained job creation. It will also 
be decisive in giving a direction to the historical evolution of Europe in the perspective of the 
“longue durée”.  
The historical stakes are important. Either we prove that we are able to find the new strong 
reinforced  governance  concept,  which  will  fit  with  a  constellation  of  sovereign  states  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
permit  the  European  Union  to  face  up  with  the  new  globalised  world.  Or,  we  do  not 
convincingly succeed into this direction, and then a new jump in the institutional framework of 
Europe toward a political federation will appear necessary.  
It is often said that Europe has demonstrated the capacity to make progress when it has to 
draw  lessons  from  its  own  difficulties.  I  find  this  notion  in  Jean  Monnet’s  remarks, 
immediately  after  the  conference  of  the  “six”  on  23  July  1952,  on  the  E.C.S.C.,  almost 
60 years  ago.  At  the  end  of  Chapter  14  of  his  mémoires,  he  writes:  “Je  dis  à  François 
Fontaine: Nous avons quelques heures pour nous reposer, et quelques mois pour réussir. 
Ensuite… Ensuite – poursuivit Fontaine en souriant, nos rencontrerons de grandes difficultés 
dont nous nous servirons pour avancer à nouveau. – C’est bien cela, n’est-ce pas ? – C’est 
cela même. Vous avez tout compris sur l’Europe.” 
“I  told  François  Fontaine :  We  have  a  few  hours  to  rest,  and  a  few  months  to  succeed. 
Then…  Then  said  a  smiling  Fontaine,  we  will  meet  great  difficulties  which  we  will  use  to 
advance  further.  Is  it  the  right  way  to  look  at  it ?  It  is  exactly  the  right  way.  You  have 
understood everything about Europe!” 
Tommaso  was  often  mentioning  this  remark  of  Jean  Monnet  when  we  were  discussing 
together the future of Europe.  
More than ever, Europe, coping with the present challenges, needs to demonstrate its sense 
of direction. This is no time for fatigue. This is no time for complacency.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
