Jean-Claude Trichet: E pluribus unum – the legacy of Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the colloquium 
in honour of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa at the Bocconi University, Milan, 1 February 2011. 
 Mr President of the Republic, 
Dear Members of the family of Tommaso, 
Dear Mario Monti, Dear Carlo Ciampi, Cher Jacques Delors, 
Dear Romano Prodi, Dear Paul Volcker, Dear Mario Draghi, 
Dear Friends from all over Europe and the world,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
“Aún aprendo” – “I am still learning”. This is the name of a painting by the late Spanish painter 
Francisco Goya.  
A beautiful, colourful souvenir with this very motto – “I am still learning” – is what Tommaso 
gave  to  his  colleagues  when  he  completed  his  seven-year  mandate  as  a  member  of  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  2005.  It  was  well  chosen.  For  it 
encapsulates  his  own  tireless  search  for  knowledge  and  new  ideas  and  in  particular  how 
Tommaso saw, and shaped, the world around him: central banking, the single currency and 
European unification.  
Tommaso once told to me what his high school teachers advised him in his early youth: that 
he needed to decide what interests him most: whether to understand or whether to change 
the world. The choice of Tommaso was economics. And, because the subject of economics 
is human action, he thought that the call for action would prevail, in his motivations, over the 
enquiring spirit. I remain profoundly impressed by the remarkable capacity of Tommaso to 
combine  practical  activity  with  deep  reflection  and  accurate  analysis,  without  which  action 
would be ineffective.  
This has been his way to be in the world and to search for truth.  
In  1998,  Tommaso  joined  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  to  serve  a  currency  and  an 
institution that few had believed would be created in time according to the Treaty. A currency 
and  an  institution  he  had  contributed  to  design  when  he  was  a  rapporteur  of  the  Delors 
Committee. The institution was assigned the extraordinary mission to deliver to 11 and, soon 
after, 12 nations and 300 million Europeans a currency which would have the highest level of 
confidence and credibility from the start.  
Over  the  course  of  his  central  banking  career,  Tommaso  gradually  developed  a  general 
paradigm  of  what  he  believed  central  banking  involves.  This  paradigm  is  drawn  from  the 
evolution  of  modern  central  banks  over  the  last  200  years.  As  the  role  of  money  –  as  a 
means of payment, a unit of account and a store of value – evolved over time, also what he 
called  the  triadic  function  of  central  banking  evolved.  In  his  view,  ensuring  price  stability 
refers  to  money  as  a  unit  of  account  and  a  store  of  value;  operating  and  supervising  the 
payment system refers to money as a means of payment; and pursuing the stability of banks 
refers to money as a means of payment and a store of value. I would add that price stability 
is  the  primary  goal,  the  primary  mandate  and  that  ensuring  price  stability  is  also  a 
precondition for the other functions to be correctly exerted.  
Tommaso’s paradigm still provides a single and consistent order, in which the responsibilities 
of  a  central  bank  have  their  place.  To  each  of  these  activities  –  from  monetary  policy  to 
banknote  printing,  to  market  operations,  financial  stability,  payment  systems,  relations  with 
other public institutions, dialogue with the financial community and international cooperation – 
Tommaso has been assigned at different stages of his professional life.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In all these activities the central bank pursues and represents the public interest of a sound 
and credible currency, one that preserves its value over time. 
And  it  is  with  great  pride  that  I  say  today,  in  particular  thanks  to  Tommaso’s  contribution, 
together with all members of the Executive Board, of the Governing Council and the staff of 
the ECB, that our primary mandate has been fulfilled: with an average inflation rate in the 
euro area over the past 12 years of 1.97%, the ECB governing council has delivered what 
330 million Europeans expect – “la difesa del risparmio”, “die Währung zu sichern”, “assurer 
la stabilité des prix”.  
This remarkable track record has been delivered by a team of, today, 18 central banks (the 
ECB, as captain of the team, and the national central banks of the 17 euro area countries), 
which  we  call  the  Eurosystem.  From  the  very  beginning,  Tommaso  saw  the  challenge  of 
making the full body of the Eurosystem an effective, continent-wide central bank, to make all its 
components act together, as I call it, as a true team, with a strong and dedicated team spirit.  
It has not always been easy to draw the appropriate line between preserving the diversity of 
national  traditions,  cultures  and  institutional  arrangements,  which  illustrate  the  richness  of 
Europe, and being European in the definition of the policy missions and pursuing the public 
interest.  
Tommaso  was  a  central  banker  by  profession,  but  he  was  also  an  advocate  of  a  united 
Europe by deep personal conviction. European unification as a project which is economic in 
content and historically strategic.  
On  the  one  hand,  the  creation  of  a  single  market  was  a  process.  A  process  that  could 
ultimately lead to the contradiction which Tommaso referred to as the “inconsistent quartet” – 
that  free  trade,  free  mobility  of capital,  a system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  and  autonomous 
national monetary policies were incompatible. One of the four would come under pressure 
and would have be surrendered in order to avoid inconsistency.  
The single currency was the way to square the circle in merging all the independent national 
monetary policies.  
One single money for one single market.  
Tommaso  saw  the  creation  of  the  single  currency  as  an  ultimate  integrative  step,  in  the 
clearly defined policy field of monetary policy and was very aware of the responsibility given 
to  the  ECB  to  make  this  a  success  and  a  stepping  stone  for  completing  and  achieving 
economic  integration.  The  euro  contained  a  strong  commitment  to  move  towards  more 
economic integration.  
One  of  the  lessons  of  the  present  crisis  is  precisely  the  necessity  to  not  only  very  strictly 
apply the governance of the fiscal policy that was enshrined in the Maastricht treaty and in 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  but  to  reinforce  very  significantly  this  governance  and  to 
enlarge it to the surveillance of competitive indicators and macropolicies. 
This  is  why  I  called,  on  behalf  of  the  governing  council  of  the  ECB,  for  a  quantum  leap 
towards strengthening the institutional foundations of EMU and deepening economic union. 
The framework for economic governance needs to take into account that the euro area must 
operate,  de  facto,  as  a  quasi-fiscal  federation,  in  which  the  college  of  participating 
governments  has  the  responsibility  of  exerting  a  very  strong  surveillance  on  national 
economic and fiscal policies.  
Tommaso  has  always  been  very  profoundly  convinced  that  it  was  necessary  to  reinforce 
considerably the E letter in EMU in order for Economic Union (EU) to be fully commensurate 
to Monetary Union (MU). And the time to move is now. 
We  need,  in  particular,  a  stronger  role  of  EU  institutions,  quasi-automaticity  of  the 
surveillance  process,  quasi-automaticity  of  sanctions,  a  much  more  effective  enforcement. 
We need sound economic and fiscal policies to be performed individually by each nation and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to be effectively and rigorously controlled by the peers, in each member’s very own interest 
and in the interest of all.  
When  the  sad  news  of  Tommaso’s  passing  away  reached  us,  we  were  preparing  the 
inaugural meeting of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which I have the honour to 
chair.  Poor  Tommaso  passed  away  before  we  had  the  ESRB  inaugural  meeting  on 
20 January  2011.  In  commemorating  Tommaso  and  his  legacy,  the  ESRB  deserves  a 
particular  mention  because  the  reform  of  Europe’s  supervisory  architecture  was,  like  the 
single currency, one of his more profoundly held professional concerns.  
Indeed,  Europe  has  been  confronted  with  the  problem  of  asymmetry  between  economic 
development and institutional response also in the area of financial markets. While financial 
integration  in  the  Single  Market  was  progressing,  regulation  and  supervision  remained 
fragmented.  Tommaso  devoted  a  large  part  of  his  professional  life  to  overcoming  this 
fragmentation  and  making  regulatory  and  supervisory  structures  commensurate  with  the 
realities of integrated European financial markets. He argued tirelessly in favour of a single 
rule  book  for  financial  institutions  and  was  among  the  first  to  call  for  the  establishment  of 
supervisory authorities at EU level.  
With the setting up of the European System of Financial Supervision, and three European 
Supervisory  Authorities  and  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  we  are  a  step  closer  to 
overcoming this asymmetry.  
Our  dear  dear  Tommaso,  the  militant  of  the  European  Union,  the  president  of  “Notre 
Europe”,  founded  by  Jacques  Delors,  used  to  quote  Jean  Monnet  frequently.  One  of  the 
quotations he loved – and that I love – is the following:  
“Quand  on  est  determiné  sur  l’objectif  que  l’on  veut  atteindre,  il  faut  agir  sans 
faire d’hypothèses sur les risques de ne pas aboutir. Aussi longtemps que vous 
ne l’avez pas essayé, vous ne pouvez pas dire qu’une chose est impossible”. 
Which I would translate – firstly, in Italian and then in English: 
“Quando si è decisi sull’obiettivo che si vuole raggiungere, bisogna agire senza 
fare ipotesi sui rischi di insuccesso. Finché non avete tentato, non potete dire che 
qualcosa sia impossibile.” 
“When  one  is  determined  as  regards  the  desired  goal,  one  must  act  without 
making multiple hypotheses on the risks of failure. As long as you did not try it, 
you cannot state that the endeavour is impossible”. 
It is that very spirit of the founding fathers that Tommaso was always referring to. That very 
spirit of the founding fathers that is inspiring us today when we are drawing the lessons from 
the crisis. 
Tommaso was not only a man of culture, a brilliant economist, a remarkable central banker, 
an important member of the Italian government, a true and visionary European. He was also 
an  extraordinary  and  exemplary  friend.  The  depth  of  his  culture  and  his  personal  qualities 
helped him to establish exceptional and friendly relationship with his colleagues.  
Je  peux  le  dire  en  français,  admirablement,  car  il  parlait  français  mieux  que  les  français, 
comme Jacques Delors le sait mieux que personne.  
Merci Tommaso, notre ami si cher, notre ami si regretté, pour cette amitié profonde et pour 
tout ce que tu as fait au service de notre Union Européenne.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
