Manuel Sánchez: Three issues for Mexico’s economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  United 
States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce, New York, 14 July 2011. 
 I would like to thank the United States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce for the opportunity to 
share some of my thoughts on the Mexican economy, including both the conditions it faces 
currently and its outlook. I will focus on three questions which have recently gained particular 
importance,  in  the  hopes  of  shedding  some  light  on  possible  answers.  First,  do  recent 
indicators  of  moderation  in  Mexico’s  economic  activity  substantially  change  its  growth 
prospects? Second, are capital inflows to the country bound to continue, and if so, will they 
generate  any  financial  problems?  And  third,  what  are  the  main  challenges  to  the 
consolidation  of  price  stability  in  Mexico?  These  comments,  of  course,  are  my  own 
responsibility and do not necessarily represent those of the Bank of Mexico.  
Current and future economic conditions 
As you know, since the second half of 2009, along with the world economy, Mexico has been 
undergoing a process of economic recovery. The upturn has included positive annual growth 
rates  for  the  industry  and  services  sectors,  which  together  account  for  approximately 
94 percent of GDP. As a result, by the beginning of 2011, the levels of the monthly Global 
Economic  Activity  Indicator  (IGAE)  and  of  these  two  main  components  surpassed  their 
corresponding values prior to the global financial crisis.  
The improvement of economic conditions has occurred in tandem with the recovery in the 
United States, Mexico’s main trading partner. This has been particularly clear in view of the 
rebound  of  U.S.  industrial  production,  which  maintains  a  remarkably  high  correlation  with 
Mexican industrial production through its manufacturing-export component. Hence, the initial 
engine  of  the  upturn  was  external  demand  through  highly  dynamic  non-oil  exports,  which 
account for more than 80 percent of total exports and include a high proportion of automotive 
exports.  
Domestic demand in Mexico has also been in the process of recovering although at a less 
impressive pace. In particular, consumption, as measured by monthly retail sales, started to 
exhibit a clearer path of growth only since the middle of 2010. Among other factors, this lag 
may  reflect  unemployment  rates  which,  on  average,  have  been  approximately  two 
percentage  points  higher  than  their  corresponding  average  before  the  crisis.1  It  may  also 
reflect the deterioration of real wages, which has partially reversed course in recent months. 
Both  factors  may  contribute  to  an  explanation  of  relatively  depressed  levels  of  consumer 
confidence. On the other hand, gross fixed investment has shown a moderate rebound in all 
major  components,  especially  construction.  Business  managers  appear  to  be  reacting 
cautiously to the atypically slow recovery of the global economy and uncertainties over the 
extent of future expansion. 
Some  less  encouraging  recent  data  point  to  the  possibility  that  the  Mexican  economy  has 
entered  a  weaker  growth  phase.  In  particular,  GDP  in  the  first  quarter  exhibited  lower 
seasonally  adjusted  growth  than  in  the  previous  quarter,  including  deceleration  in  the 
industrial sector. The slowdown in Mexican industrial production coincides with that observed 
in  the  world  economy,  heavily  influenced  by  factors  that  may  be  transitory.  These  include 
                                                 
 
1  The average national unemployment rate was 3.4 percent from 2000 to 2008 and 5.4 percent since 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1
high oil prices, reflecting political tensions in some oil-producing countries, and supply-chain 
disruptions  resulting  from  the  tragic  events  in  Japan  last  March.  Oil  prices  fell  during  the 
second quarter, and recent developments as well as the reconstruction efforts underway in 
Japan seem to point toward a possible V-shaped recovery in that nation. Partly as a result of 
that, Mexican industrial activity and motor vehicle production, in which Asian manufacturers 
participate significantly, have exhibited a rebound in the second quarter. 
It  is  too  early  to  tell  whether  the  recent  weakening  of  worldwide  industrial  activity  is  a 
temporary phenomenon or not. At this point, the odds do not seem to allow us to discard the 
possibility of a soft patch rather than a definitive change in the trend. In any case, it is evident 
that the Mexican economy, and in particular, industrial production, will continue to depend on 
the strength of U.S. economic activity.  
Although in recent months forecasters have cut their projections for world and U.S. economic 
growth, their baseline scenarios imply a continuation of the recovery. Against this backdrop, 
the Bank of Mexico estimates that the Mexican economy will grow between 4 percent and 
5 percent in 2011 and between 3.8 percent and 4.8 percent in 2012. The domestic drivers of 
growth will continue to be financial stability, the expansion of banks’ lending to the private 
sector, including consumer credit, and further increases in employment and real wages.2 
The main downside risks to economic growth in Mexico are external. Most importantly, the 
United States and other advanced countries face the challenge of maintaining their economic 
recovery  while  gradually  implementing  exit  strategies  from  their  unusually  expansionary 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  A  particularly  worrisome  problem  could  be  the  fiscal 
consolidation that some countries will have to undertake in order to make their public-debt 
paths sustainable. A second risk is the possibility of persistently higher oil prices, which may 
hamper global growth. A third contingency regards a recovery in Japan that is slower than 
expected.  
Financial markets and capital flows 
By the time recession ended in the United States and Mexico, financial markets had attained 
more normal conditions. Indeed, global uncertainty and fears expressed in the flight to quality 
which had disturbed the Mexican stock, currency and bond markets during the crisis, eased 
substantially  by  the  middle  of  2009.  Since  then,  asset  prices  have  rebounded,  if  not  at  a 
steady  pace.  In  particular,  the  Mexican  stock  market  has  surpassed  its  pre-crisis  highs, 
although this year it has experienced downward adjustments.  
Bond  spreads,  as  expressed  by  the  JP  Morgan  EMBI  for  Mexico,  have  tightened  and 
stabilized during the first half of 2011 to around 160 basis points, slightly above its average in 
the  same  period  of  2006.  Consistently,  the  domestic  yield  curve  has  shifted  downward, 
especially for the short- and middle-term interest-rate structures. These developments seem 
to reflect both lower country-risk perception and expected inflation based on the difference 
between nominal and real interest rates in domestic bond markets.  
Additionally, the Mexican peso has gained value against the U. S. dollar, although somewhat 
less vigorously than the currencies of many other emerging economies. The lesser extent of 
Mexican peso appreciation may be partly due to the uncertainty regarding the sustainability 
of the U.S. economic rebound in light of the tight links between both economies. Moreover, 
recent  news  of  further  7 sovereign-debt  problems  in  some  economies  in  the  European 
Monetary  Union  (EMU)  has  triggered  international  financial  volatility,  putting  transitory 
                                                 
 
2  For example, this year, Blue Chip forecasts for U.S. output growth for 2011 fell from 3.2 percent to 2.5 percent 
and for 2012 from 3.3 percent to 3.0 percent from February to July. However, the corresponding projections 
for Mexico were raised from 3.9 percent to 4.3 percent (2011) and from 3.8 percent to 4.0 percent (2012). 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
pressure on the peso exchange-rate. Until the weak fiscal and financial situation of the EMU 
is  solved  comprehensibly,  an  event  that  may  yet  take  some  time,  additional  financial 
turbulence from this source cannot be ruled out.  
As in other emerging economies, the upsurge in financial asset prices since 2009 has been 
fueled by substantial portfolio inflows to Mexico. These flows have been directed both to the 
equity  and  fixed  income  markets,  most  notably  via  government  bond  purchases.  The  total 
holdings of government securities by foreign investors have reached unprecedented levels, 
close to US$68 billion as of the end of June, more than 23 percent of the total outstanding.  
To date, there does not seem to be a cause for concern regarding the effects of these capital 
flows  to  Mexico.  Such  movements  seem  to  reflect  a  search  for  higher  yields,  given  the 
extremely low interest rates that prevail in the United States and other advanced countries 
and the relative improvement of Mexico’s economic prospects. This search for yield occurs in 
the context of a Mexican peso that is freely convertible and now traded 24 hours with ample 
liquidity.  An  additional  favorable  factor  seems  be  the  inclusion  in  2010  of  Mexican 
government bonds into the Citigroup World Government Bond Index (WGBI), which is used 
as a benchmark by many index fund managers and institutional investors. As of now, there 
are no apparent signs of overheating in spending or the gestation of a credit or asset boom 
as a result of these flows, either of which could endanger control over inflation or the stability 
of the financial system.  
However,  a  possible  reversal  of  these  flows  may  translate  into  volatility  and  asset  price 
declines, including exchange rate depreciation. Yet, if such an eventuality materializes, the 
functioning  of  the  economy  should  not  be  affected,  provided  that  monetary  and  fiscal 
fundamentals remain strong, and the banking system highly liquid and well capitalized. An 
additional element of strength will continue to be the flexible exchange-rate system that has 
served as a shock absorber in previous turbulent times.  
In  any  case,  the  financial  authorities  will  have  to  continue  monitoring  potential  risks  from 
various sources that may impair the functioning of the financial system, to prevent this from 
occurring and to act accordingly if an adverse situation emerges. This responsibility implies 
making  progress  in  measuring  systemic  risk,  strengthening  the  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision of the system, and perfecting the resolution mechanisms for insolvent financial 
institutions.  
Challenges to price stability in Mexico 
Monetary  policy  in  Mexico  has  been  conducted  according  to  the  constitutionally mandated 
primary objective of seeking the stability of the purchasing power of the national currency. To 
express its commitment to this mandate, since 2001 the Bank of Mexico has implemented its 
monetary  policy  within  an  explicit  inflation-targeting  scheme.  Starting  from  double-digit 
annual  inflation,  references  were  gradually  reduced,  and  since  2003  the  permanent  target 
has  been  3 percent  annual  inflation.  This  commitment  refers  to  headline  inflation  as 
measured  by  the  National  Consumer  Price  Index  (INPC).  A  variability  range  of  plus/minus 
one percentage point around this benchmark was added later, an addition which should not 
be interpreted as a target but as an acknowledgment of uncertainty stemming from the highly 
volatile nature of some components of the price index.  
In  2008  the  Bank  of  Mexico  formally  replaced  its  policy  instrument,  moving  from  a 
quantitative guideline (the “corto”) to the overnight interest rate used in the interbank market. 
In the middle of that year, to counter pressures from currency depreciation and other supply 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3
shocks  which  had  pushed  inflation  off  the  convergence  path  to  its  permanent  target,  the 
Bank of Mexico raised its reference interest rate by 75 basis points.3 
However,  in  2009  when  it  was  clear  that  those  pressures  had  ceased  to  threaten  price 
stability, the Bank of Mexico relaxed its monetary policy. Specifically, from January to July of 
that year the overnight policy interest rate was cut 375 basis points in all, and since then the 
reference  policy  rate  has  been  kept  at  4.5 percent.  The  resulting  expansionary  monetary 
stance, as reflected in the central bank’s Monetary Conditions Index, among other indicators, 
has helped to mitigate the impact of the global trade and output contraction that led to the 
severe recession in 2009.4  
Monetary  policy  was  effective  at  bringing  inflation  back  to  the  desired  convergence  path. 
Annual  inflation  fell  from  6.5 percent  in  2008  to  3.6 percent  in  2009  and  since  then  its 
average has been 3.9 percent. Furthermore, after hitting 3 percent in March of 2011, annual 
inflation has remained substantially close to, albeit somewhat above, the permanent target.  
The fact that inflation has approximated the objective during the last four months is a hopeful 
sign,  since  a  similar  pattern  had  not  been  achieved  since  2006.  This  progress  should  be 
beneficial  to  expectations  for  the  sustained  feasibility  of  the  inflation  target  in  a  context  of 
economic  growth.  In  order  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  current  benign  environment, 
monetary  policy  must  continue  to  be  geared  toward  facilitating  the  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations on the permanent target. A challenge to this goal is the fact that medium- and 
long-term inflation expectations, as reflected in analyst surveys and the bond markets, still 
remain  above  3 percent,  and  in  the  recent  past,  short-term  expectations  frequently 
surpassed this level by a large margin.  
Monetary policy should also take into account the fact that certain factors that contributed to 
the recent decline in inflation could be transitory. These elements include the negative output 
gap, defined as the difference between observed and estimated potential output, as well as 
other  measures  of  slack  that  will  continue  to  tighten  as  the  economy  grows;  unusually 
favorable agricultural prices; seasonal reductions of electricity tariffs; and the appreciation of 
the Mexican peso, which could vanish and even reverse course due to factors outside the 
country’s control.5  
These  challenges  notwithstanding,  the  Bank  of  Mexico  is  confident  that  the  future  path  of 
inflation  will  be  consistent  with  its  convergence  to  the  permanent  target.  The  Bank  of 
Mexico’s Governing Board has repeatedly stated that it will continue to examine all variables 
that could raise warnings about the emergence of any generalized pressures on prices and 
that,  if  such  an  event  happens,  it  will  adjust  monetary  policy  to  ensure  convergence. 
According to the central bank’s estimates, headline inflation will most likely settle between 
3 percent  and  4 percent  during  this  year  and  next,  while  core  inflation  will  most  probably 
settle  in  a  range  between  3 percent  and  3.5 percent  during  2011,  and  slightly  below 
3 percent in 2012.6  
                                                 
 
3  The “corto” was defined as the amount in the balance of the commercial banks’ accounts with the Bank of 
Mexico, for which the central bank provided daily liquidity at a price of twice the market interest rate. A higher 
“corto” signaled a more stringent monetary policy. 
4  The Monetary Conditions Index (MCI) is calculated as the weighted average of the changes in indicators of 
real interest rate and the real exchange rate  with respect to their average level during a certain period. An 
exchange rate appreciation and/or a real interest rate increase lead to an increase in the MCI. Therefore, an 
MCI increase  suggests relatively more stringent monetary conditions. To review this indicator  as applied to 
Mexico, see Bank of Mexico, Inflation Report January–March 2011. 
5  For an analysis of the output gap and other measures of slack, see Governing Board of the Bank of Mexico, 
Minuta No. 4, May 27, 2011. 
6  See the Bank of Mexico, Inflation Report January–March 2011. 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
Let  me  close  by  commenting  on  two  recent  developments  that  should  strengthen  the 
institutional framework  of  monetary  policy.  One  is  the  publication,  starting  this  year,  of  the 
minutes of the Board meetings for monetary policy. This action has the purpose of disclosing 
the reasons individual Board members had for casting their votes, hopefully contributing to a 
better  understanding  of  the  basis  of  monetary  policy  decisions  in  Mexico.  The  second 
development centers on the transfer of the responsibility for producing the price indices to 
the  National  Geography  and  Statistics  Institute  (INEGI)  beginning  this  month.  The 
independence  of  INEGI  from  the  Bank  of  Mexico  should  further  support  monetary  policy 
credibility.  
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the critical role that responsible fiscal policy in Mexico 
has played in the reduction of inflation. Narrow fiscal deficits and the adequate management 
of public indebtedness, as expressed in moderate debt-to-GDP ratios, the long duration of 
public debt, and low foreign-currency exposure, among other indicators, have been notably 
supportive.  Definitively,  the  deepening  of  a  solid  fiscal  position  will  continue  to  be  a 
prerequisite for sustainable price stability in Mexico.  
Concluding remarks 
Since  the  middle  of  2009,  the  Mexican  economy  has  shown  clear  improvement.  Recent 
indications of moderation notwithstanding, Mexico’s economic outlook continues to be one of 
recovery in which the main risks are external. Relative stability in financial markets has led to 
substantial capital inflows to the country, without generating any noticeable problems. Future 
reversals  of  these  flows  cannot  be  ruled  out,  given  free  capital  mobility,  but  if  they 
materialize,  such  events  should  not  harm  the  functioning  of  the  economy  provided  that  its 
strong  fundamentals  are  maintained.  Finally,  monetary  policy  faces  the  challenge  of 
perseverance in order to ensure continued progress on the long road to price stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5
