Andreas Dombret: Current developments in Germany and Europe 
Welcome  address  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the reception for the outgoing Deputy Head of the Representative 
Office of the Deutsche Bundesbank, New York, 24 August 2011. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
For  more  than  four  years  we  have  been  facing  an  unprecedented  crisis,  which  has 
sometimes led to high levels of uncertainty. I will start my short speech with some information 
on the current situation in Germany and Europe before returning to the individuals and their 
role in transmitting such information. Let me stress in this context that it is a pleasure to be 
meeting  all  of  you  today  and  to  have  this  opportunity  to  improve  our  transatlantic 
relationships and to exchange views later on. 
Current situation in Germany and Europe 
2 
As I mentioned, we have been living in the face of an extraordinary crisis for more than four 
years. Having originated from the American housing market, this crisis quickly spread to the 
global financial markets. It caused a severe recession of the real economy and eventually led 
to an erosion of confidence in the public finances of various countries. In the wake of debt 
problems and amidst worries about the state of the global economy, we have seen renewed 
market turbulences over the past weeks. However, looking at the underlying development of 
the  real  economy,  the  situation  in  Germany  and  the  euro  area  is  not  as  dire  as  these 
turbulences might suggest. Let us begin by taking a look at the situation in Germany. 
GDP  as  the  most  general  indicator  of  a  nation’s  economic  performance  has  broadly 
recovered. During the crisis the German economy shrank considerably; in 2009 alone, GDP 
contracted  by  5.1%  –  by  far  the  most  severe  downturn  for  more  than  half  a  century. 
However, in 2010 and the first quarter of 2011, the German economy recovered strongly and 
the level of economic activity has almost returned to pre-crisis levels by now. These strong 
dynamics seem to be contrasted by the first estimate of GDP growth in the second quarter of 
this year which revealed an increase of just 0.1% compared to the first quarter. Nevertheless, 
this pronounced drop in the growth rate does not come as a surprise and should be no cause 
for  concern:  the  strong  expansion  we  saw  in  the  first  quarter  was  in  part  due  to  catch-up 
effects, since the last quarter of 2010 had been adversely affected by an exceptionally cold 
winter. Hence, a certain backlash in the second quarter was to be expected, and in its recent 
June  forecast  the  Bundesbank  actually  predicted  a  growth  rate  of  0.1%  in  the  second 
quarter.  This  suggests,  of  course,  that  the  GDP  growth  figure  for  the  second  quarter 
understates  the  underlying  cyclical  momentum.  As  for  the  remainder  of  the  year,  recent 
leading  indicators  suggest  a  continuation  of  the  upswing,  albeit  at  a  more  moderate  pace 
than before. 
To  be  sure,  despite  the  relatively  benign  outlook  some  risks  remain.  These  include 
uncertainties regarding the US economy, a potential cyclical slowdown in emerging markets, 
uncertainties in financial markets and the continuing debt problems in a number of countries. 
However,  in  Germany  these  less  favourable  external  conditions  are  contrasted  by  more 
encouraging internal dynamics. Thus, the recent slowdown is no indication that the German 
economy has been affected by the increased uncertainty, and according to our forecast the 
German economy will grow by 3.1% in 2011. 
This  rather  positive  impression  is  confirmed  when  looking  beyond  GDP  growth  at  other 
economic  indicators.  In  particular,  the  German  labour  market  presents  a  bright  picture.  It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  still 
favourable  outlook 
fared  unexpectedly  well  during  the  crisis  and  moreover  has  recovered  rapidly.  This  year, 
unemployment  has  reached  its  lowest  level  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  The  current 
unemployment  rate  stands  at  7.0%  and  employers’  willingness  to  recruit  staff  is  still  very 
high. Given that the slump in 2008 and 2009 was mostly due to a cyclical shock, the labour 
market  profited  significantly  from  previous  bold  reforms,  which  had  modernised  the  labour 
market structure. These structural reforms paved the way for further necessary market-based 
corrections, for example in wage setting and intra-plant working-time flexibility. Given these 
circumstances  and 
for  economic  growth,  we  expect 
unemployment to fall to 6.5% in 2012. The strong performance of the labour market is one 
important reason why we expect domestic demand to contribute significantly more to growth 
than in the past. 
Turning  from  Germany  to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  we  find  a  mixed  picture  in  various 
respects.  Overall,  we  still  see  a  positive  underlying  momentum  of  economic  activity. 
However, the underlying trend may be overstated, as the strong growth we observed in the 
first quarter was partly due to extraordinary factors. In line with this observation, GDP growth 
slowed  down  in  the  second  quarter:  according  to  Eurostat’s  first  estimate,  euro  area  GDP 
increased  by  a  mere  0.2%.  Regarding  the  further  development,  signals  are  mixed  at  the 
moment:  while  recent polls  showed  that  expectations  have  dampened,  current  data  reveal 
that orders in the industrial sector increased significantly. Overall it seems that, in line with 
previous expectations, the euro area economy will continue to expand over the rest of this 
year, albeit at a moderate pace. 
A glance at the labour market in the euro area also reveals an uneven picture: recovery had 
already been tentative before and slowed down further in spring. Overall unemployment in 
the euro area currently stands at nearly 10%, while the individual rates range from 4.0% in 
Austria to as much as 21% in Spain. Finally, consumer prices have been rising over the past 
months,  and  although  the  increase  has  slowed  down  somewhat  of  late,  current  inflation 
stands at 2.5% – clearly above the Eurosystem’s 2% definition of price stability. To prevent 
second-round  effects  and  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored,  the 
Eurosystem has raised interest rates twice this year. 
Challenges in the euro area 
3 
The major risk for the euro area is probably the uncertainty resulting from the debt crisis in 
Greece and some other member states. However, in mid-July, policymakers agreed on an 
all-encompassing package to stabilise the situation. First of all, it is important to keep in mind 
that  the  situation  in  Greece  is  exceptional  in  various  aspects,  and  for  these  reasons  the 
measures taken should not be extrapolated to other member countries. Furthermore, from a 
central banker’s perspective, it is to be welcomed that the European Council announced its 
intention  to  ensure  sufficient  capitalisation  of  banks  and  adequate  collateral.  For  the 
Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations,  solvent  counterparties  and  sufficient  collateral  are 
crucial. 
When  I  mention  counterparties,  please  allow  me  to  briefly  address  one  current  point  of 
interest  in  financial  markets  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic:  US  dollar  funding  of  European 
banks. This is certainly an area that relevant authorities, including the Bundesbank, monitor 
closely. But let me offer you some assurance about the current situation – in particular, of 
course,  from  the  German  point  of  view.  Without  a  doubt  unsecured  US  dollar  funding 
markets  have  tightened  somewhat  recently.  For  example,  US  money  market  funds,  which 
account  for  a  non-negligible  but  small  part  of  European  banks’  short-term  liabilities,  have 
become  more  selective  when  providing  funding  to  non-domestic  banks.  But  let  me 
emphasize that we are very far away from the situation we witnessed in 2008. First, liquidity 
needs  can be  covered by  a  number  of  other  means  including  secured funding  with  repos. 
Second,  if  need  be,  the  ECB  stands  ready  to  mitigate  potential  bottlenecks,  based  on  the 
swap  agreement  in  place  with  the  Fed.  Third,  the  lion  share  of  German  and  other 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
European banks have used the rather benign market conditions in the first part of this year 
and have completed an over-proportional part – or even all – of their overall 2011 funding 
needs in the capital market segment. And let me make a final important point here: European 
banks,  in  general,  have  considerably  improved  their  capital  base  making  them  less 
vulnerable  to  financial  strains.  Speaking  about  German  banks,  the  Tier  1  capital  ratio 
currently  reaches  12.6  %  on  average,  having  improved  by  about  three  percentage  points 
between the end of 2008 and June 2011. 
But let me return to the bigger picture. It has to be kept in mind that the sovereign debt crisis 
and, indeed, challenges we face in parts of the European banking system can ultimately only 
be  resolved  by  ambitious  and  credible  fiscal  policy  measures,  particularly  in  the  countries 
whose  fiscal  soundness  is  being  questioned.  Conversely,  it  is  imperative  to  very  clearly 
separate  monetary  policy  from  fiscal  policy.  Wherever  the  boundary  between  the  two  has 
become blurred, it must be redrawn as quickly as possible. 
Conclusion 
4 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Let me conclude by stressing the importance of the work done by our Representative Office 
in New York. As I see it, there are two main functions that this office serves. First, it gives us 
an opportunity to further explain policy decisions and economic developments in Germany 
and the euro area on this side of the Atlantic. Second, and for us even more importantly, our 
New York office reports back to us, in particular, on monetary policy and financial stability 
issues as well as financial markets developments. Through the financial crisis, in particular, 
we have seen the significance of directly exchanging information with our colleagues at the 
Fed,  with  representatives  of  commercial  banks,  policy  makers,  think  tanks  and  market 
participants. It allows us to better understand political and economic developments in the US 
and we are much more in a position to separate noise from significant market developments. 
Our  team  here  in  New  York  is  doing  an  excellent  job  identifying  and  communicating  key 
developments in the US back to Frankfurt. This, I suspect, would not be possible without the 
support of everyone present here tonight. 
Finally, one great side-effect of having people work at our Representative Office is that they 
become  even  more  valuable  when  they  return  home.  As  you  know,  Felix  Thierfelder  has 
worked at the office over the past three years, which were marked by the financial crisis. He 
has gained significant experience during this time. We are glad that he is now returning to 
our Central Office as a staff member in the Financial Stability department. Mr Thierfelder will 
be responsible for setting up new market contacts and intensifying our existing ones. With 
the creation of this new post we hope to be better positioned to identify key risks to financial 
stability  early  on.  It  also  testifies  to  the  importance  we  attach  to  exchanging  views  with 
market participants. 
Feline von Heimburg has also been monitoring the development of the financial crisis when 
working  in  the  Financial  Stability  departments  of  both  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the 
European  Central  Bank.  She  will  now  be  able  to  employ  the  experience  she  gained  in 
Europe in the more hands-on environment of the Representative Office. 
Let  me  now  thank  Felix  Thierfelder  for  his  work  over  the  past  three  years  and  welcome 
Feline von Heimburg as his successor. I wish both all the best for the future. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
