Andrew Bailey: Financial stability – objective and resolution 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Bailey,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Pro 
Manchester Business and Professional Services Conference, Manchester, 17 March 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at Pro-Manchester. It is a pleasure to be here. 
Today, I will talk about the financial crisis that is now in its fourth year, and particularly about 
the new regime of financial regulation that is being put in place. 
There is, I am afraid, nothing new about financial crises. On one count there have been sixty 
different crises since the early seventeenth century, and the first record of a bank panic dates 
back to at least Rome in AD331. A common theme of the antecedents of financial crises is 
that  they  begin  with  a  wave  of  optimism  and  borrowing  among  consumers,  companies, 
investors and governments.  
One  of  the  best  modern  descriptions  of  this  sequence  can  be  found  in  a  book  by  the 
economists  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  Rogoff.  They  summarise  the  sequence  as  one 
where: “excessive debt accumulation, whether it be by the government, banks, corporations, 
or consumers, often poses greater systemic risks than it seems during a boom. Most of these 
booms end badly”.2 Reinhart and Rogoff’s book goes under the title “This Time is Different: 
Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”.  Their  response  to  the  cry  of  this  time  is  different  is  to 
assert that “it almost never is.” 
Why, then, is it so hard to understand the true picture of financial crises? I think that the issue 
here lies clearly in the characteristics of banks. One of the conclusions of work on the history 
of  financial  crises  is  that  they  have  worse  outcomes  when  they  involve  banks.  As  an 
example, if you remember the stock market crash of 1987, which seemed very bad at the 
time,  it  did  not  threaten  the  banking  system,  and  its  effects  were  contained.  It  was  not  a 
major financial crisis in its own right. 
The reasons for this difference when banks are involved have to do with the nature of banks. 
At  the  heart  of  banking  is  a  technical  term  called  maturity  transformation,  or  more  simply, 
banks borrow at a shorter term and lend at a longer term in respect of the duration of their 
deposits  and  loans.  This  is  the  essence  of  banking.  Banks  transform  savings  that may  be 
required  by  their  owners  at  short  notice  into  longer-term  loans.  This  is  a  benefit  to  the 
economy and society because it allows longer-term borrowing by companies and by all of us 
to buy houses. But it makes banks inherently illiquid. If all depositors decided to ask for their 
money  back  at  the  same  time  the  bank  would  struggle  to  pay-out  and  survive.  This  is 
because  the  bank  will  generally  find  it  difficult  to  realise  its  assets  in  time.  Northern  Rock 
represented the most extreme case of this, the bank run, starting with wholesale creditors 
and then on to a full-scale retail creditor run. And it follows from this assessment that banks 
depend upon maintaining the confidence of their depositors that they will over time be able to 
meet claims on them. A very important part of maintaining confidence in banks is that the 
value  of  their  assets  –  the  loans  they  make,  to  simplify  –  has  not  fallen  below  their 
sustainable  value  in  the  accounts  of  the  bank.  In  order  to  prevent  this  happening,  banks 
maintain buffers of their own funds – capital – which can be used to maintain the claims of 
depositors. 
                                                 
1   Liaquat Ahamed: “Lords of Finance” (Windmill Books, 2009), p14. 
2   Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff: “This Time it is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly”. Princeton 
University Press, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Here  then  we  have  the  two  fundamental  elements  of  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks, 
liquidity and capital. Banks are often said to  fail either because they are insolvent (lack of 
capital)  or  because  they  are  illiquid  (lack  of  funds  to  meet  the  claims  of  depositors  to  be 
repaid).  My  own  experience  of  dealing  with  banks  that  get  into  trouble  suggests  that  the 
reality is somewhat different – it isn’t a case of either one or the other. On the whole, banks 
lose deposits for a reason – depositors worry that there is something going on that they do 
not  like.  The  film  “It’s  a  Wonderful  Life”  illustrates  this  point  well.  Rumours  spread  fast, 
depositors queue to get their money out while the bank still has funds available. In the film of 
course  James  Stewart  came  to  the  rescue,  and  he  did  that  by  convincing  the  queuing 
depositors that they should have faith in his bank. 
Loss of deposits is a symptom of a wider problem – in other words, typically a bank becomes 
illiquid  because  its  depositors  fear  a  problem  which  is  more  often  than  not  to  do  with  the 
expected  future  solvency  of  the  bank.  I  want  to  put  the  emphasis  here  on  the  word 
“expected”.  Very  few  banks  fail  because  they  are  insolvent  today.  They  don’t  get  that  far. 
Typically, they fail because of a rising probability that they are expected to be insolvent at 
some  point(s)  in  the  future.  This  is  important  because  regulating  banks  has  to  be  forward 
looking, and in my view has not been adequately so in the past. 
It also means that a problem in a bank can spread to create a problem in the wider financial 
system, so called systemic risk. Maintaining the stability of the financial system – financial 
stability  –  is  therefore  at  the  heart  of  the  efforts  of  the  authorities  to  prevent  problems  in 
banks  spreading  out  of  control.  The  financial  crisis  of  the  last  three  and  a  half  years  has 
illustrated starkly what can happen when financial stability is not maintained. So, establishing 
and  maintaining  financial  stability  should  be  high  up  everyone’s  agenda,  and  we  should 
embed  financial  stability  as  the  objective  of  public  policy  towards  regulating  the  financial 
system. 
You can reasonably ask, why is this difficult to achieve? Financial stability is difficult to define 
quantitatively and precisely. Some people say that you know it when you have it, but it might 
be better to say that you know when you don’t have it. 
What is being done to tackle the issue? A month ago, the Government issued a consultation 
paper  which  seeks  to  define  the  financial  stability  objective  that  will  be  given  to  the  new 
Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England under its plans. The objective is defined 
at the high level as protecting and enhancing the stability of the financial system of the UK. 
More  precisely,  the  Bank’s  objective  “relates  primary  to  the  identification  of,  monitoring  of, 
and taking of action to remove or reduce” risk to the stability of the UK financial system as a 
whole  or  to  a  significant  part  of  the  system,  “with  a  view  to  protecting  and  enhancing  the 
resilience of the UK financial system”. But the paper goes on to include in the objective the 
statement that: this does not require or authorise the Bank “to exercise its function in a way 
that would in its opinion be likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the 
financial sector to contribute to the growth of the UK economy in the medium or long term”. 
Here  then  we  have  the  recognition  of  the  need  to  have  regard  to  the  impact  of  financial 
regulation on the long-run growth of the economy. To back this up, the Government intends 
to include in the legislation a power for it to provide the Bank with guidance in the form of a 
remit  which  would  provide  greater  clarity  on  the  overall  approach  the  Bank  should  take  to 
pursue its objective. That remit is likely to be more a matter of words than a single number 
like  the  inflation  target,  but  it  is  the  right  approach  to  seek  to  set  this  out  as  explicitly  as 
possible.  
There are at least three things that need to accompany such an approach, none of which by 
the way is unusual to this area of public policy. The first is transparency, namely the clarity of 
explanation of the objective and how it is pursued. Transparency is an important part of the 
monetary policy framework – the same approach can be used for financial stability.  
The second necessary tool is accountability to Parliament. Again, this is a well-established 
feature of monetary policy and is already well embedded for financial stability.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A  third  necessary  element  of  financial  stability  policy  is  to  have  an  approach  which 
recognises the importance of the spirit as well as the letter of the law. I believe lawyers call 
this  a  purposive  approach  to  interpreting  legislation  and  regulations  –  in  other  words 
interpreting meaning in the context of regulations rather than a literal interpretation. This is 
necessary because history shows us that the financial services industry can be addicted to 
arbitraging regulations – exploiting the rules to suit short term purposes rather than longer-
term stability. 
I want to finish by saying something about a further important feature of financial stability. For 
me, the most unacceptable aspect of the financial crisis is that large banks have required the 
support of so much public money. This is often called the Too-Big-To-Fail problem, or better 
the  “Too-Important-To-Fail-therefore-public-money-has-to-be-used”  problem.  Why  are  large 
banks in this position? The root of this issue is common to the key features of banks, namely 
their dependence on the confidence of depositors, the role of banks providing each of us with 
the  facility  to  manage  our  money  –  our  savings,  and  in  our  everyday  lives  in  terms  of 
payments  –  and  the  externality  caused  by  the  failure  of  one  bank  spreading  a  loss  of 
confidence to other banks. 
The  failure  of  any  company  should  be  dealt  with,  wherever  possible,  using  the  standard 
insolvency  or  bankruptcy  laws  of  the  country.  These  provide  a  well-established  and 
predictable framework for dealing with company insolvency. But, the insolvency laws do not 
operate quickly – resolving a company can take time. For a standard company, this will not 
matter  in  the  sense  that  there  is  an  externality  in  terms  of  loss  of  confidence  in  other  like 
companies. But this is not true for banks. If ordinary depositors get locked into an insolvency 
process, there can be both hardship and unacceptable loss and the real risk of spillover to 
other banks. And yet, when a bank fails, decisive action is required to solve the underlying 
problem.  This  was  the  problem  with  Northern  Rock  –  the  only  action  that  could  be  taken 
promptly was to use public money, initially in the form of a guarantee by the Government. 
For the last three years, we have had a special resolution regime for banks in the UK, initially 
in  the  form  of  emergency  legislation,  and  for  the  last  two  years  in  the  form  of  permanent 
powers given to the Bank of England. The resolution powers give us the right to speed up the 
insolvency  process,  subject  to  a  series  of  legal  safeguards  which  limit  what  we  can  do  to 
affect  people’s  property  rights  in  their  money.  The  central  aim  of  resolution  is  to  enact  a 
solution which ensures that depositors have access to their money and the supply of credit to 
the economy does not suffer an unacceptable disruption. Resolutions are possibly the most 
stressful thing you can do as a central banker. Fortunately, we don’t do them very often. The 
aim  is  to  get  the  failing  bank  to  a  weekend  and  give  ourselves  that  time  to  effect  the 
resolution.  There  is  one  question  that  has  to  be  answered  by  8am  on  Monday  morning – 
when the depositor asks: “Is my money safe”, you have to be able to say yes, no hesitation 
or qualification. 
The  reason  I  have  described  this  is  that,  while  we  have  a  resolution  regime,  and  we  are 
ahead  of  many  other  countries  in  this  respect,  it  is  a  regime  for  small  and  medium-sized 
banks. We are working very hard to solve the too important to fail problem for big banks. But, 
until we do so, we haven’t solved the big problem that we have seen in the last four years, 
the dependence on public money. A healthy industry is one in which within an industry that is 
fundamentally  sound,  companies  can  fail,  and  new  companies  can  enter  to  replace  them 
without  an  unacceptable  cost  to  society.  That  will  be  the  objective  of  the  new  Prudential 
Regulation  Authority.  From  a  resolution  perspective,  we  need  a  regime  in  which  failure  is 
orderly, and the cost of failure is borne by the capital holders and, if necessary creditors of 
the failed bank. This is a big issue on which a lot of work is currently underway.  
Very important changes are under way in financial regulation. These put the stability of the 
financial system at the heart of the objective of regulation. Financial stability is a necessary 
condition to allow the pursuit of other good objectives of public policy – avoiding mis-selling, 
competition in the provision of financial services etc, things that are rightly not done by the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Bank of England but are important to society. Financial stability is not a superior objective to 
these  other  goals,  but  it  is  in  my  view  a  necessary  condition  to  achieve  them.  And,  in 
reforming regulation we should have in mind that a healthy and competing industry is one 
that does not rely on the support of public money, either explicitly or implicitly. 
Thank you. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
