Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Corriere della Sera 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
by Ms Marika De Feo and published on 28 September 2011. 
 Corriere della Sera: Mr President, are you satisfied with the outcome of the meetings 
in Washington? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  It  is  always  extremely  important  for  world  leaders  in  the  areas  of 
economy  and  finance  to  exchange  views,  compare  notes  and  work  out  a  diagnosis  of  the 
situation  which  is  lucid  and  without  any  complacency.  We  are  in  the  fourth  year  of  a  very 
demanding global crisis. The epicentre of the crisis is in Europe, but it is a global crisis. On 
behalf of the ECB’s Governing Council, I called on all European authorities to be up to the 
very demanding challenges of the times and to demonstrate their sense of direction. And I 
told our partners in the rest of the world that we needed support and strong encouragement 
for European affairs, but not public lectures.  
The G20 pledged on Thursday to “take all necessary actions to preserve the stability 
of banking systems and financial markets”. Which strong and collective action do you 
suggest?  
First,  the  full,  comprehensive  and  speedy  implementation  of  all  decisions  already  taken 
individually and collectively in Europe and in the world. As regards the Europeans, full and 
swift implementation of the decisions taken on 21 July.  
Second, as has been underlined by the European Systemic Risk Board, coordinated efforts 
to strengthen bank capital, including recourse to backstop facilities.  
Third,  we  need  to  stand  ready  to  respond  to  new  challenges  that  can  arise  at  any  time. 
Permanent and credible alertness is more important than ever in the present circumstances.  
Are governments responsible for the dangerous development of the crisis?  
I am on record as having stressed, on behalf of the Governing Council, since the inception of 
the euro, that fiscal soundness was of the essence, that the Stability and Growth Pact was 
fundamental in a single currency area without a federal budget, and that the surveillance of 
competitive indicators by peers was absolutely necessary. All this is clearly documented.  
Now, in the present very demanding circumstances, what counts is that all authorities are up 
to their responsibilities. Now is the time for effective action, implementation, verbal discipline 
and a stronger team spirit on the part of the European executive branches.  
European countries were urged to boost the rescue fund (EFSF) to contain contagion 
and  avoid  recession.  What  do  you  think  of  that?  Could  the  EFSF  be  leveraged,  for 
example, through the European Central Bank, or receive a bank licence? Or is it better 
to anticipate the creation of the ESM, as Germans suggest?  
I call for the full and swift implementation of the decisions of 21 July taken by the 17 Heads of 
State or Government. And for them to stand ready to face up to acute new challenges in a 
period which is so demanding.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Mr  President,  growth  seems  to  have  deteriorated  quickly,  downside  risks  to  growth 
are  augmenting.  Are  these  reasons  strong  enough  for  the  ECB  to  become  more 
aggressive in the fight against the crisis, involving also monetary policy?  
As you know, we consider that being a very solid anchor of stability and confidence in the 
turbulent times we are experiencing is a fundamental contribution to growth and job creation. 
The  remarkable  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,  which  is  due  to  our  credible  monetary 
policy, protects us against the risk of inflation and the risk of deflation. You know our well-
established  concept:  we  are  never  pre-committed,  and  our  interest  rates  are  always 
designed to deliver price stability in line with our definition and the anchoring of expectations.  
Would the ECB go as far as introducing also other liquidity operations, for example 
12-month liquidity operations, as was suggested in Washington?  
Do not forget that we are presently refinancing all our banks on the basis of full allotment at a 
fixed rate at one-week, one-month and three-month maturities. This is the most important of 
our non-standard measures, designed to help restore a better monetary policy transmission 
mechanism. These non-standard measures have to be exactly commensurate to the degree 
of abnormal functioning of markets in the assessment of the Governing Council.  
Do you think that the downgrading of Italy recently decided by Standard & Poor’s is 
justified?  
I  do  not  comment  on  decisions  by  rating  agencies.  Investors  and  savers  know  that  what 
counts  is  their  own  judgement.  What  counts  are  fundamentals  and  actions  taken  by 
governments and parliaments to enhance and consolidate confidence.  
And are you satisfied with these actions until now?  
As  you  know,  we  sent  messages  to  Italy  that  were  followed  by  action  and,  after  some 
hesitation, the decisions were confirmed rapidly by the parliament. Of course, this is work in 
progress, all this has to be implemented as soon as possible, and there are other measures 
upon which the authorities are reflecting.  
Which measures are still missing?  
We would encourage everything that goes in the direction of structural reforms to unleash the 
capacity  of  Italy  to  grow  faster,  to  have  a  better  growth  potential.  The  potential  of  Italy  is 
immense, and the present growth potential is not in line with the overall capacity of Italy. I 
think there is a general consensus among economists on this, and everything that goes in 
the direction of unleashing productive forces is welcome.  
Which other strengths do you see in the potential of the Italian economy?  
One of the major strengths of Italy is its entrepreneurial spirit. The capacity of individuals and 
families to start a business, take risks and be devoted to their enterprises is exceptional. But 
this  entrepreneurial  spirit,  which  is  shared  by  society  as  a  whole,  needs  to  be  allowed  to 
develop fully through structural reforms aimed at increasing the flexibility of the economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What more should be done to increase growth? For instance, reducing protection in 
non-tradable  sectors  and  monopolies,  approving  the 
liberalisation  of  closed 
professions, higher pension age, making labour markets more flexible and an overall 
increase in productivity?  
A  lot  of  things  can  be  done,  in  particular  but  not  exclusively  the  liberalisation  of  closed 
professions, improved flexibility of the labour markets, improved education and training, and 
measures to boost innovation.  
How  do  you  evaluate  the  fact  that  Italy  is  going  to  have  a  primary  surplus  as  a 
percentage of GDP from next year onwards?  
It  is  of  course  something  which  is  important,  and  maybe  not  sufficiently  well-known  by 
external observers. We encourage Italy to follow this path and to do all that is necessary in 
order to consolidate this primary surplus and reach the goal of having balanced overall public 
finances in 2013.  
Do you think that this objective can be reached with the measures taken until now?  
What  counts  is  the  goal.  The  decisions  which  were  taken  recently  make  it  possible  to 
advance  significantly  in  the  direction  of  that  goal.  Whether  new  decisions  will  have  to  be 
taken, taking into account the overall situation and the evolution of the real economy, is an 
open question. But the goal is the goal; it has been affirmed, and it is very important.  
Would it have been better to publish the messages you sent to Italy?  
As you know, we have sent messages and we do that on a permanent basis, through various 
means,  addressed  to  individual  governments.  We  do  not  make  them  public.  But  we  are 
calling  for  all  governments  without  exception  to  permanently  ensure  sound  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic policies. We do this every month in the Eurogroup and in ECOFIN, so this is 
not something extraordinary.  
The SMP is temporary, how long will you go on with the programme?  
We are implementing this programme – like all non-standard measures – for monetary policy 
reasons, to restore a better transmission of our monetary policy, because some markets or 
segments are disrupted and not functioning properly. These disruptions, in the case of the 
Securities Markets Programme (SMP), are due to the fact that governments, individually, still 
have to ensure their full credibility in the markets, and that the peer surveillance called for by 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was  not  exercised  correctly.  It  was  on  the  basis  of  the 
commitments of 21 July made by the EU Heads of State or Government that the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  decided  to  activate  the  SMP,  taking  into  account  the  commitment  of 
governments to give the EFSF the capacity to intervene on the secondary market.  
Are you buying sovereign bonds to help Italy in particular?  
No.  We  are  embarking  on  the  SMP  to  help  restore  a  better  transmission  mechanism  for 
monetary  policy  at  a  time  when  governments  have  not  yet  implemented  their  decision  of 
21 July.  
What will happen when you stop this programme?  
I already explained how we see this programme and the commitment of the governments to 
step in individually and collectively.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Many are calling for Greece to default, also from the Governing Council…  
We have decisions which were taken with the signature of 17 Heads of State or Government 
on  21  July,  and  the  Governing  Council  considers  that  it  is extremely  important  that  all  the 
decisions be implemented. Moreover, the key to everything are the decisions of the Greek 
government, which has to adjust in a decisive way, in the interests of the Greek people.  
But  some  observers  from  outside  have  the  impression  that  you  are  also  losing 
patience with Greece.  
Our message is crystal clear.  
Are you satisfied with this first agreement of the Troika?  
When we have a report, we shall see.  
Will the role of the EFSF be enough to substitute for the ECB?  
The  decisions  which  have  been  taken  by  the  European  governments  have  to  be  fully 
implemented, and they explicitly include the possibility of intervening on the secondary bond 
market.  
People say that we are at a crossroads for Monetary Union, where the euro may break 
apart, remain only 10–12 countries, or have a more integrated governance.  
Since 9 August 2007 we have been experiencing the worst crisis since the Second World 
War.  This  global  crisis  is  challenging  the  strategies  of  all  the  big  advanced  economies, 
Japan, the United States and Europe. So it is not surprising that we are all in very demanding 
times. As regards Europe, it is absolutely crucial to make a distinction between the currency 
itself and the tensions that we have observed in some countries. The euro has kept its value 
remarkably over 13 years, has preserved price stability, is backed by strong fundamentals 
and is considered by markets to be solid and stable for the next ten years, when we look at 
inflation expectations. On a consolidated basis, public finances in the euro area are sounder 
than in the United States or in Japan, with a public finance deficit of 4.5% of GDP, whereas it 
is around 10% in the other two countries. That being said, we have a number of countries 
that undoubtedly have to correct their policies. And that calls for a strong enforcement of their 
national  policies  in  the  domain  of  public  finances  and  structural  reforms.  We  must  have  a 
“quantum leap” in the governance of the 17 members of the euro area.  
Mr President, did the role of the ECB change during the crisis, and if so, how?  
The ECB is an anchor of stability and confidence in Europe. Its track record in terms of price 
stability is remarkable and better than what any of the euro area countries experienced over 
the last 50 years. The crisis did not change anything in this respect. On the contrary, in times 
of difficulty, turbulence and crisis, the role of the ECB as an anchor is even more important. 
Is there still a vision for a united Europe?  
I profoundly believe that the people of Europe feel that, in the present world, a united Europe 
is more important than ever. The rise of the big emerging economies, the structural changes 
at the global level, and the rapid advances of science and technology call for Europeans to 
unite, with a profoundly improved governance structure.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
How many hours do you work every day, how many days a week? Do you still have 
room for private interests and family?  
I  would  say  10  to  11  hours  a  day  and  probably,  as  an  average,  6  to  6½  days  a  week, 
depending  on  the  European  and  international  working  weekends.  It  is  demanding, 
particularly  in  times  of  turbulence.  I  thank  profoundly  my  wife  and  family  for  their 
understanding. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
