Mario Draghi: In memory of Enzo Grilli 
Memorial  lecture  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at the Johns Hopkins University, Bologna, 21 February 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Enzo  was  not  a  neoclassical  economist,  or  a  Keynesian  one,  a  conservative  or  a  liberal. 
What I miss most is Enzo’s tendency to challenge intellectual clichés and fads, which made 
every  conversation  with  him  a  learning  and  eye  opening  experience.  He  was  a  truly 
independent minded person and scholar, passionate at defending his opinions but ready to 
accept others’ points of view, if based on sound economic thinking or empirical research. He 
was  a  strong  believer  in  free  trade  but  also  a  firm  advocate  of  market  regulation.  He 
defended  the  global  institutions  at  the  time  of  the  antiglobal  movement  but  also  openly 
criticized the influence that the main shareholders exert on those institutions. 
Enzo  held  important  leadership  positions  both  in  academic  institutions  and  international 
organizations. As an official or government representative in these organizations he always 
resisted political pressures on the decision making process, a factor that made his life difficult 
on  many  occasions,  but  which  helped  him  gain  high  respect.  His  brief  experience  at  the 
Italian  Ministery  of  Budget  in  the  early  eighties  was  one  of  these  episodes.  He  had  a 
distinctive ability to combine research with actual policy making. In his own words, “the two 
aspects  –  theory  and  economic  policy  –  cannot  be  distinguished  too  clearly  from  each 
other”1.  
Most of Enzo’s life was spent in the US but he remained passionately attached to his own 
country with which he communicated mainly through his opinion pieces on the “Sole 24 Ore”. 
His last book, “Crescita e Sviluppo delle Nazioni” was written in ltalian in order to “enhance 
also in our country the reflection on economic development, whose presence or absence has 
fundamental consequences for “humanity”2.  
The environment, economic and institutional 
2. 
Enzo Grilli’s thinking as an academic was certainly influenced by his unique exposure, during 
his many years at the World Bank and particularly in the mid-nineties, to the debate on the 
evolution of the world trade system with an increasing number of developing countries.  
Enzo was a convinced supporter of multilateral trade liberalization. This process culminated 
at  the  end  of  1994  with  the  conclusion  of  the  Uruguay  Round  and  the  subsequent 
establishment  of  the  World  Trade  Organization  in  1995.  For  the  first  time  developing 
countries  committed  to  partly  opening  their  markets  and  to  well-defined  international  trade 
rules;  in  exchange,  they  could  benefit  from  more  open  export  markets  and  a  greater 
possibility to protect their stakes through the new mechanism of trade dispute settlement. 
However,  the  Uruguay  Round  Agreement  left  open  a  number  of  unfinished  issues:  large 
agricultural markets  in  rich  countries  are  still  relatively  closed;  international  trade  rules  are 
costly to abide by for a number of developing countries; poor countries need foreign aid to 
develop their supply capabilities and engage successfully in international trade. 
                                                 
1 
“Prospettive sullo sviluppo economico dei paesi emergenti”, Banca Popolare dell’Etruria e del Lazio – Studi e 
Ricerche, 1999. 
“Crescita e Sviluppo delle Nazioni”, Libreria UTET, Torino, 2005, page VII. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, which was launched in 2001 was partly 
devoted to address these issues. Yet, negotiations have been stalemated for a long time. As 
stressed  with  foresight  by  Enzo3,  the  failure  to  conclude  the  Round  poses  dangers, 
particularly in two respects. Firstly, by inducing as a defensive response a more widespread 
pursuit of bilateral and regional trade agreements it could result in a loss of bargaining power 
of the weakest and poorest countries. Secondly, a failure could threaten the very process of 
rebalancing of the global economy in which the international community is engaged.  
Enzo Grilli’s analytical contributions 
3. 
Enzo firmly believed that international trade by contributing to economic development could 
significantly  reduce  poverty  by  fostering  specialization  of  national  production  of  goods 
according  to  countries’  comparative  advantages  and  by  increasing  knowledge  that  would 
help less developed countries to overcome their significant technological gaps. 
Enzo  stressed  particularly  two  facts.  At  the  global  level,  greater  efficiency  of  production 
raises the return to capital. At the national level, trade in capital-intensive commodities tends 
to equalize the domestic and global return to capital. Both effects stimulate investment, which 
is an extremely powerful engine of economic growth. The spectacular performance of export-
oriented  economies  mainly  in  East  Asia  is  a  good  example  of  how  trade  can  unleash 
economic development.  
The  importance  of  trade  was  confirmed  during  the  recent  crisis.  World  trade  collapsed  in 
2009 as a consequence of the recession, then recovered to pre-crisis levels, and it is poised 
to  revert  to  strong  trends.  World  economic  integration  is  continuing.  Emerging  and 
developing  countries  have  become  engines  of  growth  for  the  economy  of  the  world. 
According to World Bank’s estimates about 60 per cent of the increase in world trade in the 
recovery has been brought about by the rapidly growing demand from emerging countries, 
especially for capital goods and consumer durables. The surge of those exports has been an 
important contributor to the recovery in high-income countries, in particular in Germany4.  
In  order  to  help  transform  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  into  an  opportunity  it  is  necessary  to 
proceed now more than ever to the structural reforms already envisaged by Enzo Grilli in a 
number  of  articles.  Reforms  capable  of  enhancing  high  and  sustainable  growth  rates  in 
developed as well as in developing countries, which may also be conducive to rebalancing of 
domestic absorption in deficit and surplus countries, most notably US and China.5 
He emphasized accumulation of human capital, education and Research & Development as 
essential  elements  to  raise  countries’  productivity  and  to  drive  endogenous  technological 
change. 
In his analyses Enzo devoted much attention to China. To sustain high growth rates, China 
should  move,  he  argued,  on  to  a  new  development  phase  where  accumulation  of  human 
capital would outpace that of physical capital. In the process a desirable rebalancing of the 
supply side of the economy (from manufacturing to services) would be coupled with a parallel 
development  on  the  demand  side  (a  rise  in  workers’  incomes  and  in  public  and  private 
consumption)6. 
Enzo was also a passionate communicator. Whether in an IFI’s boardroom or in a classroom 
he liked to establish a dialectic exchange with his interlocutors. It was only natural for him to 
“Ritrovare la spinta del mercato”. Il Sole 24 ore, November 12, 2005. 
                                                 
3 
4  World Bank “Global Economic Prospects”, January 2011. 
5  See for example “Sugli USA il peso di tutta la crescita”; Il Sole 24 ore, April 20, 2006. 
6 
“Cina: la corsa e il rischio di una brusca frenata”; Il Sole 24 ore, September 5, 2006. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
extend his audience through a regular collaboration with the main Italian newspapers, and 
since 2002 as a regular contributor to Il Sole 24 Ore. For over a decade he engaged in a 
dialogue with the public opinion, a fact that, following the example of Luigi Einaudi, was only 
common  to  a  handful  of  Italian  policymakers  and  academics.  The  word  “dialogue”  truly 
characterizes  his  newspapers  contributions  both  for  their  frequency,  almost  monthly  in  his 
later  years,  and  for  their  structure, a  series  of short  questions  and  longer  answers,  that  is 
mindful  of  Socratic  conversations.  The  occasional  reader  was  always  provided  with  a  key 
that helped him understand in a plain language the essence of the often complex technical 
and political issues being debated in international fora.  
What were the dominant themes of these conversations? Perhaps oversimplifying, I would 
select three subjects which stand out both for their recurrent nature and for their relevance 
today.  
A  first  subject,  raised  in  his  commentaries  of  G7  meetings  or  other  important  international 
gatherings, was the issue of coordination (or lack thereof) of economic policy decisions by 
major global players. Here he was often concerned with the inadequate or delayed European 
response to the global challenges that often left the US as the dominant or the only player. 
For example, at the time of China’s negotiations for admission into the WTO he complained 
for Europe’s notable silence or absence at the negotiating table. Similarly he was concerned 
with  Japan’s  protracted  stagnation,  which  he  attributed  to  the  disconnect  of  politics  from 
economics in that country, with the result of silencing another important player. 
A second item of Enzo’s articles was debt management at times of economic crises where 
he suggested greater market involvement in sovereign debt restructuring through those very 
Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)  that  are  now  being  considered  for  future  Euro  area 
sovereign debt issues. Similarly, he took strong positions regarding the debt relief proposal 
for  highly  indebted  emerging  countries  launched  by  the  then  UK  Chancellor  of  Exchequer 
Gordon Brown and approved by the G7 and the IFIs. His view was that the accumulation of 
an unsustainable debt is in most cases the result of a wrong policy stance and that debt relief 
should therefore not be granted if the country had not taken a firm commitment to reverse 
that stance. 
A third recurrent subject of Enzo’s articles, not surprisingly, was the IFIs themselves: their 
effectiveness  and  their  governance.  He  defended  IMF  policies  during  and  after  the  Asian 
crisis,  at  a  time  when  the  IMF  was  under  heavy  attack  due  to  its  crisis  management 
strategies on the fiscal and on the monetary front. He claimed that in a world of free capital 
flows the IMF required a new mandate to be able to effectively pursue crises prevention and 
management. Such a mandate should encompass new information requirements, additional 
monitoring powers, as well as access to a broader volume of resources. All these issues are 
still at the top of the IMF reform agenda. No matter how passionate his defence of IFIs was, 
Enzo considered IFIs’ criticisms “a normal and even a positive fact” because of the IFIs’ own 
mandate to pursue public goods with public money. 
In fact, Enzo was himself often on the critic’s bench, as when he vividly criticized the World 
Bank  for  lending  to  middle  income  countries  without  proof  that  these  loans  would  achieve 
better and more effective (additional) development results than commercial loans. For those 
familiar  with  the  aid  debate,  Enzo’s  point  was  an  early  call  for  the  certification  of 
“additionality” of aid money. 
To  the  IFIs’  governance  Enzo  devoted  a  paper,  jointly  written  with  another  friend  that 
prematurely left us, Riccardo Faini. The question raised by the paper’s title (“Who runs the 
IFIs?”)  was  addressed  with  straightforward  intellectual  honesty  asking  the  data  to  reveal 
whether IFIs’ lending was aligned with the financial and commercial interests of their most 
influential shareholders. The empirical evidence showed the US influence to be pervasive, 
while  Europe  appeared  to  limit  its  influence  to  its  trading  partners  and  Japan  to  Asian 
countries. Despite the unequal distribution of power, coalitions were nevertheless necessary 
to  run  both  IFIs.  He  and  Riccardo  really  foresaw  the  debate  on  the  reform  of  the  IFIs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Shouldn’t developing countries’ voting power be better aligned with their economic weight? 
Should the objective of greater weight be pursued by promoting regional initiatives, such as 
the  proposal  of  an  Asian  Monetary  Fund?  Could  new  broader  groups  such  as  the  G20 
provide a better coordination? 
After  the  crisis  there  is  a  growing  need  of  coordination  of  economic  policies  in  order  to 
reduce  instability  and  uncertainty.  Several  international  fora  can  coexist  and  usefully 
complement each other. The G20, even though it has no universal membership, has been 
particularly  effective  on  a  broad  set  of  policy  issues  even  before  they  are  submitted  for 
discussion  to  the  boards  of  the  International  Financial  Institutions.  Recent  experience  in 
Europe has also shown how regional institutions like the EFSF can usefully collaborate with 
the IMF and can greatly leverage the IMF funds. 
Conclusions 
4. 
These  few  thoughts  about  the  life  and  work  of  Enzo  Grilli  bear  witness  of  his  eclectic 
approach to discipline of economics, as well as of his intellectual and moral integrity. 
He once claimed that “economic growth, which is an essential condition for development, is 
not a mysterious process ( ... )”. Of course, this does not mean to say it is mechanical. In 
fact,  he  remarked  that  “understanding  its  diffusion  (  …  )  represents  maybe  the  most 
important challenge still open”. This calls for a firm commitment to continue the work that he 
pursued  for  a  whole  life.  The  ultimate  goal  is  “human  progress,  better  quality  of  life,  the 
chance to free ourselves from the fatal tyranny of ignorance and from the chains of poverty.”7 
 
                                                
7 
“Crescita e Sviluppo delle Nazioni”, page VII. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
