Deepak Mohanty: Statistics in the Reserve Bank of India 
Welcome address by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the Statistics Day Conference of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 5 July 2011. 
 to 
friends. 
you  all 
I  welcome 
invitees  and 
The assistance by Dr O P Mall is acknowledged. 
Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  Deputy  Governor  Dr.  Subir  Gokarn,  Professor  Pantula,  Professor 
Karandikar,  distinguished 
the  
Reserve  Bank’s  5th  statistics  day  conference.  This  annual  event  provides  an  occasion  to 
learn about developments in the area of statistics, review the contribution of statisticians in 
the Reserve Bank and reflect on challenges in the way forward. 
Since  2007,  29th  June  is  celebrated  as  the  statistics  day  in  honour  of  Professor  Prasanta 
Chandra  Mahalanobis.  This  day  commemorates  his  invaluable  contributions  the  field  of 
statistics and to the development of the Indian statistical system. Professor Mahalanabis was 
a great institution builder can truly be called the father of the Indian statistical system. The 
Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), the Central Statistical Organization (CSO) and the National 
Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) bear testimony to this. He was the founder editor of the 
Indian Journal of Statistics, “Sankhya”. During his career several international acclaims came 
his way such as: Fellow of the Royal Society, President, International Statistical Institute and 
Chairman  of  United  Nations  Statistical  Commission.  He  was  bestowed  with  Padma 
Vibhushan in 1968 in recognisation of his immense contributions. 
Professor  Mahalanobis’s  technical  contributions  in  the  field  of  theoretical  and  applied 
statistics  were  no  less.  These  include,  the  famous  Mahalanobis  D2  (D-square)  –  a 
multivariate  distance  function  for  classification  of  populations  –  and  the  methodology  for 
design  of  large  scale  sample  surveys.  Commenting  on  his  contributions  to  sampling 
techniques, Harold Hotelling wrote, “No technique of random sample has, so far as I can find, 
been developed in the United States or elsewhere, which can compare in accuracy with that 
described by Professor Mahalanobis”. Of course, his contribution to public policy, particularly 
the  Second  Five-Year  Plan  of  industry-led  growth,  is  well  known.  In  modern  management 
parlance, Professor Mahalanobis was an “out of the box” thinker. While many of his research 
findings  primarily  arose  from  the  need  to  solve  applied  statistical  problems,  the  solutions 
straddled both applied and theoretical statistics. 
We  are  happy  that  Professor  Sastry  Gouripathi  Pantula,  an  alumnus  of  Indian  Statistical 
Institute, has kindly accepted our invitation and will be sharing his thoughts with us today. 
Professor  Pantula,  an  authority  in  time  series  analysis  is  currently  Director  of  the 
Mathematical Sciences Division, National Science Foundation, the United States of America. 
Professor Pantula, presided over the American Statistical Association (ASA) last year as its 
105th  President.  Professor  Pantula  in  his  presidential  address  to  the  American  Statistical 
Association last year, while paying glowing tribute to Professor Mahalanobis aptly captured 
his vision of statistics, “as a key technology to solve real world problem”. In a data centric 
world, Professor Pantula noted, statistics or statistical thinking is the key to innovation. This 
is an aspect we are deeply aware in the Reserve Bank of India. 
We  are  delighted  that  Professor  Rajeeva  Lakshman  Karandikar  has  graciously  agreed  to 
share  his  thoughts  with  us  today.  Professor  Karandikar  currently  Director,  Chennai 
Mathematical Institute has distinguished himself in the fields of probability theory, stochastic 
processes,  derivative  pricing  and  risk  modelling.  Professor  Karandikar  is  an  expert  in 
cryptography which has wider application in electronic banking; an area of great interest to all 
of us in the Reserve Bank. Professor Karandikar is also a renowned psephologist. We often 
see him on Television, given the frequency of elections in our country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Professor Pantula and Professor Karandikar between them bring together valuable expertise. 
I am sure we will benefit a great deal from their discourses today. 
Let me briefly turn to the role of the statistician in the Reserve Bank of India. As the Reserve 
Bank  is  responsible  for  a  wide  range  of  central  banking  function  from  monetary  policy  to 
financial  inclusion,  the  statistical  and  analytical  requirement  becomes  all  the  more  diverse 
and  demanding.  To  my  mind,  the  statistics  department  has  four  key  responsibilities.  First, 
compilation  and  dissemination  of  macro-financial  statistics.  Second,  conduct  of  surveys. 
Third, technical support to operational departments. Fourth, research. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  responsible  for  money,  banking,  financial,  external  and  corporate 
balance sheet data. The Reserve Bank compiles and disseminates these statistics as per the 
best  international  practices.  The  monetary  and  balance  of  payments  (BoP)  statistics 
generated by the Reserve Bank of India confirms to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
special  data  dissemination  standards  (SDDS)  and  general  data  dissemination  system 
(GDDS).  We  are  also  participating  in  the  IMF’s  coordinated  portfolio  investment  survey 
(CPIS)  and  coordinated  direct  investment  survey  (CDIS).  We  contribute  to  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) data exchange programme. Apart from the standard balance 
sheet related data for banks, we have a unique database, the Basic Statistical Return (BSR), 
that  provides  detailed  granular  unit  level  data  on  important  parameters  of  financial 
intermediation by the banking sector. The Balance of Payments (BoP) statistics are generally 
based on near-complete enumeration of transactions through banking channel, unlike many 
other countries. We have started disseminating data on trade in services on a monthly basis 
starting from June 2011. Statistics on corporate sector is being collected and analysed by the 
Reserve Bank for well over six decades now. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  a  long  tradition  in  conducting  surveys.  For  example,  the  direct 
All-India rural credit survey, later rechristened as the all India debt and investment survey, 
was initiated by the Reserve Bank way back in 1951. The Reserve Bank conducted the first 
census of India’s foreign assets and liabilities in 1948. Since then surveys have evolved as 
per  the  need  for  analysis.  In  the  recent  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  several 
forward-looking  quarterly  surveys  such  as  the  industrial  outlook  survey,  order  book  and 
capacity utilisation survey, inflation expectations survey, professional forecasters survey and 
credit  conditions  survey.  These  surveys  provide  inputs  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  quarterly 
monetary policy assessments. The results of these surveys are released in public domain for 
further research and analysis. 
Apart  from  generation  and  dissemination  of  statistics,  statisticians  are  also  posted  across 
various departments of the Bank. They provide support for different operational aspects such 
as  payment  system,  risk  analysis,  currency  management  and  portfolio  management 
evaluation.  Furthermore,  statisticians  internally  generate  forecasts  for  key  macroeconomic 
variables. They do their own research, and publish many of their research findings. 
Let me now turn to some of the emerging challenges. First, we must recognise that timely 
and  accurate  representation  is  the  core  objective  of  a  good  statistical  system.  It  provides 
foundation for good analysis and effective policy-making. In this context, the Bank’s IT-vision 
document emphasises the use of uniform reporting standards and automated data flow from 
the source system of banks to the Reserve Bank. This will ensure data integration, reduce 
reporting  burden  and  improve  overall  efficiency  of  the  statistical  system.  The  department 
should, therefore, gear up towards on-line reporting of information.  
Second,  earlier  data  were  released  periodically  through  the  Reserve  Bank’s  website  and 
various publications. Consolidated time-series data were made available through the annual 
publication  of  Handbook  of  Statistics  on  the  Indian  Economy  (HBS).  These  data  are  now 
being made available on-line on almost on a real time basis on the RBI website. It will be 
desirable to aim at a single point of data storage and dissemination. The department can set 
an example by taking steps to migrate the entire macro-financial database into RBI’s Data 
Warehouse (DBIE). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in 
the 
risks 
the  build-up  of 
financial  sector  and  of 
Third, in addition to the traditional statistical issues facing emerging economies like India, the 
global financial crisis has drawn attention to data gaps in the financial sector which needs to 
be  addressed.  The  G-20  has  particularly  emphasised  the  importance  of  data  for  better 
identification  of 
financial 
interconnectedness  The  proposal  is  to  scale  up  SDDS  by  including  financial  stability 
indicators (FSIs). While the Reserve Bank has started providing data under this SDDS-plus 
initiative, this process needs to be expanded further. The demands on statisticians is going to 
increase for which we should be prepared. 
Fourth,  macroeconomic  models  are  important  tools  developed  and  used  by  major  central 
banks for understanding the dynamics of growth, inflation, money, interest rates and other 
related  variables  in  the  context  of  formulating  monetary  policy.  There  is  no  unique  way  of 
macro-economic  modelling.  Policy  makers,  therefore,  tend  to  rely  on  a  suite  of  modes  to 
make  their  own  judgements  about  policy  action.  The  department  should  develop  an 
independent policy model, to help understand the transmission of the policy signals to the 
real and financial sector. This will facilitate assessment of the medium-term impact of various 
policy variables and how they are informed by changes in macro-conditions. Many countries 
have  core  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  models  for  this  purpose,  which 
takes into account the micro foundations behind the macroeconomic behaviour of different 
sectors  of  the  economy.  The  underlying  microeconomic  considerations  could  be  quite 
complex for a rapidly growing economy like ours. There is, therefore, a need to make further 
progress towards development of a DSGE model for Indian economy. 
Fifth,  asset  prices  have  become  important  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and 
maintenance of financial stability. One of the major data gaps on Indian economy relates to 
asset prices, particularly commercial real estate and house prices. Though initial efforts have 
been made to construct House Price Index (HPI) for seven cities. This needs to be expanded 
further to cover more areas so as to ultimately facilitate construction of an All-India HPI. 
Sixth, there is a need for compilation of employment statistics, though this is not clearly in the 
purview  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  However,  from  the  perspective  of  monetary  policy 
assessment  the  need  for  data  on  employment  and  wages  cannot  be  ignored.  The 
department  can  explore  possibilities  of  conducting  quick  surveys  on  wages  covering  both 
formal and informal sectors. 
Seventh, another area where the role of the department will increasingly become crucial is 
the  assessment  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  financial  inclusion  initiatives  through  follow-up 
surveys.  The  survey  finding  could  facilitate  better  policy  design.  In  the  conduct  of  surveys 
and in gathering market intelligence the role of regional offices of the department becomes 
critical.  The  regional  offices  can  also  help  in  providing  early  warning  indications  on  price 
pressures, build-up of supply shocks, sudden developments in the real estate sector and so 
on. 
Noted economist Alfred Marshall once said: “Statistics are the straw out of which, I, like every 
other  economist,  have  to  make  the  bricks”.  In  the  Reserve  Bank,  the statisticians not  only 
provide  straw,  they  also  make  their  own  bricks.  This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the 
statisticians are equal partners with the economists when they present their own independent 
assessment  of  growth  and  inflation  in  the  Monetary  Strategy  Committee  chaired  by  the 
Governor. In these meetings presentation of alternate viewpoints helps avoid the pitfalls of 
“group-think”. 
The Reserve Bank like many other central banks nevertheless draws its share of criticism for 
inaccuracies in its projection of growth and inflation. But, as observed by noted statistician 
Arthur L. Bowley in early 20th century, “A statistical estimate may be good or bad, accurate 
or the reverse; but in almost all cases it is likely to be more accurate than a casual observer’s 
impression,  and  in  the  nature  of  things  can  only  be  disproved  by  statistical  methods”. 
Statistics  has  made  significant  strides  since  Professor  Bowley’s  time.  Hence,  great 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
challenges lie ahead for statisticians in the Bank not only to improve the quality of data but 
also to refine statistical methods to aid better policy formulation. 
I once again extend a hearty welcome to all of you to this one day event. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
