Subir Gokarn: Economic reforms for sustainable growth 
Presentation  by  Dr  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
175th Annual General Meeting of the Madras Chamber of Commerce & Industry, Chennai, 
23 June 2011. 
Inputs from Bhupal Singh are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  speaking  at  the  175th  Annual  General 
Meeting of the Madras Chamber of Commerce and Industry. I have had the opportunity to 
speak  at  previous  events  organized  by  the  Chamber,  and  also  interact  with  committee 
members and the secretariat during my tenure as the chairperson of the Economic Affairs 
Committee  of  ASSOCHAM.  But,  this  is  a  special  occasion  and  I  thank  the  Chamber  for 
inviting me to speak on a topic that has been close to my heart and mind for many years 
now. 
An  organization  that  has  been  in  existence  and,  by  all  indications,  thrived  for  175 years 
clearly knows a thing or two about sustainability. It has, presumably, through trial and error, 
figured out what it needs to change and what it needs to retain in order to remain relevant 
and  useful  to  its  individual  stakeholders.  To  be  meaningful,  sustainable  growth  has  to  be 
viewed from the perspective of the individual. Ultimately, it is individuals or households who 
determine  whether  the  growth  process  has  benefitted  them  or  not.  In  short,  just  as  the 
durability  of  an  institution  such  as  the  MCCI  depends  on  how  effectively  it  serves  the 
interests of its members, so also does the sustainability of a growth process depend on how 
effectively it serves the interests of its core stakeholders – the individuals and households in 
the economy. 
This is the broad perspective with which I plan to address today’s topic. In what follows, I will 
address four issues – food, human capital, infrastructure and financial sector development – 
in which I believe reforms are critical to the sustainability of the growth process in the way I 
have defined it. This is not intended to be an exhaustive list. I am acutely aware that there 
are  many  other  issues,  which  have  a  legitimate  claim  to  be  on  anybody’s  list  of  reform 
priorities. I have chosen my list based on my understanding and knowledge of them and not 
because I believe they are decisively more important than others that have been excluded. 
Nor am I claiming to offer panaceas by way of reform ideas. Given complex inter-linkages, 
many solutions that may seem perfectly reasonable in a limited context break down when the 
context is widened. However, despite all these caveats, I will assert that these are all critical 
reform agendas and it is worth debating and refining the solutions that emerge. 
Food 
II. 
Food  inflation  is  a  significant  negative  feature  of  today’s  economic  environment.  It  has  a 
tremendous impact on quality of life, as people struggle to maintain nutritional standards that 
they  had  previously  achieved,  or  give  up  some  other  forms  of  consumption  so  as  to  keep 
themselves well-fed. For a country that legitimately believed that it had effectively dealt with 
its vulnerability to food shortages in the form of the Green Revolution of the late 1960s and 
early  1970s,  the  current  situation  comes  as  a  rude  reminder  that  solutions  are  rarely 
permanent.  
To place the current developments in context, it must be pointed out that the world economy 
is itself facing problems with food prices. As Chart 1 shows, food as a category has been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
following global trends in commodity prices over the past couple of years. There is a view 
that this is the outcome of the larger trend towards financialization of commodities, wherein 
large increases in global liquidity as a response to the 2008 crisis feed directly into higher 
asset prices, including commodities. Be that as it may, the price dynamics of individual food 
items,  also  displayed  on  Chart  1,  suggest  that  there  are  also  some  commodity-specific 
factors  at  work,  which  may  either  reinforce  or  counteract  the  broader  trend.  Sugar,  for 
example,  shows  fluctuations  in  response  to  current  supply  conditions,  while  wheat  reflects 
the effect of persistent drought in some major cultivating areas.  
India’s food inflation is certainly linked to global trends, particularly in relatively heavily traded 
commodities  like  sugar  and  oilseeds,  but,  given  the  high  degree  of  self-reliance  in  many 
other commodities, domestic factors play a big role. Chart 2 shows the significance of food 
inflation  in  the  overall  domestic  inflation  scenario.  As  the  graph  suggests,  although  the 
drivers  of  inflation  in  recent  months  have  been  energy  prices  and  demand  pressures,  as 
reflected in the non-food manufactured products index, food prices contributed significantly in 
the  first  half  of  2010  and  remain  uncomfortably  high.  Apart  from  the  direct  impact  on  the 
index, it is also likely to feed through into the wider inflationary process through higher wage 
demands, of which there is some evidence. 
It is generally believed that food prices are highly sensitive to monsoon performance, but this 
belief has been tested over the past few years. I think there is sufficient evidence to suggest 
that  food  prices  are  being  driven  not  by  transitory  factors,  such  as  rainfall,  but  my  more 
fundamental  forces.  Essentially,  a  long  period  of  relatively  rapid  growth  has  taken  large 
numbers  of  households  across  a  threshold  at  which  they  begin  to  look  for  nutritional 
diversification.  The  predominance  of  cereals  in  the  typical  household  diet  gives  way  to 
greater balance and a consequent increase in the demand for proteins – pulses, milk, meat, 
fish  and  eggs  –  ,  vegetables  and  fruit.  It  is  no  surprise  that  these  items  have  been  the 
primary causes of food inflation in the recent period.  
Further,  as  Chart  3  clearly  shows,  as  far  as  proteins  are  concerned  there  is  a  significant 
deviation  from  an  earlier  trend,  with  no  significant  sign  of  reverting  to  the  more  moderate 
trend, unlike non-protein items. The implication is that, as long as growth is leading to rising 
household incomes, particularly at the lower end of the income distribution, the pressure on 
food prices resulting from nutritional diversification will continue. 
The enduring solution to persistent demand-supply imbalances in food is to rapidly increase 
supply.  This  is  exactly  what  the  Green  Revolution  did.  The  combination  of  inputs  that 
achieved  that  success  is  well-known  and  some  lessons  may  yet  be  relevant.  The  basic 
principles,  however,  are  quite  clear.  Production  of  the  relevant  items  has  to  be  increased, 
mostly  by  increasing  productivity.  Cultivation  risks  have  to  be  mitigated  for  farmers  to  find 
these products more attractive. Transportation, storage and distribution efficiency have to be 
increased to keep losses and distribution margins down. These may seem obvious points, 
even clichés, but there is no getting around them. There will be some generic strategies and 
some crop-specific ones, which makes it worthwhile to approach the problem from a wider 
perspective.  A  first  step  has  been  taken  by  the  Government  in  setting  up  the  National 
Mission on Protein Supplements, from which a concrete action plan needs to emerge quickly. 
In  its  absence,  the  likely  scenario  is  one  of  persistent  food  inflation  and,  from  the  all-
important perspective of quality of life, persistent nutritional imbalances. This is not a recipe 
for sustainable growth. 
Human capital 
III. 
India is the second most populous country in the world and will become the most populous in 
a couple of decades. It is also one of the youngest and will remain so for some decades to 
come. At one level, this “demographic dividend” provides an enormous opportunity. Chart 4 
shows the contrasting demographic transition in India and China over the next two decades. 
The Chinese growth story over the past three decades has been well chronicled and I don’t 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
want to go into it here, except to make the point that a critical input into the sustained high 
growth was the abundance of labour. Of course, other policies contributed, but they can all 
be seen in terms of how they facilitated the absorption of large numbers of workers from the 
farms into the factories.  
The main point that Chart 4 makes is that the Chinese pool of workers is going to shrink as 
the  population  ages  over  the  next  two  decades,  during  which  period  India  will  add  a 
substantial number of workers. While China will lose about 40 million workers between 2010 
and  2030  as  they  move  past  the  age  of  60,  India  will  actually  add  220 million  workers.  In 
terms of competitive advantage, this is an opportunity to take over the mantle “factory to the 
world”, with hundreds of millions of relatively low-cost workers producing goods that the rest 
of  the  world  will  consume.  In  fact,  as  Chart  5  shows  very  clearly,  India  will  dominate  the 
global pool of workers as China’s population ages, because no other country that is likely to 
face  the  same  level  of  labour  costs  as  India,  is  anywhere  close  to  having  that  number  of 
people. If the hub of global manufacturing is to move from China, realistically speaking, it can 
only move to India, or to expand the geographic scope somewhat, South Asia 
However, the mere fact that the economy has a large number of potential workers doesn’t 
guarantee  that  they  will  be  employed  in  desirable,  relatively  high-productive,  well-paying 
jobs. There is nothing automatic about the process, which is what makes the other policies 
that facilitate and support it extremely important. This is where some questions about India’s 
ability to replicate the process arise. 
A basic concern is the quality of the workforce. Chart 6 provides a comparative picture of the 
most basic workforce quality parameter, i.e., whether workers have been through secondary 
school. Evidently, despite significant improvements in India’s record, it lags a long distance 
behind  China  and  the  South-East  Asian  economies,  all  of  which  have  been,  or  still  are, 
manufacturing  powerhouses.  Of  course,  the  mere  fact  of  having  finished  school  does  not 
guarantee that a worker can be productively employed. Vocational, job-oriented training may 
be a necessary part of equipping workers to function. Data on these indicators are sketchy, 
but anecdotal evidence suggest that this is not a very large pipeline and, in its current state, 
can hardly hope to make a dent on the large numbers of potential workers today, let alone 
the surge that is anticipated over the next two decades.  
Partly as a result of this, but also due to some other factors, some of which will be addressed 
in the next section, India’s record in moving people from farm to factory has not been very 
good.  As  Chart  7  shows,  over  the  1993–94  period,  the  structure  of  economic  activity 
changed  significantly.  While  the  share  of  agriculture  declined,  the  share  of  services 
increased  and  that  of  industry  virtually  remained  the  same.  The  decline  in  the  share  of 
agriculture is a universal historical pattern, but the transition of the share predominantly to 
services is unique to India. But, that is a separate issue. What is striking in Chart 7 is that the 
transition  in  the  workforce  has  been  far  less  significant.  Over  55 per cent  of  the  workforce 
remained  in  agriculture,  with  the  decline  in  this  sector’s  share  being  equally  absorbed  by 
industry  and  services.  In  1993–94,  agriculture,  with  30 per cent  of  GDP,  was  providing 
employment  and  livelihood  to  65 per cent  of  the  workforce.  By  2007–08,  the  same  sector 
accounted  for  less  than  17 per cent  of  GDP,  but  continued  to  support  55 per cent  of  the 
workforce.  In  short,  the  workforce  did  not  restructure  as  rapidly  as  the  economy  did, 
indicating the inability of the non-agricultural sectors to absorb workers. 
How  much  did  this  impact  livelihood  and  inequality  in  the  economy?  A  simple  calculation 
gives  some  indication.  Chart  8  displays  the  absolute  and  relative  levels  of  average  labour 
productivity across the three sectors, agriculture, industry and services. Although these are 
very crude measures of productivity differentials, the magnitudes are suggestive. The graph 
shows that the average worker in industry or services is about 5 times as productive as the 
average worker in agriculture, which means that the ratio of their earnings must be about the 
same  order  of  magnitude.  In  other  words,  in  terms  of  this  simple  arithmetic,  every  worker 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
shifting  from  agriculture  to  industry  or  services  would  contribute  four  more  units  of  GDP, 
besides spending and saving more out of higher earnings.  
As crude as the arithmetic may be, the point is clear. Accelerating growth in a way that is 
sustainable will inevitably involve moving workers from agriculture to industry and services. 
However,  the  past  pace  of  transition  does  not  provide  much  reassurance  that  the  Indian 
economy does this very well. Facilitating the transition is, therefore, a critical requirement for 
sustainable growth. In my view, three things are absolutely necessary for this to happen.  
First,  there  is  evidence  to  suggest  that  job  security  regulations  in  the  manufacturing  deter 
employers from hiring workers. There are clearly ways around this, but since they exist, their 
deterrent  effect  is  probably  being  felt.  Second,  if  job  security  is  eliminated,  workers  must 
have  access  to  a  safety  net  of  unemployment  insurance.  By  all  accounts,  the  Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) is providing a tangible 
safety  net  for  rural  workers.  It  is  time  to  think  of  cost-effective  ways  to  extend  safety  net 
access to industrial workers as a concomitant to scaling down job security regulations. Third, 
large  numbers  of  workers  have  to  be  trained  and  equipped  to  work  in  modern  industrial 
environments. Whether this is to be done through traditional schooling or alternative methods 
is a matter of debate, but the primary objective should be to move from generic knowledge to 
work-oriented skills. The numbers involved indicate that the whole exercise is going to be a 
huge organizational and financial challenge, but it must be faced. 
Infrastructure 
IV. 
The  third  critical  area  for  reforms,  to  my  mind,  is  infrastructure.  The  problems  in  most 
infrastructure  sectors  are  well-known  and  can  be  summarized  in  a  couple  of  sentences. 
Rapid  growth  has  raised  demand  for  infrastructure  services  far  in  excess  of  available 
capacity. Meanwhile, a combination of policy, regulatory and financial factors has slowed the 
pace of investment in infrastructure, leading to a persistence of the gap. 
We can look at this basic condition of shortage from a variety of perspectives. Charts 9 and 
Chart  10  provide  some  indications  of  the  gaps  that  currently  exist.  Chart  9  reinforces  the 
general perception of severe power shortages across the country. The Northern and Western 
regions  are  relatively  dynamic  in  terms  of  their  growth  momentum  and  the  magnitude  of 
shortage that is estimated for them may prove to be significant drag on growth. Of course, 
since the deficit has persisted for some time, most establishments look for alternatives in the 
form of captive power. However, this is relatively costly, not to mention more dependent on 
diesel, which then contributes to an increase in petroleum demand, which has both fiscal and 
balance  of  payments  consequences.  The  Chart  also  provides  an  indication  of  how  much 
distance  there  is  to  cover  in  providing  the  country  a  comprehensive  four-lane  highway 
system, the absence of which is leading to huge inefficiencies in the national transportation 
system. 
The  impact  of  inadequate  supply  of  power  and  transport  infrastructure  on  manufacturing 
activity is quite significant. This sector, in general, is infrastructure-intensive and any increase 
in  costs  due  to  unreliable  or  privately  provided  infrastructure  services  tends  to  reduce  the 
competitiveness of producers. Since virtually all manufactured goods are tradable, inefficient 
domestic cost structures put producers at a disadvantage not only in global markets but also 
in  their  home  markets,  where  they  have  to  compete  against  imports.  This  is  a  significant 
reason why the Industrial sector’s share of GDP has virtually remained the same over a long 
period of time. This is in sharp contrast to virtually all other economies, particularly those in 
East Asia, whose industrial sectors acted as engines of growth, resulting in a large increase 
in their share of GDP over comparably long periods.  
Chart 10 focuses on parameters that impinge very directly on quality of life, access to water 
and sanitation. These statistics suggest that access to water is relatively high, but sanitation 
is a different matter altogether. It is no comfort that on this one parameter, India and China 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  quite  close  to  each  other.  Over  45 per cent  of  India’s  population  is  estimated  to  be 
without access to sanitation facilities, a gap that presumably vitiates many of the quality of 
life improvements arising from higher earnings and better access to a range of goods and 
services. 
This  leads  to  a  larger  point  about  urban  infrastructure.  As  we  look  ahead  at  the  country’s 
population  trajectory,  apart  from  the  aggregates,  it  is  very  important  to  keep  in  mind  that 
there  is  likely  to  be  a  significant  shift  from  rural  areas  to  urban  areas.  Chart  11  provides 
projections of the incremental contribution to the world urban population expected to come 
from India and China over the next few decades. Evidently, Indian cities are going to become 
the repository of a very large number of the young workers that the country will add to its 
workforce during this period. In a situation in which cities are already reeling under enormous 
pressure on all urban systems because of rapidly increasing population, their ability to cope 
with  even  larger  numbers  without  both  more  resources  and  significant  increases  in  their 
organizational and managerial capacities is doubtful. 
In a nutshell, the infrastructure problem has two dimensions – sectoral and geographic. Each 
needs distinct focus in order to arrive at meaningful solutions. As far as sectoral imbalances 
are  concerned,  there  are  fortunately  areas  in  which  significant  progress  has  been  made. 
Over a period of time, policy clarity has been achieved and appropriate regulatory structures 
have  been  or  are  being  put  into  place.  This,  in  turn,  has  created  the  space  for  significant 
private investment to flow in, typically though not always in partnership with the public sector. 
In  fact,  for  the  past  two  years  or  more,  infrastructure  has  been  the  largest  contributor  to 
growth in bank credit. This has given rise to some problems, which I shall address in the next 
section, but, it is a reassuring sign that new infrastructure capacity is being created.  
As  the  supply-demand  gaps  in  a  variety  of  sectors  close,  the  stress  that  they  impose  on 
industrial investment  will  ease.  Conditions  will be  created  for  new  industrial  capacity  to  be 
created, unburdened by uncertain or high-cost infrastructure services. This, in turn, should 
facilitate  the  movement  of  workers  from  relatively  low-productivity  agriculture  to  relatively 
high-productivity manufacturing, provided that the policy framework indicated in the human 
capital discussion are put into place. 
However, the urbanization scenario raises concerns. If the ultimate goal of sustained growth 
is to create enduring improvements in the quality of life of as many people as possible, this is 
not  going  to  be  achieved  if  urban  systems  do  not  keep  pace  with  the number  of  entrants. 
Fortunately, there are a number of initiatives in place that at least provide the prospect for the 
needed improvement. These are both top-down and bottom-up approaches. The Jawaharlal 
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) is the primary example of the former, in 
which the central government provides resources for urban investments, subject to explicit 
accountability standards as well as resource commitments by city governments.  
In the bottom-up category, many cities have launched initiatives to digitize their land records, 
which immediately enhance the capacity to collect property taxes, always a significant source 
of revenue for cities. Simplification of tax formulae and procedures is another aspect of urban 
governance  reform.  Rationalization  of  user  charges  for  civic  services,  the  use  of  private 
agents to provide some services, e.g., waste management and so on are all ways in which 
cities are going about the task of improving service delivery to their current residents as well 
as creating the capacity to do so for newcomers. 
As reassuring and promising as all these programmes and initiatives are, they do not seem 
to be at a scale matching the enormity of the challenge. A significant restructuring of urban 
governance framework, which helps build the capacity to meet the challenge, is therefore a 
reform priority in this domain. There is plenty to learn from the experience of other countries 
where the quality of urban environment is noticeably superior to that in India. Some broad 
guidelines may include, for example, greater powers to tax with a consequent decrease in 
the dependence on higher tiers of government, and the creation of a professional cadre of 
urban management specialists, who spend their entire career running the city and can rise to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
levels of seniority comparable to other government hierarchies. Of course, cities exist in a 
socio-cultural  context,  so  no  model  is  strictly  transplantable,  but  that  does  not  mean  that 
some widely applicable principles do not exist. 
There have been other kinds of suggestions specifically in the Indian context, e.g., to convert 
the larger cities into Union Territories to give them some autonomy from political economy 
forces  at  the  state  level,  which  also  tend  to  favour  rural  areas  due  to  simple  electoral 
arithmetic.  Such  ideas  are  worth  examining.  But  certainly,  any  means  of  giving  cities  both 
greater autonomy in resource mobilization, along with greater managerial capability need to 
be pursued, even if this is to be achieved within the existing federal framework. 
The financial sector 
V. 
Looking  back  over  the  past  20 years,  there  have  clearly  been  massive  changes  in  the 
financial sector, which have completely changed the nature of intermediation, the range of 
products  and  services  available  and  the  intensity  of  competition.  This  has  clearly  been  in 
sync  with  the  overall  development  and  structural  change  of  the  economy.  The  financial 
sector has had the space to service the requirements of an increasing number of individuals 
and organizations. However, the process is clearly far from complete. It is useful to think of 
financial sector reforms as a perpetual work-in-progress, in which policy and regulation need 
to create space for service providers to cater to increasing and new customer requirements, 
while ensuring that existing and emerging risks are monitored and mitigated. 
This topic could be the basis of a full-length speech by itself, but I clearly don’t want to do 
that here. I will confine myself to two sets of issues – financial inclusion and the development 
of a corporate bond market.  
Expanding  the  reach  of  financial  services  to  those  individuals  who  do  not  currently  have 
access is an objective that is fully consistent with the people-centric definition of sustainable 
growth. Going by the evidence, there is a long way to go in achieving this objective. Chart 12 
provides a picture of the current levels of access to different financial products and services. 
Bank accounts are relatively widespread, but even in that most basic of services, the gap is 
quite large. Other services have very low levels of penetration. Of course, high penetration 
depends on demand conditions as well and not everyone may want or need every kind of 
product  or  service,  but,  as  subsequent  Charts  will  suggest,  the  unmet  demand  for  some 
kinds of services may be quite large.  
Chart 13 makes the point that a very high proportion of household financial assets are held in 
cash,  which  suggest  that  the  ability  of  many  households  to  access  the  financial  system  is 
low.  This  is,  understandably,  even  higher  in  rural  areas  than  in  the  urban  ones.  Bank 
deposits are clearly providing an alternative to cash, which is a positive development, but the 
room for improvement is clearly visible in the picture.  
The Reserve Bank has been emphasising on expanding the access to the banking system. 
The broad objective is to ensure access to all households in villages with a population over 
2000 (as per the 2001 Census) by 2012. The extensive use of technology facilitates this by 
allowing  banks  to  operate  virtual  branches  in  the  form  of  an  IT-enabled  Business 
Correspondent (BC). This model shows some promise as it rolls out across the country, and 
also some limitations. It is reasonably clear that the BC model is not infinitely scalable. Banks 
have  to  innovate  in  terms  of  their  own  organizational  structures  and  support  systems  to 
increase the viability and sustainability of the model. But, even with all these concerns, it is a 
good beginning and the generic model, with appropriate adaptations to local conditions, is 
the most likely way to achieve at least minimal access to the financial system through a basic 
or  no-frills  bank  account.  This  is  visualized  as  the  beginning  of  the  process;  once  the 
customer is in the system, it can begin to address his or her other needs by adapting existing 
products or designing new ones. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What other products may interest this new pool of financial service customers? One way to 
gauge this is to identify the reasons for people to use financial services. Chart 14, reporting 
results  from  a  recent  survey  of  households,  provides  some  important  insights  on  this. 
Ceremonies  or  social  obligations,  old-age  security,  children’s  education  and  meeting 
emergency needs are four of the most important motivations for accessing financial services. 
Clearly,  there  is  a  role  for  insurance,  pension  and  other  long-term  savings  instruments  in 
advancing  the  cause  of  financial  inclusion.  It  is  in  these  segments  that  penetration  is 
extremely  low.  Chart  15  provides  a  cross-country  comparison  of  insurance  services.  It 
speaks for itself. 
What  is  needed  here  is  to  develop  last-mile  delivery  mechanisms  that  can  take  these 
products  from  the  large  providers  in  the  formal  sector  to  this  vast  pool  of  new  customers. 
Though volumes are potentially large, individual transactions will be small and geographically 
scattered,  which  can  play  havoc  with  costs.  Organizational  structures,  whether  within  the 
existing  providers  or  independent,  have  to  be  developed  to  accommodate  these  specific 
market conditions. From a regulatory perspective, the massive expansion of services brings 
with it risks and these have to be identified and provided for. 
I will now turn to the issue of the corporate bond market. To provide a backdrop, Chart 16 
shows  the  estimated  financial  requirements  for  infrastructure  over  the  12th  Plan  period, 
2012–17.  Over  the  next  five  years,  over  Rs.  40 lakh  crores  or  $1  trillion  are  desired  to  be 
invested.  As  I  indicated  earlier,  infrastructure  supply  is  a  serious  bottleneck  and  large, 
efficiently implemented and well managed projects across sectors are imperative. Even as 
these  are  getting  under  way,  there  is  an  obvious  lack  of  financial  channels  for  them  to 
mobilize  resources.  So  far,  the  responsibility  for  financing  new  investments  has  fallen 
predominantly  on  banks.  For  reasons  relating  to  asset-liability  management  and  sector 
exposure limits, the capacity of banks to continue to finance this sector is limited. Therefore, 
alternative channels have to be quickly put into place. The corporate bond market is perhaps 
the most important of these. 
For  several  years,  one  committee  after  another  has  been  making  recommendations  for 
actions to develop this market. These cut across regulatory domains and this is perhaps one 
reason why, despite the several steps taken, a critical threshold that would make the market 
viable  was  not  reached.  However,  in  recent  months  this  is  on  high  priority  with  both  the 
regulators and the government addressing the remaining binding constraints. The 2011–12 
Union Budget took a crucial step in exempting bonds issued by Infrastructure Development 
Funds  from  withholding  tax.  It  would  be  reasonable  to  extend  this  facility  to  bonds  issued 
directly  by  infrastructure  companies.  Another  issue  that  has  been  flagged,  inter-state 
differentials  in  stamp  duties,  is  being  addressed  by  attempting  a  harmonization  of  rates 
across  states.  To  make  a  large  number  of  bonds  attractive  to  a  potentially  large  domestic 
investor base in the form of insurance and pension funds, credit enhancement mechanisms 
which will allow bonds to meet minimum rating requirements for a price are being explored. 
The more efficiently and reliably this service is delivered, the larger will be the potential pool 
of investment for these huge institutions.  
Of course, aspirations notwithstanding, the question is whether bond markets can realistically 
emerge  as  an  alternative  channel  of  financing,  for  infrastructure  certainly,  but  also  for 
investment in other sectors. Chart 17 provides a cross-country comparison. It would appear 
that  even  in  the  context  of  emerging  economies,  Indian  bond  markets  do  have  some 
headroom available.  
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
I have addressed four sets of factors, which I believe hold the key to sustainable growth and 
tried to articulate my thoughts on what the policy imperatives are. As I have pointed out, in 
many areas, reform measures have been taken or are in the pipeline. However, there are 
also  many  in  which  either  action  needs  to  be  taken  on  the  basis  of  credible  supporting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
evidence  or,  new  approaches  and  solutions  need  to  be  visualized.  I  also  want  to  re-
emphasize  my  caveat  that  this  was  not  meant  to  be  an  exhaustive  list  of  actions  for 
sustainable growth.  
I will not attempt to summarize my thoughts on actions and solutions for each set of factors. 
But, I would like to end by emphasizing three key principles that have provided, explicitly or 
implicitly, a common thread running through my presentation. 
First, policies and strategies for growth have to be welfare-oriented. Placing the well-being or 
quality  of  life  of  the  key  stakeholders  –  individuals  or  households  here  –  at  the  centre  of 
strategic thinking is the key to sustainability.  
Second, any policy or strategy must give due consideration to the risks involved. High-risk-
high-return may be a valid approach to portfolio management by individuals, but is not so in a 
policy setting, where it is difficult to justify the large losses to some stakeholders in terms of 
large gains to others. “The greatest good for the greatest number” is certainly a valid premise 
for  policymakers,  but  it  needs  to  be  complemented  with  “the  least  risk  for  the  greatest 
number”.  In  situations  in  which  heightened  risks  are  unavoidable  for  some  stakeholders, 
reliable safety nets need to be an integral part of the strategy. 
Third,  a  pragmatic,  “whatever  works”  approach 
important.  There  are  multiple 
environments, multiple economic, social and political contexts in which policies are made and 
implemented, even within a single country. No single solution can be expected to work in all 
of them. Bottom-up thinking, which draws on local knowledge and understanding to design 
appropriate solutions is necessary. At the same time, a top-down element, which articulates 
common  goals  and  policy  principles,  increases  efficiency  in  resource  mobilization  and 
allocation  and  facilitates  learning  across  jurisdictions,  also  plays  a  critical  part.  An  optimal 
mix of the two needs to be found. 
Let  me  end  by  once  again  thanking  the  MCCI  for  inviting  me  to  speak  on  this  special 
occasion. I do hope that my presentation met your expectations.  
 
is 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
