Jean-Claude Trichet: Preventing spillovers on the global economy 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Bretton 
Woods  Committee,  International  Council  Meeting  2011,  Washington  DC,  23  September 
2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is now four years after the outbreak of the global financial crisis, and three years after the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, which were stark reminders of how much financial integration 
and globalisation made all economies interdependent. 
This  interdependence  creates  benefits  but  also  adverse  spillovers  which  may  arise  in  all 
domains, from inadequate macro policy choices to private market imperfections. I will focus 
today  on  two  key  areas  of  policy  interest  to  address  spillovers  in  the  global  economy: 
(1) reforming  global  finance,  and  (2) strengthening  policy  discipline  at  the  domestic  and 
global level, before turning to how the euro area can contribute to global stability.  
Reforming global finance 
1. 
At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, G20 leaders agreed “to do everything needed to repair our 
financial system and to maintain the global flow of capital”. The November 2011 G20 Cannes 
summit will take stock of where we stand in terms of implementation of this important reform 
agenda.  
In a number of areas, important decision have already been taken, notably as regards the 
improvement of bank capital with the agreement on Basel III, and the development of macro-
prudential frameworks. In other areas, we are close to concluding our work, in particular as 
regards a new global framework on systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs).  
In  those  areas  where  decisions  have  already  been  taken  by  the  international  community, 
implementation is now key. The G20 yesterday committed to full implementation of Basel III 
along the agreed timelines. The EU has already started this process early with the European 
Commission  putting  its  proposals  on  the  table  for  the  so-called  Capital  Requirements 
Directive IV, which will translate Basel III into the legal framework of the EU Member States.  
In terms of macro-prudential framework, the European Systemic Risk Board has started its 
operation this year. All jurisdictions must ensure timely implementation so that we can ensure 
that we have done everything to make a difference as regards the resilience of the global, 
regional and national financial systems.  
Let me briefly highlight three key areas on which we need to stay committed and where swift 
progress is of the essence. 
The  first  challenge  may  come  from  the  shadow  banking  sector.  The  introduction  of  more 
stringent capital requirements may provide incentives for banks to shift part of their activities 
outside the regulatory realm. It is therefore decisive that we continue our work to improve our 
capacity  to  identify  and  assess  the  potential  risks  stemming  from  the  shadow  banking 
system.  This  includes  regulatory  reform  of  money  market  funds,  securitisation  and  the 
interaction with the banking sector.  
The second challenge is how to keep pace with financial innovation. Improving the OTC and 
commodity derivatives markets is a key part of this agenda, It is a complex matter and one in 
which alignment of details is essential to avoid regulatory arbitrage.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The third challenge is to enhance transparency across the board: with regards to markets, 
institutions, and products. Insufficient information contributes to mispricing of risks, mistrust 
among  market  participants,  which  can  result  into  downturns  and  crises.  At  our  October 
meeting  of  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Banks  Governors  we  will  be  discussing 
IOSCO “recommendations to promote markets’ integrity and efficiency to mitigate the risks 
posed to the financial system by the latest technological developments”.  
Improving policy discipline globally 
2. 
Aside from a more resilient global financial system, we need to have more disciplined macro 
policies  as  the  lack  of  discipline  in  macroeconomic  policies  in  several  countries  led  to  the 
build-up of unsustainable external imbalances before the financial crisis. 
There is still a gap between the degree of economic integration and the willingness of policy 
makers to take into account interdependence and spillovers.  
Keeping one’s house in order is no longer sufficient in an integrated world. Spillovers from 
the rest of the world can influence economies considerably. Multilateral surveillance is now 
being enhanced along two tracks. The informal G20 track and the formal IMF track. 
The  G20  Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and  Balanced  Growth,  incorporates  a  first 
systematic  multilateral  assessment  of  global  imbalances.  It  comes  at  an  appropriate  time 
because four years after the crisis, global imbalances remain unsustainably high. The sum of 
the  current  account  balance  (in  absolute  terms)  of  the  major  economies  are  projected  to 
remain close to 2.5% of world GDP in the next few years. This is less than their pre-crisis 
peak  (over  3%  of  world  GDP),  but  still  twice  as  high  as  in  the  early  1990s,  before  the 
acceleration in financial and real globalization. 
It is now of foremost importance to implement the Framework effectively, and to fully live up 
to the expectations that the G20 process raised internationally. The G20 Cannes Summit will 
provide a litmus test. 
Multilateral surveillance of domestic policies of systemic countries to ensure their orientation 
towards medium term stability and sustainability is being strengthened in the IMF as well. 
The  recently  conducted  first  round  of  IMF  spillover  reports,  the  Consolidated  Multilateral 
Surveillance Report to the IMFC and the current triennial review of IMF surveillance can be 
seen as useful steps towards a broader and more comprehensive framework.  
Strengthening governance in the euro area  
3. 
The need to strengthen discipline is understood strongly on our side of the Atlantic, so that 
the euro area can do its part in contributing to global stability. 
The  earlier  economic  governance  framework  has  proved  to  be  insufficiently  binding  while 
lacking appropriate comprehensiveness. 
The requirements for a very significant reinforcement of the fiscal surveillance of the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  and  for  the  creation  of  a  new  surveillance  of  competitive  indicators  and 
macroeconomic  policy  have  been  discussed  widely  and  in  much  detail  by  euro  area 
authorities.  We  have  embarked  on  a  deep  and  comprehensive  reform  of  its  economic 
governance to reinforce economic policy coordination. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  called  for  a  “quantum  leap”  in  the  economic 
governance of the euro area. This includes in particular (i) greater automaticity of sanctioning 
mechanisms,  particularly  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (ii)  as  well  as  truly  independent 
fiscal and economic analyses of macroeconomic imbalances. 
2 
 The  recent  conclusion  of  the  negotiations  between  the  European  Parliament  and  the  EU 
Council on the economic governance reform package are welcome. Fiscal surveillance will 
become stronger and more coherent with the reinforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
While  falling  short  of  the  quantum  leap  that  the  ECB  was  advocating,  this  agreement 
strengthens the initial Commission proposals in many ways and is thus a step in the right 
direction.  
The EU budgetary frameworks will also be strengthened, including through the introduction 
of fiscal rules at the national level. The so-called “European Semester” can be expected to 
provide ex-ante and integrated guidance to the Member States for the formulation of national 
budgets and structural reforms for the following year. 
This will be complemented by the introduction of a macroeconomic surveillance procedure, 
which  closes  an  important  gap  in  the  economic  governance  framework.  It  is  key  for  this 
framework  to  be  rigorously  applied,  including  in  terms  of  the  indicators  used,  in  order  to 
consolidate the effectiveness of this new procedure to assess in particular euro area Member 
States experiencing sustained losses of competitiveness and large current account deficits. 
The focus needs to be on the prevention of situations creating risks to economic, budgetary 
and  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area.  In  addition,  this  macroeconomic  surveillance 
procedure should rely on transparent and effective trigger mechanisms. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude  with  three  key  messages  to  policy  makers  –  in  advanced  and  emerging 
market  economies  alike  –  who  all  have  a  role  to  play  to  address  the  challenges  that  are 
ahead of us.  
First, what has already been decided has to be implemented expeditiously, comprehensively 
and  fully.  This  requires  resolve  and  fortitude  on  the  part  of  the  public  authorities,  but  also 
lucidity on the part of the private sector. 
Second, there can be no complacency as regards the unfinished part of our reform agenda 
for a stronger international financial architecture. And I cannot help saying that on top of what 
is clearly identified by the international community as the urgent issues under discussion in 
the Financial Stability Board and the G20, we are far from understanding the potential global 
systemic  instability  that  is  associated  today  with  the  sheer  size  of  the  non-banking  sector 
which experienced an exponential growth over the last 20 years.  
Third,  as  regards  the  euro  area  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  of  which  the  euro  area  is 
currently the epicentre, the euro area central banks, and the ECB in particular, have been 
permanently  calling  for  sound  economic  policy  management,  in  particular  in  the  fiscal 
domain,  for  structural  reforms  and  for  reinforced  economic  governance.  As  independent 
institutions that are devoted to stability and that are medium- to long-term oriented, we are an 
anchor  of  stability  and  confidence.  This  is  especially  valuable  in  the  turbulent  market 
environment  that  we  are  witnessing  and  that  is  characterised  by  acute  tensions  of  some 
sovereign signatures which are causing negative spillovers on others. 
Only a few weeks ago, the central bankers were all meeting in the BIS headquarters in Basel 
in our Global Economy Meeting. Reporting to the press afterwards, I stressed that we were 
all very closely “united in purpose”: each of us in our own economy, with its different features 
and  challenges,  striving  to  solidly  anchor  inflation  expectations,  preserve  stability  and 
consolidate  confidence.  Meeting  here  in  Washington,  authorities  have  the  opportunity  to 
display  the  same  unity  in  purpose  to  address  their  economic  challenges  at  home,  prevent 
negative spillovers for the global economy and consolidate confidence in the world recovery.  
Now, at the end of this exposition, it might be useful for me to tell you what is the assessment 
that the European Systemic Risk Board has expressed after its last meeting only two days 
ago:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Since its previous meeting on 22 June 2011, risks to the stability of the EU financial system 
have increased considerably. Key risks stem from potential further adverse feedback effects 
between sovereign risks, funding vulnerabilities with the EU banking sector, and a weakening 
growth  outlook  both  at  the  global  and  the  EU  level.  Over  the  past  few  months,  sovereign 
stress  had  moved  from  smaller  economies  to  some  of  the  larger  EU  countries.  Signs  of 
stress are evident in many European government bond markets, while the high volatility in 
equity markets indicates that tensions have spread across capital markets around the world. 
The  situation  has  been  aggravated  by  the  progressive  drying-up  of  bank  funding  markets, 
and  availability  of  US  dollar  funding  to  EU  banks  had  also  decreased  significantly.  In  that 
context, central banks have decided on coordinated US dollar liquidity-providing operations 
with longer maturities. The high interconnectedness in the EU financial system has led to a 
rapidly rising risk of significant contagion. This is threatening financial stability in the EU as a 
whole and adversely impacts the real economy in Europe and beyond. 
Looking  ahead,  decisive  and  swift  action  is  required  from  all  authorities.  In  the  immediate 
future  this  includes:  (1)  implementing,  fully  and  rapidly,  the  measures  agreed  upon  at  the 
21 July  meeting  of  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government  of  the  euro  area;  (2)  adopting 
sustainable  fiscal  policies  and  growth-enhancing  structural  measures  so  as  to  achieve  or 
maintain  credibility  of  sovereign  signatures  in  global  markets;  and  (3)  enhancing  the 
coordination and consistency of communication.  
Authorities  must  act  in  unison  with  a  total  commitment  to  safeguard  financial  stability. 
Supervisors should coordinate efforts to strengthen bank capital, including having recourse 
to  backstop  facilities,  taking  benefit  from  the  possibility  of  the  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility  to  lend  to  governments  in  order  to  recapitalise  banks,  including  in  non-programme 
countries.  
I thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 