William C Dudley: US experience with bank stress tests 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Group  of  30  plenary  meeting,  Bern,  Switzerland, 
28 May 2011. 
 Today  I  would  like  to  comment  on  the  U.S.  experience  conducting  bank  stress  tests.  I 
thought this might be of interest both in light of the lessons we learned and the relevance of 
these lessons as the European banking regulators conduct another important round of bank 
stress  tests  this  summer.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve 
System. 
As way of background, the U.S. experience conducting stress tests across an array of large 
banks came out of earlier work doing horizontal supervisory evaluations of banks. We found 
these exercises useful in identifying best practices and to determine where particular banks 
were deficient. 
In talking about stress tests in the United States, there are three distinct sets of stress tests 
to consider: 
 
 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), completed in May 2009;  
stress  tests  conducted  as  part  of  the  larger  Comprehensive  Capital  Assessment 
Review (CCAR), completed in April 2011; and  
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act mandated stress 
tests, which we have yet to implement. 
 SCAP was a supervisory stress test, meaning that regulators specified the adverse scenario 
and determined the resulting loss and revenue estimates on a standardized basis drawing on 
information submitted by each firm. The CCAR process centered on bank-run stress tests in 
which  regulators  specified  the  scenario  but  required  each  bank  to  model  the  stress  event 
itself. 
Dodd-Frank mandates both supervisory stress tests and bank-run stress tests. We are still 
working  out  how  we  will  do  each  of  these  types,  but  I  expect  that  the  SCAP  and  CCAR 
exercises will serve as models. 
Today I will focus on the SCAP and CCAR exercises. The first important point to make is that 
the  purposes  of  the  SCAP  and  CCAR  are  very  different.  Thus,  these  processes  are 
conducted  in  very  distinct  ways.  Turning  first  to  the  SCAP,  its  purpose  was  to  restore 
confidence  in  large  U.S.  banks.  The  SCAP  was  designed  to  accomplish  this  mission  by 
measuring  how  much  capital  these  banks  would  need  in  a  stress  macroeconomic 
environment and then forcing these banks to either raise this capital from private sources or 
take mandatory convertible preferred equity from the U.S. Treasury. 
The key attributes of the SCAP include: 
 
A common stress scenario was applied to each of 19 large bank holding companies 
(BHCs).  
This stress scenario was applied in a consistent manner across these banks. The 
test  was  applied  at  the  detailed  trading  book  and  banking  book  level,  with  the 
expected loss experiences based upon the particular characteristics of the portfolio 
being  examined.  So,  for  example,  evaluation  of  a  residential  mortgage  portfolio 
might include detailed factors such as FICO scores and geographic distribution of 
the mortgages. This means that estimated potential losses under the stress scenario 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   vary across banks not just because of differences in overall portfolio composition, 
but also because of differences in asset quality within particular asset classes.  
A  minimum  capital  standard  was  applied  after  two  years  of  stress  and  with 
appropriate  reserves  at  the  end  of  the  two-year  period.  The  minimum  capital 
standard was set at 4 percent of Tier I common and 6 percent of Tier I capital.  
Estimated  potential  losses  were  compared  with  the  starting  capital  level  and  the 
estimated resources expected to be generated by the ongoing business – referred 
to as pre-provision net revenue (PPNR) – in order to determine the capital needed 
to meet the minimum capital standard.  
Details of the test were disclosed on a bank-by-bank basis using a template that the 
Federal Reserve established. This common template ensured comparability across 
the 19 BHCs and ensured that the Federal Reserve controlled the message, not the 
banks. 
 In contrast, while CCAR had an embedded stress test, the key attributes of the CCAR are 
quite different: 
 
The purpose was to assess the BHCs’ capital planning processes to ensure that the 
BHCs have good capital plans in place.  
Stress tests were applied by individual banks as part of this exercise. We set the 
main scenario that the banks must use, and the banks were required to apply the 
stress  test  in  the  manner  they  deemed  appropriate  in  assessing  their  capital 
adequacy. Supervisors used independent quantitative techniques both as a check 
on firm estimates and to assist in their evaluation of the firms’ tools and processes. 
We evaluated their efforts in terms of: 1) how the stress test is applied, 2) what this 
implies in terms of capital adequacy, and 3) their capital plans and requests to pay 
dividends and/or conduct share repurchase programs. 
Our  evaluation  of  their  capital  planning  processes  and  their  requests  to  make  capital 
disbursements was based mainly on three factors: 1) capital adequacy, 2) the quality of the 
capital  planning  process,  and  3)  the  credibility  of  their  plans  to  meet  the  Basel  III  capital 
requirements. Elements of a good  planning process include: 1) description of risk appetite 
and  capital  targets,  2)  robust  internal  controls,  3)  incorporation  of  stress  testing  and 
stress-test results into the decision making process, 4) good governance with respect to the 
role  of  senior  management  and  the  board  of  directors,  and  5)  well-articulated  capital 
distribution  policies  that  describe  how  decisions  are  made  relative  to  the  expectations  of 
future outcomes. 
Some outside observers ask why supervisors would ever want to use bank-run stress tests 
rather  than  supervisory  stress  tests.  The  answer  is  that  they  serve  different  purposes.  A 
bank-run stress test allows supervisors to evaluate how good each individual bank – and the 
banking  system  in  general  –  is  at  assessing  the  risks  it  faces  in  a  stress  scenario  and 
translating  this  into  an  appropriate  amount  of  capital  to  set  aside  against  these  risks. 
Crucially,  supervisors  do  not  simply  accept  the  results  the  banks  produce  in  these  
tests  –  they  evaluate  both  the  adequacy  of  the  numbers  the  banks  produce  and  the 
processes they use to get there. 
If all we ever did was run supervisory stress tests in which we instruct banks in detail how to 
perform the test, we would be in the position of a parent who shows his child how to solve 
each problem in her homework – and never discovers whether the child can do the work on 
her own or not. 
The CCAR process differs from the SCAP in several key respects. First, in the CCAR there 
was no disclosure by the Fed of the stress test results. In CCAR, the focus was on assessing 
the sensitivity of the firms’ own projections of capital under the baseline and stress scenarios 
to  alternate  assumptions  and  estimates.  The  results  do  not  lend  themselves  to  direct, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
apples-to-apples comparisons like the results in the SCAP.  Second, the emphasis was on 
the  capital  planning  process,  not  forcing  the  banks  to  raise  capital  to  withstand  a  stress 
environment. Third, the CCAR was conducted at a different stage of the economic cycle. The 
issue was not capital raising as in the SCAP, but instead how fast should they continue to 
build  their capital.  What’s  prudent? This  translated  into  an evaluation  about  the  amount  of 
capital that they could prudently pay out via dividends and/or share buybacks. 
Fourth,  with  respect  to  the  distribution  requests,  we  were  not  calculating  the  amount  of 
capital that the banks can distribute. Instead, we were making an “up” or “down” decision per 
their  requests.  Either  we  “objected”  or  we  “did  not  object.”  We  want  banks  to  have  good 
capital planning processes and make intelligent decisions with respect to capital. We don’t 
want to determine their capital actions or what their distributions should be. They need to be 
able to do this. Fifth, with respect to disclosure, this decision was left to individual firms. In 
some cases, banks disclosed whether we objected or not to their plans for distributions, while 
in  other  cases  they  simply  announced  their  intention  with  regard  to  future  capital 
distributions. 
So what have been the lessons from our stress test exercises? 
One key issue during the financial crisis was the unwillingness of banks to proactively raise 
capital  so  they  would  be  better  prepared  to  withstand  a  “bad  state  of  the  world”  scenario 
should that transpire. Banks didn’t want to do this for two reasons. First, capital raises might 
signal that they were, in fact, weak. Second, the capital raises would be dilutive. In particular, 
in many cases the expected share price would be higher without dilution even admitting the 
possibility of a “bad state of the world” scenario. The problem with this approach was that 
each individual bank’s decision not to raise capital to protect against the “bad state of the 
world” scenario increased the likelihood of the “bad state of the world” scenario. There was 
an important externality. If a bank raises additional capital, it doesn’t just make its own bank 
stronger, it also makes the entire banking system more stable. Yet it reaps only a portion of 
these  benefits.  This  was  the  collective  action  problem  that  the  SCAP  was  designed  to 
remedy. 
Perhaps, I can best illustrate the problem via two figures. In Figure 1, banks have sufficient 
capital. The mean value of capital is well above zero, the distribution is narrow, and none of 
the distribution falls below zero – everyone believes the bank is solvent. In Figure 2, losses 
push the distribution of capital to the left and uncertainty about the value of the assets widens 
the  distribution.  Thus,  unlike  the  case  in  Figure  1,  a  portion  of  the  distribution  falls  below 
zero. The bank may be insolvent. Thus, the bank is likely to encounter funding difficulties. 
The point of the SCAP was to push the probability distribution back to the right by adding 
capital – and to narrow it by creating more certainty about how much capital the banks need. 
By moving the banking industry collectively back to Figure 1 from Figure 2, the “bad state of 
the world” becomes less likely. 
In the SCAP, we had to make a number of important decisions. These included: 
 
The appropriate capital target. We focused on the Tier I common ratio because we 
believed  that  this  was  the  most  credible  form  of  capital.  This  put  much  greater 
emphasis on common equity than previously.  
The  severity  of  the  stress  test.  We  assumed  a  stress  scenario  with  an 
unemployment  rate  1.5  percentage  points  higher  than  the  baseline  scenario,  and 
further  home  price  declines  of  about  29  percent  compared  with  18  percent  in  the 
base case. We were aiming for a stress test scenario that had about a 5 percent to 
10 percent probability of being realized.  
The capital target at the end of 2010 and the stress test severity were both important 
in  terms  of  the  credibility  of  the  SCAP.  Going  in,  we  were  worried  that  with  our 
capital  goal,  the  BHCs’  needs  might  turn  out  to  be  higher  than  the  available 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
that 
fortunate 
the  need 
turned  out 
to  not  be 
resources  from  the  private  sector  and  the  U.S.  Treasury.  We  decided  not  to 
compromise the credibility of the stress test to save on needed capital resources. 
We  were 
that  great: 
$185  billion  of  capital  needed  prior  to  capital  actions  already  implemented  and 
revenue generated during the first quarter of 2010; $75 billion of capital needed after 
these first quarter actions.  
We decided to apply the stress scenario on a consistent basis across all 19 banks. 
This entailed economists and bank supervisors working together to do analysis on 
both  a  top-down  and  bottom-up  basis.  This  allowed  us  to  generate  aggregate 
estimates that made sense on an economywide basis. If we had just used the initial 
estimates  supplied  by  the  banks  –  we  would  have  had  a  Lake  Wobegon  
outcome – the banks would all have said that they were above average.  
We  specified  the  capital  need  in  terms  of  dollars  rather  than  in  terms  of  a  capital 
ratio.  In  other  words,  we  did  not  allow  banks  the  option  of  shrinking  their 
risk-weighted assets in order to push up their capital ratios. We didn’t want banks to 
shrink to minimize the amount of capital needed because such behavior might have 
damaged the macroeconomy. I think this was an important macroprudential element 
of the SCAP.  
Disclosure. This was hotly debated. There was no precedent for the disclosure of 
supervisory information. However, senior policymakers – including myself – thought 
disclosure was essential for the SCAP to be credible and we resolved to disclose 
extensive information. 
   Disclosure allowed private-sector analysts to kick the tires and this was important. The day 
after the results were published, I remember that Bridgewater Associates – which had said 
the banks needed considerably more resources – published a paper evaluating the SCAP 
results. The banner headline was: “We Agree.” So this was important. However, I would note 
that it is important not to draw too strong a conclusion from just one episode. In the SCAP 
process, I also think it is important that we had some good luck. First, the banks’ needs were 
not  that  great.  What  people  didn’t  appreciate  going  in  was  that  U.S.  banks  have  strong 
revenue-generation capabilities: the banks had already set aside a large amount of reserves 
and  taken  large  mark-to-market  losses,  and  the  banks  had  already  bolstered  their  capital 
resources  via  capital  raises  and  the  sale  of  ancillary  businesses.  Second,  the  economy 
started to look a bit better in May at the time the SCAP results were released. This made the 
stress scenario more credible. Third, the capital markets were open to the banks. This was 
important because, as we saw, private capital was viewed as very much superior to Treasury 
mandatory  convertible  preferred  shares.  Fourth,  although  we  made  the  correct  decision  to 
disclose, this was a difficult and close call. The fact that the loss experiences for the different 
asset classes varied across the banks helped to bolster the credibility of the results. 
Going into the spring of 2009, there was a prevailing view that several of the largest banks 
would  have  to  be  nationalized.  The  problem  was  that  on a  mark-to-market  basis,  some  of 
these  banks  were  viewed  as  potentially  insolvent.  But  the  mark-to-market  price  declines 
overstated the problem because a significant portion of the decline in prices did not reflect 
expected losses but instead was due to a huge increase in the illiquidity premium. This was 
due to the fact that risky assets could no longer be financed easily on a leveraged basis. As 
long as banks could hold onto the assets, losses would shrink once the illiquidity premium 
narrowed back to a more typical level. 
To  sum  up,  I  believe  that  the  SCAP  was  an  important  turning  point  in  the  financial  crisis. 
Confidence improved as banks raised capital mainly in the private markets. 
So what were the lessons from the CCAR? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I think here the lessons were mostly for the banks. There were negative consequences for 
banks that had inadequate capital planning capabilities or asked to make distributions that 
were too large relative to expected capital resources. 
From the CCAR, we concluded that all banks could and should be required to improve their 
capital  planning  processes,  even  those  that  received  a  decision  of  “no  objection”  to  their 
proposed  distributions.  A  detailed  letter  went  to  each  firm  outlining  areas  for  improvement 
and we will be tracking the banks progress. 
CCAR is not a one-off event. It will be an ongoing process. It is designed to push banks to 
continue to upgrade their risk management and capital assessment processes. 
So what are the implications of the U.S. experience? The context and purpose of any stress 
test  should  dictate  the  form  it  takes.  Both  the  SCAP  and  CCAR  models  likely  have  some 
lessons for other such exercises, but in circumstances of market stress, the SCAP model is 
more relevant than the CCAR model. In such episodes, our experience suggests: 
 
 
First, the stress scenario needs to be severe to be credible.  
Second,  disclosure  of  the  results  is  needed  at  a  sufficiently  granular  level  so  that 
private analysts can make their own independent assessment.  
Third, the results need to be credible in terms of expected losses.  
Fourth, there needs to be a credible capital backstop so that market participants can 
be  sure  banks  will  be  able  to  raise  the  capital  that  they  need  under  a  stress 
environment, one way or another. 
 One tricky issue is how to treat sovereign debt exposures. This was not an issue in the U.S. 
SCAP  exercise.  This  is  difficult  because  there  is  a  complex  interaction  between  fiscal 
soundness  and  bank  soundness,  which  is  very  hard  to  model.  This  illustrates  a  wider  
point – that all situations are importantly distinct and that while we can all learn from each 
others’ experiences in this field, there is no one-size-fits-all approach. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
