Jean-Claude Trichet: Achieving maximum long-term growth 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Panel: Setting priorities for long-term 
growth, Jackson Hole, 27 August 2011. 
 The title of our panel today is Setting Priorities for Long-Term Growth. Given all of our recent 
struggles to regain our reference growth paths, it may strike some as something of a luxury 
to  think  about  the  long  run;  central  bankers  and  policy  makers  have  had  to  devote 
unprecedented  attention  to  higher-frequency  economic  developments.  Many  new  lessons 
have been learned; many policy and institutional innovations have been introduced.  
The recent financial crisis has produced a large and persistent downturn in our economies; a 
downturn,  moreover,  that  threatens  our  long-run  growth  potential.  It  is  therefore  entirely 
natural that policy makers do not lose sight of the prerequisites for stable sustainable growth.  
This  is  especially  so  for  most  of  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  euro  area, 
characterized (as it has been in recent decades) by declining potential growth rates. In the 
face of any economic predicament, one should ask oneself two questions – what got us here, 
and what can get us out? In the wider case of sustainable growth for the euro area, what 
matters  is  a  commitment  to  structural  reforms  and  sound  macroeconomic  policies.  In  the 
case of the financial matters, a robust macro prudential and supervisory framework is key. I 
will address both these issues in my coming remarks.  
Likewise, some may consider it unusual to solicit views on matters of long-run growth from 
the President of a central bank. After all, pick up just about any growth-theory textbook and 
you’ll  find  few  references  to  inflation  and  fewer  still  to  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  is 
fundamentally viewed as neutral over the long run. 
And indeed, inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon. Growth, in turn, is ultimately a 
real  one  reflecting,  in  particular,  technology,  education  and  training,  capital  accumulation, 
institutional quality. 
Nonetheless,  monetary-policy  institutions  can  play  and  have  played  a  fundamental  role  in 
supporting long-run, sustainable growth. In many ways, I see a parallel between the theory 
and  practise  of  monetary-policy  making  and  the  shaping  of  modern  growth  analysis  which 
emphasises the role of sound/proper institutions. 
That achieving high and sustainable growth matters, however, is easy to motivate. On the 
subject  of  growth  differences  across  countries,  Lucas  (1988)  memorably  wrote:  The 
consequences  for  human  welfare  involved  in  questions  like  these  are  simply  staggering: 
Once one starts to think about them, it is hard to think about anything else. 
What drives growth in the long run? 
I. 
So let’s start to think: what does drive growth in the long run? In fact, growth theory – much 
like central banking – has come a long way. As everyone knows, Solow’s work in the late 
’50s produced two startling insights.1 First, that smooth factor substitutability could rid us of 
the  Harrod-Domar  boom-bust  cycle.  This,  in  fact,  paved  the  way  for  a  proper  analysis  of 
                                                 
1   Solow (1956, 1957). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sustainable  growth.2  His  second  insight  was  that  growth  was  driven  not  only  by  factor 
accumulation but also by technological progress.  
Fundamentally,  technological  progress  and  innovation  are,  over  the  long  run,  the  prime 
drivers  of  economic  growth  and  also  important  reasons  for  differences  in  international 
economic performance, even though demographic differences are also very relevant. Higher 
growth rates of technical innovation raise output and can lower the non-inflationary rate of 
unemployment.  
But what is technical change? Cracking open the Solovian black box of technical progress 
has taken us from theories of learning-by-doing, to the impact of R&D on product variety and 
quality.  The  latter  theories  being  underpinned  by  Paul  Romer’s  reflection  on  the  fact  that 
ideas are fundamentally non rival.3 This concept, by the way, was not really new. The famous 
letter  of  Thomas  Jefferson  to  Isaac  McPherson  expressed  it  very  clearly  in  1813.4  The 
bottom line in all of this is that knowledge spillover between open, dynamic economies could 
benefit everyone. Not surprisingly, these new developments in growth theory came replete 
with policy prescriptions. 
A more recent but allied literature suggested the following: how close an economy is to the 
technological  frontier  and  whether  its  institutions  facilitate  convergence  to  that  frontier  are 
vital  considerations.5  In  effect,  a  laggard  country  gains  by  implementing  (or  jumping  to) 
frontier technologies.6] But an economy near the frontier – or with an appetite to define that 
frontier – should increasingly favour innovation over imitation.  
Like  many  close  to  European  policy7,  I  find  this  an  attractive  framework.  Indeed,  following 
World  War  II,  the  European  economies  were  remarkably  catching  up  in  productivity  and 
technological  terms  and  today  are  leaders  in  many  fields,  in  particular  as  concerns  the 
embedding  of  technological  innovation  in  manufacturing  processes.8  Yet,  there  is  still  an 
enormous potential to tap, to reform our economies and boost their growth potential and job 
creation.9 
Growth patterns in the euro area and us 
II. 
Debates about the US versus the euro area have become common place in recent years. To 
my mind, though, such debates often fall short of a careful, nuanced analysis required. Some 
international comparisons are indeed informative and yield important insights. Others – given 
lack of harmonized data, data concept or data unit – are more suspect. The crisis, though, 
has taught us that growth is only meaningful if it is sustainable and balanced. Growth that is 
not sustainable but follows boom-bust cycles, carries enormous costs in terms of economic 
well-being. These costs go far beyond pure GDP numbers; the deepest of these costs is that 
they,  in  some  cases,  put  a  strain  on  the  fabric  of  our  societies.  For  that  reason  alone, 
                                                 
2  For contemporary discussions see La Grandville (2009), Klump et al. (2007 a, b). 
3  Romer (1990). 
4 
“… He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his 
taper at mine, receives light without darkening me. That ideas should freely spread from one to another over 
the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his condition, seems to have been 
peculiarly  and  benevolently  designed  by  nature  …”,  Letter  of  Thomas  Jefferson  to  Isaac  McPherson, 
13th August 1813. 
5  Acemoglu, Aghion and Zilibotti (2006). 
6  This is the so-called advantage of backwardness, Gerschenkron (1962). 
7  Sapir et al. (2003), Kok (2004). 
8  Gomez-Salvador et al. (2006). 
9  See for example, the discussion in Sondermann (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sustainability  is  a  key  qualification  to  associate  to  growth.  The  second  key  term  is  the 
balance  of  growth,  both  in  domestic  and  external  terms.  Domestically  balanced  growth 
implies a broadly acceptable distribution of economic well-being within societies in terms of 
income and wealth as well as the avoidance of misalignments especially of asset prices; and 
externally balanced implies the need to avoid excessive international disequilibria.  
Since  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  in  1999,  the  euro  area  has  experienced  a 
per-capita growth rate that, at around 1% a year, is comparable to that in the United States 
(1.1%).  This  is  the  first  fact  that  is  often  overlooked  in  international  comparisons.  In  such 
comparisons,  we  often  look  at  headline  growth  numbers;  yet,  demographics  are  very 
different. Adjusted for population growth, there has been virtually no difference between US 
and euro area growth over the first decade since the introduction of the single currency. The 
euro  area,  though,  has  created  more  jobs:  14  million  compared  with  8  million  in  the  US. 
Further, over recent decades differences in country and state dispersion rates of growth and 
inflation in the euro area and US are remarkably similar. On employment, moreover, it will be 
interesting to compare our different evolutions in the coming years. What we all want to avoid 
is excessively volatile employment where human capital is all too easily lost and inequality 
deepens.  
Table 1 shows a detailed comparison of the euro area with the US over recent decades. This 
makes  the  standard  growth  accounting  of  contributions  into  employment  and  labour 
productivity.  Labour  productivity  itself  can  be  further  decomposed  into  changes  in  labour 
composition,  Information  and  Communication  technologies  (ICT)  and  non-ICT  usage  per 
hour  and  (residual)  TFP  growth.  The  interest  in  the  distinction  between  ICT  and  non-ICT 
reflects  recent  evidence  that  the  ICT  sector  has  been  strongest  where  most  growth  has 
emerged across the world economy.  
Looking over the contributions, we note a significant difference in labour productivity (1.7 for 
EU13  vs.  2.9  for  US).  The  main  drivers  in  this  comparison  of  labour  productivity  are  ICT 
capital services per hour (0.4 vs. 1.0) and, perhaps more significantly from our standpoint, 
economy-wide TFP (0.5 vs. 1.1). Although having said that, there turns out to be quite some 
heterogeneity among countries. 
Moreover,  see  Table  2  analysing  the  sectoral  decomposition  of  TFP  growth.  TFP  in  the 
production  of  goods  is  slightly  larger  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the  US.  Rather,  the  higher 
overall TFP growth in the US is driven by stronger TFP growth in services, in particular in 
distributive trade (0.2 vs 0.5).10 Although, in passing, we should remember that productivity 
and technical improvements in Services are plagued by measurement difficulties. 
But  of  course  TFP  numbers  always  represent  a  rough  metric.11  The  TFP  residual  will  be 
contaminated by measurement errors, erroneous assumptions about market structure, or the 
nature  and  existence  of  the  aggregative  production  function.  The  residual  will  also  be  a 
catch-all  of  neglected  factor  utilization,  factor  quality  improvements  over  time,  statistical 
complications  associated  in  calculating  factor  rewards  (appropriate  tax  and  depreciation 
allowance for capital income etc). 
But the wider perspective is: (1) the services and distributive sector is now a dominant and 
growing part of the euro area economy’s output (around 60%) and employment share; (2) the 
Service  sector  typically  more  regulated  and  thus  less  flexible  to  changes  and  open  to 
innovation12  although  certainly  recently  there  has  been  progress  in  the  deregulation  of 
                                                 
10  Note, the share of respective sector  grouping’s value-added  in total value-added  across both countries are 
quite similar: Goods Production (0.44 for the euro area; 0.36 for the US), Market Services (0.35 for the euro 
area; 0.42 for the US), and Distributive Trades (0.21 for the euro area; 0.22 for the US). 
11  See for example the discussion in Crafts (2008). 
12  See European Central Bank (2006). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
network industries and progress through the new Services directive; (3) evidence is mixed 
but the Service sector in general is often thought to have inherently lower productivity and 
employment generation mechanisms relative to the more open manufacturing sector. 
Diversity within the United States and the euro area 
III. 
Allow me, next, to take a closer look at the developments both across US states and euro 
area Member States. 
For the euro area it is very common to look at the level of its constituent countries and focus 
on the diversity among individual states, because a number of economic policy choices that 
affect productivity are national.  
For  the  US,  this  exercise  is  rarely  done.  It  is  often  conjectured  that  relevant  policies  are 
federal,  and  therefore  by  definition  uniform  at  the  level  of  the  federation;  and  that,  as  a 
consequence, differences at the state level play much less a role. In essence, it is therefore 
often  assumed  that  the  US  economy  would  be  significantly  more  homogeneous  than  the 
economy of the euro area. 
Looking more closely at the regional dispersion across US regions and euro area economies 
does  not  confirm  this.  In  fact,  the  dispersion  of  many  of  the  key  indicators  is  surprisingly 
similar. 
Let me share with you some findings from our analysis that we started some months ago and 
begin with inflation.13 Before the crisis, the dispersion of HICP inflation in euro area countries 
had remained broadly stable since the late 1990s, at a level similar to the 14 US Metropolitan 
Statistical Areas.14 During the crisis we saw a temporary increase in inflation dispersion in the 
euro area but this has been reversed over the past 12 months. (Chart 1.) 
The picture is similar for the dispersion of GDP growth. Before the crisis the dispersion of 
growth rates was around 2%, in both the euro area and the United States. Dispersion rose 
somewhat during the crisis in both currency areas but remained broadly in line with pre-crisis 
patterns overall.15 (Chart 2.) 
Going one step further, investigation of the sources of this growth dispersion in the US and 
euro  area  economies  reveals  parallels  even  in  the  root  causes  of  dispersion  in  economic 
performance and productivity. On the one hand, both currency areas comprise regions that 
experienced a significant boom and bust cycle over the past decade. On the other hand, both 
also  contain  regions  that  are  facing  significant  structural  challenges  of  a  more  long-term 
nature. 
In  the  United  States,  for  example,  Nevada,  Arizona,  Florida  and  California  experienced 
increases in house prices that outpaced the national average by a wide margin. The steep 
house  price  increases  accompanied  above  average  growth  in  these  states.  This  could 
probably be explained, at least in part, by the impulse that these states received from the 
housing-related sectors such as construction, which saw its share in terms of value added 
increase at the national level during the years of the housing boom. In the crisis, the sharp 
                                                 
13  Keynote address by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB at the “ECB and its Watchers XIII” conference, 
Frankfurt am Main, 10 June 2011. 
14  The  use  of  all  US  states  in  the  computation  of  GDP  dispersion,  in  contrast  to  only  14  US  Metropolitan 
Statistical Areas (MSAs) in the computation of inflation dispersion, is to be explained by data availability. The 
most recent entries to the euro area have been excluded to avoid breaks in the time series. 
15  The 2010 data for US regions are estimates published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on 7 June 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fall in house prices in Florida and the south-western US states turned boom into bust. These 
states experienced the harshest recession among the US states.16  
Similarly,  in  the  euro  area  some  countries  experienced  asymmetric  boom-and-bust  cycles. 
Several euro area countries had higher than average growth in the pre-crisis years. In Ireland 
and  Spain  particularly,  strong  growth  was  accompanied  by  strong  increases  in  housing 
prices. 
At the same time, other US states, particularly the former manufacturing powerhouses in the 
“Great  Lakes”  region,  have  seen  a  long  episode  of  below average  growth.  Below  average 
performance of the region – and particularly weaker growth rates in the states of Michigan 
and  Ohio  –  are  related  to  strong  reliance  on  manufacturing.  Structural  shifts  in  the 
US economy  towards  services  have  gradually  reduced  the  value  added  of  manufacturing 
relative  to  GDP,  with  implications  for  areas  with  a  high  concentration  of  companies  in 
manufacturing industries other than information and communications technology. During the 
crisis, GDP growth in the “Great Lakes” region, which was below average before the crisis, 
remained below average. 
Similarly,  other  countries  in  Europe  –  Portugal,  for  example  –  have  experienced  growth 
persistently below the euro area average for the past decade due to structural rigidities that 
are now being addressed. 
Just  a  few  years  ago,  the  low-growth  group  of  countries  included  Germany  –  labelled  the 
“sick man of Europe” at that time. Yet Germany is now an example of how big the dividends 
of reform can be if structural adjustment is made a strategic priority and implemented with 
sufficient patience. 
The effect of the crisis on the different euro area economies follows a similar pattern to those 
of comparable US states. The countries in the euro area that have been hit hardest are those 
in which either large asset-bubble driven imbalances unwound or structural problems were 
left  unaddressed  before  the  crisis.  Those  countries  that  have  yet  to  implement  more  far 
reaching structural reforms also have relatively low growth prospects after the crisis. These 
relatively  low  growth  rates  are  linked  to  a  deterioration  of  competitiveness,  driven,  for 
example, by persistent above average unit labour costs.  
Precisely  as  regards  the  evolution  of  unit  labour  costs,  that  are  so  important  for  growth, 
dispersion both ahead of the crisis and during the crisis was quite similar in the euro area 
and the United States. (Chart 3.) 
At the same time, it is worth noting that both currency areas include regions with persistently 
above or below average unit labour cost growth. Again leaving aside the countries to join the 
euro area most recently, here, Greece, Portugal and Ireland, in particular, had progressively 
lost  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  their  main  trading  partners  in  the  euro  area.  They  are  now 
engaging in catching-up, adjustment strategies. Germany, which had lost competitiveness in 
the reunification process, by contrast, has been able to restore this competitiveness over the 
same period of time. (Chart 4.) 
Similar  persistent  losses  and  gains  in  unit  labour  costs  are  also  observed  in  the  United 
States. Taking a look at the upper and lower bound of the spectrum of US states over the 
same period as the euro area reveals that some states have experienced large or persistent 
increases in unit labour costs, currently exceeding the national average by as much as 20%. 
Other  states  have  been  improving  their  labour  cost  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  the  national 
average over the past decade. (Charts 5, 6 and 7.) In summary, there are strong indications 
                                                 
16  The “Industry specialization index” – a measure of the degree to which states are more or less specialized in 
an industry relative to the nation average – reveals that California, Florida, Arizona and Nevada all witnessed 
the share of their respective construction sectors increase relative to the national average between 2001 and 
2006, followed by the opposite development after 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that economic diversity in the euro area and the United States has not been significantly very 
different over the past 12 years.  
The observation that very large, continental economies of the size of the US or of Europe are 
probably necessarily diverse should not be reason for complacency. The fact that advanced 
economies of the size of more than 300 million people have a tendency to be significantly 
diverse  calls  for  a  solid  economic  governance  framework  and  explains  why  the  ECB 
Governing Council has been so vocal in this ground since the inception of the euro area.  
And  this inherent  diversity  of  advanced  economies  of  large size is an  additional  reason  to 
resolutely engage in the structural reforms that would permit to accelerate the completion of 
the  European  single  market  in  all  sectors,  and  to  enhance  the  growth  potential  of  each 
individual European economy and of the euro area as a whole. 
Setting priorities for long-run growth 
IV. 
Let us get back to our central theme – Setting Priorities for Long-Run Growth. Let me make 
some suggestions – three to be precise. A first, and overwhelming, priority – notably for the 
euro  area  –  is  the  vigorous  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  A  second,  but  by  no 
means unrelated priority, is the continued attention to external and internal imbalances. A 
final priority is greater flexibility on the part of policy institutions. Let’s take them one by one, 
with a particular emphasis on the euro area. 
First,  structural  reforms.  We  earlier  noted  the  primacy  of  institutions  in  modern  growth 
theory.  Sound  institutions  are  essential  to  encourage  a  flexible,  cutting-edge,  knowledge-
based economy. There is substantial evidence from industry-level studies on regulation as 
well from firm-level studies on the dynamics of firm performance that confirm the need for 
such a conducive environment to generate productivity growth.17  
Douglas North defined institutions as … the rules of the game in a society … the humanly 
devised constraints that shape human interaction.18 And being “humanly devised constraints” 
(rather  than  exogenous  geographical  or  climactic  constraints),  their  major  impact  was 
through the setting of incentives.19  
And one can see the remaining challenges for many advanced economies as follows:  
 
Employment regulation needs to help more proactively outsiders, low-skilled, young 
and older workers. 
In  Europe,  the  single  market  needs  to  be  advanced  especially  in  the  area  of 
services.20  
Tax, benefit and pensions systems should not discourage labour participation and 
create weak incentives for investment and innovation.  
The distribution of wealth and general economic well-being needs to ensure some 
acceptable social balance.  
   Several remedial policy proposals have been suggested and implemented in the recent past. 
The  most  well  known  is  the  European  Council’s  Lisbon  Strategy  for  Growth  and  Jobs, 
                                                 
17  Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2003), Bartelsman et al. (2005). 
18  North (1990). 
19  North (1981). 
20  For instance, the Service sector accounts for over 70% of GDP but only 20% of intra-EU trade. Some home 
bias in the provision of Services is inevitable, but such a gap suggests that there are considerable local rents 
being extracted at consumers’ expense. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
followed by the Europe 2020 Strategy.21 The latter is the Agenda that the European Union 
and its Member States have decided to help Europe recover from the crisis and come out 
stronger,  both  internally  and  at  the  international  level.22  The  Agenda  sets  targets  for  the 
European  Union  in  2020  in  terms  of  employment,  research  and  development,  energy  and 
education.  
The  Agenda  puts  particular  emphasis  on  structural  reforms  in  the  labour  and  services 
markets.  These  two  markets  are  still  over-regulated  and  not  directly  subject,  given  their 
largely non-tradable dimension, to the competitive forces originating from within and outside 
the  single  markets.23  At  the  EU-level,  the  necessity  and  shape  of  structural  reforms  is 
acknowledged, but the gap between awareness and implementation is far from closed. 
That  said,  we  would  do  well  to  understand  why  political  systems  abide  distortionary, 
inefficient  structures  and  resist  more  efficient  alternatives.  Do  structural  reforms  imply  a 
J-curve of long-run gain but short run pain that sits ill with the decision making process in our 
democracies? Do vested interests strategically and systematically block change?  
A  second  priority  is  vigilance  against  imbalances.  I  spoke  at  the  last  Jackson  Hole 
symposium  of  the  risks  of  chronic  global  imbalances  and  costs  involved  in  unravelling  the 
excessive  private  leverage,  unsustainable  fiscal  and  trade  positions.  Establishing  more 
reasonable  borrowing,  restructuring  and  strengthening  the  balance  sheets  of  firms, 
households  and  governments  in  an  orderly  manner  remain  key  to  smooth  and  continuous 
global growth. In all this, central banks are not immune. Tensions in financial markets and 
severe global imbalances deepen uncertainty and, therefore, profoundly challenge monetary-
policy setting. 
Precisely  these  dangers  underpin  the  Mutual  Assessment  Process  of  the  G20  framework. 
The  indicative  indicators  –  agreed  in  February  this  year  –  identify  imbalances  in  public, 
private and external positions as the key culprits preventing balanced global growth, and a 
key  input  in  shaping  corrective  policies.  Seen  in  that  light,  a  country’s  economic  success 
should be judged also on these indicators and not only on its last few years’ growth figures. 
However, another imbalance – which has gained currency following the financial turbulence – 
is  income  imbalances.  Naturally,  extremes  of  income  inequality  and  restricted  opportunity 
challenge our values and strain the fabric of our societies.  
In short, growth skewed towards the few (or absent for a large minority) risks social tensions, 
undermines  institutions  and  encourages  policy  failures  of  one  kind  or  another.  Structural 
reforms, particularly in the form of re-training, improving job matching, providing flexibility and 
incentive for job creation and innovation remain the best policy options for encouraging well-
balanced growth, and an environment of low and credible inflation the best environment to 
encourage matters from a central-banking perspective. 
Finally,  a  priority  for  medium  and  long-run  growth  is  that  our  policy  institutions  remain 
attuned to an ever-changing landscape. We have seen in recent years the near-Knightian 
uncertainty policy makers endured and how boldly they responded. The ECB was among the 
first central banks to react to the outbreak of the financial turmoil in August 2007 in providing 
liquidity to distressed institutions. Another example of flexibility by ourselves and in the wider 
central  banking  community  is  in  the  swap  agreements  with  other  central  banks  as  an 
example of internationally co-ordinated means of swiftly responding to the crisis. 
                                                 
21  For  example:  European  Commission  (2002,  2005a,  2005b,  2010),  International  Monetary  Fund  (2004), 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (1997, 2003, 2006). 
22  European Council (2010). 
23  Macroeconomic assessments of the gains that might be realized in the euro area from greater competition and 
other  structural  reforms  can  be  found  in,  for  example,  Bayoumi  et  al.  (2004),  Ebbinghaus  and  Eichhorst 
(2006), Jacobi and Kluve (2006), Gomes et al. (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Since  then,  we  acted  with  what  I  have  previously  (here  in  Jackson  Hole)  called  “credible 
alertness”.24  This  includes  implementing  both  non-standard  monetary  policies  and  our 
interest rate policy. Interest rate policy depends on the outlook for price stability. The use of 
non-standard measures depends on the functioning of the monetary policy transmission and 
must be commensurate with the level of malfunctioning or disruption of money and financial 
markets and segments of markets. Our non-standard measures do not in any way impinge 
upon  our  capacity  to  design  our  monetary  policy  stance  to  deliver  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. 
Despite all the ups and down of recent years, our key challenge remains as it has always 
been:  to  create  strong,  sustainable,  balanced,  non-inflationary  growth.  Credibility  and  the 
medium-term  orientation  in  monetary  policy  allows,  where  needed,  scope  and  flexibility  to 
address various types of severe shocks. Over the long-term a commitment to price stability 
anchors  expectations,  improves  the  workings  of  the  price  mechanism,  reduces  transaction 
costs, protects savers and reduces uncertainty. This is what I meant at the outset when I said 
that  the  theory  and  practice  of  monetary  policy  making  paralleled  developments  in  growth 
theory – namely, both are now seen to hinge on institutional quality.  
Conclusions 
V. 
Let  me  conclude.  Ultimately  growth  is  driven  by  technical  progress.  This  is  especially 
important where there are limiting demographic factors. In the euro area, there is ample of 
scope to realize efficiency gains from existing and prospective technological changes given 
structural  reforms  and  more  vigilant  implementation  of  the  existing  policy  agenda.  The 
remarkable  resilience  of  the  German  labour  market  in  the  last  few  years25,  where  wage 
moderation  and  flexible  time  accounting  shielded  the  economy  from  excessive  job 
destruction, illustrates admirably the promise of well-structured reforms.  
Although  there  have  been  improvements  in  the  euro  area  in  recent  years,  there  is  still 
evidence of regulatory and market-based barriers to entry in selected professions which have 
to be actively corrected.  
Structural reforms – re-training, improving job matching, providing flexibility and incentives for 
job creation and innovation – remain the best policy options for encouraging well-balanced 
growth, and an environment of low and credible inflation the best environment to encourage 
matters from a central-banking perspective.  
Likewise,  alertness  against  savings  and  trade  imbalances  across  the  global  economy  is  a 
fundamental concern. Such imbalances – if unchecked or conveniently rationalized away – 
make our entire, inter-connected economies more fragile and more risk prone. We have seen 
how  rapidly  negative  financial  impulses  can  transmit  through  the  global  economy  and  pull 
down economic activity. Alertness means alertness. I have learned whilst discussing global 
imbalances and financial transmission channels – much of it done here at Jackson Hole – 
that  appropriate  improvements  in  regulation  and  multilateral  surveillance  frameworks  can 
yield large gains. We should work hard to maintain momentum. 
References  
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion and F. Zilibotti (2006) Distance to Frontier, Selection, and Economic 
Growth, Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(1), 37–74.  
                                                 
24  “Monetary Policy and Credible Alertness”, J. C. Trichet, Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2005. 
25  For example, Arpaia, A. and G. Mourre (2011), Boysen-Hogrefe and Groll (2011), Burda and Hunt (2011). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in 
January 
2008.  Available 
a  Dynamic  Economy”,  Frankfurt, 
Arpaia, A. and G. Mourre (2011) Institutions and performance in European labour markets: 
Taking a fresh look at evidence, Journal of Economic Surveys, forthcoming.  
Bayoumi,  T.,  D.  Laxton,  and  P.  Pesenti  (2004)  Benefits  and  Spillovers  of  Greater 
Competition  in  Europe:  A  Macroeconomic  Assessment.  Working  Paper  341  (Frankfurt: 
European Central Bank). 
Boysen-Hogrefe,  J.  and  D.  Groll  (2011)  The  German  Labour  Market  Miracle,  National 
Institute Economic Review, 214 (1): R38–R50. 
Burda,  M.  C.  and  J.  Hunt  (2011)  What  Explains  the  German  Labor  Market  Miracle  in  the 
Great Recession?, NBER Working Paper No. 17187. 
Crafts, N. (2008) What Creates Multi-Factor Productivity? Paper for the joint ECB, Banque 
de France and The Conference Board conference “The Creation of Economic and Corporate 
Wealth 
at 
http://www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/cecwe.en.html. 
Ebbinghaus, B. and W. Eichhorst (2006) Employment Regulation and Labor Market Policy in 
Germany, 1991–2005. IZA Discussion Paper 2505, December. 
European Central Bank (2006) Competition, Productivity and Prices in the euro area services 
sector.  Task  Force  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  European  System  of  central 
Banks. Occasional paper, No. 44. 
European Commission (2002) Better Functioning Labor and Product Markets. In European 
Economy 6/2000, Chapter 3, Brussels: European Commission. 
European Commission (2005a) Working for Growth and Jobs: Next Steps in Implementing 
the Revised Lisbon Strategy. Commission Staff Working Paper 622/2. 
European Commission (2005b) Working together for Growth and Jobs. A new start for the 
Lisbon Strategy. Communication to the Spring European Council. 
European  Commission  (2010)  Europe  2020:  A  European  Strategy  for  Smart,  Sustainable 
and Inclusive Growth. Communication from the Commission to the European Council, arch. 
European Council (2010) European Council 17 June 2010 Conclusions, June. 
Gerschenkron, A. (1962) Economic backwardness in historical perspective, Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press.  
Gomes,  S.,  P.  Jacquinot,  M.  Mohr  and  M.  Pisani  (2011)  Structural  reforms  and 
macroeconomic  performance  in  the  euro  area  countries:  a  model-based  assessment, 
Working Paper 1323 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank). 
Gómez-Salvador,  R.,  A.  Musso,  M.  Stocker  and  J.  Turunen  (2006)  Labour  productivity 
developments in the euro area, Occasional Paper No. 53, European Central Bank. 
International Monetary Fund (2004) World Economic Outlook: Advancing Structural Reforms. 
Washington, April. 
Jacobi,  L.  and  J.  Kluve  (2006)  Before  and  After  the  Hartz  Reforms:  The  Performance  of 
Active Labour Market Policy in Germany. IZA Discussion Paper 2100, April. 
Klump, R., P. McAdam and A. Willman (2007a) Factor Substitution and Factor Augmenting 
Technical  Progress  in  the  US:  A  Normalized  Supply-Side  System  Approach  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, 89, 1, 183–192. 
Klump,  R.,  P.  McAdam  and  A.  Willman  (2007b)  The  Long-Term  SucCESs  of  the  Neo-
Classical Growth Model, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23, 1, 94–114. 
Kok, W. et al (2004) Facing the Challenge: The Lisbon strategy for growth and employment, 
European Commission. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
La Grandville, O. de. (2009) Economic Growth: A Unified Approach. Cambridge University Press. 
Nicoletti, G. and Scarpetta, S. (2003) Regulation, productivity, and growth: OECD evidence, 
Policy Research Working Paper Series 2944, The World Bank. 
North, D. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, Norton, 1981. 
North,  D.  (1990)  Institutions,  Institutional  Change  and  Economic  Performance,  Cambridge 
University Press.  
Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (1997)  OECD  Report  on 
Regulatory Reform. Paris: OECD. 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2003) The Sources of Economic 
Growth in OECD Countries. Paris: OECD. 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2006) Economic Policy Reforms: 
Going for Growth. Paris: OECD. 
Romer, P. M (1990) Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 
S71–102. 
Sapir,  A.  et  al 
http://www.euractiv.com/ndbtext/innovation/sapirreport.pdf. 
Serafini, R., R. Strauch and M. Schiffbauer (2011) The impact of ICT and human capital on 
TFP – implications for recent EMU and US growth differences. Working Paper forthcoming 
(Frankfurt: European Central Bank). 
Solow,  R.  M.  (1956)  A  contribution  to  the theory  of  economic  growth.  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 70(1):65–94. 
Solow,  R.  M.  (1957)  Technical  change  and  the  aggregate  production  function.  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, 39(3):312–320. 
Sondermann,  D.  (2011)  Productivity  in  the  Euro  Area:  Any  Evidence  of  Convergence?, 
European Central Bank, mimeo. 
 
for  a  Growing  Europe,  Available  at 
(2003)  An  Agenda 
Presentation’s charts 
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
    11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
