Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Regulatory insights – successfully 
supporting the next phase of development for the regional insurance 
markets 
Keynote  speech  by  HE  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al  Maraj,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Bahrain, at the 7th Annual Middle East Insurance Forum (MEIF), Manama, 7 February 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
On behalf of the Central Bank of Bahrain, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the 
seventh Middle East Insurance Forum. Over the years this event has become established as 
the leading event in the region for the insurance industry to meet and exchange  views on 
current market and economic developments. I would like to thank the organisers, sponsors 
and  speakers  for  supporting  this  important  gathering  and  congratulate  the  organisers  on 
having put together such a strong speaker list over the next two days. 
My theme today is “Successfully Supporting the Next Phase of Development for the Regional 
Insurance Market”. This theme is certainly very timely as the regional insurance industry has 
now reached the point where it is ready – in the title of this Forum – to translate potential into 
growth. Although I will briefly discuss the CBB’s role as a regulator, my main focus will be on 
the  way  in  which  the  industry  needs  to  change  and  develop  to  capture  the  growth 
opportunities  that  undoubtedly  exist.  I  will  discuss  three  issues  in  particular:  the  need  to 
provide  customers  with  high  service  standards;  the  need  to  obtain  greater  economies  of 
scale in the industry; and the need for owners and investors to adjust to a new environment 
in which returns are likely to be lower than they were in the past. 
Let me first say a few words about the CBB’s role as a regulator. As I am sure many of you 
know,  we  have  introduced  a  comprehensive  set  of  requirements  for  Insurers,  both 
conventional  and  Islamic,  as  part  of  Volume  3  of  the  CBB  Rulebook  that  has  been 
progressively introduced since 2005. 
Over the year ahead the process of refining and modifying these requirements will continue. 
One of the most important recent developments was the introduction of the revised module 
HC on corporate governance. The changes we have made are to reflect the provisions of the 
Kingdom of Bahrain’s Code on Corporate Governance which was introduced last year. At the 
same  time,  one  of  the  lessons  of  the  global  financial  crisis  has  been  to  put  corporate 
governance  arrangements  under  the  spotlight.  Several  of  the  firms  that  failed  during  the 
crisis  appear  to  have  suffered  from  serious  shortcomings  in  their  corporate  governance. 
Regulators  will  have  to  consider  ways  of  strengthening  the  effectiveness  of  boards  of 
directors  in  overseeing  the  operations  of  the  firms  they  run.  This  applies  especially  to 
ensuring high standards of risk management. We may also make changes to our framework 
with respect to the regulation of insurance brokers in the near future. 
In addition, we continue to monitor new recommendations originating from the international 
standard setting bodies, including the Islamic Financial Services Board and the International 
Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors.  We  are  currently  considering  how  to  implement  the 
standards  that  the  IFSB  issued  last  year  on  corporate  governance  and  on  solvency 
standards for Takaful companies. Both of these standards could have a significant impact on 
Takaful firms. 
We also continue to play a role in the work of the IAIS in developing international standards 
and in this regard the CBB’s role has been enhanced by being selected as a member of the 
IAIS  Executive  Committee  for  a  two-year  term.  The  CBB’s  selection  is  recognition  of  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
efforts among the 17 Middle East and North Africa regulators to ensure the development and 
enforcement of high standards of insurance supervision and regulation. As a member of the 
IAIS Executive Committee the CBB will aim to represent the interests of all regulators in the 
MENA region. Our new role will allow us to shape major new regulatory initiatives and also to 
alert the industry to upcoming changes in regulation. 
While the CBB as a regulator can lay the groundwork of rules for the industry to follow, the 
industry’s development and future growth potential is primarily a matter for its shareholders 
and managers. This is not to say that we, as a regulator, are not keen to see the industry to 
grow  and  prosper.  Far  from  it.  The  development  of  the  insurance  industry  is  a  major 
component of the Kingdom of Bahrain’s Vision 2030 strategy that outlines the competitive, 
dynamic and diversified economy we aim to develop for a post-oil era. In our latest national 
economic strategy we have identified insurance and asset management as two sectors of the 
financial industry that have enormous potential for future growth. However, my point is that 
while  regulators  can  provide  the  conditions  for  industry  development,  whether  these 
opportunities are seized is a matter for shareholders and the managers of insurance firms. 
There are three specific topics that I think are worth emphasizing as we look to the industry’s 
future growth and development. 
The first of these is the need for the industry to ensure that it can meet high standards of 
customer  service.  The  CBB  has  played  its  role  in  encouraging  better  customer  service  by 
mandating  all  insurance  representatives  (agents)  to  comply  with  training  requirements 
focused on their areas of expertise and mandated by the internationally renowned Chartered 
Insurance Institute (CII). 
At  the  same  time,  however,  customer  service  is  primarily  the  responsibility  of  the  firms 
themselves. The regional insurance market is becoming highly competitive as we see more 
entrants, both established international firms and local companies, offering a growing range 
of services, including medical and life coverage. Although insurance penetration rates in the 
region are still relatively low, in the long run not all the firms currently competing in the market 
will  be  able  to  build  viable  franchises.  Those  that  do  will  be  the  ones  that  can  offer  their 
customers the best standards of service. 
This  will  not  mean  simply  competing  on  price,  particularly  if  it  means  cutting  premiums  to 
levels that are simply not viable in the long run. Good customer service has many different 
dimensions.  It  includes,  for  example,  ensuring  that  at  the  point  of  sale  the  firm’s 
representative is well trained, knowledgeable about the products, and places the customer’s 
interests  first.  It  involves  devoting  resources  to  the  development  of  new  products  that  can 
meet  customer  needs.  It  also  involves  ensuring  that  policy-holders  receive  quality  and 
reliable service when presenting their claims. The firms that will emerge strongest from the 
current highly competitive environment will be those that are capable of providing the best 
customer experience in all its dimensions. 
My second issue concerns the need for economies of scale in the industry. In many of the 
MENA  countries  locally-incorporated  insurance  firms  remain  relatively  small  and  are 
therefore unable to compete with large internationally active firms that have the benefits of 
scale.  These  benefits  range  from  the  ability  to  construct  large  diversified  investment 
portfolios to efficiencies in IT for claims handling and processing. Over the long run, there is 
a need for locally-incorporated insurance firms to achieve greater scale economies if they are 
going to be able to compete on level terms with their international competitors. 
Firms will only be able to achieve economies of scale if they become larger. Inevitably, this 
means  that  there  will  need  to  be  some  industry  consolidation.  To-date,  however,  the 
shareholders of locally-incorporated firms have been reluctant to enter into mergers, perhaps 
because they fear that this will lead to a dilution of their control. However, if the industry’s 
growth opportunities are to be realized, shareholders will need to take a broader perspective 
and  to  recognize  that  future  profit  growth  will  require  firms  that  are  larger  than  those  that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
currently exist. In this respect, I think it is particularly important that a session of this Forum is 
devoted to the subject of merger and acquisition activity in the insurance industry. 
My  third  issue  is  closely  related  to  the  second.  One  reason  why  shareholders  have  been 
slow to grasp the need for industry consolidation has been the expectation that the returns 
on capital that they were able to achieve during the boom years will swiftly return. During the 
boom years all sections of the financial industry were able to achieve returns on equity that 
were quite exceptional. However, we need to recognise that the global financial crisis was 
not just a temporary interruption, and that we will soon return to the period of strong profits 
and quick and easy returns. 
As we gain more perspective on the global financial crisis it is becoming increasingly clear 
that the boom years immediately before the crisis were the exception rather than the rule. 
Shareholders and investors in all financial firms, including in the insurance industry, will need 
to adjust to a world in which the returns on their investments will be lower than they came to 
expect  in  the  boom  times.  In  the  insurance  industry,  with  its  many  competing  firms,  this 
adjustment is particularly important. 
We  are  currently  living  through  a  period  of  adjustment.  Once  shareholders  and  investors 
recognise  that  they  will  need  to  accept  lower  returns  on  their  investments  than  during  the 
boom  years,  the  process  of  industry  consolidation  is  likely  to  begin.  Improved  returns  on 
investment  will  require  greater  efficiency,  better  standards  of  customer  service,  and  new 
product  innovation,  all  of  which  are  more  likely  to  be  delivered  by  larger  more  diversified 
insurance firms. 
Let me conclude by returning to the title of this keynote address. Successfully supporting the 
next phase of development for the regional insurance markets is a process that must be led 
by the industry itself, particularly by its shareholders and managers. The next phase of the 
development  of  the  insurance  markets  is  likely  to  require  the  consolidation  of  firms,  the 
development of new product offerings, the expansion of insurance firms in the region, and 
high standards of customer service that only the private sector can deliver. While we as the 
regulator  can  work  to  ensure  a  sound  and  stable  insurance  market  and  the  protection  of 
policy-holders,  ultimately  it  is  for  you  in  the  industry  to  take  advantage  of  the  growth 
opportunities that the Middle East and North Africa region can offer. 
As  the  regulator,  the  CBB  will  continue  to  provide  a  strong  framework  of  rules  based  on 
international best practice and will apply them in a transparent and fair way. We will continue 
to consult with the industry and to ensure that we are responsive to your needs. Ultimately, 
however, the future of the industry is in the hands of the industry itself. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
