Choongsoo Kim: Changes in the global financial and economic 
landscape and challenges facing the Korean economy 
Speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, to the American Chamber of 
Commerce in Korea (AMCHAM) General Membership Meeting, Seoul, 16 March 2011. 
 (Greetings) 
Good  afternoon.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  American  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Korea 
(AMCHAM) for inviting me to be here with you today. 
My remarks today will focus on the changes in the global financial and economic landscape, 
and I will also offer some thoughts on the challenges now facing the Korean economy. 
First of all, however, I would like to offer my deepest condolences to the Japanese people in 
their  suffering  after  the  earthquake,  and  my  hopes  that  Japan  recovers  swiftly  from  the 
damage  caused.  It  is  very  much  to  be  hoped  that  worldwide  economic  cooperation  be 
directed now toward helping Japan in its hour of need.  
Let me begin my remarks now with the Changes in Financial and Economic Conditions. 
Policymakers  around  the  world  face  a  whole  new  set  of  challenges  today,  posed  by  the 
recent changes in the global financial and economic landscape. This is an evolution that has 
been ongoing since the global financial crisis broke out. 
And these difficulties, which are marked by uncertainty, owe to the fact that nowadays, in this 
post-crisis era, there can be no return to the world economy of the pre-crisis days, but only a 
transition to a new paradigm to be explored in international forums like the G20. 
Familiar concepts as we know them are now in flux. To cite just one example, the concept of 
“too interconnected to fail” has arisen in parallel with that of “too big to fail”.  
Now, the most prominent feature of the global economic environment today is the fact that a 
two-speed recovery still continues. 
As you are all well aware, what this means is that the growth paths and growth rates of the 
advanced and the emerging economies are diverging. And this concept, I would say, is one 
integral part of the new paradigm that has emerged since the crisis. 
In this two-speed global recovery, emerging economies now agonize over the instability of 
their prices, including those of real estate, as they overcame the crisis swiftly and are now 
enjoying  rapid  growth.  The  advanced  economies  in  contrast  fret  over  their  own  sluggish 
growth and high rates of unemployment. 
The task of analysis imposed on us as policymakers thus becomes all the more complicated, 
because it is no longer sufficient to consider just the one-way spillovers by which economic 
policies in advanced economies influence emerging ones. The two-way spillovers, where the 
influences run in both directions, must be taken into account at the same time. 
A good case in point is our analysis of the effects of the US Federal Reserve’s second round 
of  quantitative  easing,  or  QE2,  in  which  we  must  not  simply  consider  the  impact  that  the 
Fed’s policy has on emerging economies in addition to its own, but also take into account 
how this impact on emerging economies feeds back to the US economy in turn. 
Another major concern in the global economy these days is the growing problem of global 
inflation. 
At present, most countries other than the United States and Japan are quite concerned about 
inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
And  for  the  emerging  economies  in  particular,  prices,  including  asset  prices,  have  risen 
greatly as capital inflows to them have expanded.  
That being said, in the global financial markets we are presently seeing some indications of 
capital being pulled from emerging economies over the short-term, as a consequence of the 
economic recoveries in advanced economies and the emergence of geopolitical risks. 
The  international  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities  have  also  surged,  with  the  recent 
escalation of geopolitical risks in North Africa and other regions, adding further to the impact 
of the increased demand for them generated by the global economic recovery. 
It  follows  from  all  of  this  that  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  has  emerged  as  a  very 
pressing policy concern for most central banks, which must ensure that the ample liquidity 
supplied in response to the crisis will not stoke inflation. 
The last of my comments on the changes in financial and economic conditions relates to the 
G20,  which  has  been  at  the  center  of  the  active  post-crisis  discussions  on  a  new  global 
economic order. The key to construction of such an order is of course to resolve the problem 
of  global  imbalances,  that  lay  at  the  root  of  the  crisis,  by  producing  concerted  and 
coordinated deliverables in relation to the indicative guidelines laid out in the discussions at 
the G20 meetings. 
We must not forget that at the center of any financial crisis lies a crisis of the real sector of 
the economy, and that correcting the conditions for sound operation of the real sector is thus 
of paramount importance. 
And needless to say, because such deliverables cannot be achieved through the efforts of a 
few  countries  alone,  we  must  endeavor  to  reduce  market  uncertainties  through  policy 
coordination among countries at international forums including the G20. 
Now then, what are the Challenges Facing the Korean Economy? 
The growth outlook for the Korean economy this year is clouded by the existence of several 
downside  risks,  among  them  the  political  unrest  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa,  and 
resultant rise in international oil prices, and domestically, the damage caused by foot-and-
mouth disease. 
On the other hand, there are also upside risks, such as the strengthening of the economic 
recoveries  in  the  US  and  other  major  advanced  economies.  And  as  the  effects  of  these 
downside  and  upside  risks  are  likely  to  be  of  similar  magnitude,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Korea 
expect  the  Korean  economy  to  achieve  favorable  growth  at  the  originally-forecast  level  of 
around 4.5% this year, with balanced contributions from exports and domestic demand. 
Employment has exhibited a trend of recovery since 2010, led by the private sector, with the 
unemployment  rate  holding  steady  at  the  mid-3%  level,  while  a  solid  trend  of  surplus  has 
been maintained in the current account, albeit at a declining ratio to GDP. For this year as 
well, we foresee outcomes similar to those of last year both in employment and in the current 
account balance. 
Given such prospects, I believe price stability to thus now be the greatest challenge facing 
the Korean economy. 
Amid  the  build-up  in  demand  pressures  from  our  swift  recovery  from  the  global  crisis  and 
economic upswing, consumer price inflation, after recording 4.1% in January, marked 4.5% 
in February, exceeding the upper bound of the Bank of Korea’s medium-term inflation target. 
This  is  due  mainly  to  three  factors.  First  are  the  run-ups  in  oil  and  other  international 
commodity  prices,  and  the  surge  in  prices  of  agricultural,  livestock  and  fisheries  products 
owing mostly to the abnormal cold wave experienced this winter and to the outbreak of foot-
and-mouth  disease.  Second  is  the  demand-side  pressure,  as  measured  by  the  positive 
output  gap.  And  the  third  factor  is  the  rising  inflation  expectations.  Roughly  speaking,  the 
supply-side factors account for half of the price inflation that we are seeing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the coming months, consumer price inflation may remain elevated at a high level for some 
time. 
Having said that, I expect inflationary pressures to be concentrated more in the first half of 
this year than in the second half, and particularly those stemming from supply-side factors 
like international commodity prices to ease in the second half relative to the first. 
Given  the  very  wide  range  of  factors  at  play  in  this  recent  bout  of  inflation,  including  the 
supply-side and  the  demand-side  factors,  I  think  that  a  multi-pronged  response  is  likewise 
called for on the policy front. 
Particularly in terms of macroeconomic and monetary policies, I believe it vital to block off 
second-round  effects  such  as  wage  increases,  spurred  by  cost-push  inflation  spreading  to 
other sectors via inflation expectations and so forth. 
An important task for the Korean economy from a longer-term perspective, meanwhile, lies in 
securing financial and foreign exchange market stability. 
Korea and the other emerging market countries presently experiencing large global capital 
inflows, in line with their continued strong growth, are necessarily wary of the possibility of 
heightened financial and foreign exchange market volatility in the event of any future reversal 
of these capital flows. 
And for Korea, reducing exchange rate volatility has become an important policy objective, 
since the Korean won’s volatility towers well above those of other currencies. 
The won’s intraday volatility vis-à-vis the US dollar was in fact found to be 0.60% for 2010, 
fourth-highest among the 25 major currencies assessed against the dollar. 
In order to address such issues, the Korean government aims to ensure financial and foreign 
exchange market stability through such measures as regulation of banks’ foreign exchange 
forward positions, re-introduction of withholding taxes on foreigners’ domestic bond holdings, 
and  implementation  in  the  latter  half  of  this  year  of  a  “Macro-prudential  Stability  Levy”  on 
non-core foreign currency liabilities. These measures are being employed purely as a matter 
of  macro-prudential  policy,  and  not  as  capital  controls,  and  they  will  be  legislated  and 
implemented in line with global standards. 
(Closing Words) 
While  Korea  was  the  first  among  OECD  members  to  overcome  the  impact  of  the  global 
financial crisis, it was also the one hit the most severely when the crisis initially erupted, as 
was seen in the dramatic drop in GDP growth. 
Internationally, countries are now striving not only to overcome the global crisis but also to 
devise and put into place mechanisms to prevent its recurrence. Through the construction of 
a  new  financial  regulatory  framework,  dubbed  Basel  III,  we  seek  to  prevent  individual 
financial institutions from becoming insolvent while at the same time keeping systemic risks 
under control, and to thereby avert future global crises. 
In overcoming and preventing global economic crises, the central bank’s role as its national 
economy’s lender of last resort is indispensable. In light of this, the Bank of Korea is moving 
to cooperate actively in the systems of international policy coordination, by strengthening our 
networks with other central banks. 
Domestically, we find ourselves in a situation in which inflationary pressures have become 
very large, driven by global inflationary trends due to the excessive global liquidity and rapid 
growth in emerging economies, and by the continued growth of our domestic economy. It is 
high  time  now  for  us  to  seek  ways  of  establishing  a  post-crisis  paradigm  so  as  to  firmly 
anchor the foundation for price stability in the medium- and long-term, based upon thorough 
analysis of the currents of economic change both at home and abroad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Going forward, we must be unremitting in our efforts to restore the robustness of the Korean 
economy, so that it is not so greatly swayed by domestic or external shocks. 
I  am  firmly  convinced  that  all  AMCHAM  members  gathered  here  today  will  also  contribute 
much, in your own individual fields of expertise, as our partners for the stable growth of the 
Korean economy. 
I  should  like  to  close  by  again  expressing  my  gratitude  to  AMCHAM  for  giving  me  this 
opportunity to address you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
