K C Chakrabarty: Indian education system – issues and challenges 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the JRE 
School of Management, Greater Noida, 5 August 2011. 
Assistance provided by Shri S. Arunachalaramanan in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
 “Plants are shaped by cultivation and humans by education” 
Mr.  Shantanu  Prakash,  Chairman  and  CEO,  Educomp  Solutions  Ltd.,  Mr.  Harpreet  Singh, 
President,  JRE  Group  of  Institutions,  Prof.  Stephen  Rawlinson,  Academic  President,  JRE 
Group of Institutions, Mr. Siddharth Mukherjee, Director of Corporate Relations, Prof. Pankaj 
Gupta,  Director,  School  of  Management,  Dr.  Ramesh  Agarwal,  Director,  JRE  Group  of 
Institutions, members of the print and electronic media, students of the pioneer batch of MBA 
Programme and their parents, distinguished invitees, ladies and gentlemen. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  inaugurate  the  campus  of  JRE  Group  of  Institutions,  in  particular  the 
opening  of  JRE  School  of  Management,  which  is  an  outcome  of  an  academic  partnership 
between Educomp Solutions Limited and Raffles Education Corporation Limited. I also take 
this  opportunity  to  congratulate  all  those  associated  with  this  venture  and  warmly 
congratulate the students of the first batch (2011–13) of the JRE School of Management. 
Need and importance of education 
Education,  as  you  are  aware,  is  vital  to  the  human  resources  development  and 
empowerment in the stages of growth of a nation. In any education system, higher education 
encompassing  Management,  Engineering,  Medicines  etc.,  plays  a  major  role  in  imparting 
knowledge,  values,  and  developing  skills  and,  in  the  process,  increase  the  growth  and 
productivity of the nation. While the Government is committed to providing primary education 
and  certain  facilities/subsidies  for  higher  education,  given  the  higher  cost  involved  in  the 
establishment of higher education institutes, we are witnessing the entry of private sector to 
run educational institutions.  
On the need for education, I wish to quote our Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi, who 
once  said  that  education  not  only  moulds  the  new  generation,  but  reflects  a  society’s 
fundamental  assumptions  about  itself  and  the  individuals  which  compose  it.  The  famous 
philosopher  Einstein  while  discussing  the  need  for  education  has  projected  the  following 
fundamentals:  
a. 
To educate the individual as a free individual; to understand and use critical thinking 
skills. 
To  educate  the  individual  as  a  part  of  society  –  virtually  all  our  knowledge,  our 
clothes,  our  food  is  produced  by  others  in  our  society,  thus,  we  owe  Society  and 
have responsibility to contribute back to Society.  
Through education, knowledge must continually be renewed by ceaseless effort, if it 
is not to be lost. It resembles a statute of marble which stands in the desert and is 
continually  threatened with  burial by  the  shifting  sand.  The  hands  of service  must 
ever be at work, in order that the marble continue to lastingly shine in the sun.  
b. 
c. 
While  discussing  the  importance  of  education,  I  must  state  that  schools  have  become  the 
most important means of transforming wealth of knowledge and skills from one generation to 
another.  However,  the  role  of  institutions  becomes  more  challenging  in  the  modern  world 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
with innovations and technological developments. Investment in education and educational 
institutions should be viewed as an investment for economic prosperity. 
In India, there are about 26,478 institutions providing higher education and accounting for the 
largest number in the world. In comparison, according to a report1, in 2010, the U.S. had only 
6,706  higher  education  schools  and  China  had  4,000.  It  is  important  that  given  the  large 
number of schools of higher learning in India, we must target to bring more students under 
the system. Investment in human capital, lifelong learning and quality education help in the 
development of society and nation. 
Demographic contour 
According to the National Commission on Population, it is expected that the age profile of 
population  of  India  will  experience  changes  in  the  coming  years.  By  2016,  approximately 
50 per cent of the total population will be in the age group of 15–25 years. It is projected that 
a vast population would enter the working age group in the next 15 years, leading to increase 
in productive activities and also savings rate as witnessed in Japan in the 1950s and China 
1980s. In other words, there would be a tremendous rise in the number of employable work 
force in the job market which would demand commensurate investment in education. In the 
literature,  Demographic  Dividend  refers  to  population  “lump”  in  the  working  age  group  of  
15–60  which  can  be  described  as  a  major  advantage  for  pushing  the  economic  growth.  It 
suggests that the major challenge before India is how this advantageous demographic profile 
can be harnessed to reflect in the macro-economic parameters of the country.  
Given  the  demographic  profile  advantage,  the  average  Indian  will  be  only  29  years  old  in 
2020  as  compared  with  37  years  for  China  and  the  U.S.,  45  years  for  West  Europe  and 
48 years  for  Japan.2  The  global  demographic  profile,  in  future,  would,  therefore,  lead  to 
shortage  of  productive  workforce  globally  but  India  will  experience  a  surplus.  We  need  to 
realize that this advantage for us will not be automatically transformed into higher economic 
growth.  Strategic  interventions  and  foresight  in  terms  of  encouraging  investments  in 
education and skills development by policy makers are needed to reap maximum benefits of 
demographic dividend.  
Issues and challenges 
Expenditure on education 
In  terms  of  expenditure  incurred  on  education, particularly  on  higher  education,  during  the 
year 2010–11, the government spent around Rs.15, 440 crore which is about 85 per cent of 
the revised budget estimates for the year. The recent 66th round of NSSO survey reveals 
that between 1999 and 2009, spending on education in general jumped by 378 per cent in 
rural areas and 345 per cent in urban areas of the country. The survey further reveals that 
spending  on  children’s  education  underlines  sharp  increase  –  63  per  cent  for  rural  and 
73 per cent  for  urban  families.  However,  if  we  measure  the  expenses  on  education  as  a 
percentage  to  GDP,  India  lags  behind  some  developed/  developing  nations  (Table  1).  We 
recognize that the gap in investments in education in India can perhaps be filled by private 
sector playing a crucial role.  
                                                 
1  Ernst & Young – EDGE 2011 Report 
2  C P Chandrasekhar and Jayati Ghosh, “The Hindu Business Line” , 2006 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Table 1: 
Expenditure on education 
Country 
Spending on education 
as a % of GDP 
Country 
Spending on education 
as a % of GDP 
Switzerland  
U.S.  
France  
U.K.  
Malaysia  
Mexico  
5.8 
5.7 
5.6 
5.3 
8.1 
5.3 
South Africa  
Thailand  
Chile  
Brazil  
India  
Russia  
5.3 
5.2 
4.2 
4.2 
4.1 
3.8 
Note: Government education expenditure as a percentage of GDP (2000–2002). 
Source: United Nations Human Development Programme. 
Gross enrolment pattern 
At present, in India, there are about 1.86 crore students enrolled in various streams of higher 
education including Business Management.3 Despite the large number of students studying 
in various streams, we have not seen any major shift in the productivity as skills and talents 
are  deficient  to  support  economic  activities  and,  hence,  there  is  a  serious  concern  on 
employability  of  these  educated  persons.  The  gross  enrolment  ratio  (GER)  for  higher 
education  in  India  was  12  per  cent  in  2010.  However,  the  enrolment  level  varies  across 
states.  We  also  need  to  recognize  that  our  enrolment  level  is  far  below  several  other 
countries. For example, according to a Report, GER is 23 per cent for China, 34 per cent for 
Brazil, 57 per cent for U.K., 77 per cent for both Australia and Russia and 83 per cent for the 
U.S (Annex 1). In this context, the attempt of Government authorities to increase the number 
of students by 2020 so as to reach GER of 30 per cent becomes a big challenge. No doubt, 
the  launch  of  new  institutes  like  JRE  School  of  Management  can  play  a  catalyst  role  in 
addressing the challenge of increasing GER in India. As a positive step, for the remaining 
duration  of  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan,  the  Government  has  taken  initiatives  to  incentivise 
States  for  setting  up/expansion  of  existing  educational  institutions,  establishment  of 
8 universities,  expansion  of  colleges  to  achieve  a  target  of  1  lakh  students  enrolment  and 
schemes for setting up model colleges in regions which are below national average of GER. 
Capacity utilisation 
Another  challenge  to  be  addressed  in  strengthening  the  Indian  education  system  is  to 
improve the capacity utilization. For example, a recent study4 on capacity utilization in India 
for higher education indicates that the capacity utilization in case of MBA is about 57 per cent 
in Maharashtra and 72 per cent in Haryana (Annex 2). In case of certain states, there are a 
lot of unfilled seats in institutions. On the one hand, we need to improve our GER, and on the 
other,  we  need  to  ensure  that  institutions/  colleges/schools  created  for  providing  higher 
education fully utilize the capacity created. 
                                                 
3  Statistics of Higher Technical Education, 2008–09 
4  Ernst & Young – EDGE 2011 Report 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Infrastructure facilities 
One  of  the  factors  why  the  capacity  utilization  is  low  in  upcoming/new  institutions/colleges 
(both  in  private  and  public  sectors)  is  their  inability  to  provide  necessary  physical 
infrastructure  to  run  the  institutions.  The  infrastructure  facilities  desirable  to  rank  the 
institutions of better quality include real estate, state of the art class rooms, library, hostels, 
furniture, sports facilities, transport, commercial buildings, etc. We need to ensure apolitical 
private  sector  participation  in  the  establishment  of  colleges  for  providing  quality  physical 
infrastructure.  
PPP model 
The  Government  is  making  efforts  to  improve  the  education  system  in  terms  of  various 
parameters like GER, quality, investments, infrastructure, etc. But we need to recognize the 
constraints  for  the  Government  to  make  a  big  turnaround  with  huge  investments  in 
education. I believe that private sector has started playing a distinctive role in improving the 
education  system  in  India.  In  this  context,  it  is  useful  to  explore  the  possibility  of  public 
private partnership (PPP) model in education. This is not only going to reduce the burden of 
the Government in incurring high cost of providing basic infrastructure facilities but also lead 
to  construction  of  state  of  the  art  buildings,  labs,  libraries,  hostels  etc.  Besides,  the 
collaborative  efforts  between  universities/colleges  and  corporates  would  help  in  organizing 
joint research and development, students getting exposure to industrial activities in terms of 
internships, corporate training during vacations and issuing of certificates by corporates for 
attending  internship/training  etc.  and,  thus,  facilitating  in  image  building  and  branding  of 
institutions and making the students more job-worthy. 
Student-teacher ratio 
Another  challenge  for  improving  the  Indian  education  system  is  to  improve  the  student-
teacher ratio. In India, this ratio is very high as compared to certain comparable countries in 
the  world.  For  example,  while  in  developed  countries  this  ratio  stands  at  11.4,  in  case  of 
India,  it  is  as  high  as  22.0.  It  is  even  low  in  CIS  (10.9),  Western  Asia  (15.3),  and  Latin 
America (16.6) (Annex 3). This brings the necessity to recruit quality teachers and strengthen 
the  teachers  required  to  handle  classes.  I  also  feel  that  like  in  developed  countries  where 
students are given part-time teaching assignments, we can also explore such possibilities in 
technical/higher  education  to  handle  lower  level  classes.  It  is  also  expected  to  help  the 
students in meeting their education expenses partially. 
in  qualified  but  not  employable  category.  We  need 
Accreditation and branding – quality standards 
In order to improve the skills and talent of our large populace, there is a need for raising the 
quality  and  standards  of  our  education  system.  It  is  well-known  that  many  of  our 
professionals (engineers/doctors/management professionals) remain unemployed despite lot 
of opportunities being open in the globalised world. One of the major factors is the lack of 
quality  education  resulting 
to 
introduce/activate  the  mechanism  for  rating  and  ranking  universities/colleges.  At  present, 
there is no compulsion for institutions/colleges to get accreditation in India. Government has 
already mooted a proposal to introduce accreditation. We, therefore, require standard rating 
agencies  to  give  accreditation  to  universities/colleges/schools.  In  a  recent  ranking  of 
Business Schools by Financial Times at global level, in the top fifteen, only two of the Indian 
premier Business Schools appeared at rank no. 11 and 13 for the year 2011. Most of the top 
ranking business schools were from the U.S. In this ranking, even China was ahead of India. 
In the same reporting, in respect of value for money of these two Schools, it is observed that 
it is not that high when compared with some of the best U.S. Schools. However, a positive 
development  is  that  these  high  ranked  Indian  Schools  possess  faculties  with  doctoral 
qualifications and of global standards who can deliver quality education to the students. In 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  world  ranking  of  universities  by  Quacquarelli  Symonds  in  2010,  out  of  200  world 
renowned  universities,  only  one  Indian  educational  institution  appears  in  the  list,  while 
53 institutions  are  in  the  U.S.  According  to  Webometrics  ranking  for  2011,  while no  Indian 
university appears in the list, there are 99 U.S. universities included. This essentially shows 
that we need to develop Centre for excellence of global standards. Given the increasing role 
of private sector in the recent years in the development of higher education standards, we 
need  more  such  institutions  that  meet  certain  global  rating  standards  to  come  up  in  those 
areas where low GER prevails. I understand that the JRE School of Management has been 
established  in  collaboration  with  the  largest  private  education  group  in  Asia-Pacific  and, 
hence, striving for quality education of global standards would be its principal aim. 
Students studying abroad 
As  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  my  address,  India  has  the  largest  number  of  higher 
education  institutions.  Despite  that,  we  find  the  number  of  students  interested  in  pursuing 
higher  studies  abroad  is  on  the  rise.  In  the  year  2006,  according  to  a  Wikipedia  report, 
1.23 lakh students opted for higher education abroad, of which about 76,000 chose the U.S. 
as  their  destination,  followed  by  U.K.,  Canada  and  Australia.  However,  in  2010–11,  about 
1.03 lakh students got admission to study in the U.S. In regard to Australia also, the number 
is  on  the  rise.  During  2004  to  2009,  the  number  of  students  joining  different  courses  rose 
from  30,000  to  97,000.  Likewise,  in  the  other  sought  after  destination  of  U.K.  for  higher 
education,  students  studying  abroad  doubled  between  1999  and  2009.  In  2009,  about 
19,205 students  were  studying  in  U.K.  Various  factors  encourage  Indian  students  to  seek 
admission abroad by taking loans from financial institutions including (a) quality of education, 
(b)  increasing  prosperity  and  aspirations  and  (c)  social  prestige  and  also  exposure  and 
experiences  gained.  We  have  to  recognize  these  short-comings  while  building  our 
educational institutions for reversal of trend. 
Role of RBI and commercial banks 
Now,  I  would  like  to  dwell  upon  the  role  played  by  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  and  the 
banking  system  in  India  in  strengthening  education  system.  Realizing  the  importance  of 
education for the economic development and the overall living standards, the RBI is involved 
in  formulating  progressive  and  proactive  policy  guidelines  for  lending  to  education  by  the 
banking system.  
 
The RBI, in view of the importance of education and the need to bring more students 
under  the  category  of  “education  loans”,  has  classified  such  loans  and  advances 
granted to individuals for educational purposes up to Rs. 10 lakh for studies in India 
and Rs. 20 lakh for studies abroad, under “priority sector”.  
In  June  2004,  the  scope  of  definition  of  “infrastructure  lending”  was  expanded  to 
include  construction  of  educational  institutions.  Accordingly,  schools  and  colleges 
can now avail bank finance for improving their infrastructure. The available figures 
(covering about 63 per cent of banks under the category of “infrastructure”), indicate 
the share of outstanding loans to educational institutions in the total infrastructure 
lending of commercial banks was 1.5 per cent for end-March 2011. 
RBI  has  been  liberalizing  foreign  exchange  rules  for  acquiring  education  from 
institutions abroad. A student can draw foreign exchange equivalent to USD 10,000 
under private visit quota at the time of going abroad. The limit of USD 30,000 for 
education  abroad  on  declaration  basis  was  enhanced  to  USD  1,00,000  since 
July 17, 2003. In addition, a student can also draw foreign exchange equivalent to 
USD 2,00,000 for education purposes under liberalized remittance scheme before 
leaving the country i.e. before he/she gains the status of non-resident. Students can 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 avail loan from a bank abroad for study purposes on the basis of counter guarantee 
given by an Indian Bank under approval route. 
With  a  view  to  facilitate  banks,  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  has  brought  out  a 
model  scheme  for  educational  loan  in  the  year  2001  which  was  again  revised  in 
January 2010 and got circulated to all member banks for implementation. This would 
facilitate economically weaker sections of the society to avail educational loans from 
scheduled  banks  with  modified  easier  norms.  In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a 
remarkable  spurt  in  the  disbursal  of  educational  loans  by  commercial  banks.  The 
educational loans outstanding amounted to Rs.27,709 crore as at end March 2009 
which increased to up to Rs.42,808 crore as at end-March 2011 Table 2).  
Table 2:  
Educational loan of scheduled commercial banks 
Particulars 
Amount outstanding (in Rs Crore) 
No of accounts (in Lakh) 
Mar-09 
27709.5 
16.3 
Mar-10 
36359.7 
19.7 
Mar-11 
42808.1 
22.8 
  We have nominated a nodal officer at the Central office of the RBI for the purpose of 
all educational loan issues/grievances. 
Apart  from  policy  formulation,  as  an  institution  also,  RBI  undertakes  activities  to 
educate  students  relating  to  central  banking,  banking  and  financial  system. 
Illustratively,  to  educate  young  scholars,  a  scheme  has  been  introduced  in  which 
every  year  RBI  selects  a  good  number  of  scholars  from  different  region  of  the 
country.  In  addition,  RBI  has  set  up  research  and  training  institution  for  banking 
technology.  
Way forward 
Innovations required 
The challenge of educating millions of young people implies that we need to scale up our 
educational efforts multi-fold despite having the largest number of higher education institutes 
in the world. Mr Shantanu Prakash has established one more institute today but we need to 
create  many  more  such  centres.  Scaling  up  is  not  possible  unless  the  students  become 
successful, create value in the society and contribute back to their alma-mater or, better still, 
start new institutes of global standards themselves. 
The curriculum of some of the colleges/universities is more or less obsolete and do not equip 
students with the necessary skills or impart latest knowledge. If a student passes out of a 
chosen course, he or she should be employable as a work force. Unfortunately, given the 
phenomenal share of lack of technical knowledge in the courses of education, students are 
found wanting in the desired skills and technical soundness. To address this issue, we may 
think  of  strengthening 
the 
universities/schools/colleges  to  regularly  revisit  their  curriculum  by  involving  experts  from 
different fields so that the curriculum can lead to knowledge development. Further, why can 
we not use the available infrastructure more intensely? For instance, why cannot a second 
stream of courses, say vocational, be run in the evening/night so that the available /created 
infrastructure is better utilized.  
Teachers  are  the  most  important  factors  for  any  innovative  society  because  teachers’ 
knowledge and skills not only enhance quality and efficacy of education, but also improve the 
potential for research and innovation. Given the higher level of GER to be achieved by 2020, 
the  vocational  streams 
in  schools/colleges. 
I  urge 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
a  large  number  of  teachers  would  be  required  to  educate  the  growing  young  population. 
Maybe,  students  could  be  used  as  teachers,  especially  good  students  coming  from  lower 
income  groups  so  that  they  can  be  partly  be  compensated.  Further,  barring  some  leading 
schools/universities/autonomous  educational 
teachers  of 
colleges/universities need to hone their skills/talent. There is a need to encourage teachers 
to participate by presenting research papers in seminars/workshops/conferences and receive 
periodic  trainings  for  updation  of  knowledge/skills.  It  is  equally  important  that  a  feedback 
mechanism  from  students  is  introduced  in  universities/colleges  to  assess  and  evaluate 
teachers’ role in the institutional developmental process. 
institutions,  many  of 
the 
Quality of education 
Given  that  we  need  to  compete  globally  in  the  21st  century,  our  education  system  should 
adopt certain benchmarking techniques for improving instruction models and administrative 
procedures in universities/colleges to move forward. I suggest that we need a thorough study 
and  evaluation  of  models  implemented  elsewhere  and  work  out  strategies  to  adopt  such 
models in our system. Benchmarking in my opinion would provide benefits to our education 
system in terms of reengineering, setting right objectives, etc. 
The country is showing consistency in economic growth pattern, leading the world in terms of 
information  and  technology,  modernization  various  economic  activities  and  pushing  for 
higher share of industries and services sectors of the economy but there is one area which 
needs reform is “education system”. While it is true that some investments are taking place in 
the country’s higher education system, we are yet to establish world class research facilities, 
recruiting profound academicians in universities/colleges/research institutions, etc. to sustain 
and  forge  lead  in  economic  development.  It  is  important  to  understand  that  countries  like 
China,  Singapore,  South  Korea,  etc.  are  moving  fast  in  investing  in  education  system. 
Therefore,  it  is  imperative  that  our  educational  institutions  are  equipped  with  the  desired 
quality  and  standards  which  are  essentials  for  transforming  the  younger  workforce  into 
productive ones. Needless to reiterate that in the higher education system focus on use of 
technology  for  effective  learning  by  students  also  need  to  be  encouraged  to  have  cutting 
edge over our competitors in the globalised world.  
Making education affordable 
In India, if education has to reach all deserving students, it should be made affordable. The 
fee structure in Government owned/sponsored institutions is inexpensive in India. However, 
in  some  private  sector  institutions,  which  have  the  freedom  to  prescribe  fee  structure  and 
despite  broad  guidelines  from  certain  state  governments,  fees  are  beyond  the  capacity  of 
poor  and  deserving  students.  Ideally,  the  fee  structure  should  vary  for  such  economically 
weaker  students.  I  would  urge  the  educators  to  keep  in  mind  that  education  should  not 
become prohibitively expensive and ensure that no deserving candidate is denied admission 
just for the fact that he or she does not possess the necessary financial resources. 
Ethics in education 
In  my  opinion,  the  most  important  objective  of  any  educational  institution  is  to  equip  the 
students with ethical values besides imparting knowledge and skills. Today, I find that this 
basic human quality is slowly eroding. Illustratively, while the RBI as well as Government of 
India  is  formulating  progressive  policies  to  ensure  funds  do  not  pose  a  major  problem  for 
education, I observe some disturbing trend in respect of repayment of loans by students. It 
may be noted if the loans are not repaid after it falls due, the non-performing assets of banks 
will increase and in the process, banks are likely to be skeptical in sanctioning educational 
loans.  It  is,  therefore,  important  that  the  repayment  schedules  are  adhered  to  by  those 
students who have taken loans. It is understood that to encourage banks to give educational 
loans to all deserving students, the Government is looking into the issue of setting up of a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
system  of  insuring  educational  loans.  To  reduce  default  of  education  loans,  I  strongly  feel 
that the School Alumni Association of students can become active in inculcating ethics and 
values among students. They can provide the required synergies and linkages in addressing 
challenges relating to non-payment of outstanding education loans. 
In the same coin, as education has to be made affordable to all deserving and poor students, 
there is a strong need for educational institutions not to over-commercialize education but to 
uphold ethics in the business of education as well. It is not anyone’s case that the business 
has  to  be  run  unprofitably  but  the  business  must  be  carried  out  with  ethical  values  for 
sustenance of educational institutions. Over exploitation should be avoided. Profit cannot be 
the sole motive for undertaking this business. It must be driven by an unflinching commitment 
to society which in turn will benefit the business in the long run.  
Conclusion 
To sum up, we need to recognize that the knowledge, skills and productivity of our growing 
young and dynamic work force forms the backbone of our economy. To reap the benefits of 
such a young work force, we need to implement the reforms in the  education system and 
also  bring  forth  new  factors  of  production,  namely  knowledge,  skills  and  technology  which 
have the ability to unleash the productive frontiers of the economy in the most efficient and 
dynamic  way.  Besides,  taking  a  leaf  from  the  western  hemisphere,  India  should  try  to 
become “knowledge economy” to promote inclusive growth. I, therefore, would like underline 
three  major  areas  to  be  focused  to  ensure  that  our  education  system  is  sustainable  and 
meets global standards: 
i. 
ii. 
Quality of Education – in terms of infrastructure, teachers, accreditation, etc. 
Affordability  of  Education  –  ensuring  poor  and  deserving  students  are  not  denied 
education. 
Ethics in Education – avoiding over-commercialization of education system. 
iii. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  again  wish  JRE  Group  of  Institutions  in  establishing  JRE 
School of Management which I am sure will play an important role in the 21st century in the 
Indian  education  system  by  providing  world  class  education  at  an  affordable  cost  to  the 
young students and achieve success in all frontiers of educational activities. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Annex 1 
Gross enrolment ratio (GER) for higher education 
Source: chinaeducenter.com, UNESCO Global Education Digest 2009; EY Analysis 
Annex 2 
Capacity utilization 
Source: Maharashtra DTE, AITCE; EY Analysis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
Annex 3 
Student-teacher ratio (2008) 
Source: “Higher Education in India”, UGC Report, 2008; UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2010; EY Analysis 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
