Jean-Pierre Danthine: Market volatility, Swiss National Bank liquidity 
measures and foreign exchange reserves 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Berne, 15 December 2011. 
 I  would  like  to  address  three  main  issues  today.  These  are  the  acute  market  volatility 
experienced this summer, the impact of the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) liquidity measures 
and minimum exchange rate upon our money and foreign exchange (FX) markets, and the 
management of our FX reserves.  
Acute market volatility  
The  second  half  of  2011  has,  until  now,  been  marked  by  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
uncertainty.  Volatility  on  the  equity,  bond  and  foreign  exchange  markets  has  increased 
markedly, reflecting investors’ concerns about the softening of global growth, the European 
sovereign debt crisis, the US debt ceiling crisis and the resilience of the international banking 
system.  
Signs  of  this  acute  volatility  abound.  Allow  me  to  highlight  three  recent  examples.  Firstly, 
between July and early August, the VIX Index, a measure of the volatility of the S&P 500, 
abruptly doubled. Secondly, the MSCI World Index, a measure of the state of global equity 
markets, decreased by almost 20% between early July and late September, rebounding in 
October,  only  to  fall  again  afterwards.  As  concerns  about  bank  solvency  and  credit  risk 
increased banks being at the heart of the crisis the benchmark MSCI World Banks Index also 
fell  by  over  25%  between  early  July  and  late  September.  Thirdly,  as  concerns  over  the 
security  of  corporate  and  government  bonds  grew,  the  premia  investors  have  had  to  pay 
against  bond  defaults  have  increased  very  significantly.  The  perceived  decrease  in  the 
creditworthiness of key European companies and Western European sovereign bonds was 
highlighted by the very sharp rise of several benchmark credit default swap (CDS) indices for 
these markets.1 
The  foreign  exchange  market  has  been  of  particular  concern  to  the  SNB,  as  the  Swiss 
franc’s  safe  haven  properties  and  the  growing  dearth  of  alternative  “safe”  assets  led  to 
massive movements in our currency, which required the SNB to act.  
In early August, the real effective exchange rate of the Swiss franc peaked at an estimated 
level of almost 40% above its post-1990 long-term average.2 The extent of this deviation was 
very  rare,  in  historic  terms,  as  the  previous  high  point,  at  the  end  of  1995,  was  only  12% 
above the same long-term average. Since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the volatility of 
the EUR/CHF exchange rate has averaged approximately 5%.3 In August it rose to almost 
30%. As chart 1 shows, three of the largest ever daily negative movements in the EUR/CHF 
exchange rate also occurred in this period. Since the introduction of the minimum exchange 
                                                 
1  The Markit iTraxx Europe Index, for example, which is composed of 125 investment grade entities from six 
sectors  (auto,  consumer,  energy,  financial,  industrial  and  TMT),  more  than  doubled  between  July  and 
September.  Likewise,  the  iTraxx  Sovereign  Western  Europe  Index,  consisting  of  15  sovereign  CDS  across 
Europe, rose by approximately 70% in the same period.  
2  This  is  an  approximation  of  the  real  effective  exchange  rate,  assuming  constant  weights  and  inflation 
differentials. 
3   Annualised volatility computed over one calendar month on the basis of daily movements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rate on 6 September, EUR/CHF volatility has fallen below 10%, though it remains high from a 
historical perspective.  
The introduction of the minimum exchange rate also had an impact on some of the dynamic 
properties of the Swiss franc. As the red bar on the left side of chart 2 suggests, there was 
previously a positive correlation between the movements of the Swiss franc and those of risk 
indicators such as the VIX Index, i.e. investors tend to buy Swiss francs when perceived risk 
increases. In the same vein, the blue bar on the left of the chart shows that the correlation 
between  the  movements  of  the  Swiss  franc  and  those  of  risky  assets,  such  as  the  equity 
shares  on  the  MSCI  World  Index,  has  historically  been  negative.  In  other  words,  negative 
market developments have often been accompanied by a rising Swiss franc. Intriguingly, as 
the right side of chart 2 shows, the introduction of the minimum exchange rate appears to 
have had a significant impact on these correlations.  
The SNB’s implementation of monetary policy: liquidity measures  
On  3  August,  the  SNB  started  to  implement  liquidity  measures  against  the  massively 
overvalued Swiss franc. Let me provide some further information on these operations. That 
day,  the  SNB  announced  that  it  was  narrowing  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor 
from 0.00–0.75% to 0.00–0.25%. It also stated its intention to expand sight deposits at the 
SNB.  These  were  subsequently  increased  from  around  CHF  30  billion  at  the  beginning  of 
August to over CHF 250 billion by the first week of September.  
The SNB used a range of well-established instruments to effect this extraordinary increase in 
the supply  of liquidity to the Swiss franc money  market, as chart 3 shows. Firstly, reverse 
repo  operations  were  discontinued.  As  a  result,  outstanding  reverse  repos  fell  from  CHF 
26 billion on 3 August to zero a week later. Secondly, the SNB stopped renewing SNB Bills 
that fell due, and later started to repurchase those that remained outstanding. While these 
amounted  to  some  CHF  110  billion  at  the  end  of  July,  this  figure  gradually  decreased  to 
below  CHF  45  billion  by  the  end  of  August,  reaching  some  CHF  20  billion  by  the  end  of 
November. Thirdly, to further boost liquidity, on 10 August the SNB also started to employ 
foreign exchange swaps. These amounted to approximately CHF 80 billion by the end of the 
third quarter. Fourthly, the SNB again resorted to conducting repo operations, which provided 
the Swiss franc money market with approximately CHF 18 billion of liquidity in August and up 
to around CHF 33 billion in November.  
These  exceptional  liquidity  measures  exerted  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates.  In  line 
with the goals stated in the SNB’s announcement of 3 August, the three-month Libor fell from 
17.5 bp on 2 August to a low of 0.3 bp on 5 September, as chart 4 shows. It is now hovering 
around  5  bp,  though  it  is  worth  noting  that  limited  volumes  of  unsecured  trades  are  being 
conducted  in  the  present  environment.  The  significance  of  the  three-month  Libor  remains 
unchanged,  however,  as  reflected  by  the  fact  that  all  money  market  interest  rates  are 
currently close to zero, as is the Swiss franc Libor itself.  
Since early August, the Libor futures yield curve has also decreased sharply, with its March 
2012 maturity reaching –0.5% on 18 August. That day, the entire curve for the period up to 
September 2013 also lay below zero. The three-month rate implied in the price of EUR/CHF 
swaps  reached  a  low  of  –1.5%4.  From  a  foreign  investor’s  standpoint,  such  interest  rate 
conditions make the Swiss franc and its money market less attractive, as intended.  
The downward movement of interest rates also affected the short-term borrowing costs of the 
Swiss Confederation. Since the end of August, the yields from money market debt register 
claims5 have moved into negative territory. On 23 August, the yields from six-month auctions 
                                                 
4   This was computed on the basis of three-month euro-denominated overnight index swap rates.  
5   Geldmarktbuchforderungen der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft (GMBF).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
decreased to –1%, and on 30 August, the yields from three-month auctions went down to –
0.75%. At recent auctions, both yields were still negative.  
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  these  liquidity  operations  may  have  affected  more  than  just 
current and expected short-term rates. After the SNB’s 17 August announcement, the rates 
of two-year Swiss government bonds briefly moved below zero, and the yields of longer-term 
Swiss  government  bonds  also  decreased  significantly.  While  the  yields  on  other  long-term 
government bonds which are generally considered safe also followed similar patterns, it is 
nevertheless striking to observe in chart 5 that in the wake of the SNB’s liquidity measures in 
August,  ten-year  Swiss  government  bond  yields  experienced  their  largest  declines  since 
1995.  
The interest rate and liquidity measures taken by the SNB in August naturally preceded and 
prepared  for  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  in  case  it  proved  necessary. 
The SNB will continue to keep liquidity at exceptionally high levels, but has decided not to set 
a specific target level for sight deposits at present.  
Management of the foreign exchange reserves  
In  the  context  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  there  has  been  renewed  interest  in  the 
management of our FX reserves. Let me repeat here that our investments are subject to the 
primacy of monetary policy and implemented according to three criteria, namely, in order of 
priority:  security,  liquidity  and  returns.  The  SNB  has  to  bear  the  risk  associated  with 
exchange rate fluctuations, as any hedge would be equivalent to buying Swiss francs against 
foreign currencies. The SNB has therefore emphasised the importance of diversification and 
limiting the concentration risks of our foreign currency investments.  
Today, 53% of the SNB’s FX reserves are invested in euro-denominated securities. This is in 
line with the share of Swiss exports to the euro area, and only five percentage points more 
than our allocation three years ago, though the size of our FX reserves, excluding swaps, 
increased from CHF 50 billion in 2008 to over CHF 225 billion by the end of September 2011. 
In order to promote further diversification, in 2010 the SNB added four new currencies to its 
reserves, namely Australian and Singapore dollars, Danish krone and Swedish krona. As a 
result, in addition to euros and these four currencies, the SNB’s portfolio is now composed of 
26% US dollars, 9% Japanese yen, 5% pounds sterling and 4% Canadian dollars.  
Central  banks  generally  have  large  holdings  of  government  bonds  due  to  their  need  for 
liquidity. As is widely known, in recent months the ratings agencies have been reviewing or 
have  downgraded  the  credit  ratings  of  many  sovereign  bonds.  Despite this  turn  of events, 
approximately  96%  of  all  our  investments  in  fixed-income  assets  are  rated  AAA  or  AA.  In 
closing, I would like to emphasise that we are actively exploring and monitoring new asset 
classes and currencies in developed and developing markets. The aim of this process is to 
continually reduce concentration risks and to further diversify the SNB’s FX reserves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
