Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Rebuilding confidence in the financial 
sector 
Introductory remarks by HE Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at  the  Chartered  Institute  for  Securities  and  Investment  (CISI)  event  “Rebuilding 
confidence  in  the  financial  sector”,  organized  in  conjunction  with  the  Bahrain  Institute  of 
Banking and Finance, Manama, 4 October 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It gives me great pleasure to be here at the first of the Continuing Professional Development 
events being arranged by the Chartered Institute for Securities and Investment in conjunction 
with the Bahrain Institute of Banking and Finance. 
I am sure that many of you here this evening are already familiar with the CISI’s work. For 
almost  20  years,  the  CISI  has  been  recognised  as  the  leading  professional  body  for  the 
investment industry in the UK. It now has over 40,000 members in 89 countries. Bahrain is 
on course to have the largest membership outside the UK, due in part to the success of the 
BIBF’s Financial Advisor Programme, which allows successful candidates to become affiliate 
members of the Institute. 
Membership of the Chartered Institute is recognition that an individual has achieved not only 
a  high  standard  of  technical  competence,  but  also  displays  the  ethical  judgement  and 
personal integrity necessary if confidence in the financial system is to be maintained. 
Confidence  and  integrity  are,  without  a  doubt,  the  foundation  of  the  financial  system.  All 
financial  firms  –  whether  they  are  banks,  investment  managers,  insurance  companies,  or 
securities brokers – are alike to the extent that they make a promise to the customer. 
Similarly, customers have to believe that the people working in the industry are placing their 
interests first. If they doubt that the firm or its employees are truly interested in making the 
customer’s money grow, rather than claiming as much of it as possible in the form of fees 
and bonuses, they will be reluctant to deal with financial firms. 
These are just two examples of the way in which consumers’ trust in financial firms can break 
down. In the last few years we have seen plenty of examples around the world of financial 
firms  that  have  lost  the  trust  of  their  customers  and  have  paid  a  heavy  price.  The  recent 
allegations that the employees of some large investment banks deliberately created financial 
products that would fail, imposing large losses on customers so their own firms could benefit, 
are simply the most high profile of many such allegations that have been unearthed following 
the financial crisis. 
Regulators have an important role to play in ensuring that customers can trust the financial 
institutions that they deal with. We can set entry and licensing conditions to make it difficult 
for those who are dishonest or incompetent to set up firms or to work in the industry. We can 
require firms to have adequate financial resources to back the promises that they make, and 
adequate control systems to ensure that they can properly identify and manage the risks that 
they are taking. We can also mandate training and competency requirements for staff who 
deal directly with a firm’s customers. 
However,  a  regulator  cannot  be  everywhere  at  once.  Nor  should  we  aim  to  be.  To  a  very 
large extent, maintaining public confidence in financial firms is the job of the firms themselves 
and their employees. As regulators we cannot set rules that ensure that people will behave 
honestly and with integrity. Those are values that must come from within, they must be part 
of a firm’s culture. Only an industry that takes seriously the need for ethical standards will be 
able to grow and prosper and to offer its customers the services they require. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For this reason, I am very pleased that the CISI has chosen the subject of “Integrity at Work” 
for its first interactive seminar in Bahrain. By encouraging participants to debate real life case 
studies,  to  consider  their  responses  to  them,  and  to  suggest  ways  to  deal  with  these 
problems, this learning environment will encourage participants to think more deeply about 
the ethical implications of their work place actions. 
As I mentioned earlier, Bahrain is on course to have the largest CISI membership outside the 
UK. This fact demonstrates the already strong emphasis that firms in Bahrain place on the 
importance of integrity and trust. It also illustrates one of Bahrain’s many continuing strengths 
as  a  financial  centre,  our  deep  pool  of  qualified  and  experienced  financial  sector 
professionals.  Factors  such  as  these  will  ensure  that  we  can  move  on  from  recent  events 
and remain at the forefront of financial centres in the MENA region. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
