Yaseen Anwar: Role of financial institutions and capital markets in 
Pakistan’s economy 
Speech by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the PAF Air War 
College, Karachi, 21 December 2011. 
 The Commandant PAF Air War College, Members of the Faculty and the Future Leaders of 
the Armed Forces 
I  am  delighted  to  be  invited  by  the  PAF  Air  War  College  which  is  one  of  our  premier 
institutions  of  the  armed  forces  of  Pakistan,  to  share  my  views  on  the  Role  of  Financial 
Institutions and Capital Markets in the Pakistan Economy. 
The  importance  of  Financial  Institutions  (FIs)  cannot  be  overemphasized.  FIs  perform  the 
vital function of intermediation between providers of investable funds (depositors, securities 
holders  etc)  and  the  users  of  such funds  (namely  businesses).  No  economy  can  progress 
unless  its  financial  sector  facilitates  its  business  activity  consistently,  and  in  the  case  of  a 
developing country like Pakistan, these FIs act as a necessary catalyst for economic growth 
as well. 
The State Bank of Pakistan, as the central bank of a developing country, has played two very 
critical roles with respect to the financial sector. Firstly it ensures soundness of banks and 
DFIs  through  prudential  oversight  with  a  view  to  maintain  financial  stability;  secondly  it 
pursues a developmental objective under which it facilitates financial markets developments 
and enhancement of access to finance. Over the years much has been accomplished, yet a 
lot more is yet to be achieved. 
The  banking  system,  which  constitutes  88  percent  share  of  the  total  financial  sector,  is 
comprised of 34 commercial banks and 4 specialized banks. The share of non-bank financial 
institutions  is  approximately  12  percent,  and  includes  leasing  companies,  Mudarabas, 
insurance  companies,  investment  banks,  housing  finance  companies,  venture  capital 
companies,  and  mutual  funds.  The  Banking  sector  of  an  economy  is  generally  the  most 
significant  player  and  performs  three  primary  functions  which  include  the  facilitation  of  the 
payment  system,  mobilization  of  savings,  and  allocation  of  loanable  funds.  By  virtue  of  its 
pivotal role, the banking sector can exert its positive influence on various other segments of 
the economy. 
During  the  course  of  my  speech,  I  would  be  giving  you  a  historical  perspective  of  the 
development  of  financial  sector  in  Pakistan,  followed  by  a  discussion  of  challenges  and 
opportunities of present scenario. Finally, I would like to share with you our priorities related 
to the banking sector for the future to come. 
Historical perspective 
The current structure of the financial sector in Pakistan is the result of several policy shifts 
and  developments.  The  eras  of  financial  sector  developments  in  Pakistan  can  broadly  be 
segregated into 1947–70, 1971–90 and 1991 to date period. Prior to 1971, the primary focus 
was on developing commercial banks in the private sector and creating development finance 
institutions  backed  by  the  government.  The  private  sector  development,  however,  almost 
clogged during the period 1971–1990, owing to the nationalization policy of the government. 
During this period, the banking sector came  under the government’s control. Since 1990s, 
more liberal and market-based reforms have been followed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Period of 1947 to 1970 
At  the  time  of  independence  in  1947  the  banks  services  were  adversely  affected  and  by 
June 30,  1948,  the  number  of  branches  of  scheduled  banks  came  down  to  only  81  in  the 
territories  now  comprising  Pakistan.  However,  commercial  banking  made  tremendous 
progress and achieved phenomenal growth since independence as by December 31, 1973 
i.e.,  before  nationalization,  there  were  14  scheduled  Pakistani  commercial  banks  with 
3,323 branches  all  over  Pakistan  and  74  branches  in  foreign  countries.  Development 
Finance  Institutions  (DFIs)  played  a  significant  role  in  the  early  industrial  development  of 
Pakistan from the sixties up to about the mid eighties. These DFIs were major channels for 
routing development funds to the private manufacturing sector and achieving socio-economic 
objectives  such  as  encouragement  of  new  entrepreneurs,  setting  up  of  industries  in  less 
developed  areas  and  wider  diffusion  of  industrial  ownership.  However  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s many DFIs ran into problems stemming basically from poor management, excessive 
bad loans, withdrawal of incentives or resource constraints, and considerable losses to the 
point of their financial ruin. They were also unable to compete with the increasingly nimble 
banking  sector  of  the  1990s  which  was  able  to  capture  substantial  investment  banking 
business. 
Period of 1971 to 1990 
As you may be aware, all 14 Pakistani commercial banks were nationalized and merged into 
5  banks  from  January  01,  1974,  and  the  financial  landscape  of  the  country  changed 
significantly. One of the rationales given for nationalization was the fact that private banks 
were likely to neglect small borrowers and other priority areas, and it was thought that with 
nationalization, the government could direct credit to desired sectors. Consequently, various 
steps were taken, which included commencement of subsidized credit schemes, introduction 
of a complex system of credit ceilings, and the imposition of controls on interest rates. 
The  experiment  of  nationalization,  however  failed  to  give  the  desired  results,  as  political 
interference  in  lending  decision  and  also  in  the  appointment  of  the  boards  and  chief 
executives marred the operations of these banks. The efficiency of the banks was affected 
severely, and by the end of 1980s, the banking sector in Pakistan had become unsuitable for 
adequately meeting the growing financial needs of the country. 
Period of 1991 to date 
Realizing the inherent weaknesses in Pakistan’s financial system, a broad based program of 
reforms was framed for the financial sector in the early 1990s. The reform agenda included, 
among others, financial liberalization and deregulation measures which were: privatization of 
NCBs,  removal  of  restrictions  on  opening‐up  of  private  banks,  phasing  out  of  subsidized 
and  mandatory  credit  schemes,  removal  of  caps  on  deposit  and  lending  rates  of  banks, 
abolishment of the system of credit ceiling, and switching towards a market based approach 
of  credit  distribution,  etc.  These  measures  were  implemented  over  time  with  gradual 
improvement that continues today. 
The State Bank of Pakistan played a pioneering role in these reforms, and has championed 
the developments in the financial sector. A brief summary of some of the major steps taken 
under these reforms are as follows: 
For privatization of nationalized commercial banks, the Government injected Rs. 30.7 billion 
to  offset  the  losses  incurred  by  these  banks  and  recapitalized  them.  Professional  bankers 
were  appointed  as  Chief  Executives  and  persons  from  the  private  sector  enjoying  a 
reputation  of  competence  and  integrity  were  nominated  on  the  Board  of  Directors  and 
ultimately the banks were privatized. 
Besides the privatization, fresh licenses were also issued to private sector sponsors to set up 
new commercial banks. These new banks provided the necessary competitive stimulus in the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system,  and  have  contributed  to  the  enhancement  of  banking  services  in  Pakistan. 
Resultantly the overall share of private sector owned commercial banks in the banking sector 
assets increased from almost negligible in 1991 to about 80 percent by June 2004. 
The legal and regulatory framework was strengthened significantly, and State Bank powers 
under  the  Banking  Companies  Ordinance  were  enhanced  in  order  to  make  it  an  effective 
regulator. Here I would like to emphasis that strengthening of the framework is a dynamic 
process,  and  as  recently  as  in  April  2011,  the  amendments  in  the  BCO  were  carried  out 
which further reinforced SBP’s role as regulator of the banking sector. 
The  prudential  regulations  and  various  guidelines  issued  by  SBP  provided  the  essential 
impetus  for  prudent  operations  of  the  banks  and  DFIs.  Under  the  regulatory  framework, 
corporate governance, and risk management standards have improved significantly across 
the industry. These regulations also aim to enhance the quality of oversight of the Board of 
Directors of banks, mainly by (a) ensuring that only reputable and competent persons sit on 
these  boards  and  (b)  requiring  that  the  members  fulfill  their  responsibilities  towards  policy 
making for their respective banks. 
Foreign  direct  investment  in  the  banking  sector  was  made  more  viable;  and  since 
liberalization,  large  numbers  of  reputable  foreign  shareholders  have  invested  in  locally 
incorporated Pakistani banks. At the same time several foreign banks have opted to operate 
in Pakistan in branch mode as well. One of the most recent positive development is the entry 
of largest Chinese bank ICBC in Pakistan that started operations earlier this year. 
Since capital of a bank provides the buffer against unexpected losses, it is essential for any 
bank to have adequate capital to survive the ups and downs of a business cycle and to bear 
exogenous shocks successfully. The Capitalization of the banks has been enhanced steadily 
over the years. The minimum paid up capital (net of losses) was set at Rs.1 billion in 2003, 
increased to Rs2.0 billion by 2005, Rs6.0 billion by 2009, and Rs.10 billion to be achieved by 
2013. 
In  addition  to  Minimum  Capital  Requirement  (MCR),  SBP  also  adopted  internationally 
accepted solvency standard of Basel I in 1997; and the revised standard of Basel II has been 
enforced since 2008. Under this regime, banks have to maintain a Capital Adequacy ratio of 
10%.  The  ratio  is  calculated  keeping  in  view  the  risk  profile  of  a  bank’s  assets,  with  an 
ultimate objective to ensure that banks carrying higher risk assets should be required to hold 
more capital. 
Over the years the monitoring of banks and DFIs has also improved. The on-site inspection 
and off-site surveillance has increased the level of supervision of SBP. Electronic information 
gathering  has  made  oversight  timely  and  consequently  more  effective.  The  SBP  also 
undertook massive capacity building during the late 1990s and early 2000s to upgrade the 
level  of  expertise  of  its  officers.  Merit-based  recruitment,  competency-enhancing  training, 
performance-linked  promotion,  and  induction  of  skilled  human  resources  are  now  regular 
feature of SBP’s corporate strategy. 
The  IMF  and  World  Bank  in  their  banking  sector  assessment  of  2004  state  Quote:  “far 
reaching  reforms  have  resulted  in  a  more  efficient  and  competitive  financial  system.  In 
particular,  the  pre-dominantly  state-owned  banking  system  has  been  transformed  into  one 
that is predominantly under the control of the private sector. The legislative framework and 
the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan’s  supervisory  capacity  have  been  improved  substantially.  As  a 
result,  the  financial  sector  is  sounder  and  exhibits  an  increased  resilience  to  shocks”. 
Unquote. 
Present day scenario 
Before I discuss the present day challenges and opportunities, let me first identify the key 
performance  figures  of  the  current  banking  sector.  Total  assets  of  our  banks  amount  to 
Rs7.7 trillion as of end June 2011. The deposits stand at Rs6.0 trillion, while Advances and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Investments  of  the  sector  are  Rs3.8  trillion  and  Rs2.6  trillion  respectively.  In  spite  of  the 
economic slowdown, the pretax profit of the banking sector for year 2010 was Rs105 billion 
and for the first six month of 2011 it was Rs77 billion. The banks stand at a healthy Capital 
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of over 14 percent and have shown a steady increase in capital even 
in  absolute  terms,  and  equity  of  the  banks  is  now  Rs722  billion  (June  2011).  While  the 
picture  appears  quite  stable,  the  key  challenge  comes  from  the  word  I  used  just  now 
“economic  slowdown”.  We  have  witnessed  the  impact  of  an  economic  slowdown  through 
rising credit risk in the banks. The gross non-performing loans which were low in 2007 (7.6%) 
are now at 15.3% as of June 2011. Thanks to our conservative provisioning regime, the net 
NPLs  are  still  at  a  reasonable  level  at  5.5%,  but  we  are  aware  that  unless  an  economic 
turnaround  is  achieved  within  a  reasonable  time,  the  impact  of  high  credit  risk  can  cause 
serious problems, at least for some banks. 
Since FY07, banks in Pakistan have been able to withstand the headwinds from weakening 
macroeconomic  fundamentals.  While  they  have  remained  largely  insulated  from  the  first 
round  of  shocks  from  the  global  financial  crisis,  we  cannot  ignore  the  adverse  trends  that 
have risen since then. 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  has  continued  despite  the  recovery  efforts  of  advanced 
economies and has morphed from a financial crisis to a sovereign credit crisis with serious 
political implications. The crisis brought forth the realization that organizations which are not 
just too-big-to-fail but also too-interconnected-to-fail are the major source of systemic risk. It 
reinforced  the  fact  that  complete  reliance  on  mathematical  model-based  risk  management 
systems is insufficient in assessing the wide array of risks faced by the financial sector, some 
of which need more qualitative analysis and judgment. Most importantly, it showed how its 
protracted duration severely impaired the basic function of the financial sector i.e. efficient 
allocation  of  resources  in  the  process  of  financial  intermediation.  The  regulatory  focus  in 
Pakistan has strived to prevent and mitigate the occurrence of these factors as the financial 
sector continues to evolve and progress. 
The silver lining from the GFC is the fact that the emerging markets are gaining more focus. 
The contribution of BRIC and other emerging economies in world economic growth is on the 
rise.  The  relatively  less  sophistication  of  their  financial  markets  has  been  a  blessing  in 
disguise,  as  they  did  not  face  the  brunt  of  the  GFC  and  the  growth  continued  at  an  even 
faster pace. It will be unfortunate if Pakistan is unable to take advantage of this shift in the 
growth paradigm. We are facing several domestic issues that limit our ability to fully attain 
our potential. Our financial institutions and businesses must become more competitive and 
innovative, regulators like SBP and SECP must actively facilitate financial markets, and the 
Government should step up its function of providing infrastructure for growth, most crucially 
to meet the Energy demand of productive sectors. 
As is true in most cases, the challenges provide opportunities as well. As banking regulator, 
the  big  challenge  arises  from  a  two-pronged  dilemma.  We  want  our  banks  to  be  sound, 
profitable  and  efficient  users  of  their  funds,  yet  we  also  want  them  to  increase  financial 
service penetration into unbanked segments of the economy. Interestingly this challenge is 
the biggest stimulus for technological innovation. 
There  is  a  huge  surge  among  the  banks  to  upgrade  their  technology  and  on-line  banking 
services. The ATM network has been expanding and on June 2011 there were approximately 
5200  ATMs  operating  throughout  the  country.  Progress  in  creating  automated  or  on-line 
branches  of  banks  has  been  significant  so  far  and  it  is  expected  that  almost  all  the  bank 
branches  will  be  on-line  or  automated.  Utility  bills  payment  and  remittances  would  be 
handled  through  ATMs,  kiosks  or  personal  computers  reducing  both  time  and  cost.  The 
country’s  payment  system  infrastructure  has  been  strengthened  to  provide  convenience  in 
transfer of payments to the customers. 
The  concept  of  branchless  banking  has  opened  a  new  avenue  for  efficient  channeling  of 
funds.  It  has  the  potential  of  changing  lives  of  those  people  who  are  still  unbanked  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
without any financial services and opened new vistas for the entrepreneurs and households 
of those areas; particularly with the increasing ease of mobile phone usages, it is a preferred 
channel of choice for those customers for transfer of funds. 
Keeping  in  view  its  importance,  the  State  Bank  took  the  lead  and  introduced  Branchless 
Banking Regulations in 2008. These were the first of its kind regulatory initiative and since 
then  other  jurisdictions  have  replicated  them  for  development  of  the  branchless  banking. 
Since  2008,  Branchless  Banking  has  expanded  steadily  with  increased  participation  of 
stronger  as  well  as  new  players.  At  present,  the  agent  network  under  the  umbrella  of 
branchless banking exceeds 20,000 that facilitate around 53 million transactions amounting 
to Rs196 billion (Sep-11). 
Notwithstanding  this  progress,  overall  financial  penetration  in  Pakistan  remains  quite  low. 
The number of borrowers of 3.8 million constituted only 2.3% of the population on December 
2010.  Recognizing  the  overwhelming  size  and  intensity  of  financial  exclusion  in  Pakistan, 
SBP is pursuing the second generation reforms for the financial services industry and has 
placed  high  priority  on  developing  and  implementing  an  effective  strategy  for  financial 
inclusion. 
Enabling  regulatory  environment  has  been  provided  for  lending  to  SME,  Agricultural  and 
microfinance;  thus  banks  and  financial  institutions  are  encouraged  and  enabled  to  expand 
their  scope  of  lending  and  customer  outreach.  Licensing  and  prudential  norms  for  micro 
finance  institutions  have  been  designed  with  particular  emphasis  on  facilitating  growth  of 
these institutions and expanding their outreach to the poor and vulnerable segments of the 
population.  In  2010  &  11  Consecutively,  Pakistan  has  been  ranked  First  in  a  sample  of 
55 countries in the category of “overall regulatory framework and practices for Microfinance” 
by The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) of The Economist Magazine. 
The  customer  base  of  MFBs  (Microfinance  banks)  has  crossed  700,000  whereas  that  of 
MFIs has exceeded 1,300,000 in June 2011. At present 8 MFBs are operating in Pakistan, 
with total assets of Rs21.4 billion. Moreover, SBP is engaged in collaborative efforts with civil 
society institutions, especially involving large NGOs and RSPs in providing complementary 
services, such as social intermediation and capacity building. The regulatory regime adopted 
by SBP for the microfinance sector is that of a facilitator, guide and problem solver. We do 
not  prescribe  for  Micro  Finance  Banks  the  same  onerous  regulations  that  prevail  for  other 
financial  institutions.  We  have  a  Consultative  Group  drawn  from  the  representatives  of 
stakeholders, who guide us in the development of our regulations and prudential norms. 
The  access  of  small  and  medium  entrepreneurs  to  credit  has  been  a  major  constraint  to 
expansion  of  their  business  and  up  gradation  of  their  technology.  There  exists  strong 
evidence  that  SME  expansion  boosts  employment  more  than  Large  Firm  growth  because 
SMEs are more labor intensive. We realize the fundamental importance of the SME sector in 
the economic development of the country. While SME prudential regulations have  been in 
place for years, we are in the process of reviewing and revising the same to make them more 
conducive  for  this  sector.  The  economic  slowdown  has  hit  them  particularly  hard.  The 
advances  to  SME  sector  declined  from  Rs.383  billion  in  Dec  2008  to  Rs.292.5  billion  in 
June 2011. The loan infection ratio of SME sector has also risen and is around 16.8 percent. 
Clearly we need to come up with sound solutions for revival of this sector. In March 2010, 
SBP  came  up  with  the  Credit  Guarantee  scheme  for  small  and  rural  enterprises  with  the 
assistance of GOP and donor agencies that aims to motivate the banks to lend to borrowers, 
who otherwise would not have access to credit under normal circumstances. Several other 
initiatives are also underway. 
Pakistan  introduced  the  Islamic  banking  system  in  2003  to  operate  in  parallel  with  the 
conventional  banking,  providing  a  choice  to  the  consumers.  A  large  number  of  Pakistanis 
have  remained  withdrawn  from  commercial  banking  because  of  their  strong  belief  against 
riba-based banking. These individuals and firms now have the opportunity to invest in trade 
and businesses by availing of loans from Islamic banks and thus expand economic activity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
and employment. The total Islamic banking assets stand at Rs.560 billion (June 2011) which 
is 7.3% of total assets of the banking sector. More importantly, this sector has shown more 
accelerated growth as compared to other segments. Deposits grew by 15.9 percent while the 
overall deposit growth was 9.4 percent (June 2011 data). We are very optimistic about the 
prospects of IB system. 
Now  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  the  role  and  importance  of  Capital  markets  that  mainly 
consists  of  Stock  (equity)  and  Debt  markets.  The  capital  market  provides  an  avenue  for 
raising  long-term  financing  needs  of  businesses  through  equity  and  long  term  debt  by 
attracting investors with a long term investment horizon. Both the banks as well as capital 
markets are vital in ensuring the desired level of liquidity in the system, facilitating efficient 
price  discovery  and  allocation  of  credit  and  diversifying  risks  in  the  economy.  However  at 
present the level of development varies considerably in each market. While banks take the 
lion’s  share  of  the  overall  financial  sector  as  dominant  players  in  money  and  foreign 
exchange markets, the capital market has yet to develop and still requires nurturing to reach 
its  true  potential.  Even  within  capital  market,  the  corporate  debt  market  is  truly  at  nascent 
stage. 
While  equity  markets  typically  tend  to  develop  earlier  than  the  debt  markets  in  most 
developing countries, Pakistan’s economy and financial sector are now at a stage where they 
can support and benefit from a vibrant and efficient debt market. The size of Private debt, or 
Term Finance Certificates (TFCs) in Pakistan, remained around Rs. 74 billion (0.5% of GDP) 
which is paltry compared to the outstanding domestic government debt of PKR 4.64 trillion 
(31.4%  of  GDP).  There  is  clearly  underexploited  capacity  available  to  support  economic 
growth. 
Banks continue to be the main provider of debt in the system. In the absence of an active 
capital markets, the commercial entities fail to procure long term debt financing, and rely on 
short  and  medium  term  loans  from  banks.  Consequently  banks  carry  sizable  maturity 
mismatches on their balance sheets as they fund their advances through short term deposits. 
Since banks tend to lend to only larger borrowers, their portfolio is highly skewed towards 
large sized loan. 
In recent years, with rising NPLs, and increased borrowing by the government, the growth in 
private sector credit has become stagnant. Banks are trying to limit their credit risk and it has 
become more challenging to raise private debt for a business. While some credit uptake may 
take place in the future, it is unlikely that banks will be keen to finance new long term projects 
anytime soon. There is a need for coordinated efforts and support of the Government as well 
as of regulators (SBP & SECP) and banks for the development of a fixed income market that 
is  necessary  to  diversify  the  financial  sector  which  in  turn  would  enhance  its  role  in 
supporting economic growth. 
Future priorities for the banking sector 
The future is obviously not isolated from the progress made so far. We have unambiguously 
designated our future path that includes three main priorities (a) to make our banking sector 
more resilient against exogenous shocks through our macro (systemic) and micro prudential 
framework,  (b)  actively  encourage  technological  solutions  for  financial  access  and  an 
efficient payment system, and (c) address the development needs of the financial markets 
and broaden the array of product and services as well as outreach. 
We  would  like  to  see  our  banks  operating  at  world  class  standards  and  synergistically 
reinforcing  the  real  economy.  We  are  actively  working  at  a  pace  to  achieve  this goal,  and 
despite the current economic challenges, we are confident that we will succeed.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
