Ravi Menon: Monetary Authority of Singapore at forty 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at MAS 40th Anniversary Dinner, Singapore, 28 November 2011. 
 Prime Minister, Lee Hsien Loong 
Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman MAS, Tharman Shanmugaratnam 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Staff  and  management  of  MAS  are  delighted  to  welcome  you  to  our  40th  anniversary 
celebrations. 
1. 
one. 
An anniversary is a good time to thank all those who made the journey a successful 
Economic  and  financial  stability  that  Singapore  has  enjoyed  over  last  40  years  is 
First, we thank the past leaders and staff of MAS 
2. 
result of tireless efforts of generations of MAS officers. 
3. 
The  pioneers,  led  by  our  first  Chairman,  Mr  Hon  Sui  Sen,  and  first  Managing 
Director, Michael Wong Pak Shong, laid the foundations for an integrated central bank and 
financial regulator while navigating a turbulent global environment – the collapse of Bretton 
Woods, global recession, and double-digit inflation. 
4. 
With Dr Goh Keng Swee as Chairman at the start of the 1980s and Mr Lim Kim San 
and  Mr  Yong  Pung  How  as  Managing  Directors,  MAS  adopted  the  exchange  rate  as  the 
principal  tool  of  monetary  policy,  at  a  time  when  the  conventional  tools  were  monetary 
aggregates and interest rates. 
5. 
Under  Dr  Richard  Hu  as  Chairman,  and  Mr  J  Y  Pillay  and  Mr  Lee  Ek  Tieng  as 
Managing  Directors,  MAS  set  about  establishing  the  high  standards  of  financial  regulation 
and supervision that Singapore has become known for, while dealing with crises from Pan El 
to Barings. 
The  arrival  of  then  Deputy  Prime  Minister  Mr  Lee  Hsien  Loong  as  Chairman  and 
6. 
Mr Koh Yong Guan as Managing Director in 1998 launched a wide-ranging liberalisation of 
the financial sector in the midst of the Asian financial crisis. 
7. 
And  MAS  built  on  those  reforms  while  navigating  the  financial  sector  through  the 
2008/2009  crisis  under  the  leadership  of  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong  as  Chairman  and  Mr  Heng 
Swee Keat as Managing Director. 
8. 
We thank the past management and staff of MAS at all levels. They are the unsung 
heroes who made it all possible. Highly professional, and driven by a strong sense of public 
service, they did not hesitate to do what was right even if it was unpopular. 
9. 
In crisis after crisis – be it the speculative attack on the Singapore Dollar in 1985 or 
the global financial crisis in 2008 – staff of MAS worked long and hard behind the scenes, 
keeping our exchange rate strong, our banks safe, and the system sound. 
Next, we thank our partners in government 
10. 
MAS  could  not  have  done  it  alone.  If  Singapore  government  had  run  persistent 
budget  deficits  instead  of  chronic  surpluses,  outcome  would  have  been  very  different. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Experience  from  around  the  world  shows  that  biggest  threat  to  monetary  and  financial 
stability is government that spends beyond its means. 
11. 
A fellow central bank governor told me this story. He had gone to a country in Africa 
to deliver a speech. This was a country ravaged by hyperinflation brought on by mounting 
fiscal deficits. His grateful hosts gave him a momento – a beautifully framed currency note 
denominated in ten million units of the local currency. Ordinarily, he would decline such a gift, 
to save the trouble of having to declare it back home. But on this occasion, he asked for one 
more  of  the  framed  currency  note  and  paid  for  it.  On  reaching  home,  he  sent  one  of  the 
framed currency notes to his colleague at the Ministry of Finance with a short note saying, 
“Please  put  this  in  a  prominent  part  of  your  office  as  I  have  done.  Let  it  be  a  constant 
reminder  to  us  both  that  if  we  do not  do  our  jobs  properly,  this  is  what  will happen  to  our 
country.” 
12. 
We  at  the  MAS  thank  our  colleagues  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  broader 
government. Your fiscal rectitude has allowed us to concentrate on our mission of securing 
price stability. 
13. 
MAS is independent within the government, not of it. Having a Cabinet Minister as 
the non-executive Chairman of MAS has insulated MAS from political pressure. When MAS 
was  set  up  in  1971  and  the  then-Minister  for  Finance  Mr  Hon  Sui  Sen  became  its  first 
Chairman, the World Bank was horrified. They said it was like asking the cat to look after the 
fish!  The  track  record  shows  that  the  cat  has  been  exceedingly  well  behaved.  In  last 
40 years, government has consistently backed MAS. Never has the government pressured 
MAS  to:  ease  monetary  policy;  or  give  a  license  to  a  bank  that  MAS  was  not  inclined  to 
admit; or refrain from taking action against a financial institution that did not behave. 
Next, we thank our partners in the financial industry 
14. 
Managing risk is an exercise in partnership. MAS will never know what all the risks 
are and where they are, as well as the institutions themselves. That is why the boards and 
management  of  our  financial  institutions  must  be  at  the  forefront  of  keeping  their  own 
institutions  safe  and  sound.  That  our  financial  sector  has  remained  so  is  testimony  to  our 
partnership with them in prudent risk management. 
15. 
Our financial industry has been an active partner in crafting regulation. MAS places 
much importance on consulting the industry before setting new rules or standards. We thank 
the industry for giving us useful suggestions and feedback, and sensitising us to unintended 
consequences. And our financial institutions have been a great ally in our efforts to promote 
Singapore as an international financial centre. 
16. 
need not be the case. 
17. 
 
 
 
Let us in Singapore together build a financial industry: 
that is economically purposeful: generating real value-added and good jobs 
that is socially redeeming: creating opportunities for individuals and enterprises; and 
that is ethically sound: acting with integrity at all times. 
The 2008 global financial crisis has given the financial industry a bad  name. This 
Finally, we thank our international partners 
18. 
At  our  genesis  in  1971,  we  had  no  experience  in  central  banking  or  financial 
supervision.  We  learnt  much  from  other  central  banks  –  like  the  Bank  of  England,  Bank 
Negara Malaysia, and the Reserve Bank of Australia. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The IMF seconded to MAS a generous array of advisers, from whom we learnt core 
19. 
skills  in  banking  supervision  and  economic  research.  I  still  recall  the  IMF’s  Article  IV 
Consultations of twenty years ago, when I was a young economist in MAS. To many of us, 
they were the best tutorials in macroeconomic analysis that we have ever had. 
20. 
Being part of the community of central bankers at the BIS was another way in which 
we learnt from the rest of the world. We continue to benefit to this day from the collegial spirit 
of Basel, working together to craft international standards, and co-operating in cross border 
supervision. 
In  closing,  let  me  re-dedicate  on  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  MAS,  our 
Conclusion 
21. 
commitment to our mission: 
 
 
 
 
In this, we look forward to your continued support. Thank you. 
to secure for Singaporeans a low rate of inflation; 
to preserve the purchasing power of our official foreign reserves; 
to keep our financial sector safe and sound amidst crisis and change; and 
to grow Singapore as a vibrant and trusted financial centre. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
