Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Improving the investment climate in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of 
Zambia, at the Foreign Private Investment & Investor Perception Survey 2011 Dissemination 
Workshop, Lusaka, 22 December 2011. 
 Permanent Secretaries;  
Chief Executive Officers;  
Distinguished Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
I would like to welcome you all, on behalf of the Bank of Zambia, the Zambia Development 
Agency  and  the  Central  Statistical  Office,  to  this  Foreign  Private  Investment  and  Investor 
Perceptions 2011 Survey Dissemination Workshop.  
I want also to take this opportunity to thank the companies that participated in the Survey 
which was conducted by the three institutions in the third quarter of 2011. The insights and 
the various valuable revelations on the investment climate in Zambia contained in the survey 
report were only made possible by their co-operation and support to the process. We want to 
thank them most sincerely.  
This  dissemination  workshop  is  built  around  two  objectives.  The  first  one  is  to  give 
representatives  of  respondent  companies  the  chance  to  comment  on  the  contents  of  the 
report. In this sense, this can be considered as a validation workshop from which inputs into 
the  final  version  of  the  report  will  be  received.  The  second  objective  is  to  give  the  three 
institutions  that  commissioned  the  survey  the  opportunity  to  receive  feedback  on  what  the 
community of investors considers to be the main issues in investment. Specifically, it should 
help the Government through Zambia Development Agency to understand the concerns of 
investors and formulate, if possible, better strategies for improving the investment climate.  
As we discuss this report, it is important that we put into perspective some of the reasons 
why  it  was  decided  that  a  survey  of  investor  perceptions  should  be  carried  out.  The  first 
reason has been to do with the fact that the perceptions of investors are a good proxy for 
measuring  the  investment  climate.  This  arises  from  them  being  actively  involved  in 
implementation and are, if you like, at the receiving end of existing investment policy. More 
importantly, existing investors are a country’s most important promoters of investment. Their 
views on the investment climate are more likely to be trusted by prospective investors than 
even  those  of  the  official  investment  promotion  agencies  such  as  Zambia  Development 
Agency.  Some  prospective  investors  may  take  the  view  that  official  investment  promotion 
agencies paint a rosy picture of the investment climate. Existing investors, on the contrary, 
are  presumed  to  present  factual  position  based  on  their  own  experience.  Investor 
perceptions,  therefore,  are  important  because  where  the  perceptions  are  positive,  it  can 
reasonably be assumed that those investors will continue to do business in future or probably 
even expand. Secondly, their positive perceptions can serve as a source of encouragement 
or  comfort  to  potential  investors  who  might  be  contemplating  investing  in  Zambia.  On  the 
contrary, negative perceptions have the opposite effect. They may dispose existing investors 
to disinvest. That action alone may serve as the most eloquent statement that all is not well 
with the investment climate in the country thus risking existing investment and keeping at bay 
prospective investment.  
The general findings of the report fortunately are positive. Political stability and governance, 
economic and regulatory reforms some of which have led to improvements in the business 
environment, macroeconomic gains reflected in robust GDP growth, low inflation, reduction 
in budget deficits and relatively stable exchange rate are some of the elements making up 
the  improved  investment  climate.  In  contrast  to  past  perceptions  which  focused  on  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
volatility of the investment climate, high levels of poverty, absence of institutional governance 
coupled with corruption, the report paints a changed picture. Investors are seeing Zambia as 
offering  a  stable  and  predictable  environment  with  an  elected  government  and  functional 
democracy.  
It  is  this  positive  environment  which  is  seen  as  explaining  why  Zambia  remained  resilient 
through the financial crisis of 2009 and enabled the country to rebound strongly in 2010. It is 
noted in the report that foreign private capital inflows into Zambia posted a strong recovery to 
over US $3.3 billion from a slump of below US $1 billion recorded in 2009. But as we review 
this report, it is important not to gloss over some of the challenges that must be addressed in 
order  to  consolidate  this  positive  environment.  These  challenges  include  infrastructural 
deficiencies  in  transport,  telecommunications  and  energy,  the  small  market  that  Zambia 
presents, constraints to doing business, enduring perceptions of corruption, inadequate skills 
and talent management.  
Although the country has seen increase in investment in many sectors such as construction, 
agriculture and the financial sector, copper remains the  major focus of foreign investment. 
But over-dependence on natural resource wealth and the related commodity prices is not a 
very  sustainable  route  to  growth.  This  consideration  brings  into  focus  one  aspect  that  this 
workshop  should  address,  that  is  the  need  to  encourage  private  investment  across  many 
sectors. The country must diversify in such a way that it reduces its present dependence on 
copper and draws strength from other sectors. We all know the effects of over-reliance on 
the  copper  exports  on  our  economy.  It  remains  a  source  of  vulnerability  due  to  price 
fluctuations in the international market, making the country’s incomes highly volatile.  
Apart  from  private  investment  being  a  stimulus  for  job  creation,  development  of  local 
suppliers, skills transfer; it can be a critical source of long-term capital for driving economic 
diversification.  I  urge  you  to  reflect  on  all  these  issues  so  that  the  final  document  that  is 
produced  from  this  effort  will  be  comprehensive  and  point  to  viable  strategies  that  will 
promote economic diversification through directed private investment.  
The end result of this workshop will be posted on the website of the Bank of Zambia and 
Zambia  Development  Agency.  The  Zambia  Development  Agency  will  incorporate  the 
recommendations  submitted  from  this  exercise  into  its  policy  recommendations  on  how  to 
improve  the  investment  climate  in  the  country.  With  these  few  remarks,  I  wish  you  good 
deliberations.  
I thank you… 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
