Denton Rarawa: The credit union movement in Solomon Islands 
Address  by  Mr  Denton  Rarawa,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands  and 
Registrar  of  Credit  Unions,  at  the  International  Credit  Union  Day  Celebrations,  Honiara, 
20 October 2011. 
 Chairman, SICUL 
General Manager, SICUL 
Directors and Members of Credit Unions 
Representatives of partner organizations 
Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let  me  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  say  a  few  words  at  this  event  to  mark  the 
International Credit Union Day. It is an honour to be here this morning to deliver this address 
as part of celebrating and observing the International Credit Union Day with the rest of the 
world.  
Today the International Credit Union Day is celebrated all over the world in recognition of the 
many  positive  contributions  that  credit  unions  have  made  in  the  lives  of  millions  of  their 
members around the world.  
Our  theme  for  this  year:  “Credit  Unions  Build  a  Better  World”  –  fittingly  highlights  the 
economic  and  social  contributions  credit  unions  make  to  their  members  and  communities 
worldwide.  It  is  important  that  we  acknowledge  the  contribution  of  credit  unions  as  an 
important vehicle for social and economic development. I will return to this theme later in my 
speech.  
Credit unions are owned by the members and aim to provide affordable financial services to 
improve their living standards.  
In  the  words  of  the  founder  of  the  movement,  F.  W.  Raiffeisen,  “credit  unions  must  not 
confine itself to granting loans. The main objective should be to control the use of money, 
and improve the moral and physical values of people and their will to act by themselves”. 
It  is  therefore  important  that  we  view  credit  unions  not  only  as  institutions  where  we  can 
borrow money rather credit unions should be seen as vehicles for (members) to improve their 
livelihoods through;  
 
 
 
financial self-reliance;  
financial discipline – save first before spending;  
borrowings 
opportunities.  
for  productive  purposes 
self-employment 
including 
creating 
Solomon Islands context 
Recently we have started observing the International Credit Union Day in Solomon Islands.  
This was in recognition of the global reach of the credit union movement and to celebrate the 
achievements and contribution of credit unions in the country in delivering financial services 
to their members and the Solomon Islands economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For  many  years,  credit  unions  have  demonstrated  that  they  can  provide  micro-finance 
services to their members in our communities.  
Credit Unions therefore, are an important part of our financial system and have the potential 
of advancing national development that could improve the living standards of people in the 
country.  
Stakeholder commitment 
The  Office  of  the  Registrar  of  Credit  Unions  and  the  Central  Bank  are  committed  to 
supporting and promoting the credit union movement in Solomon Islands particularly through 
its support to the Solomon Islands Credit Union League (SICUL). This is to assist the League 
perform its role in supporting the growth of credit unions in the country. 
The  Central  Bank  has  promoted  micro-finance  and  recently  taken  the  lead  in  promoting 
financial inclusion in Solomon Islands. Our participation in this global event is a reflection of 
the strong commitment to the development of the credit union movement in the country.  
But  the  Central  Bank  cannot  do  this  alone.  It  needs  the  support  of  all  stakeholders  and 
partners to work together to ensure that the credit union movement in Solomon Islands grow 
and prosper. In this connection, I am encouraged by the presence of all of you this morning. 
It  is  an  indication  of  your  support  and  commitment  towards  the  growth  of  the  credit  union 
movement in this country.  
I am also encouraged by the pragmatic presentations and topics for group discussions later 
during the day. This assures me that we all have the interest of the movement at heart and 
that we are constantly discussing and exploring new ideas on how best we can develop and 
progress the movement forward.  
Before I conclude, let me return to our theme for today. We are saying that “credit unions 
can build a better world”. Is this possible? Do we have the clout and capacity to build a 
better world?  
This may seem far-fetched but I think in our own unique way, credit unions can help build a 
better world. They can start by improving the livelihoods of their members, by helping then to 
save money for the future. Or credit unions can assist their members borrow funds to start 
small income generating projects that help raise their standard of living. Once this happens 
successfully, the family of members benefit, in turn their communities benefit and the country 
benefits or the world at large benefits. So yes, credit unions can help build a better world.  
In  advanced  countries,  large  credit  unions  have  become  fully  fledged  commercial  banks 
providing  financial  services  to  more  people  and  businesses  in  those  countries.  Our  credit 
unions in Solomon Islands may not yet be in a position to operate as commercial banks even 
in  the  medium  term,  but  there  is  nothing  stopping  well  managed  credit  unions  from 
expanding in the future. 
This leads me to another area I want to highlight for our attention. Our credit unions suffer 
from  poor  governance  and  weak  management.  If  our  credit  unions  are  to  build  a  better 
Solomon Islands in line with our theme for today, then we have to address our weaknesses 
and  shortcomings.  Some  of  these  issues  may  seem  trivial  but  it  is  important  that  they  be 
addressed sooner than later.  
Acknowledging the challenges 
And  yes,  there  are  challenges  facing  the  credit  union  movement  in  this  country.  But  as 
stakeholders and partners in promoting credit unions in the country, we all need to respond 
to these challenges.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  is  also  important  that  we  return  to  the  original  principle  of  credit  unions  –  the  idea  that 
established credit unions in the country, that is, to harness and build a brighter future for our 
people and the economy.  
Credit  unions  have  a  lot  to  offer  for  their  members  and  the  nation,  if  the  right  legal  and 
institutional frameworks are in place.  
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  let  me  re-iterate  that  given  the  important  role  that  credit  unions  play  in  the 
economy, the Central Bank pledges its continued support to the credit union movement in 
the country. And our co-hosting of this event to commemorate the International Credit Union 
Day today is a reflection of that support.  
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
