Philip Lowe: World prices and the Australian farm sector 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, 
at  the  Australian  Farm  Institute  Agriculture  Roundtable  Conference  2011,  Melbourne, 
10 November 2011. 
 I would like to thank Troy Gill, Ewan Rankin and Trent Wiltshire for assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
Good morning.  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today about some of the challenges and opportunities 
facing the farming sector in Australia.  
Perhaps  more  than  any  other  parts  of  the  Australian  economy,  farmers  understand 
uncertainty. They live with uncertainty about rainfall and growing conditions. They live with 
uncertainty  about  the  costs  of  their  key  inputs.  And,  of  course,  they  live  with  uncertainty 
about the world prices for their outputs. It is this ability to deal with uncertainty that is one of 
the strong and enduring characteristics of the Australian farming sector.  
This morning, I would like to begin by talking a little about some of the uncertainties facing 
the global economy. I would then like to discuss why it is that, despite these uncertainties, 
the medium-term global environment facing the Australian farming sector is quite favourable. 
And  then  finally,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  on  current  conditions in  the  farming  sector  in 
Australia.  
Global uncertainties 
It is clearly a difficult time for the world economy. Financial markets remain captivated by the 
unfolding events in Europe. The authorities there are dealing with a very difficult combination 
of excess government debt and weak banking systems. The problems are compounded by 
the weak growth prospects in the region and increasing fear of widespread contagion.  
This situation is, in part, a legacy of many years in which a number of governments spent 
much more than they raised in taxes, with bondholders being more than willing to finance the 
difference  at  low  interest  rates.  It  is  being  compounded  by  the  fact  that  the  policy  options 
facing  the  members  of  a  currency  union  are  more  restricted  than  those  that  would  face  a 
country with its own currency.  
In preparing the Reserve Bank’s latest forecasts of the world economy, we have assumed 
that  the  European  authorities  do  enough  to  avert  a  real  disaster  but  are  not  able  to  avoid 
periodic bouts of considerable market volatility and uncertainty. There are, of course, a range 
of other scenarios, many of which, unfortunately, are on the downside. This inevitably means 
that there is likely to be considerable uncertainty about the global economy for some time.  
But amongst the gloom emanating from Europe, it is important not to lose sight of what is 
going on elsewhere in the world. In the United States, recent economic data have generally 
been better than they were earlier in the year. It now seems clearer than it was a few months 
ago that temporary factors – including the rise in oil prices and the supply-chain disruptions 
from the Japanese earthquake – contributed to the weak US economic outcomes earlier in 
the year. As is normal though for a country having experienced a financial crisis, the recovery 
in economic activity has been slower than normal. Nonetheless, corporate balance sheets in 
the United States remain in good shape and a pick-up in business investment is under way. 
And  importantly,  there  are  few  signs  that  the  recent  financial  turbulence  has  led  to  the 
significant deferrals of spending on capital goods that caused so much damage in 2008 and 
2009.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In Asia, growth remains firm, although below the pace in 2010. This moderation in growth 
partly reflects a general tightening of macroeconomic policy over the past year in response to 
a pick-up in inflation. Recently, there have also been some indications that the weakness in 
the North Atlantic economies is having an effect in the region, with growth in exports having 
slowed. But taking a slightly longer-term perspective, one encouraging development is that 
domestic  demand  in  the  region  appears  still  to  be  growing  reasonably  strongly.  This  is 
important  because  over  the  years  ahead,  Asia  will  need  to  rely  more  on  domestic 
consumption,  rather  than  exports  and  investment,  to  drive  its  growth.  To  do  this,  further 
policy reforms in the region will be required, but progress on this front is being made.  
So  the  global  environment  is  a  very  complex  one  at  the  moment.  Over  the  course  of  this 
year, forecasts for world growth in 2012 have been revised down from slightly above-trend 
growth  to  slightly  below-trend  growth.  It  is  noteworthy  that  around  three-quarters  of  the 
expected increase in global output is expected to come from the emerging and developing 
countries, a marked change from the past when the advanced economies accounted for the 
bulk  of  growth  in  global  output.  From  Australia’s  perspective,  global  growth  somewhere 
around  average,  or  just  a  little  below,  would  make  for  a  relatively  benign  international 
backdrop. The difficulty for many other advanced economies is that average growth will not 
allow them to make inroads into their very high levels of unemployment and excess capacity, 
and this is likely to create both economic and social strains in these countries for some time.  
The global environment facing farming 
I would now like to look beyond these global macroeconomic risks to the medium-term global 
outlook facing the farming sector. And here the news is more positive.  
In short, farming is benefiting from some of the same underlying forces that have led to an 
improvement in the outlook for the mining sector: namely, the development of Asia and the 
steady  rise  in  incomes  of  the  many  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  who  live  on  the  Asian 
continent. As incomes rise, especially from low levels, food consumption tends to increase, 
and  the  increase  is  concentrated  in  food  with  relatively  high  value  added.  There  is  also 
growing demand for agricultural products for energy production. And this increase in demand 
is occurring at a time when global growth in agricultural productivity has been slow by the 
standards of previous decades.  
This  changing  balance  in  global  demand  and  supply  can  be  seen  in  the  global  prices  for 
agricultural goods, which have increased significantly. As one example, the IMF’s global food 
price index has almost doubled over the past decade, after trending lower in the 1980s and 
1990s (Graph 1). While after adjusting for overall inflation, food prices are still just below their 
average  over  the  twentieth  century,  the  downward  trend  evident  over  most  of  the  past 
100 years  appears  to  have  stopped.  And  looking  forward,  there  are  reasonable  prospects 
that higher prices are not just a temporary development. For example, in its latest review of 
world  agriculture,  the  OECD  is  predicting  that prices  of  a wide  range  of  products over  the 
next decade will be 20 to 30 per cent higher than their average over the past decade (after 
adjusting for inflation).1 
The higher prices of agricultural commodities – together with their greater volatility – have 
attracted the attention of policymakers around the world. Just last week, the G20 issued a 
comprehensive report looking at the reasons for these developments. Its central conclusion 
is that “marked shifts in the physical supply-demand balance … have been the main driver of 
                                                 
1  See  OECD-FAO  (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  and  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations) (2011), OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2011–2020, OECD Publishing, 
Paris. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the price fluctuations over the past ten years” and that “for many commodities, the expansion 
of supply has fallen short of buoyant demand”.2 
Graph 1 
 This buoyant demand for agricultural commodities is underpinned by rising food consumption 
per capita as incomes rise, particularly in Asia (Graph 2). Since the early 1960s, the number 
of  kilojoules  consumed  on  average  per  person  across  the  planet  has  increased  by  almost 
30 per cent.  In  China,  the  rise  in  average  food  consumption  has  been  particularly 
pronounced, with food consumption per capita more than doubling over the past 50 years. 
And in recent times, there has also been a significant increase in average food consumption 
in the world’s least developed economies, after there had been little growth for many years.  
Graph 2 
                                                 
2  See  G20  (2011),  “Report  of  the  G20  Study  Group  on  Commodities  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Mr  Hiroshi 
Nakaso”, November, p 5. See also FAO, IFAD, IMF, OECD, UNCTAD, WFP, the World Bank, the WTO, IFPRI 
and  the  UN  HLTF  (2011),  Price  Volatility  in  Food  and  Agricultural  Markets:  Policy  Responses,  OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Looking at cross-country data, it is clear that higher-income countries consume much larger 
quantities  of  meat  and  sugar  per  person  than  do  lower-income  countries  (Graph 3).  In 
contrast, there appears to be little relationship between the average human consumption of 
grains and a country’s per capita income. However, overall demand for grains does increase 
with income, given the use of grains as food for animals. One implication of these findings is 
that as average incomes increase over time, there is a tendency to consume more protein, 
especially  meat.  Over  the  years  ahead,  this  switch  in  diets  is  likely  to  generate  strong 
underlying growth in demand for a wide range of agricultural commodities.  
Graph 3 
 Another  factor  adding  to  global  demand  has  been  an  increase  in  the  use  of  agricultural 
commodities  for  non-food  purposes,  particularly  for  biofuels.  In  the  United  States,  for 
example, bioethanol production now uses more than one-third of the total corn crop and, in 
Brazil, sugarcane is used extensively to produce ethanol. Globally, the OECD estimates that 
almost one-quarter of total sugar cane production is now used for non-food purposes, and 
this share is expected to increase significantly over the years ahead. Similarly, a substantial 
rise is expected in the use of vegetable oil for purposes other than food (Graph 4).  
Graph 4 
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
These  developments  on  the  global  demand  side  have  coincided  with  relatively  modest 
expansion  on  the  global  supply  side.  In  the  years  prior  to  the  surge  in  demand,  global 
research into improving yields was relatively low, as was investment in expanding the supply 
of arable land. This is one of the consequences of the low level of prices in the 1980s and 
1990s. The result has been that the rate of growth in yields has slowed and there has been 
little growth in the area devoted to agricultural production over recent decades, partly due to 
the urbanisation process in Asia (Graph 5). Another factor affecting global supply has been 
an increase in the frequency of reported extreme weather events including droughts, floods 
and  high  temperatures.3  Export  bans  imposed  by  some  countries  have  also  reduced  the 
supply coming onto world markets.  
Graph 5 
 All up, these fundamental global drivers are reasonably favourable for the Australian farming 
sector.  No  doubt,  global  prices  will  continue  to  fluctuate  in  a  wide  range  and  there  will  be 
problems in individual markets. But the overall external environment is likely to be a relatively 
positive one over the medium term. And this external environment is being driven by some of 
the same underlying factors that have improved the outlook for the mining sector.  
I would now like to turn more specifically to recent developments in Australia.  
Developments in Australia 
To  begin  with,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  high  prices  for  agricultural  commodities  in  global 
markets have flowed through to higher prices for many commodities in our domestic markets. 
However, the higher exchange rate has meant that the increase in Australian dollar prices 
has  been  less  than  the  increase  in  foreign  currency  prices.  In  Australian  dollar  terms,  the 
IMF’s food price index that I showed earlier has increased by 40 per cent since 2004; this is 
substantially  less  than  the  increase  in  foreign  currency  terms,  but  significant  nevertheless 
                                                 
3  See, for example, G20 (2011), p 17. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(Graph 6). The other notable feature of this graph is that the long-run swings in Australian 
dollar  prices  tend  to  be  smaller  than  those  in  foreign  currency  prices.  This  is  another 
illustration of the stabilising effects of our floating exchange rate; when commodity prices are 
high, the exchange rate tends to be high, and when commodity prices are low the exchange 
rate  tends  to  be  low,  smoothing  out  the  fluctuations  in  domestic  prices.  This  provides  an 
important source of stability for the economy as a whole.  
Graph 6 
At the individual commodity level, there have been substantial increases in the prices of a 
number of commodities over recent years (Graph 7). While prices are generally lower than 
earlier  in  the  year,  partly  due  to  problems  in  the  global  economy,  most  are  substantially 
higher than they were a decade ago. This is true for the commodities in this graph as it is for 
lamb prices and the prices of many dairy products.  
 Graph 7 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
This rise in prices is the good news for domestic producers. The bad news is that the same 
forces that have driven up global prices have also put upward pressure on the prices of many 
inputs  used  by  the  farming  sector.  Obvious  examples  here  are  the  higher  prices  of  fuel, 
fertiliser  and  seed.  For  some  parts  of  the  industry,  these  increases  in  costs  have  been  a 
significant constraint on profitability.  
It is also important to recognise that there are substantial differences in the current situation 
across commodities. In particular, the producers of commodities whose global prices have 
not risen have found that the exchange rate appreciation and higher input costs have had a 
significant  effect  on  their  competitive  position  in  global  markets.  One  clear  example  is  the 
wine industry, where the price of grapes internationally has not shown the same pattern as 
that  for  many  other  commodities,  with  the  Australian  dollar  price  of  grapes  falling 
significantly. As a result, the average Australian dollar export price for wine has declined by 
around 40 per cent over the past decade, and production has fallen over recent years. And 
according to its latest assessment, ABARES does not expect a reversal of this trend in prices 
any  time  soon  (Graph 8).4  A  similar,  although  less  dramatic  picture,  is  evident  for  some 
horticultural products.  
Graph 8 
 Turning now to the volume of output, as opposed to the price of output, the recent aggregate 
outcomes  for  the  farm  sector  have  also  been  generally  favourable.  According  to  the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), farm GDP increased by almost 10 per cent in the past 
financial year, boosted by higher levels of rainfall. As one example, the winter wheat crop is 
expected to be a near-record high of around 40 million tonnes this year and this follows a 
good harvest last year. Taking a somewhat longer perspective, farm output has increased by 
around 70 per cent since the mid 1990s, although there have been a number of bad years 
over this period, particularly due to severe drought. 
This combination of generally high prices and high output has provided a substantial boost to 
aggregate income of the farming sector over the past financial year, and another favourable 
                                                 
4  ABARES  (Australian  Bureau  of  Agricultural  and  Resource  Economics  and  Sciences)  (2011),  Agricultural 
Commodities: September quarter 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
outcome  is  expected  this  year  (Graph 9).  After  adjusting  for  inflation,  farm  incomes  over 
these two years are expected to be almost double the average of the previous two decades. 
As I mentioned earlier though, the picture is not uniform across the industry and some parts 
of  the  farming  sector  have  experienced  very  difficult  conditions  over  the  past  year.  But 
overall, the current picture is better than it has been for some years.  
Graph 9 
 Of course, agriculture remains an industry whose fortunes can change quickly from year to 
year.  And  it  is  one  in  which  very  significant  structural  change  has  occurred  over  many 
decades. Given its importance to the overall Australian economy, it is also an industry that 
the Reserve Bank has paid close attention to over the years, and it continues to do so.  
Looking forward, no doubt the fortunes of the industry will continue to wax and wane. And 
like many other parts of the Australian economy, the farming sector will need to continue the 
process of structural change. As I have talked about, this process is being driven, in part, by 
a fundamental realignment of global relative prices due to the re-emergence onto the global 
stage of the populous countries of Asia. This realignment of relative prices is creating new 
opportunities for Australian agriculture. I wish you success in finding those opportunities and 
in taking advantage of them over the years ahead.  
Thank you.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
