Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial inclusion in the north-eastern region (NER) 
and other issues 
Text  of  interview  of  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  with 
Assam Tribune, published on 29 November 2011. 
 1. 
RBI  has  introduced  financial  inclusion  programme  to  cover  more  and  more 
people  under  the  banking  system.  Though  most  of  the  banks  have  been 
carrying  out  this  programme,  the  progress  is  still  slow.  Are  you  happy  with 
the progress of the financial inclusion programme in the region and what is 
your best possible advice to the banks? 
Please allow me to give you the context before answering your specific questions. 
For  the  last  several  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  aggressively  pursuing  financial 
inclusion on the belief and understanding that financial inclusion is a necessary pre-condition 
for inclusive growth. Development experience over the last sixty years from around the world 
clearly  evidences  that  what  the  poor  want  is  not  doles,  but  opportunity  to  improve  their 
incomes  and  thereby  their  quality  of  life.  Financial  inclusion  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
providing such an opportunity to the poor not only to raise their incomes but also to insulate 
their families against income shocks and meet emergencies such as loss of job, illness or 
death in the family. 
Both the Government and the Reserve Bank have taken several initiatives to further financial 
inclusion. We have liberalized branch licencing – domestic commercial banks are now free to 
open branches anywhere they like in towns and villages of up to 100,000 population. Banks 
are also required to ensure that at least a quarter of the branches they open are in villages 
with a maximum population of 10,000. To provide an incentive to banks, the Reserve Bank 
has  also  advised  them  that  their  performance  in  financial  penetration  will  be  a  criterion  in 
giving them authorization for branches in metros and other large urban areas. 
There is a road map for providing banking access to all villages in the country with population 
of over 2000 by March 2012. Across the country, about 74,000 villages have been identified 
as falling within this category. Banking access will be provided either by opening a “brick and 
mortar” branch or through the business correspondent model – although we are encouraging 
banks to set up as many “brick and mortar” branches as possible. 
There are 3250 villages in the north-eastern region (NER) falling into this category of over 
2000  population  with  as  yet  no  banking  facility.  Of  these,  only  about  1031  villages  were 
covered  by  end  September  2011.  There  may  have  been  further  progress  since,  but 
admittedly, the performance in NER is inferior to that in the rest of the country. 
The  north-east  poses  a  more  complex  challenge  for  financial  inclusion  because  of  difficult 
terrain,  lower  population  densities,  poor  infrastructure,  inadequate  communication  facilities 
and law and order disruptions. Regardless, we want to ensure that financial inclusion in NER 
is at par with that in the rest of the country. Towards this end, we have a Special Dispensation 
Scheme for opening bank branches in NER. Under the Scheme, the Reserve Bank provides 
one-time  capital  cost  and  recurring  costs  for  five  years  for  supporting  a  bank  branch.  The 
State Government is required to provide the required premises, residential accommodation for 
the staff and security for the bank branch. The scheme is operated by calling for bids from 
banks for opening branches in agreed centres. Meghalaya was the first state to get off the 
block, but other NE states are now eager to take advantage of the scheme. 
With  that  background,  let  me  now  answer  your  specific  questions.  First,  the  progress  in 
financial inclusion, as you say, has been slow, but it has certainly picked up pace over the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
last several months. Banks across the country, including in the NER, are more enthusiastic 
about financial inclusion than before. 
You also asked about my “best possible advice” to the banks. In fact, I have three bits of 
advice. First, remember that financial inclusion is more than chasing and meeting a target. 
To cover every household with a bank account is necessary, but not sufficient. Banks must 
also ensure that the bank account is active – which means that the household is using that 
account  for  saving,  for  remittance  and  is  also  getting  credit  and  where  necessary  micro 
insurance. In other words, make sure that financial inclusion is “meaningful”. Second, look 
upon  financial  inclusion  not  as  an  obligation,  but  as  an  opportunity.  There  is  enormous 
“banking potential” at the bottom of the pyramid, and first mover banks will be able to exploit 
that potential. So, go on. Move forward boldly and enthusiastically. Third, focus on the north-
east.  This  is  relatively  virgin  territory  as  far  as  banking  is  concerned.  Those  banks  which 
pursue  financial  inclusion  in  the  north-east  will  be  rewarded  not  only  by  business 
opportunities but by a fulfilling experience. 
2. 
Agriculture is the lifeline of the people in the North East. But as far as credit 
flow is concerned, the farmers don’t get credit. The Government of India has 
asked the banks to increase their credit to the agriculture sector in order to 
boost productivity. Are you going to review the performance of the banks in 
this regard? 
Agriculture is surely the life line of a majority of the people in the country including in the North 
East.  Agriculture  is  one  of  the  key  priority  sectors  for  lending  by  banks;  under  the  priority 
sector lending sector, banks are required to ensure that at least 18% of their advances goes 
to agriculture. Even so, we are aware that millions of small farmers, many of them farming at 
subsistence levels, do not get access to credit for a variety of reasons. Simplified Know Your 
Customer  guidelines,  “no  frill”  accounts,  Kisan  Credit  Cards,  General  Credit  Cards  and 
overdraft facilities have all been designed keeping the rural borrower in mind. 
The  Reserve  Bank  also  mandates  that  banks  prepare  Annual  Credit  Plans  whose  roll  out 
which we closely monitor through the State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC). The SLBC, 
comprising banks, the state government, central government agencies, the Reserve Bank, 
NABARD and SIDBI meets every quarter to review the progress of institutional credit flow in 
the State. Progress under the Annual Credit Plan is one of the key issues on the agenda of 
every  SLBC  meeting.  Where  there  is  slippage,  SLBC  initiates  prompt  corrective  action. 
Similar  committees  function  also  at  the  District  and  the  Block  Levels.  These  meetings  are 
also  held  at  quarterly  intervals  and  the  Reserve  Bank  plays  a  pro-active  role  in  these 
meetings. 
Many steps have been taken in the NER to increase credit flow to agriculture. Since Assam 
is  one  of  the  states  selected  under  the  scheme  of  “Bringing  Green  Revolution  in  Eastern 
India”  implemented  by  the  Government  of  India,  the  annual  credit  plan  for  agriculture  for 
Assam has been revised upwards. We want banks to sanction KCCs to all eligible farmers in 
the State. In Assam, block-wise weekly credit camps are being organised to bring more and 
more farmers under the KCC. The loan application format has been simplified and wherever 
land  documents  are  not  available,  the  Village  Panchayat’s  certification  is  considered 
sufficient for grant of a loan. The exercise is being replicated in other NER states as well. 
Credit,  however,  is  only  one  among  several  inputs  needed  for  boosting  agricultural 
production.  Experience  shows  that  the  quality  and  reach  of  extension  services  is  crucial. 
Clearly,  there  is  need  for  greater  effort  at  bringing  extension  services  in  NER  at  par  with 
those in other States. Furthermore, the state governments have to ensure timely availability 
of  fertilisers,  procurement  of  food  grains  at  the  Minimum  Support  Price,  storage  and 
transportation facility, etc. 
3. 
North  East  India  has  very  close  border  with  foreign  countries.  Taking 
advantage  of  porous  border,  fake  currencies  are  coming  to  the  region.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Considering the gravity of the situation, what is the plan of RBI? 
The role of Reserve Bank in addressing the menace of counterfeit notes lies in the following 
areas: 
 
 
Ensuring integrity of banknotes, 
Putting  in  place  proper  systems  for  prompt  detection  and  removal  of  counterfeit 
notes from the banking system, and  
Educating  the  public  through  education  campaigns  in  mass  media  and  through 
outreach  programmes  about  the  features  of  genuine  currency  notes  to  help  them 
easily distinguish genuine notes from counterfeit ones. 
 Towards this end, we have initiated several measures: 
 
The  challenge  for  us  is  always  to  remain  one  step  ahead  of  the  counterfeiters. 
Towards that end, we periodically enhance security features of Indian banknotes. 
We  have  made  it  mandatory  for  the  banks  to  issue  only  clean  and  genuine 
banknotes – both over their counters and through ATMs. They also need to have 
mechanised processing capabilities for branches having daily receipt of 50 lakh and 
above. 
We  released  a  60-second  film,  “Paisa  Bolta  Hai”  made  in  Hindi  and  11  other 
regional languages, including Assamese on Doordarshan and its regional channels. 
This film is intended to spread awareness about how to tell a genuine note from a 
fake one.  
On our website (www.rbi.org.in), we hosted a section called Paisa Bolta hai which 
explains, among other things, features of all genuine Indian banknotes. 
We have also taken measures to improve inter-agency co-ordination (Police, CBI, 
RAW, NCRB, MHA) to tackle the problem in a concerted manner.  
CD  ratio  in  the  North  East  is  poor  compared  to  other  states  in  the  country. 
How to improve the CD ratio and what is your suggestion to the banks? 
    4. 
It is true that the ratio in the NER is lower than that in the rest of the country. Bridging this 
gap is critical to mainstreaming the north-eastern economy into the national economy. Our 
constant and consistent advice to banks has been that they should achieve a CDR of at least 
60 per cent in respect of their rural and semi-urban branches and also that disparities across 
regions and states should be narrowed, if not eliminated. 
The State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) which I referred to earlier is mandated to review 
the  flow  of  credit  in  each  district  with  reference  to  the  CDR  and  draw  up  a  special, 
monitorable action plan for districts with CDR of less than 40%. 
If the CDR of NER is low, what it means is that savings of people in the region are going 
outside to finance investment elsewhere. This is unfair and strictly inadvisable. The savings 
in the NER should be used to finance investment here in the region. This requires responses 
both from supply and demand sides. Our efforts have so far largely focused on the supply 
side. We must do much more to generate demand for credit. The state governments and the 
banks should work in partnership in this regard. The Reserve Bank will be happy and willing 
to promote this partnership for raising the absorptive capacity of states for institutional credit. 
Indian Government is now encouraging trade with ASEAN. But unfortunately 
5. 
there are very limited bank branches along border. The existing branches are 
not sufficient to meet the demand of the customers. Will RBI take any step? 
As  I  have  already  pointed  out  earlier,  at  the  policy  level,  we  have  been  encouraging 
expansion  of  bank  branches  in  the  NER.  If  the  state  governments  come  forward  with 
infrastructure  development  and  other  facilities  along  the  border,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
happy to work with them to improve the presence of banks along the border. Perhaps, the 
NE Council should come up with a viable plan in this regard. 
6. 
Customers  often  complain  about  poor  ATM  service.  Existing  ATMs  are 
inadequate to meet the demand as volume of business is increasing day by 
day. What is your advice to the banks? 
Scheduled commercial banks are no longer required to take Reserve Bank’s permission to 
install off-site/mobile ATMs. As at end March 2011, there were close to 75,000 ATMs across 
the country. 
But you are right. With just about 1800 ATMs, the share of the NER in the total number of 
ATMs is low. You must, however, appreciate that North-East is a difficult terrain. There are 
frequent  power  failures,  and  problem  of  digital  connectivity  and  security.  Lack  of 
infrastructural facilities is a major problem restricting the spread of banking, including ATMs 
in the area. 
Nevertheless,  at  the  policy  level,  we  have  taken  some  measures  to  enhance  access  of 
banking services as a whole to North East region. These include: 
 
To  improve  branch  network  in  the  region,  domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks 
(other  than  RRBs)  are  free  to  open  branches  /  mobile  branches  /  administrative 
offices / central processing centres (CPCs) / service branches in rural, semi-urban 
and  urban  centres  in  North-Eastern  States  and  Sikkim  without  permission  from 
Reserve Bank of India. 
While preparing their Annual Branch Expansion Plan (ABEP), banks are required to 
allocate at least 25 per cent of the total number of branches proposed to be opened 
during  a  year  to  unbanked  rural  (Tier  5  and  Tier  6)  centres.  An  unbanked  rural 
centre would mean a rural (Tier 5 and Tier 6) centre that does not have a brick and 
mortar  structure  of  any  scheduled  commercial  bank  for  customer  based  banking 
transactions.  
The  Committee  on  Customer  Services 
in  Banks  (Damodaran  Committee) 
constituted by the Reserve Bank, has made several recommendations for improving 
banking services in the North Eastern region. (Recommendations are given in the 
Annex for your use). An important one among them is to explore using the back up 
of  alternate  sources  of  energy 
to  ensure  their  continuous  and 
uninterrupted availability in the North East region.  
Despite  strict  guidelines,  a  section  of  fake  microfinance  companies  have 
started their operation in the North East. Hundreds of people are the victims of 
these  microfinance  companies.  As  the  situation  is  very  alarming  are  you 
going to set up any committee to monitor the operation of these microfinance 
companies? 
for  ATMs 
  7. 
No such instance of any fake Microfinance Company cheating the public of the North East 
has come to our notice. However, we are aware that many investors in this region have been 
victims  of  pyramid  schemes  operated  by  some  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies 
(NBFCs)/Multi  Level  Marketing  Companies  (MLM)  and  Unincorporated  Bodies  (UIBs).  We 
are sensitising the police and are creating awareness among the public about the nefarious 
activities of these companies. 
Having said that, I must add that it is important for the public to be discrete in investing their 
savings. The public should verify whether the company is registered with the Reserve Bank 
or  any  other  regulatory  body.  The  public  must  also  be  aware  that  high  returns  are  often 
associated with high risk and they should particularly look askance at promise of excessively 
high returns. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
