Brian Wynter: Stability, interest rates and economic growth 
Address by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, to the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants’ Forum, Kingston, 5 October 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Thank you for inviting me to participate in this forum and to speak on the important issue of 
“Stability,  Interest  Rates  and  Growth”.  The  topic  is  timely  in  light  of  Jamaica’s  economic 
history and the global financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 which is still hurting many economies, 
including  Jamaica’s.  That  crisis  also  resulted  in  the  broadening  of  the  mandate  of  many 
central  banks  to  include  an  increasing  role  in  facilitating  sustainable  growth  and  fostering 
overall financial system stability while focussing on the primary objective of price stability. In 
this regard, I will speak first to Jamaica’s experience with growth, inflation and interest rates 
over the past decade and then discuss the way forward. 
The Jamaican experience 
The  global  recession  during  2008  and  2009exposed  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  Jamaican 
economy and contributed to contractions in domestic output of 3.0 per cent and 1.2 per cent 
in  2009  and  2010,  respectively.  However,  while  the  performance  in  these  two  years  was 
primarily  the  result  of  the  global  recession,  economic  growth  before  that  was  relatively 
modest,  averaging  1.5 per cent  per  year  over  the  previous  eight  years.  The  performance 
over that period was significantly weaker than that of our Caribbean neighbours and other 
emerging market economies, despite our relatively high rates of investment. In this regard, a 
number of studies have been undertaken to explain the paradox of high investment and low 
growth  in  the  Jamaican  economy.  They  all  concluded  that  Jamaica’s  weak  growth 
performance has been due largely to low productivity. This low productivity is in turn linked to 
under-investment in social capital given the high levels of public debt obligations. 
Concurrently, over the period 2001–2010, Jamaica’s annual inflation averaged 12.0 per cent, 
well above that of our major trading partners. This partly reflected the country’s vulnerability 
to  external  and  domestic  shocks,  including  the  impact  of  fiscal  expansion  and  debt 
accumulation. The economy has been particularly vulnerable to periodic episodes of financial 
market  and  economic  instability,  given  the  persistence  of  large  fiscal  and  current  account 
deficits, in other words, the twin-deficit problem. Unsustainable public debt levels as well as 
the large fiscal and current account deficits contributed to bouts of exchange rate instability 
which  impacted  inflation  and  interest  rates.  This  instability  biased  private  investment 
decisions towards short-term, rent-seeking and portfolio hedging activities. In addition, high 
and  variable  inflation  impeded  growth  as  it  was  difficult  for  economic  agents  to  undertake 
proper 
inflationary  and  consequently  unpredictable 
environment, it was impossible to sustain low interest rates as savers demanded a premium 
on their resources. 
long-term  planning. 
In  such  an 
Main elements of the current economic strategy 
To  reverse  the  cycle  of  large  fiscal  deficits  and  unsustainable  debt,  the  Government 
embarked on a comprehensive economic transformation programme beginning at the end of 
2009 and supported by the International Monetary Fund and other international development 
partners.  The  objective  of  the  programme  is  to  secure  long-term  macroeconomic  stability, 
thus  creating  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to  the  low  interest  rates  and  long-term 
investment that are critical requirements for sustainable economic growth. The main pillars of 
the transformation programme are: eliminating the fiscal deficit over a four-year period and 
institutionalising prudent fiscal practices which will translate into sustained reductions in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
debt  to  GDP  ratio;  enhancing  financial  system  stability  and  creating  an  enabling  business 
environment. 
In the main, the Government has made a strong start to the programme, achieving most of 
the  quantitative  targets  under  the  IMF  Stand-By  Agreement.  This,  which  includes  the 
extraordinary success of the voluntary Jamaica Debt Exchange (JDX) in February last year, 
contributed to a trend decline in market interest rates. From the time that a programme was 
agreed  with  IMF  Staff  in  December  2009,  Bank  of  Jamaica’s  30-day  signal  rate  has  been 
reduced from 12.50 per cent then to 6.25 per cent now, a fall of 625 basis points. The rate on 
market-determined 180-day Treasury Bills declined even more sharply by 1,024 basis points 
from  16.80 per cent  in  December  2009  to  6.56 per cent  at  the  most  recent  auction  last 
month. Interest rates in the private money market and on deposits and loans also fell. The 
result is a substantially reduced cost of capital which is needed to encourage increased long-
term investment and growth. 
The  decline  in  interest  rates  is  also  linked  to  the  positive  trends  and  outlook  for  inflation. 
Annual  inflation  declined  to  7.8 per cent  in  August  from  12.6 per cent  a  year  earlier  and  is 
expected to fall further during this fiscal year to settle within the target band of 6.0 per cent to 
8.0 per cent.  For  the  medium-term,  inflation  is  targeted  to  continue  its  fall  towards  the 
average inflation rate of our major trading partners. 
Against this background and given the Bank’s commitment to price stability, we have been 
gradually shifting our monetary policy framework towards an inflation targeting framework in 
order to firmly entrench the achievement of low and stable inflation as the primary objective 
of monetary policy. International examples have demonstrated that low and stable inflation 
ensures  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy  and  contributes  to  sustainable  growth  and 
development. 
Complementary  to  the  Central  Bank’s  objective  of  stable  prices  is  its  role  of  ensuring 
financial  system  stability.  Fortunately  for  Jamaica,  following  the  financial  crisis  of  the  mid-
1990s,  measures  were  undertaken  to  strengthen  the  financial  system.  These  measures 
contributed to the Jamaican financial system remaining well capitalized and liquid throughout 
the recent global financial crisis. The system also remained robust during and after the JDX 
and  as  such  there  was  no  call  on  the  emergency  resources  which  were  set  aside  in  the 
Financial System Support Fund provided by the IMF. Notwithstanding this soundness, there 
is the need to bolster the system against systemic risks. The Government has therefore been 
preparing a series of legislative reforms aimed at enhancing the supervisory and regulatory 
framework  of  the  financial  system.  These  reforms  are  aimed  at  reducing  systemic  risks, 
strengthening  the  prudential  framework  of  securities  dealers,  combatting  unregulated 
financial  schemes  and  improving  the  regulatory  framework  for  collective  investment 
schemes. The changes include amending the Bank of Jamaica Act to give Bank of Jamaica 
overall responsibility for financial stability. These reforms together with the introduction of a 
credit bureau will ensure that the financial system facilitates sustained economic growth. 
However, for price stability and financial stability to be fully effective in underpinning growth, 
there  must  be  an  enabling  business  environment.  In  assessments  of  the  business 
environment,  Jamaica  has  consistently  fallen  short  of  the  requisite  levels.  This  deficiency 
was documented in the World Bank’s 2010 Ease of Doing Business Report and the recent 
Global  Competitiveness  report  for  2011–2012.  To  address  some  of  these  problems,  the 
Government  has  introduced  a  comprehensive  reform  of  the  tax  system  aimed  at  reducing 
distortions, removing inefficiencies and stimulating growth. The reform, which was set out in 
the Green Paper tabled in Parliament earlier this year, will simplify the tax system, widen the 
tax  base  and  improve  equity  mainly  through  the  rationalization  of  tax  waivers,  exemptions 
and  incentives.  The  matter  is  now  before  a  committee  of  Parliament  which  began  public 
hearings  today.  I  am  sure  that  given  the  expertise  within  the  ICAJ,  there  will  be  helpful 
comments from this organisation as a contribution to this absolutely vital opportunity to set 
the path for a future of strong and sustained economic growth in Jamaica. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  an  extended  period  of  almost  unprecedented  stability 
Final remarks 
The  current  fragility  in  the  global  environment  has  made  the  prospects  for  strong  output 
growth in 2011 and 2012 more daunting. However, while continued fiscal consolidation may 
contribute to a moderation in domestic demand, the far-reaching economic reforms that have 
been  set  in  progress  with  exceptional  levels  of  support  from  our  multilateral  partners  will 
provide a foundation for lasting growth. Progress under the economic programme is already 
being  reflected 
the 
macroeconomic  environment  and  improving  business  confidence.  In  addition,  economic 
growth was experienced for the first two quarters of 2011, reversing the trend decline over 
the previous 13 quarters. 
It is worth re-emphasising that inflation is expected to be lower in the second half of the fiscal 
year  given  the  projection  for  slower  international  commodity  price  increases,  a  relatively 
stable  exchange  rate  and  weak  but  improving  domestic  demand.  Further  deceleration  in 
inflation is expected in the subsequent years. Against this background, interest rates, which 
have been at their lowest in almost three decades, can be expected to follow a consistent 
path. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Jamaican  economy  is  in  the  midst  of  a  transition  to  enduring 
macroeconomic stability, low interest rates and sustained growth. I encourage the members 
of the ICAJ actively to support this process. 
Thank You. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
