K C Chakrabarty: Convergence of mobile banking, financial inclusion 
and consumer protection-trend 
Remarks  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Financial  Consumer  Protection  Network  (FINCONET)  meeting,  OECD  Headquarter,  Paris, 
9 November 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Radha Somakumar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ms Ursula Menke, Commissioner, Financial Consumer Agency of Canada and Chair of the 
International Financial Consumer Protection Network (FinCoNet), distinguished participants, 
ladies and gentlemen. 
I thank the FinCoNet for including a special session on Financial Inclusion, Mobile 
1. 
Banking and Consumer Protection in today’s agenda and inviting me to share the Indian 
perspective. Further, given the extent of financial exclusion that prevails in India where out of 
the 6,00,000 habitations in the country, less than 30,000 have a commercial bank branch, 
only 55% of the population have deposit accounts, and the proportion of people having any 
kind of life insurance is as low as 10 per cent, the RBI and the Government of India are in 
recent  times  aggressively  focussing  on  financial  inclusion  as  one  of  the  most  important 
drivers of inclusive growth. 
2. 
In a technology driven financial sector scenario, although intermediation is probably 
more  tiered,  it  should  eventually  result  in  lower  costs,  greater  financial  inclusion  and 
customer  protection.  Customer  protection  becomes  more  important  and  perhaps  more 
difficult  due  to  such  an  intermediation.  Given  this  scenario,  the  RBI  makes  a  conscious 
evaluation  of  the  customer  service  and  financial  inclusion  issues  while  approving  any  new 
innovation in the financial sector in general and payment system in particular. The fact that 
the  RBI  had  appointed  a  high  level  committee  on  customer  service  in  banks  headed  by 
Mr. M. Damodaran and representations from both the industry and the public to examine the 
entire  gamut  of  customer  protection  issues  indicates  the  importance  which  we  attach  to 
customer service and protection. The Committee incidentally has come out with more than 
100 recommendations for our consideration. 
3. 
banking, financial inclusion and consumer protection. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  specific  issues  I  have  been  asked  to  speak  on  viz.  mobile 
A. 
Bank-led vs non-bank led model of mobile banking 
4. 
We were confronted with the question “which model of mobile banking should India 
go for – a bank led model or a non-bank led one?” Protagonists of the non-bank led model 
referred to the success of such models in a few countries like Kenya and Philippines. While 
acknowledging  that  the  mobile  banking  models  in  these  countries  were  perhaps  the 
appropriate solution in the respective jurisdictions, we, in India, came to the conclusion that 
absence  of  a  bank  presence  in  large  parts  of  the  country  cannot  be  solved  by  non-bank 
players  alone.  Having  said  that,  after  a  careful  evaluation  of  the  existing  banking 
infrastructure  in  place,  it  is  our  own  perception  of  the  scope  of  financial  inclusion  and  the 
relative merits and demerits associated with the two models that India opted for the Bank-led 
model. It is perhaps this model which has the capability to deliver the minimum of four basic 
products and services, viz. a savings account with overdraft facility, a remittance product, a 
pure  savings  product,  preferably,  variable  recurring  deposit,  and  an  entrepreneurial  credit 
product which in our perception are minimum qualifying products that any financial inclusion 
model should contain. Further, the bank led model provides regulatory comfort as the banks 
have  been  in  the  business  of  banking  including  money  transfer;  systems  to  adhere  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
KYC/AML  norms  and  customer  grievance  redressal  are  in  place  and  are  under  the  direct 
regulation and supervision by the Reserve Bank of India. At the same time, we did recognize 
the important role which the mobile service providers (MSPs) could and should play in this 
payment  space  given  their  vast  agent  network  across  the  country  touching  the  remotest 
areas where banks did not have a physical presence. We, therefore, enabled these MSPs to 
be  appointed  by  banks  as  their  Business  Correspondents  of  banks  to  foster  a  healthy 
partnership  between  the  two  which  could  gainfully  utilize  the  expertise  of  banks  and  the 
reach of the MSPs. The new partnerships are beginning to happen and the full impact of this 
liberalisation is unfolding still. 
B. 
Regulatory initiatives taken to promote mobile banking 
5. 
The first measure to regulate mobile banking in India was taken in October, 2008. 
Since  then,  we  have  progressively  liberalized  the  manner  and  extent  to  which  banks  can 
conduct  mobile  banking;  alive  to  the  needs  of  the  market,  in  particular,  the  unbanked 
population  and  the  migrant  labour  force  within  the  country.  Today,  banks  in  India  are 
permitted  to  facilitate  funds  transfer  between  bank  accounts  through  a  mobile  phone.  To 
enable such transfers in a cost-effective manner particularly for the small ticket transactions, 
we have waived the need for end-to-end encryption for transactions of value up to Rs. 5000 
(around  USD100).We  have  also  enabled  money  transfers  from  a  bank  account  with  cash 
pay-out to the receiver at an ATM or a Business Correspondent with a cap on the transaction 
value. 
6. 
To enhance the efficiency of the mobile banking system, we had approved a unique 
initiative,  the  Inter  Bank  Mobile  Payment  System  (IMPS)  which  provides  a  centralized 
interoperable  infrastructure  and  enables  money  transfers  between  customer  accounts  in 
different banks through mobile phones in real time. This service rides on the existing National 
Financial  Switch  (NFS)  Interbank  ATM  transaction  switching  infrastructure  and  message 
format – and hence easy for banks to adopt. 
C. 
Present position of mobile banking in India 
7. 
Banks are given one time approval to commence mobile banking based on criteria 
set  by  RBI.  52  banks  have  been  approved  to  commence  mobile  banking  services.  The 
volume  of  mobile  banking  transactions  in  July  2011  was  1.74  million  with  a  value  of 
Rs.1.51 billion, an increase of 223% over the position in July 2010. 
D. 
Do the non-banks, including the mobile service providers have a more direct 
role in the payments space? 
8. 
India was conscious of the fact that non-bank operators need to come in directly as 
well  into  the  payment  space  given  the  size  of  the  country.  Presently  17  non-banks  are 
authorized to issue prepaid payment instruments, including mobile-wallets. These include a 
mobile  service  provider  and  a  mobile  phone  company.  Funds  transfers  from  these 
instruments  have  been  permitted  albeit  in  a  limited  way  to  enable  money  transfers  by  the 
domestic migrant population to their families. 
What are the consumer protection measures taken by the banking regulator? 
E. 
9. 
There is often a debate as to who owns the customer for a mobile financial service. 
The  general  trend  is  to  create  a  win-win  partnership  for  both  parties,  leveraging  their 
respective  capabilities  and  reach.  Since  India  has  accepted  the  bank-led  model,  the 
customers  of  the  banks  get  full  protection  for  effecting  transactions  through  this  delivery 
channel as in the case of any other banking transaction. The lack of visible transaction costs 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and efficiency-based pricing means that the proper price signals don’t reach the end-users 
and, thereby, impede an efficient choice of payment instrument. RBI plays a crucial role in 
rationalising  the  charges  in  its  pursuit  of  customer  participation,  satisfaction  and  adequate 
resolution  of  complaints.  The  customers  have  recourse  to  the  Banking  Ombudsman  a 
customer complaint redressal machinery put in place by RBI. 
10. 
The  three  stakeholders  viz.  the  telecom  operators,  banks  and  merchants  have 
realized  the  value  proposition  and  the  only  sustainable  business  model  is  where  these 
stakeholders work together to deliver true value to customers and effectively share the costs 
saved  and  new  revenues  generated.  Hence,  it  is  imperative  that  all  the  three  while  being 
cognizant of their strengths, do not lose sight of their weakness and find ways to integrate 
their  offerings  without  losing  their  individuality.  The  broad  regulatory  approach  of  RBI  has 
been to permit such entities to provide payment services that are fee based without access 
to  funds  of  the  customers.  Customer  service  issues  have  been  pain  points  in  efficient 
delivery  of  services.  The  use  of  agent  networks  and  the  use  of  SMS  channel  mainly  for 
transactions have associated customer service issues. 
11. 
RBI aimed at customer protection 
 
In particular, I would like to mention some of the important measures taken by the 
Mandating online alerts for all card-based transactions irrespective of the value or 
the  delivery  channel.  This  would  include  transactions  effected  through  the  mobile 
wallets. 
Mandating  a  second  factor  of  authentication  for  all  card-not-present  transactions 
based on information not available on the card. M-PIN, which is mandatory, serves 
as the second factor authentication for mobile banking transactions. 
In  case  of  prepaid  instruments  including  mobile  wallets  issued  by  non-banks,  an 
escrow arrangement whereby the issuers do not have access to the funds collected 
from the purchasers of such instruments. This also ensures that the amount held in 
the escrow account is protected from bankruptcy of the issuer and the card holder 
has prior claim over other creditors. 
Payment system operators have been prohibited from entering into any agreement 
with an agent with an “exclusivity” clause preventing the agent from doing a similar 
business with another payment system operator.  
Mandating  minimum  security  standards  for  mobile  transactions  one  of  which  is  to 
insist on end to end encryption of messages except for small value transactions.  
    F. 
How does India envision the goal of financial inclusion and inclusive growth? 
There are over 600 million active wireless telephone subscribers in India. Reserve Bank has 
acknowledged the importance of mobile banking channel as a critical element to achieving 
inclusive  growth  in  India  and  has  been  taking  several  important  steps,  the  recent  being 
enabling the mobile companies to partner with banks as business correspondents. The twin 
challenge in our country would be to succeed in reducing the use of cash while encouraging 
the  spread  and  use  of  mobile  wallet  and  mobile  banking  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  this 
ubiquitous product. The stance adopted by RBI is to restrict deposit taking activity to banks 
while promoting the branchless banking model for unbanked areas. 
I thank the FinCoNet for giving me this opportunity to speak on an issue of topical interest. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
