Stefan Ingves: Introduction on monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Riksdag  Committee  on  Finance,  Stockholm, 
10 November 2011. 
 Clouds  have  gathered  recently  in  the  form  of  the  financial  unease  and  the  debt  crisis  in 
Europe.  As  Sweden  is  a  small,  open  economy  we  are  affected  in  many  ways  by 
developments  abroad.  Nevertheless,  we  must  of  course  do  what  we  can  to  ensure  stable 
economic development in Sweden. In the face of turbulence abroad we must make sure that 
we maintain order in the Swedish economy. The economic-policy framework in Sweden has 
worked well. We have learned from the mistakes we made in the past and are now in a much 
more favourable position than many other countries. This is something that we must build on, 
and monetary policy is trying to play its part in this.  
Today  I  will  begin  with  an  international  tour  before  returning  to  Sweden.  When  the  tour  is 
complete, I hope that I will have shed some light on the following questions: 
 
 
What is happening abroad and how is it affecting us? 
How can we ourselves facilitate developments in Sweden – particularly with the help 
of monetary policy? 
What is happening abroad? 
Drama on the financial markets of the world 
There have been dramatic developments on the financial markets since the summer. Stock 
markets  have  plummeted  (see  Figure  1).  The  unease  on  the  financial  markets  has  also 
contributed to falling long-term interest rates in Sweden, the euro area and the United States 
(see  Figure  2).  How  does  this  fit  together?  Well,  in  turbulent  times  investors  flee  high-risk 
investments  such  as  shares  and  turn  instead  to  safe  assets  like  government  bonds  from 
countries with a low credit risk. As a result, the price of bonds increases and interest rates 
fall.  
Basically,  the  financial  unease  is  due  to  the  problems  with  public  finances,  above  all  in 
southern  Europe,  and  in  these  countries  government  bond  rates  have  instead  increased 
substantially (see Figure 3). This is because investors, as in the case of shares, believe that 
it  is  increasingly  risky  to  invest  in  these  assets,  so  prices  fall  and  interest  rates  increase. 
There has also been a significant fall in commodity prices recently, which is partly because 
the  emerging  economies  have  also  been  affected  by  the  international  turbulence  (see 
Figure 4). Strong demand from the emerging economies has been an important driving force 
behind the upturn in commodity prices in recent years. 
In  parallel  with  the  unease  on  the  financial  markets,  there  has  also  been  a  considerable 
decline in confidence in the world economy (see Figure 5). So what is it that is causing so 
much unease? Let’s begin by looking more closely at the situation in Europe. 
Europe – from financial crisis to debt crisis 
In  connection  with  the  financial  crisis  of  2008–2009,  problems  relating  to  major  budget 
deficits and sovereign debts became apparent in several countries: primarily in Greece, but 
also in Ireland, Spain and Portugal (see Figure 6). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
One could say that the position of several countries was already too weak when the crisis 
began,  but  also  that  their  situations  differed  somewhat  in  nature.  Greece  had  long  been 
struggling  with  a  budget  deficit  and  a  high  sovereign  debt  (see  Figure  6).  In  the  case  of 
Ireland the sovereign debt was not so large when the crisis began, but the combination of a 
burst  property  bubble  and  a  large  banking  sector  meant  that  the  costs  of  supporting  the 
financial sector became enormous (see Figure 6) 
Since the end of last year, a number of support measures have been implemented by the 
ECB, the EU and the IMF. These measures have been vital to the effort to manage the acute 
problems.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  absolutely  clear  that  neither  the  European  Financial 
Stability Facility (EFSF) nor the other support programmes can do anything about the long-
term problems.  
In the longer term, structural measures are instead required to strengthen competitiveness in 
the  countries  with  debt  problems.  Costs  have  increased  far  too  much  in  several  of  these 
countries (see Figure 7). As these countries have adopted the euro, weakening the currency 
is  not  a  possible  escape  route  for  them,  providing  that  they  wish  to  remain  within  the 
monetary  union.  The  best  way  for  these  countries  to  increase  their  competitiveness  is 
instead  to  employ  what  is  usually  called  internal  devaluation.  This  means  that  wages  and 
prices must increase at a slower rate than abroad for a while. Another important measure in 
this context is to implement reforms that increase long-term growth and productivity.  
There are also various political problems that have to be resolved. Difficult dilemmas arise 
when economic cuts lead to discontent on the part of the public, whose support is needed. In 
this context the politicians also have to meet a number of pedagogical challenges. They have 
to  be  able  to  explain  the  choices  the  country  is  facing  and  the  consequences  of  various 
courses of action. There is a great difference between what you want to achieve and what 
you can achieve. For example, the desired standard of living is a value judgement, while the 
possible standard of living is a result of how well the economy works in terms of the potential 
for  long-term  growth,  how  sound  public  finances  are  and  so  on.  Another  problem  is  that 
interest rates rocket when there is a lack of faith in the ability of the political sphere to take 
action, which further aggravates the problems.  
So,  how  can  one  overcome  these  difficulties?  The  key  is  that  measures  designed  to  put 
public finances on an even keel and improve competiveness are made credible and therefore 
implementable.  In  some  cases,  such  as  Greece,  stronger  institutions  are  also  needed  to 
ensure  that  tax  revenues  are  safeguarded  in  the  future.  The  main  responsibility  for  this  of 
course lies with the politicians in the respective countries. 
In  parallel  with  this  long-term  work,  the  support  measures  designed  to  resolve  the  acute 
difficulties  need  to  continue.  Hopefully  this  will  help  us  to  reduce  the  widespread  financial 
unease. All in all, however, it will still take time to resolve the debt crisis in Europe. 
Slow growth in the euro area, but no recession 
Real  fiscal-policy  improvements  are  thus  required  in  several  of  the  euro  countries  in  the 
period ahead in order to stabilise sovereign debts. We therefore expect growth to be weak in 
the  euro  countries  over  the  next  few  years,  although  the  picture  varies  from  country  to 
country. Germany is a locomotive for growth in the euro area.  
It  is important  to  remember  that  the  euro  area  is still  managing  to  get  along,  even  though 
growth in the area as a whole is not so strong (see Figure 8). 
The United States – weak recovery with bright spots 
The situation in the United States is, like that in Ireland, the result of an overheated housing 
market and dramatic falls in housing prices in combination with structural problems. The US 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy  was  in  many  senses  the epicentre  of  the  financial  crisis.  There  are  a  number  of 
problems that need to be dealt with. 
First, many households in the United States have fallen into difficulties because their debts 
exceed the value of their homes. The households have therefore needed to increase their 
saving, which they have done. As a result, private consumption has grown slowly for some 
time but does have the potential to recover in the period ahead.  
Second,  public  finances  are  weak  in  the  United  States  too  (see  Figure  9).  The  situation 
became  more  dramatic  in  the  summer  when  the  country’s  credit  rating  was  reduced.  The 
political  deadlock  in  the  US  Congress  was  one  of  the  main  reasons  for  this.  A  major 
advantage in the United States is that, so far, government bond rates have remained very 
low  (see  Figure  2).  However,  it  is  important  that  these  problems  are  resolved  so  that  this 
positive trend can continue and so that interest rates do not begin rising as they have done in 
several countries in southern Europe. 
There are, however, a number of bright spots with regard to the US economy. One is that the 
companies are making good profits. We have to go all the way back to the early 1950s to find 
as high a level of profits in relation to GDP as there is now. When confidence returns there is 
therefore every chance that investment and employment will recover. The current very high 
level of unemployment may then fall in the period ahead. 
All in all, our assessment is that growth in the United States will nevertheless be slow in the 
near future, but that it will be stronger than in the euro area (see Figure 8). In this context too, 
it is important to point out that this is a case of weak growth that will subsequently recover 
when confidence returns. 
Global growth holding up 
One consequence of the financial unease and the decline in confidence is that global growth 
will fall this year. Nevertheless, we expect it to be around 4 per cent over the next few years 
(see Figure 8). The reason for this is that global growth will be maintained by a number of 
economies  other  than  the  United  States  and  those  in  the  euro  area,  mainly  the  so-called 
BRIC  countries  (Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China).  These  countries  have  acted  as  growth 
engines for the global economy in recent years and we expect this to largely continue to be 
the case. 
Following this tour around the world it is time to return to Sweden and to look at how we are 
affected by all the things I have mentioned so far.  
How is Sweden affected?  
We  can  say  that  Sweden  is  mainly  affected  by  events  abroad  through  three  channels: 
through  exports, 
international 
dependence of Swedish banks. 
the  financial  markets  and  through  the 
through 
Subdued demand for exports 
As I mentioned in my introduction, Sweden is a small, open economy with a high degree of 
foreign trade. Our exports are affected by the level of demand abroad. We expect the BRIC 
countries to grow at a much faster rate than the United States and the euro area in the period 
ahead.  One  way  for  Swedish  companies  to  adapt  to  this  is  to  try  to  export  to  the  rapidly-
growing  countries  to  a  greater  extent.  We  can  see  that  this  is  something  that  is  already 
happening when we look at how high a percentage of our exports go to different parts of the 
world (see Figure 10).  
However, this is a process that will take time; the BRIC countries still account for only a small 
proportion of Swedish exports. If the trend we have seen over the last 10 years continues for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
another 10 years, then the BRIC countries will have increased their share of Swedish exports 
to 15 per cent of the total, but they will still not have reached even half of the share of the 
euro countries. Europe and the United States will thus continue to be very important export 
markets for Sweden for a long time to come. The conclusion is that weaker growth in Europe 
and the United States will have a negative impact on exports, even though new markets are 
gaining  ground.  Growth  in  Swedish  exports  will  therefore  be  subdued  going  forward  (see 
Figure 11). 
Stock market falls creating uncertainty 
There are now strong international links between the financial markets. Share prices have 
fallen dramatically in Sweden as in a number of other countries (see Figure 1). This in turn 
has had a highly-negative impact on the confidence of Swedish households and companies 
(see Figure 12). We could say that a “wait-and-see” attitude is guiding the households and 
companies  at  the  moment.  The  households  are  saving  more  and  investment  is  weak 
because people are simply waiting to see what happens in the present uncertain climate. 
The banks may find it more difficult to get funding 
The Swedish banks form another channel through which the increasing unease abroad may 
have an impact in Sweden. In this connection it is worth pointing out that the Swedish banks 
have little direct exposure to the countries in southern Europe that are experiencing public-
finance problems and that they are well capitalised compared to banks in other countries. So, 
what are the risks? 
Traditionally, the Swedish banks’ lending has been largely funded by deposits from Swedish 
bank  customers.  However,  in  recent  years  an  increasing  share  of  the  funding  has  instead 
taken  the  form  of  market  funding,  often  in  foreign  currencies  (see  Figure  13).  A  greater 
degree of stress in the financial system may reduce the effectiveness of these markets. This 
may in turn affect both access to and the price of the Swedish banks’ market funding, even if 
the  cause  of  the  stress  lies  outside  Sweden.  The  Riksbank  is  monitoring  developments 
closely,  but  our  assessment  is  that  at  the  moment  there  are  no  funding  problems  for  the 
Swedish banks on the international capital markets.  
To sum up we can say that the turbulence around the world will have a dampening effect on 
Swedish growth in the period immediately ahead. The clearest signs of this so far are the 
weak stock market in Sweden and the dramatic decline in the confidence of the households 
and companies, which is reducing demand. 
How can we ourselves facilitate developments in Sweden? 
We have laid stable foundations – which we must build on  
Although we are dependent on what happens abroad, we must do what we can to keep the 
economy  on  an  even  keel  in  Sweden.  We  can  compare  the  situation  to  our  own  personal 
finances. Various external circumstances that we have no control over can undermine our 
financial situation. However, if we have had a firm grip on our personal finances before this 
happens, we will be better prepared and have a better chance of managing the situation.  
But how can we relate this to the Swedish economy as a whole? If we return to Figure 7 we 
can see that labour costs over the last 10 years or so have increased more slowly in Sweden 
than  in  the  euro  area.  We  can  also  go  back  to  Figure  9.  Here  we  can  see  that  while 
sovereign  debts  have  increased  considerably  in  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  in 
recent  years,  Sweden’s  sovereign  debt  has  decreased  more  or  less  continuously  over  the 
last 15 years.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This  indicates  that  the  economic-policy  framework  in  Sweden  has  worked  well.  The 
framework reflects the lessons we have learned from our own problems in the past, not least 
during the 1970 and 1980s, and we should build on this. The framework largely addresses 
three areas: fiscal policy, wage formation and monetary policy. 
The  first  area,  fiscal  policy,  had  to  be  changed  following  the  crisis  of  the  1990s  as  the 
problems  with  Sweden’s  public  finances  became  acute.  At  the  same  time  as  austerity 
packages were implemented, great importance was attached to not ending up in the same 
situation again. The introduction of surplus targets, expenditure ceilings and the stipulation 
that  municipalities  should  have  balanced  budgets  also  contributed  to  increased  stability  in 
public  finances.  A  number  of  important  reforms  were  also  implemented  that  significantly 
improved the budget process. Figure 14 clearly shows the positive effects of all this on the 
budget.  
The second area is wage formation, which has also improved considerably since the mid-
1990s. The Industrial Agreement and the setting up of the National Mediation Office are two 
important factors behind this improvement. Nominal wage increases have been significantly 
lower over the last 15 years than in the 1980s. The development of real wages shows how 
much of the wage increases are left when a deduction is made for inflation. Real wages have 
increased by an average of 2.5 per cent since 1995, while they did not increase at all during 
the 1980s (see Figure 15). In real terms, wages have thus developed much better over the 
last 15 years than during the 1980s. 
The third area relates to inflation and monetary policy. Monetary policy was also changed in 
the light of lessons learned in the past, in this case during the periods of high inflation in the 
1970s  and  1980s.  An  explicit  inflation  target  and  an  independent  Riksbank  have  had  a 
positive impact. Inflation has been low and stable since the mid-1990s and has largely been 
in  line  with  the  target  (see  Figure  16).  The  success  of  the  inflation-targeting  policy  is  also 
linked to the fact that fiscal policy and wage formation have been much more effective since 
the mid-1990s.  
We have thus learned from the past, and as a result Sweden’s economy is well equipped to 
meet  the  future.  It  is  important  that  we  make  the  most  of  this  strong  initial  position  in  the 
period ahead, and monetary policy must of course play its part in this.  
So, what course can we expect development to take in Sweden in the future, and how can 
monetary policy help to smooth the way? 
Growth in Sweden will gradually recover… 
In the wake of the financial crisis there were dramatic fluctuations in production in 2009 and 
2010, with a fall in GDP of over 5 per cent followed by an increase of over 5 per cent (see 
Figure 17). The National Accounts indicate that growth continued to be strong in the first half 
of this year, but not as strong as in 2010. As I have mentioned already, “soft data” in the form 
of  confidence  levels  and  so  on  looks  much  weaker  as  a  result  of  the  global  unease.  Our 
assessment is therefore that there will be a substantial slowdown in growth next year (see 
Figure 17). 
Thereafter we expect growth to increase towards 2.5 per cent, which historically speaking is 
a rather normal level (see Figure 17). An important driving force for an increase in growth in 
the  period  ahead  is  that  the  households  have  a  high  level  of  saving  to  start  with  (see 
Figure 18).  Saving  is  expected  to  remain  high  in  the  immediate  future  due  to  the  unease 
around  the  world,  but  as  unease  subsides  it  is  likely  that  the  households  will  reduce  their 
saving. Consumption may then increase at a relatively good rate. 
The labour market has improved and unemployment has fallen rather rapidly since the end of 
2009.  Our  assessment  is  that  this  improvement  will  now  slow  down.  Unemployment  will 
continue  to  fall,  but  at  a  slower  rate.  Our  assessment  is  that  unemployment  will  reach 
approximately  6.5  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the  forecast  period  (see  Figure  19).  A  lasting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
reduction in the level of unemployment also demands that wage formation is effective so that 
costs in the business sector do not increase too rapidly.  
…and inflation can approach the target 
A new round of collective bargaining has now begun and the wage demands presented so 
far are higher than those presented in 2010. The Riksbank’s assessment is that wages will 
rise by almost 3.5 per cent per year in the years ahead. This is compatible with the inflation 
target. The assumption behind our forecast is that wage formation will work as well as it has 
over the last 15 years. Responsibility for this lies with the social partners. 
The krona is an important factor for inflation in Sweden as it determines how prices abroad 
are “translated” into import prices in Sweden. Historically the krona has weakened in periods 
of financial unease as investors often move their money from small currencies like the krona 
to  the  dollar  and  the  euro.  However,  the  krona  has  weakened  only  moderately  this  time, 
despite the financial unease (see Figure 20). We expect the krona to gradually strengthen as 
the  financial  unease  subsides.  The  combination  of  falling  commodity  prices  internationally 
and a stronger krona means that inflationary pressures from abroad will be rather low in the 
period ahead. 
CPI  inflation  still  reflects  the  effects  of  the  previous  repo-rate  increases  on  housing  costs. 
Various measures of underlying inflation show that inflationary pressures are moderate (see 
Figure  21).  As  economic  activity  recovers,  underlying  inflation  will  gradually  rise  towards 
2 per cent in the years ahead. 
Continued low repo rate will facilitate stable development 
Our forecast for the repo rate is that it will remain unchanged until sometime next year and 
that monetary policy will continue to be expansionary — the repo rate is low in an historical 
perspective (see Figure 22). This will contribute to a gradual normalisation of inflation. Apart 
from stabilising inflation, monetary policy also aims to stabilise the real economy. Stabilising 
the real economy means, in more concrete terms, stabilising resource utilisation, that is the 
deviation of production and employment from long-term levels. Resource utilisation can be 
measured in many ways, but our overall assessment is that it is somewhat below normal at 
present.  An  ongoing  expansionary  monetary  policy  may  also  help  to  normalise  resource 
utilisation  during  the  forecast  period.  As  resource  utilisation  and  inflationary  pressures 
increase, the need for an expansionary monetary policy will decline. There will be a need to 
gradually  raise  the  repo  rate  to  bring  inflation  close  to  the  target  and  to  stabilise  resource 
utilisation.  
As the situation is highly uncertain, however, things may develop in a different direction than 
we expect. We see two main risks at present. 
First, our forecast presupposes that it will be possible to manage the debt crisis in Europe 
so that the acute problems can be resolved. There is a risk that the problems will continue 
and that the debt crisis in Europe will get worse, which may lead to weaker economic activity 
in Sweden and abroad. If this proves to be the case, monetary policy in Sweden will have to 
be  more  expansionary  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  more  severe  crisis.  Conversely,  it  is 
possible that political agreements will be reached fairly soon and that the financial unease 
will subside more quickly than we expected. This could lead to stronger economic activity in 
Sweden and abroad than expected, and it will then not be necessary for the repo rate to be 
so low. 
Secondly,  the  outcomes  for  inflation  abroad  have  been  surprisingly  high  recently,  despite 
falling  commodity  prices  and  weaker  economic  activity.  There  is  therefore  a  risk  that  the 
situation  abroad  will  be  characterised  by  economic  stagnation  and  high  inflation,  so-called 
stagflation. Central banks abroad may then be faced with a very difficult balancing act. The 
risk of further weakening economic activity will reduce the scope for raising policy rates to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
combat  inflation,  which  may  result  in  inflation  continuing  to  be  high.  All  in  all,  there  is 
therefore a risk that inflation abroad may not fall to the extent we expect. This will lead to 
higher inflation in Sweden too through higher import prices. A higher repo rate with then be 
needed in order to keep inflation close to the target. 
Conclusion 
Today  I  have  spoken  about  the  situation  in  Sweden  and  abroad:  partly  about  our 
dependence  on  events  abroad  and  partly  about  what  we  ourselves  can  do  to  smooth  the 
course of development in the Swedish economy. I have previously described the crisis in the 
early 1990s like this: “Things were quite OK abroad, but Sweden was not OK”. At the time of 
the crisis in 2008 the situation was the opposite: “Things were not OK abroad, but Sweden 
was OK”. 
Recent  developments  abroad  have  been  marked  by  great  uncertainty.  Sweden  is  highly 
affected by this uncertainty. With the help of monetary policy we can do all that we can to 
promote  a  stable  development  of  the  Swedish  economy:  that  is  ensure  that  inflation  stays 
close to the target and that the development of the real economy is as stable as possible. 
When we look back at how things went in a few years’ time we should be able to continue to 
say that, despite the uncertainty abroad, “Sweden was OK!”  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
 12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
 14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
 16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
