Christian Noyer: “The Brussels agreement is sound” – interview with  
Le Télégramme 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, in Le Télégramme, published on 
15 December 2011. 
 Does the Brussels agreement protect the euro area over the long term?  
I believe it is a sound agreement. It includes rules of governance that had been missing up 
until now. Of course, we had the Stability and Growth Pact, but it was of an inadequate legal 
standard,  and  it  was  not  complied  with  as  it  should  have  been.  Setting  up  clear  rules  of 
governance that are sound in substance and that will be integrated into the constitutions and 
organic  laws  of  Member  States  is  a  good  solution  that  should  provide  us  with  lasting 
protection. 
What would be the consequences of France losing its triple-A rating?  
I do not know what rating agencies will do. What I see is that these agencies have managed, 
through their criticisms, to weaken the positive sentiment that prevailed on markets after the 
Brussels  summit.  In  addition,  downgrading  France’s  credit  rating  does  not  seem  justified 
when considering economic fundamentals. Otherwise agencies should start by downgrading 
the United Kingdom which has larger deficits, the same level of debt, more inflation and a 
lower growth rate than us as well as slumping credit. 
What is the legitimacy of these rating agencies? 
Agencies  have  become  totally  incomprehensible  and  irrational.  They  make  threats,  even 
though Member States have taken strong and positive decisions. Rating agencies behave as 
if  nothing  had  happened.  It  may  seem  that  agencies  are  no  longer  a  useful  guide  for 
investors. 
Would you say that their judgments are based on political criteria? 
Indeed,  in  the  arguments  they  develop,  there  are  more  political  arguments  than  economic 
ones. 
Credit  agencies  have  downgraded  the  ratings  of  three  large  French  banks.  Are  our 
banks undercapitalised? 
No,  they  are  very  well  capitalised,  in  particular  compared  to  their  European  and 
US counterparts.  The  importance  of  this  downgrade  should  not  be  overstated  especially 
since rating agencies have recently downgraded most large banks in developed countries. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  capital  buffers  of  our  banks  are  largely  adequate  in  relation  to 
levels  in  the  global  banking  system.  It  is  true  that  we  are  asking  them  to  enhance  their 
soundness in order to meet the new regulatory requirements that have been agreed at the 
European and global level. Banks are doing this through their own resources and needless to 
say without State aid. That is why I have no concerns about the French banking system.  
Should banks’ customers, companies and individuals, fear a credit crunch?  
No, and the figures bear it out. French banks’ lending activities remain very robust: up 8% for 
mortgage  lending,  up  5.6%  for  corporate  lending  and  up  5.1%  for  lending  to  SMEs.  It  is 
precisely their retail banking business that makes them sound and profitable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Is France condemned to undergo a period of prolonged austerity?  
France  must  be  extremely  rigorous  in  the  management  of  its  public  finances.  A  balanced 
budget  must  rapidly  be  restored,  which  presupposes  in  particular  a  structural  reduction  in 
government spending. Like many other countries, we have been living above our means for 
too many years. We need to stop accumulating debt. Growth will return if confidence does. 
And to reinstate confidence, we must guarantee that our public finances will be consolidated.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
