Iqbal Belath: The importance of education in transforming Mauritius 
Address by Mr Iqbal Belath, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Annual 
Convocation  Ceremony  of  the  University  of  Technology,  Mahatma  Gandhi  Institute,  Moka, 
8 November 2011. 
 Dr Sadasivam Reddi, GOSK, President University of Technology, Mauritius 
Mr Dharmanand Fokeer, GOSK, Director General, University of Technology, Mauritius 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen 
Let me first of all thank Mr Fokeer for his kind introduction. 
It is a great honour and privilege for me to be invited to speak at the Graduation Ceremony 
for the graduands of the School of Business, Management and Finance. It is indeed a great 
day for all of us – for you, fine young men and young women, who will be rewarded for your 
many  accomplishments  in  the  course  of  the  last  three  years,  and  for  us,  the  privileged 
witnesses  of  your  crowning  moment.  It  is  also  a  great  moment  for  your  parents  and  dear 
ones who must be feeling very proud of your academic achievements.  
You, graduands, must be experiencing a feeling of delight and pride as you prepare yourself 
to cross the first phase of your academic construction. Like all your peers before you, you 
may  also  be  looking  forward  to  take  on  the  world,  curing  it  of  all  its  poverty,  ailments, 
injustices and miseries. 
The country you are living in today has gone through a lot of changes. Let me quickly retrace 
this transformation. At the time Mauritius was acquiring its independence, our country was in 
depression,  suffering  from  a  mass  exodus  of  its  best  brains  whether  from  the  banking 
profession or from the teaching profession – in fact all those who could afford it were leaving 
the  country  for  other  lands  –  for  greener  pastures.  The  unemployment  rate  had  reached 
unprecedented levels. Notwithstanding the famous comment that the Cambridge economist 
and  Nobel  Prize  winner,  James  Meade  had  made  on  Mauritius,  an  internal  World  Bank 
memo  mentioned  the  “intractable  nature  of  Mauritius’  economic  problems”  and  painted  a 
“rather gloomy picture about the development prospects” of the country.  
After independence, those of us who had opted to stay, worked very hard to give our children 
a brighter future. Those who understood the value of a formal education sent their children to 
school and those who had the means sent them abroad to pursue higher education. With the 
setting up of our first university in Réduit in 1965, more youngsters were able to get a tertiary 
education and we were able to produce a pool of highly-educated workers.  
Over  four  decades,  we  have  moved  from  a  USD  200  GDP  per  capita  economy  to  a 
USD 10,000  GDP  per  capita  economy.  We  have  today  an  unemployment  rate  of  around 
8 per  cent  which  we  do  not  consider  worrisome  when  we  compare  ourselves  with  what  is 
happening  in  some  advanced  economies.  This  does  not  imply  that  we  are  complacent  to 
have  about  8%  of  our  working  population  without  a  job.  Real  GDP  growth  has  averaged 
more  than  5  percent  since  1970.  Imports  and  exports  have  boomed.  Efforts  at  economic 
diversification have been successful, allowing the country to move from sugar to textiles to a 
broader  service  economy.  Mauritius’  reliance  on  trade-led  development  has  helped  the 
country achieve respectable levels of export performance. Mauritius is often referred to as a 
successful model in the African region. 
Mauritius therefore offers you, young ladies and young gentlemen, more opportunities now 
than our forefathers had at the time, and a standard of living that they could only dream of. I 
cannot foretell what the future has in store for you but what I can tell you is that the Mauritius 
you are going to step into after your graduation today is a transformed Mauritius. No doubt 
that you and your generation have also had to face and are facing challenges in your daily 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
life. What I want to highlight is that, you are inheriting a country with much improved footings; 
a country that does not encourage the exodus of its best brains; on the contrary, it invites 
citizens from other countries to consolidate its development.   
Let me therefore congratulate you: you have made a good choice when you invested in your 
further education and you are today well equipped to face the challenges of a modern world 
in turmoil. But mind you, you will have to put in the efforts to develop your talents.  Hard work 
is  not  always  a  guarantee  to  success  but  it  does  give  you  a  chance.  The  ingredients  of 
success  in  life  amount  to  being  adequately  qualified,  adequately  skilled,  taking  calculated 
risks  and  being  at  the  right  place  at  the  right  time.  Your  degree  is  only  the  foundation  on 
which you will have to build, stone by stone, the edifice of a successful career and life. You 
have to make use of every opportunity to develop and perfect your talents. 
You should ask yourself: what should your responsibilities be as a new graduate? First of all 
your responsibility lies with our country – your concern should be to continue to gain on the 
hard-won gains by our forebears. Our nation needs its capable young countrymen to take it 
forward and to continue to develop it into a progressive, prosperous and harmonious society 
for future generations. 
Once you step outside the portals of the University, what is awaiting you? Outside is the real 
world – very different from the academe world. You will certainly be looking for a job, a job 
that  you  feel  is  appropriate  for  the  kinds  of  competence  and  skills  that  you  have  acquired 
during those years of study. Are you well-prepared to face the jungle that the workplace can 
sometimes be, a jungle where competition is raging? Would you want to join the fight for a 
handful of positions at the top regardless of the means to reach there? Or would you rather 
choose to earn your credibility the hard way? Gone are the days when you can retire on the 
same  job.  In  a  work  environment  that  becomes  increasingly  demanding,  you  will  face 
tremendous  challenges.  Today’s  jobs  require  multi-skilling,  multi-tasking  and  lifelong 
learning.  Newton  D.  Baker1  once  said:  “The  man  who  graduates  today  and  stops  learning 
tomorrow is uneducated the day after.” How very true in today’s world? 
The world is now a very uncertain place. Changes are happening every minute – the very 
foundations on which the global economic and financial system rest are being shaken. At the 
same  time,  the  world  demands  more  transparency,  more  accountability  and  good 
governance. Some view this with misapprehension and fear. But for others, what an exciting 
time it is! I am of those who believe that something great will come out of all the turmoil that 
the world is presently going through. I am reminded of a passage in Orson Wells’ The Third 
Man,  which  refers  to  the  reign  of  the  Borgias2  in  Italy.  I  quote  the  passage,  with  all  due 
respect  to  the  Swiss  people:  “In  Italy  for  thirty  years  under  the  Borgias  they  had  warfare, 
terror, murder and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and the 
Renaissance.  In  Switzerland,  they  had  brotherly  love;  they  had  five  hundred  years  of 
democracy and peace – and what did that produce? The cuckoo clock!” The analogy stops 
short, of course, of the warfare, terror, murder and bloodshed. The point I wish to make here 
is that even when things seem at their worst, great things can happen. As they say, you can 
only see the stars when it is dark. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  we  will  be  looking  at  a  “brave  new  world”  in  which  there will  be  less 
inequity and disparity among nations. Both Europe and the US are at defining moments in 
their history. There are indeed many indicators of change that suggest that they are about to 
cross  –  or  may  even  have  crossed  –  watersheds  in  their  economic  history.  The  dollar  is 
                                                 
1  Newton D Baker was the US Secretary of War during World War I 
2  The Borgias, descendants of a noble line, originally from Valencia, Spain, that established roots in Italy and 
became  prominent  in  ecclesiastical  and  political  affairs  in  the  1400s  and  1500s.  The  house  of  the  Borgias 
produced  two  popes  and  many  other  political  and  church  leaders.  Some  members  of  the  family  became 
known for their treachery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
steadily being eroded as the world’s sole or dominating reserve currency. The days are gone 
when  85  per  cent  or  more  of  international currency  reserves  were  held  in  “greenbacks”,  a 
more realistic figure today would be around 60 per cent. The growing surreal indebtedness of 
the  US  is  putting  into  question  the  “safe  haven”  feature  of  the  dollar.  The  dream  of  Jean 
Monnet  and  Robert  Schuman’s  of  a  “United  States  of  Europe”  is  turning  into  a  nightmare. 
Looking beyond what is happening on the two sides of the Atlantic, we see Asia and Latin 
America  advancing  to  centre  stage.  And  the  new  mantra  of  investors  –  Africa’s  Success 
Story,  the  rise  of  the  Economic  Lions  of  Africa  –  speaks  volumes  about  the  “newly 
discovered” potential of Africa. Who would have forecast that Europe would turn to China for 
assistance. All these changes pose innumerable challenges for policymakers – for a central 
banker most certainly – decision makers, and implementers of government policies as well 
as  for  providers  of  goods  and  services.  But  what  a  fantastic  time  to  be  around!  As  new 
graduates, you can bring your contribution to the making of a new world order. You decide 
whether you wish to be passive onlookers or proactive players in this drama. 
Let me conclude by sharing with you some of the lessons that the crisis has taught us and 
which I believe will serve you well in your future career: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
I again congratulate you all for your academic achievement. The world is yours. Remember 
that it’s up to you to make a difference – you have the choice to be a passive onlooker or a 
proactive player. Remember your success, you owe it also to your parents who have given 
their support and for being present by your side, as you burned the midnight oil. 
I wish you all a very successful life.  
Thank you. 
Do not be too greedy. 
Do not abuse of the system. 
Do not take short cuts. 
Earn a good reputation – you cannot buy an excellent reputation, you must earn it. 
Always have a positive and proper mindset  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
