Josef Bonnici: Lessons from the crisis 
Address by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the annual 
dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, 25 November 2011. 
 Hon. Minister, Excellencies, Members of the Institute, Distinguished Guests 
I would like to thank the Malta Institute of Financial Services for inviting me to address this 
distinguished audience. Mr President, I am aware of your Institute's leading role in banking 
and financial education in Malta and of its endeavours to establish forms of collaboration with 
other  educational  institutions  with  the  aim  of  increasing  the  variety  of  courses  offered  to 
professional  staff  within  the  financial  services  industry.  I  understand  that  a  notable 
development over the last year was the relationships you established with the University of 
Bangor  and  other  strategic  partners  in  order  to  launch  a  Chartered  Banker  MBA  course 
locally. This is certainly an achievement and I augur you further success in expanding your 
reach  to  all  members  of  the  financial  community  through  the  activities  that  your  Institute 
organises and the training facilities it provides. 
This evening I shall dwell on the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, a topic which has 
persistently made news headlines over the past 18 months, and unfortunately continues to 
do  so  today.  There  are  lessons  from  this  period  of  crisis  that  are  relevant  for  both 
policymakers and the banking community. 
The origins of the crisis 
We  are  all  aware  that  the  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  in  the  US  during  2007  and  the 
subsequent  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008  sent  shock  waves  to  the 
financial markets that plunged the global economy into the most severe recession since the 
Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  However,  although  these  two  events  did  trigger  off  the 
international  financial  crisis,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  was  largely  home-grown, 
characterised  by  cases  of  excessive  risk-taking  by  banks,  imprudent  fiscal  policies  on  the 
part of a number of governments as well as shortcomings in the institutional framework of 
Economic and Monetary Union. 
With the adoption of the euro, most euro area countries benefitted from the greater credibility 
that  the  monetary  policy,  decided  collectively  by  the  Eurosystem,  offered  within  a  legal 
framework  that  ensured  its  independence  and  promoted  price  stability  as  its  primary 
objective. In addition the advent of the single currency also meant a significant step forward 
towards the completion of the EU single market, which was viewed as an important element 
in bringing about faster economic growth in the European Union. 
The  establishment  of  the  euro  area  led  to  a  significant  reduction  in  both  nominal  and  real 
interest  rates,  especially  for  the  fiscally  weaker  member  states,  as  these  converged  to 
German benchmark levels.1 This reduction in interest rates, coupled with stronger economic 
growth expectations in the euro area, gave rise to faster growth in, and cheaper interest rates 
on, credit to both households and non-financial corporations in many of these countries.  
It is instructive to compare the underlying causes of the sovereign debt crisis in Ireland with 
that in Greece. In the case of Ireland, it was the financial system and bank lending policies 
that drove the country into crisis, which then engulfed the government’s finances. Excessive 
                                                 
1   See  L.  Bini  Smaghi,  “Eurozone,  European  crisis  and  policy  responses”,  Goldman  Sachs  Global  Macro 
Conference – Asia 2011, 22 February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
risk-taking  by  the  banks  led  to  strong  credit  growth  and  the  consequent  surge  in  house 
prices.  The  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble  not  only  had  a  severe  impact  on  the  banking 
sector’s  balance  sheet  but  also  led  to  a  rapid  deterioration  in  government  finances.  Tax 
revenue flows, particularly from construction activity, dried up, while the banking system was 
hit  by  its  heavy  exposure  to  the  property  market.  This  brought  about  an  extremely  rapid 
deterioration in public finances as the government bailed out the banking system. 
In the case of Greece, it was the government’s fiscal irresponsibility that was the root cause 
of  the  crisis  that  then  had  dire  consequences  for  the  domestic  financial  system.  Poor 
governance, the absence of a culture of accountability, and an inadequate internal auditing 
mechanism,2  led  to  a  mismanagement  of  public  finances.  The  resulting  accumulation  of 
public debt led to serious financing problems for the Greek banks, which were considerably 
weakened  by  the  loss  in  value  of  their  asset  holdings  as  Greek  government  bond  yields 
surged. Difficulties were further amplified by the withdrawals of deposits as a result of a loss 
of confidence in the banking system. 
To a considerable extent, the sovereign debt crisis was also the result of institutional design 
weaknesses within EMU. To reduce the risk of fiscal imprudence, the Stability and Growth 
Pact was intended to dissuade and prevent Member States from undertaking unsustainable 
fiscal  policies  resulting  in  excessive  deficits  and  a  build-up  of  public  debt.  Furthermore, 
Article 125 of the Lisbon Treaty states that the European Union, as a whole, as well as the 
individual Member States are not liable for commitments of governments or public authorities 
of other Member States. This was included in view of what is called the “moral hazard” that 
would arise within EMU in the absence of a closer coordination of fiscal policies. In the same 
vein,  Article  123  prohibits  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  from  lending  directly  to 
governments. 
However,  experience  shows  that  the  effective  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact  was  rather  weak.  It  failed  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  excessive  fiscal  deficits  in 
several euro area countries, although without it, fiscal imbalances would probably have been 
larger. Peer pressure from other Member States was clearly insufficient.3  
The policy response 
Faced with the unfolding of a sovereign debt crisis, the European Union’s response involved 
a  two-pronged  approach.  On  the  one  hand,  it  needed  to  rapidly  address  the  immediate 
financing  needs  of  distressed  countries,  but  at  the  same  time  it  also  recognised  that  the 
origins  of  the  crisis  had  to  be  tackled  through  a  comprehensive  reform  in  economic 
governance in the Euro area.  
When Greece signalled that it needed financial support from its Euro area partners, the first 
financial programme for this country took the form of a bilateral loan agreement with its euro 
area partners, supplemented by aid from the IMF. 
It was clear at the outset that there was a need to establish a framework that could swiftly 
and efficiently respond to possible requests from other Member States. Thus, in May 2010 
the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) was set up with a lending capacity backed by 
guarantees from the Member States of the euro area. As from July 2013, the EFSF will be 
replaced by a permanent framework, in the form of the European Stability Mechanism. 
                                                 
2   See  I.  Sarmas,  “The  Greek  Financial  Crisis  from  an  Auditor’s  Point  of  View”,  World  Class  Performance 
Symposium 2011: Trust and accountability in public financial management, London, 17 March 2011. 
3   See J. M. Gonzalez-Paramo, “The reform of the Stability and Growth Pact: an assessment”, Conference on 
“New Perspectives on Fiscal Sustainability”, Frankfurt, 13 October 2005. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However,  it  is  important  to  underline  that  the  financial  mechanisms  created  by  the  EU  to 
assist Member States in distress come with strict conditions that are designed to ensure that 
needed changes are implemented in economic policies and in national institutional capacity 
building. 
The  European  System  of  Central  Banks  has  also  responded  to  the  crisis.  Apart  from  the 
conventional interest rate tool, which is currently almost at a historical low, the Eurosystem 
introduced  a  number  of  so  called  non-standard  measures  to  ensure  that  the  transmission 
channel  of  monetary  policy  is  not  impaired.  These  measures  include  the  provision  of  the 
necessary liquidity to eligible counterparties, against adequate collateral, on the basis of a 
fixed rate and full allotment procedure.  
When tensions emerged in the financial markets after Greece requested financial aid in April 
2010,  the  Eurosystem  also  activated  a  Securities  Market  Programme  which  is  intended  to 
facilitate the monetary transmission mechanism. This involves secondary market purchase of 
government bonds of a number of euro area countries, and the programme was broadened 
in the summer of this year to cover purchases of securities of other countries facing funding 
difficulties. 
Apart from instituting financial mechanisms, European authorities responded to the sovereign 
debt crisis by also focusing on reform in economic governance. Clearly, the macroeconomic 
imbalances  that  developed  in  a  number  of  Member  States,  together  with  the  ineffective 
implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  signalled  a  need  to  strengthen  the 
surveillance framework. In addition to the setting up of the European Systemic Risk Board, 
entrusted  to  monitor  financial  stability,  the  European  Commission  presented  six  legislative 
proposals, the so-called Six-Pack.4 These were aimed at strengthening the preventive and 
corrective  action  needed 
fiscal  sustainability,  reducing  macro-economic 
imbalances,  and  promoting  competitiveness.  They  were  approved  by  the  European 
Parliament  in  September  and  will  come  into  force  in  January  2012.  In  launching  these 
measures  the  European  Authorities  recognised  that  in  a  single  currency  area  there  are 
limitations  to  the  debt  that  can  be  issued  by  participating  sovereign  Member  States. 
Essentially, we are going through a period of further development of the currency union and 
the implications this has on other aspects of governance. 
to  ensure 
Lessons from the crisis 
From a national perspective, at the policy making level, there are a number of lessons that 
can be learned from the sovereign debt crisis.  
As  I  highlighted  earlier,  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  unsustainable  fiscal  policies  were 
the root cause of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe. The example of Ireland is a reminder 
that while strong GDP growth is a desirable goal, what ultimately matters is that such growth 
can  be  sustained.  In  turn,  competitiveness  is  the  key  for  a  country’s  success  in  achieving 
sustainable growth and improvements in living standards. 
                                                 
4   See European Commission,  EU Economic  governance “Six  Pack” – State of Play, Brussels, 28 September 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In Malta GDP per capita grew by 11.6% over the last decade while the increase in the euro 
area amounted to 5%, and the recession in 2009 was shorter and relatively less deep than 
that experienced by Malta’s trading partners. The Maltese economy, nevertheless, still faces 
a number of challenges.  
  One area of relevance is the inflation rate, which at an average rate of 2.5% since 2004, has 
tended to stay slightly above the 2.1% average rate in the euro area as a whole, although the 
latest data show an annual inflation rate below that for the euro area. In this context, greater 
attention  should  be  given  to  the  identification  of  any  structural  shortcomings  that  may  be 
contributing  to  the  slightly  higher  inflation,  and  the  excessive  volatility  apparent  in  Malta’s 
inflation rate as compared to the euro zone. Although imported inflation is inevitable, we have 
to  be  particularly  mindful  of  locally  generated  price  pressures  or  inflexibilities  in  structures 
which may not be responding sufficiently to competitive pressures. 
Productivity  growth  is  essential  not  only  for  enhanced  competitiveness  but  also  to  justify 
wages  that  permit  a  sustainable  increase  in  living  standards.  Productivity  growth  in  Malta 
since EU accession was broadly in line with that experienced by the euro area as a whole. 
Still, catching up with the rising living standards of the more affluent EU countries requires 
even  faster  growth  in  productivity.  To  overcome  this  challenge,  policy  makers  need  to 
continue in their efforts to provide the necessary incentives for investment and to remove the 
impediments, such as needless bureaucracy, that may hinder its implementation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On  a  positive  note,  however,  Malta’s  efforts  to  diversify  its  economy  into  new  sectors, 
especially  in  business  services  and  more  capital  intensive  manufacturing  industry  have 
helped to prevent the boom-bust cycles that were being experienced in other economies.  
Productivity is also influenced by growth in human capital. In this regard, substantial public 
funding has been allocated to investment in education, training and retraining programmes 
which  enable  workers,  to  acquire  new  skills  required  by  newly  set  up  industries  in  Malta. 
Labour  market  flexibility  also  contributes  to  productivity  growth  by  enabling  a  smoother 
transition from old to new sectors.  
Over the past decade the proportion of the working-age population with a tertiary education 
level grew by two-and-a-half times to 12.4% of the labour force. Nevertheless, there is still 
further  catching-up  to  be  made  as  the  euro  area  average  is  almost  double  that  of  Malta. 
Furthermore, not only must the number of graduates be increased, but the quality aspect is 
also of crucial importance for productivity improvements. 
Apart  from  productivity  aspects,  competitiveness  is  also  affected  by  cost  developments. 
Labour costs are a crucial element particularly in open economies, where a significant share 
of output is exported.  
 Since  EU  membership,  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  practically  matched  the  euro  area 
average. Thus, in terms of labour cost competitiveness, Malta has kept pace with the euro 
area  average.  However,  to  maintain  competitiveness  a  further  focus  on  the  wage  setting 
process  may  be  appropriate.  In  particular  the  basic  principle  must  be  to  emphasise  that 
productivity improvements are at the basis of sustained wage increases, and that these are 
best  negotiated  at  firm  level,  where  improvements  in  productivity  can  be  best  gauged. 
Consequently,  any  cost  of  living  adjustments  should  form  part  and  parcel  of  the  collective 
agreement  and  not  be  superimposed  on  collective  agreements  by  legislation  as  happens 
today.  Indeed,  already  a  number  of  collective  agreements  incorporate  the  COLA  increase, 
and I suggest that this should be the norm. 
Another important message that has emerged from the sovereign debt crisis is the need for 
fiscal prudence, which provides the space for countercyclical fiscal policy during a downturn. 
In the euro area, fiscal policy is the major macroeconomic management tool at the national 
level.  Thus,  in  periods  when  economic  activity  is  relatively  strong,  policy  needs  to  be 
sufficiently prudent to build the necessary fiscal buffers that would be utilized during periods 
of weaker growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 In the aftermath of one-off expenditure during 2008, the deficit ratio in Malta declined in 2009 
despite  the  recession  of  that  year  and  narrowed  slightly  further  in  2010.  The  debt  ratio 
generally  declined  until  2008,  but  then  picked  up  in  2009,  partly  in  response  to  the 
contraction in the economy. Although the debt ratio has been considerably below that of the 
euro  area  as  a  whole,  the  government’s  determination  to  achieve  its  fiscal  targets  is 
welcome.  Strong  efforts  need  to  be  made  in  order  to  adhere  to  these  targets,  particularly 
during times of slow economic growth. 
 Recent  experience  has  shown  that  with  the  adoption  of  targeted  and  limited  spending 
measures,  the  economy  has  proved  relatively  resilient  to  external  shocks.  Still,  at  this 
juncture, the continuing slowdown in external demand is likely to impact the economic growth 
rate, adding further pressure on the fiscal balance at a time of heightened institutional and 
market  scrutiny.  This  will  introduce  a  delicate  balance  between  two  considerations.  First, 
cutting  the  deficit  is  important  in  order  to  reduce  macroeconomic  imbalances  that  in  the 
longer  run  hinder  economic  growth.  Secondly  the  immediate  effect  is  to  reduce  aggregate 
demand,  whether  via  spending  cuts  or  through  higher  taxation,  which  would  slow  the 
economy down.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Given the desirability of avoiding such dilemmas, this may be the time to follow the lead of 
other countries and consider the adoption of self-enforced regulations, such as expenditure 
rules.5 Spending decisions involve the reconciliation of various spending needs. While it is 
the cabinet of ministers that collectively sign off on the budget, the compilation of the budget 
document  involves  the  reconciliation  of  diverse  demands.  If,  as  is  likely,  the  sum  of  the 
separate demands exceeds the previous year’s spending total, the end result is the observed 
and inefficient upward creep in total spending. A widening of the deficit is more likely when 
growth in tax revenues is constrained by the slow rate of economic growth. 
Spending  rules  can  be  viewed  as  a  remedy  for  the  problem  of  coordination  between 
competing interests. In addition the formulation of the rules requires the setting of spending 
priorities.  For  example,  it  would  be  reasonable  for  an  expenditure  rule  to  give  priority  to 
capital expenditures, while another rule prioritizes the various types of social spending. 
The choice of the rules will involve the difficult task of setting of priorities, but once the rules 
are determined, there will be considerably less discretion on the overall fiscal outcome of the 
yearly  budgetary  exercise.  For  example,  to  remain  within  the  rule,  spending  cuts  may  be 
necessary in some areas to allow a larger outlay in a higher priority area. This kind of trade-
off is an essential feature of budgetary management. 
Expenditure rules are also helpful for the purpose of assuring long-term budget sustainability. 
In this regard, the reform of the pensions system requires particular consideration.  
As  things  stand,  the  gap  between  pension  contributions  and  benefits  is  of  concern.  The 
Financial  Estimates  for  2012  include  an  amount  paid  by  government  to  top  up  the 
contributions of employers and employees in the private sector. While such an arrangement 
was understandable in the early phase of Malta’s economic development, it is less justified 
today. 
Over  145  million  euros  are  earmarked  in  2012  for  this  so-called  direct  contribution  by 
Government  by  way  of  a  grant  to  the  private  sector  in  terms  of  the  Social  Security  Act  of 
1987.  The  total  top  up  for  both  public  and  private  sector  employees  comes  to  just  over 
191 million  euros.  This  amount  is  in  addition  to  the  national  insurance  contribution  by  the 
government in its capacity as an employer. 
To  put  these  numbers  into  perspective,  one  must  keep  in  mind  that  the  deficit  in  the 
consolidated fund for the same year is projected at roughly 145 million euros. 
The size of these outlays should be of concern for two reasons. The shortfall is certainly not 
arising from pension benefits that are too generous. Secondly the amount of the welfare gap 
as identified in the Estimates is going to rise rapidly as people live longer and the population 
ages. 
One  suggestion  for  alternative  financing  would  involve  a  multi-year  programme  that  would 
reduce  the government’s  matching contribution gradually  over  an  extended  period of  time, 
ideally  through  a  tripartite  consensus  at  the  MCESD.  This  programme  would  be  financed 
from productivity growth. During times of economic growth, when the growth rate exceeds a 
particular  threshold,  the  revenue  from  a  marginal  increase  in  income  tax  or  national 
insurance rates would be earmarked to reduce the subvention. The increase in rates would 
automatically be suspended during times of slower growth. Such a scheme would be justified 
as one which reallocates resources from current to future consumption, and the reallocation 
would occur only during a time of relative prosperity. 
                                                 
5   See  F.  Holme-Hadulla,  S.  Hauptmeier  and  P.  Rother,  “The  impact  of  numerical  expenditure  rules  on 
budgetary  discipline  over  the  cycle”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series  No  1169,  April  2010;  see  S.  Hauptmeier, 
J. S. Fuentes and L. Schuknecht, “Towards expenditure rules and fiscal sanity in the euro area”, ECB Working 
Paper Series No 1266, November 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
While this on its own would not ensure the sustainability of the pension system, it would be 
an important component in the process of pension reform, and, as I have already mentioned, 
I would suggest that it would be appropriate for deliberation at the MCESD. 
The  phenomenon  of  population  ageing  raises  sustainability  challenges  also  for  the  public 
provision of healthcare, which represents a significant share of government expenditure. It 
must be recognised that the extent of provision of free healthcare and other services by the 
State  must  ultimately  be  financed  by  the  taxpayer.  The  earmarking  of  certain  revenue 
measures or particular revenue streams for this purpose may also be an appropriate topic for 
consideration by the social partners. 
The sustainability of funding the government’s capital expenditure programme, particularly in 
relation to the infrastructure and the public utilities through fiscal resources may also have to 
be reviewed. One step in this direction is to harness the ample immovable property of the 
government which presently may not be rendering an adequate return. It appears that the 
setting  up  of  special  purpose  vehicles  may  be  addressing  in  part  this  issue.  Perhaps, 
however,  we  should  go  a  step  further  by  considering  the  establishment  of  a  development 
bank  which  would  utilise  various  assets  of  government  that  are  presently  underutilised  as 
well as other sources of funding, on similar lines that exist in many EU countries, particularly 
Germany, where development banks at the regional level undertake very successfully a role 
in  promoting  the  economy  and  assisting  the  government  in  social  and  environmental 
projects. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  domestic  banking  system.  On  taking  on  my  responsibilities  as 
Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, I actively involved myself in financial stability issues 
given my concern with financial markets overseas that were characterised by volatile trading 
conditions and the contagion effects of the sovereign debt crisis. There is no doubt that the 
impact of the sovereign debt crisis highlights the importance of ensuring a stable domestic 
financial system. In fact the case of Ireland shows us that imprudent bank policies can have 
devastating effects on the economy.  
In contrast, the domestic banking system played a crucial role in preventing a more severe 
downturn  in  economic  activity  after  2008,  and  in  averting  a  sharper  deterioration  in  public 
finances, because of prudent behaviour on the part of the banks in both asset and liability 
management.  
The reliance on retail deposits has been a major source of funding for the domestic banks. 
These remained stable during the period of financial turmoil. In other countries, banks that 
relied heavily on wholesale funding sources came under severe stress as interbank markets 
dried up and the cost of funding increased significantly.  
As I mentioned earlier the Eurosystem has stepped in with ample liquidity, and the Central 
Bank of Malta, as an active member of the system, stands ready to fulfil its intermediation 
role within the local banking system. Nevertheless, it is firmly my view that domestic banks 
should continue to operate along the lines of their traditional business model. This method of 
doing  business  has  certainly  protected  them  from  the  vagaries  of  the  wholesale  funding 
market.  
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  once  again  that  the  Central  Bank  will  not  be 
supportive of banking institutions that operate in Malta and seek central bank liquidity as their 
primary source of funding their loan and investment activities. 
When  a  banking  institution  funds  its  purchase  of  high  yielding  assets  from  short  term 
sources, it is not only exposing itself to losses on the asset side but also to adverse changes 
in its funding costs, particularly at a time when historically low interest rates are in effect. For 
this  reason,  the  Central  Bank  expects  such  institutions  to  look  primarily  to  the  markets  for 
their funding requirements. 
I am pleased to note as well that the domestic banking system continues to be characterised 
by  relatively  high  liquidity  levels.  Furthermore,  a  major  strength  of  the  domestic  banking 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system  is  its  prudent  approach  towards  credit,  where  loans  are  fully  covered  by  deposits, 
while loan-to-value ratios, which were already at relatively prudent levels at the time of the 
global financial crisis, declined further to around 70%.  
Another  major  strength  of  the  domestic  banking  sector  is  its  strong  capital  base.  Capital 
adequacy ratios improved further from already healthy levels, with the core capital adequacy 
ratio rising to 12.4%. This ratio is significantly higher than the present statutory requirement 
of 4%. 
The  debt  crisis  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  risk  diversification.  Encouragingly,  the 
investment  portfolio  of  the  domestic  banks  has  limited  exposure  to  securities  issued  by 
countries in financial distress.  
  It is equally important for the banks to diversify risk in their loan portfolio. Most of the troubles 
of banking systems overseas, particularly in Ireland and Spain, stemmed from their relatively 
large  exposure  to  the  construction  sector,  especially  the  housing  market.  While  the  latest 
update  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta’s  Financial  Stability  Report6  provides  a  generally 
                                                 
6   Central Bank of Malta, Financial Stability Report Update – June 2011, 17 October 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
favourable  assessment  of  the  situation  in  the  domestic  banking  sector,  it  notes  that  credit 
and concentration risks remain elevated, mainly due to corporate borrowers in construction 
and real estate activities. However, on the positive side, the share of lending to these sectors 
has  now  eased  slightly  since  before  the  crisis  to  around  10.5%  of  total  assets  as  at 
September  2011,  and  domestic  banks  are  encouraged  to  continue  on  this  path  to  reduce 
concentration risk.  
In the same vein, I would also like to stress that the sovereign debt crisis has also highlighted 
the importance of prudent credit standards and for banks to improve the institutional capacity 
to appraise risk, not only as it relates to the individual borrower but also from a sectoral and 
economy-wide perspective. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Malta  also  continues  to  urge  banks  to  expand  loan  loss  provisioning 
levels, especially related to the construction sector, and also to strengthen further the capital 
buffers through the adoption of prudent dividend policies. Such measures are also needed 
for banks to eventually implement the stringent Basel III regulatory requirements.  
I must stress that there is never room for complacency, especially at a time of uncertainty in 
the global financial system, and also because economic growth in our main trading partners 
is expected to slow down appreciably during 2012. 
Conclusion 
I  have  touched  on  a  number  of  areas  in  this  my  first  speech  to  you  as  Governor  of  the 
Central  Bank  of  Malta.  In  concluding,  I  would  like  to  say  that  the  challenges  faced  by  the 
Maltese economy today are not so dissimilar from those of the past. It is true that the setting 
has  changed  considerably  but  as  a  small  open  economy  these  relate  mainly  to 
competitiveness aspects and the capacity to deal with external shocks. It must be stressed 
that  competiveness  is  not  exclusively  a  concern  for  the  export-oriented  part  of  the  private 
sector,  but  also  for  those  who  focus  their  business  activity  on  the  domestic  market.  Non-
competitive practices and inefficiency in that part of the economy that is not directly exposed 
to foreign competition tends to spill over into the tradable sectors thus threating the overall 
competitiveness  of  the  whole  economy.  We  must  avoid  this  as  much  as  possible.  I  am 
cautiously  optimistic  about  the  future  and  feel  sure  that  despite  the  persistence  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis and the prospect of a weaker global economy, Malta will overcome the 
challenges  that  lie  ahead,  if  all  stakeholders  remain  focused  on  meeting  the  country’s 
economic objectives in a prudent and effective manner.  
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
