Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Talent development in Islamic finance over the next 
decade 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Launching  of  IBFIM’s  Islamic  Finance  Qualification  Framework  &  Progression  Route 
(IFQFPR)  “Talent  development  in  Islamic  finance  over  the  next  decade”,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
14 December 2011. 
 In a highly dynamic, rapidly changing and challenging environment, talent development for 
the financial services industry has become an even more important agenda to ensure that its 
growth  and  development  is  supported  by  the  necessary  skills  and  capabilities.  This  is 
particularly important for Islamic finance given that it has become the most rapidly growing 
segment in our financial system. With the increased pace of the internationalisation of Islamic 
Finance,  this  growth  momentum  is  also  taking  place  in  several  other  jurisdictions.  This 
current  global  financial  crisis  which  has  highlighted  the  importance  that  the  growth  of  the 
financial sector should correspond with the growth of the economy and for risk management 
and  governance  practices  to  be  strengthened  to  ensure  its  stability  and  sustainability  has 
also  prompted  increased  interest  in  Islamic  finance.  These  are  the  very  principles  and 
foundations inherent in Islamic finance. 
Talent as a thrust for industry advancement 
The  development  of  the  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  system,  has  now  evolved  our  Islamic 
finance industry into a progressive, comprehensive and competitive component of the overall 
financial  sector.  The  market  share  of  Islamic  banking  assets  of  total  banking  industry  has 
grown  from  only  6.9  percent  in  2000  to  22  percent  in  2011.  The  contribution  of  Islamic 
finance  to  the  Malaysian  economy  has  also  been  growing  significantly,  accounting  for 
2.1 percent share to the country’s GDP in 2009, as compared to only 0.3 percent in 2000. 
This has led to greater job creation where employment in Islamic financial industry accounts 
for 11 percent of total employment in the financial sector.  
On  the  international  front,  greater  liberalisation  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  has  seen 
greater  foreign  presence  and  participation  in  our  Islamic  financial  system.  There  has  also 
been an increasing trend in foreign participation in the domestic Islamic banking and takaful 
industry, as well as the Islamic capital market. Moving forward, it is envisaged that Islamic 
financial  institutions  in  Malaysia  will  also  expand  beyond  national  boundaries  to  increase 
economic and financial linkages with other parts of the world. 
This  rapid  internationalisation  of  the  financial  system  and  technology  advancement  will 
demand  a  corresponding  increase  in  quality  skills  and  expertise  of  the  industry.  Talent 
upscaling  will  be  even  more  important  in  the  next  decade,  to  steer  the  industry’s 
advancement in the increasingly complex and competitive financial ecosystem. A strong and 
dynamic workforce will be one of the important pillars for the industry to remain stable and 
competitive. It will also serve as a catalyst to spur innovation. In terms of talent demand for 
the overall financial sector, it is anticipated that over the next 10 years, a workforce of about 
200,000  employees  would  be  required,  which  is  an  increase  of  56,000  people  from  the 
current  144,000  employees.  There  will  therefore  be  strong  demand  across  the  financial 
sector,  particularly  for  specialised  skills  in  high  growth  and  niche  areas  such  as  wealth 
management, Shariah advisory, corporate finance and investment advisory services.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Human capital development as key growth area 
In Malaysia, several dedicated institutions for human capital development in Islamic finance 
have been established. Contributions by tertiary education institutions, training and research 
institutions,  and  private  training  providers  have  been  important  to  the  development  of 
professionals  and  expertise  in  Islamic  finance.  There  are  now  more  than  5,800  students 
enrolled in Islamic finance related academic courses in Malaysian higher learning institutions. 
The International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF), established in 2006 to 
develop qualified professionals in Islamic finance, has now produced 265 Chartered Islamic 
Finance  Professional  holders;  while  approximately  2,000  students 
than 
75 countries  are  currently  enrolled  at  different  stages  of  completion  of  the  Islamic  finance 
programs.  In  terms  of  industry  training,  IBFIM  has  to  date  trained  32  percent  of  the  total 
Islamic finance industry workforce.  
from  more 
Critical components in talent development strategies 
The vision moving forward for human capital development in Islamic finance is to ensure a 
steady stream of competent and versatile talent to support greater innovation and dynamism 
of the Islamic finance industry. This will require the approach to be comprehensive, meeting 
the  highest  standards  and  in  close  collaboration  with  the  industry  so  that  the  learning 
solutions will continue to remain relevant. 
The breadth of talent development solution 
Human  capital  development  needs  to  be  comprehensive  and  holistic  in  meeting  the 
requirements for all levels. The horizon of talent development solutions has to be widened 
towards attracting, developing and retaining talents with required skills and expertise for the 
industry.  It  must  also  meet  the  specific  requirements  of  the  workforce  career  progression, 
from  the  pre-employment  stage,  during  employment  and  up  to  the  leadership  positions. 
Talent  development  solutions  must  also  be  for  beyond  the  circle  of  the  financial  services 
community,  to  include  other  business  communities,  such  as  legal  fraternity,  Government 
officials  and  IT  solution  providers.  The  advancement  of  the  industry  is  also  dependent  on 
these parts of the private and public sector. Their training needs must also be met through 
structured training programmes to facilitate their understanding of the specificities of Islamic 
finance and its value propositions.  
Raising standards of training and education programmes 
The education and training programmes in Islamic finance also needs to achieve the highest 
quality, be credible and globally recognised. The qualifications developed need to fulfill the 
expectations of the industry. To ensure the standards, the required infrastructure for standard 
setting  and  accreditation  for  Islamic  finance  training  and  education  has  now  been  put  in 
place.  The  Asian  Institute  of  Finance  (AIF)  is  ready  to  provide  accreditation  to  training 
programmes  offered  by  training  institutes  following  a  rigorous  assessment  under  the  new 
Assessment  and  Accreditation  Framework  and  to  ensure  the  highest  standard  of  the 
trainings  offered.  The  Association  for  Chartered  Islamic  Finance  Professionals,  a  body 
entrusted to raise the quality standards and professionalism of Islamic finance practitioners, 
would also contribute to achieve this objective. This will centralise the setting of standards in 
Islamic finance and provide the assessments to ensure that the standards are being met. 
Partnerships and collaboration between the industry and academia 
There  needs  to  be  greater  partnerships  and  collaboration  between  the  industry  and 
academia to align training and development with the requirements of the industry. Greater 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
involvement  by  the  financial  institutions  is  needed  in  designing  the  academic  and  training 
curriculum, and providing real business exposure and training through internship and sharing 
of experiences. Industry-universities partnership can also take the form of “summer school” 
programmes that emphasise on practical aspects of Islamic finance via business operation 
simulations.  This  move  would  provide  value-added  practical  knowledge  and  hands-on 
experience  to  improve  the  technical  competency  of  the  graduates.  More  structured 
continuous  learning  programmes  are  also  needed  for  practitioners  to  sustain  their 
professional  competencies.  For  top  executives,  the  ICLIF  Leadership  and  Governance 
Centre offers programs that aim to develop future business leaders for the financial industry.  
Focus on applied research 
Research  is  also  an  important  investment  for  long-term  competitiveness  of  the 
industry and is a key driver for greater innovation. Research institutions together with the 
industry  must  continuously  strive  towards  introducing  innovative  solutions  which  will  add 
vibrancy  and  diversity  to  the  market.  Joint  research  initiatives  should  extend  beyond 
geographical boundaries, with cross-border initiatives and convergence of ideas. Research 
by academic faculties and research agencies can also contribute to the knowledge repository 
of Islamic finance. In addition to research that have been issued by universities in Malaysia, 
The International Shariah Research Academy (ISRA) has been established as a dedicated 
international  agency  for  applied  research  in  Islamic  finance.  Further  in-depth  research  on 
contemporary  Shariah  issues  relating  to  risk  mitigation,  liquidity  management  and  hedging 
would  facilitate  the  generation  of  new  ground-breaking  developments  in  Islamic  finance. 
Greater involvement of the industry is essential not only to provide funding support, but also 
to give perspectives that contribute to the implementation of the research output. 
The  launch  of  IBFIM’s  flagship  programme  today  –  the  Islamic  Finance  Qualifications 
Framework  and  Progression  Route  –  is  part  of  this  strategy  for  upgrading  the  skills  and 
competencies of the existing talent in the industry. It is an innovative training framework that 
provides a progressive structured route to the acquisition of the relevant knowledge for the 
different levels throughout the career of the workforce in the industry. Successful completion 
of  the  comprehensive  series  of  programmes  would  lead  to  qualifications  at  three  different 
levels.  The  modules  of  the  programmes  have  been  developed  with  extensive  consultation 
with  the  industry.  The  framework  also  offers  flexibility  in  learning,  as  participants  can 
complete the modules at their own pace. Important in the offering of these programs is that 
there needs to be clarity in the qualification that is earned so that it avoids confusion with 
other qualifications offered by other centres of learning to those practitioners aspiring to gain 
qualifications in Islamic finance. Our resources for investment in human capital development 
for  the  industry  must  be  optimised.  This  would  enhance  Malaysia’s  potential  to  become  a 
centre of excellence for education in Islamic finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
