Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at 
Andaman Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Port Blair, 22 December 2011. 
 The assistance provided by Dr P K Nayak and Shri Suraj S is acknowledged. 
these  social  and  geographical  advantages,  ANI 
I  thank  the  Andaman  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  for  inviting  me  to  address  this 
distinguished gathering. This picturesque Union Territory (UT) of Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
(ANI)  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  covers  0.25  per  cent  of  the  national  geographical  area  but 
accounts for only a fractional share of 0.03 per cent of national population. This explains why 
ANI  has  the  lowest  population  density  of  46  per  square  kilometre  as  against  382  at  the 
all-India level. The high literacy rate and per capita income make ANI as one of the leading 
UTs in India in terms of socio-economic developments. Further, the lushness of its landscape 
with  bio-diversity  and  attractive  spots  for  eco-tourism  make  it  a  prime  tourist  attraction. 
Notwithstanding 
faces  several 
developmental  challenges,  especially  in  the  aftermath  of  tsunami  that  wreaked  large-scale 
damage in December 2004. 
Apart  from  natural  and  rich  human  resources,  it  is  important  to  have  a  well-functioning 
financial system for sustainable economic development. In recognition of this, the Reserve 
Bank  has  stepped  up  its  efforts  in  recent  years  to  enhance  the  penetration  of  the  formal 
financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being of our 
society.  In  this  regards,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  undertaking  special  initiatives  for 
extending  the  outreach  of  banking  facilities  in  states  and  union  territories.  Against  this 
backdrop, I propose to briefly outline the economic and financial structure of the UT of ANI as 
well  as  highlight  various  financial  inclusion  initiatives  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  In 
conclusion, I shall flag some issues that need policy attention. 
Background 
Andaman  &  Nicobar  Islands,  a  Union  Territory  of  India  since  1956,  is  an  archipelago  of 
572 islands  (306  islands  and  266  rocks)  and  has  a  geographic  area  of  8,249  square 
kilometre.  Of  these  islands,  only  38  have  human  habitation.  The  UT  is  bestowed  with 
abundant green vegetation and marine wealth besides huge potential for culture fisheries. It 
covers the Indian subcontinent’s richest rain-forest and houses indigenous tribes of Negroid 
and Mongoloid origins. The diversified mangroves have been included in the World Wildlife 
Fund  (WWF)  Global  200  list  of  the  world’s  highest  priority  biodiversity  “hot  spots”. 
Furthermore, 
in 
the  UNESCO-designated  Biosphere 
Reserve/Zone (Indo-Malayan Bio-geographic Zone). 
According to the Forest Survey of India (2005), 87 per cent of the total geographical area of 
ANI is under forest cover and only about 50,000 hectare is available for cultivation and allied 
activities  distributed  among  various  islands.  At  present,  the  major  crops  being  grown  are 
paddy,  coconut,  arecanut,  vegetables  and  fruits.  ANI  has  an  aggregate  coastline  of 
1,912 kilometres,  which  is  about  one-fourth  of  the  total  coastline  of  India.  The  Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) around the islands encompasses around 0.6 million square kilometre 
which is 30 per cent of the EEZ of India. This provides a great opportunity for development of 
fisheries and other marine resources. 
islands  are 
included 
these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Social indicators 
As per the Census 2011, the total population of ANI registered a decennial growth of 6.7 per 
cent  with  a  total  population  of  about  3.80  lakh.  ANI  consists  of  three  districts,  viz.,  South 
Andaman district, North and Middle Andaman district and Nicobar district. Over 88 per cent 
population of the UT lives in the first two districts of which 37 per cent live in urban areas. 
Nicobar  district  does  not  have  any  urban  area.  While  the  sex  ratio  in  North  and  Middle 
Andaman and South Andaman districts has increased to 925 and 874, respectively, in 2011 
from 884 and 824 in 2001, the sex ratio of Nicobar district has decreased to 778 in 2011 from 
857 in 2001. The population density in ANI has increased from 43 per square kilometre in 
2001 to 46 per square kilometre in 2011. The literacy rate in the Islands was high at 86.3 per 
cent in 2011 as compared with 74.0 per cent at the all-India level (Table 1). 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands: select socio-economic indicators 
Table 1 
 Macroeconomic structure 
The  UT  of  ANI  has  significant  potential  for  growth  given  its  natural  resource  endowment. 
However,  the  comparative  isolation  of  the  islands  from  the  mainland,  scattered  islands, 
difficult communication system, and heavy reliance on the government for supply of inputs 
and smaller base of local market are the major constraints in achieving rapid growth. 
In line with the national economy, during the last decade, the economy of ANI has undergone 
significant structural transformation. The dominance of primary sector has declined and the 
share of the tertiary sector has increased. The reduction in the share of primary sector could 
partly  be  attributable  to  reduction  in  cutting  of  forest  timber  as  per  the  decision  of  the 
Supreme Court. Further, there was reduction of agricultural produce due to submerging of 
land in the wake of the tsunami. The increase in the share of services sector is attributable to 
enhanced  construction  activities  due  to  rehabilitation  measures  and  increased  government 
expenditure  in  the  post-tsunami  period.  The  share  of  industrial  sector,  however,  remained 
more or less stagnant. 
As per the available information from the Central Statistical Office (CSO), in 2009–10 the per 
capita income (NSDP) of ANI was over 62 per cent higher than all-India per capita income. 
However, during 2009–10, the growth in NSDP of ANI decelerated to 2.7 per cent mainly due 
to the sharp decline in the growth of the industrial and agriculture sectors. Notwithstanding 
this deceleration in growth, the average annual growth rate improved during the second half 
of the 2000s to almost 10 per cent from 6 per cent in the first half. The average growth of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
NSDP  of  ANI  generally  remained  higher  than  that  of  the  all-India  NDP  during  the  period 
2005–10 (Chart 1). 
 Table 2 
Sectoral net domestic product (at 2004–05 prices)  
(in per cent) 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
The increase in the average growth of NSDP of ANI during 2005–10 was mainly driven by 
industrial and services sector. The industrial sector made a sharp recovery from a low growth 
rate of 1.5 per cent during the first half of the 2000s to 12.4 per cent in the second half of the 
decade.  However,  it  is  observed  that  the  growth  rate  in  this  sector  has  remained  highly 
volatile  during  the  entire  decade.  The  agriculture  sector  witnessed  a  turnaround  from 
negative growth during 2000–05 to a growth rate of 3.7 per cent during 2005–10 (Table 2). 
Drivers of growth 
Keeping with the overall trend in the country, the economic activity in the UT is dominated by 
the tertiary sector and its share has been continuously rising. The share of the primary sector 
has been declining and the share of the secondary sector in NSDP is static at around 3 per 
cent.  There  is  hardly  any  manufacturing  activity  in  the  UT  which  is  mostly  concentrated  in 
wood processing, and with the present restrictions on the exploitation of forests has led this 
activity to stagnate. Within the tertiary sector, construction activities, transport, storage and 
communication and public administration have been the major drivers of growth.  
Agriculture 
The  average  rainfall  in  the  islands  is  very  high  and  spread  over  eight  months  during  
April–November  each  year  which  produces  a  humid  tropical  climate.  The  agro-climatic 
condition in these islands is suitable for cultivation of plantation crops like coconut, arecanut, 
fruits  like  banana,  mango,  pineapple,  guava,  jackfruit  and  spice  like  clove,  nutmeg  and 
pepper. The soil has low water retention capacity. Out of a total reported geographical area 
of  8,24,900  hectares  in  2009–10,  the  total  cropped  area  in  the  Islands  stood  at 
16,535 hectares (Table 3). 
Table 3 
Land utilisation pattern during 2009–10 
 
Among  the  major  crops,  while  the  production  of  paddy  has  increased,  the  yield  has  gone 
down. The production of coconut, which covers maximum area under production, remained 
stagnant. Performances of other plantation crops were mixed. 
According  to  Agriculture  Census  2005–06,  the  number  of  operational  holdings  as  well  as 
area have increased primarily for the holding size-class of less than 1 hectare and to a lesser 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
extent for holding size 1 to 2 hectares. Mainly institutional land falls in the 10 plus holding 
class.  The  average  size  of  operational  holdings  has  also  decreased  from  2  hectare  in  
2000–01  to  1.88  hectare  in  2005–06  which  indicate  the  increasing  fragmentation  of  land 
holdings in the UT (Table 4). 
Number, area and size of operational holdings in ANI  
Table 4 
 Industry  
The absence of a sizeable local market for manufactured goods and the need to bring much 
of  the  raw  materials  from  the  mainland  are  considered  the  main  impediments  in  the 
development of industries. Therefore, large and medium scale industrial activity is absent in 
ANI. The industrial base of ANI consists mainly of small and tiny industries. The industries in 
the  region  are  mainly  timber  and  agro-based.  The  recent  years  have  seen  a  decline  in 
industrial output owing to closure of wood-based industrial units. There are 1,961 registered 
small-scale industrial (SSI) units in the Union Territory as at end-March 2010 (Table 5). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Industrial scenario of Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
Table 5 
 Tourism  
The Andaman & Nicobar Islands have an unique combination of sprawling beaches, rising 
hinterland and dense equatorial forests. More than 50 per  cent of the forest area is Tribal 
Reserves, National Parks and Wildlife sanctuaries. Any development activity in the islands 
including  tourism  has  to  be  sensitive  to  ecological  fragility.  The  key  challenge  facing  the 
growth of tourism in ANI is connectivity and the commensurate infrastructure to ensure better 
accessibility.  In  this  context,  there  is  considerable  scope  for  public-private  partnership  in 
sustainable  development  of  tourism  in  the  region.  In  recent  years,  the  private  sector  has 
increased  its  role  in  providing  transport  services,  theatres,  restaurants  and  shops.  The 
number of units as well as employment provided by the private sector has increased over 
time. This trend needs to be reinforced.  
Infrastructure 
Given the geographical and topographical peculiarities of these islands, including separation 
by sea over great distances, there is no single power-grid for all the electrified islands but 
several  diesel  generator  sets  cater  independently  to  the  power  requirements  of  an 
area/island.  At  present,  ANI  faces  significant  power  shortage.  Due  to  a  steady  rise  in 
population  the  demand  for  inter-island  ferrying  of  goods  and  movement  of  people  has 
become  important.  Lack  of  adequate  transport  facilities  is  a  serious  bottleneck  in  the 
economic development of the islands. Further opening up of air traffic could give a boost to 
trade and tourism.  
Fiscal scenario  
As Andaman and Nicobar Islands is a Union Territory (UT) without legislature, all allocations 
for  receipts  and  expenditure  are  made  from  the  Union  Budget.  The  UT’s  primary  source  of 
revenue emanates from non-tax receipts, which constitutes more than 80 per cent of revenue 
receipts. Non-tax revenues have been steadily increasing in recent years. On an average, total 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
revenue receipts to GSDP ratio was around 4.7 per cent during 2007–12. The tax to GSDP 
ratio in ANI was less than 1 per cent which was far below the all-India average of 5 per cent for 
all states. Revenue expenditure to GSDP ratio increased mainly on account of the Sixth Pay 
Commission award. However, capital outlay to GSDP ratio has declined (Table 6).  
Table 6 
Receipts and expenditure  
 Financial developments  
It  is  important  to  have  a  well-functioning  financial  system  for  sustainable  economic 
development. While the Reserve Bank has been actively engaged in the development of the 
financial sector, it has stepped up its efforts in recent years to enhance the penetration of the 
formal financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being 
of our society. Let me first broadly outline the financial fabric of ANI. 
There  was  a  gradual  improvement  of  banking  penetration  in  ANI  in  recent  years.  This  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  the  average  population  per  bank  branch  improved  to11,000  at 
end-June 2010 from 13,000 at end-June 2002. The banking network is largely dominated to 
public sector banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
The  recent  trend  in  the  growth  rate  of  deposits  in  ANI  was  lower  than  the  corresponding 
growth rate recorded at all-India level. The credit deposit (C-D) ratio in ANI at 37.6 per cent 
at end-December 2010 was significantly lower than the ratio of 76.7 per cent at the all-India 
level (Chart 2 and Table 7).  
Table 7 
C-D ratio by population group 
As at end-March 2010, almost 58.3 per cent of total priority sector advances were absorbed 
by  small  enterprises.  Agriculture  accounted  for  only  8.3  per  cent  of  total  priority  sector 
advances  during  the  same  period.  The  occupational  credit  structure  is  dominated  by 
personal loans, followed by advances to trade and industry (Chart 3).  
 Chart 3 
Occupational credit 
 Financial inclusion 
In the context of financial inclusion initiative taken by the Reserve Bank, the banks are being 
sensitised to pursue the inclusive drive. It may be observed that the progress of banking in 
terms of the branch expansion was stagnant during the period 2007 to 2010 though there 
was an improvement in terms of deposits and credit expansion. Due to the recent initiatives 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
taken by the Reserve Bank, the number of branches has increased from 37 in 2010 to 42 in 
2011 (Chart 4). 
 
Source: BSR, RBI. 
Further,  in  pursuance  of  the  overall  financial  inclusion  strategy,  a  total  of  47  villages  with 
population over 1,000 were identified in the three districts of ANI. Of these, 17 villages have 
been identified in South Andaman, 21 in North and Middle Andaman and 9 in Nicobar. A total 
of 37,370 no-frill accounts have been opened up to end-June 2011 in ANI. 
As at end-March 2010, the total number of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) issued in ANI was 7,000 
and the amount of loan sanctioned under the scheme was  158 crore. As at end-June 2011 
a total of  9.5 crore was disbursed to 1260 SHGs.  
 Financial inclusion measures 
Financial  inclusion  is  important  for  bringing  the  poor  and  under-privileged  sections  of  the 
society within the banking fold and thereby generating and sustaining equitable growth. Let 
me now turn to the various measures initiated by the Reserve Bank for promoting financial 
inclusion. 
First, the Reserve Bank for long has instituted a mechanism called “priority sector lending” 
through  which  credit  is  channelised  to  certain  preferred  sectors,  which,  inter  alia,  include 
small-scale industry, small businesses and agriculture. In the post-reform period, the priority 
sector  group  has  been  expanded  to  include  advances  to  retail  trade,  educational  loans, 
micro-finance  and  low-cost  housing.  This  has  helped  in  furthering  the  cause  of  financial 
inclusion. 
Second, the Union Finance Minister announced in the Budget 2010–11 that every village in 
the country with over 2000 population must have access to banking services by March 2012. 
In order to operationalise this process, commercial banks have prepared financial inclusion 
plans which have been submitted to the Reserve Bank. As brick-and-mortar branches will not 
be viable in very small centres, the approach is to meet this challenge through the business 
correspondent (BC) model and by leveraging communication technology. Under this model, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
50,000 and credit up to 
banks  appoint  agents  who  provide  basic  banking  services  at  the  door-step  of  a  client  on 
behalf of the bank. 
Third, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to open no-frills accounts. These accounts have 
no or very low minimum balance requirement and have provisions for small loans by way of 
overdrafts. This is a very convenient account for small depositors, especially in rural areas.  
Fourth, a major impediment for a common person to open bank account is the “Know Your 
Customer” (KYC) norm. The norm has been relaxed for small accounts, viz., deposits up to 
1 lakh. A simple introduction by an existing account-holder in a 
bank  should  be  adequate  to  open  an  account.  In  this  regard,  Aadhar,  the  Unique 
Identification  Number  (UID)  Project  of  the  Central  Government,  which  aims  at  providing  a 
unique ID number for everyone in the country, will help the poor to establish their identity to 
meet the banks’ KYC norms. 
Fifth, farmers can get credit from banks conveniently through Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) and 
General Purpose Credit Cards (GCCs).  
Sixth,  financial  literacy  becomes  critically  important.  While  several  banking  facilities  are 
available,  a  common  person  may  not  be  aware  of  them.  Hence,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
initiated  a  “Project  Financial  Literacy”  with  the  objective  of  disseminating  information 
regarding  the  central  bank  and  general  banking  concepts  to  various  target  groups.  Our 
“Financial Education” website link offers basics of banking, finance and central banking for 
children of all ages. Our website is also available in 13 languages.  
Finally,  this  is  also  a  learning  process  for  the  Reserve  Bank.  We  recognise  that  being 
responsible  for  banking,  we  must  be  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  a  common  person. 
Accordingly, our Governor, Dr. Subbarao initiated the outreach programme as a part of our 
Platinum Jubilee celebrations. Under the outreach programme, the top management of the 
Reserve  Bank  visits  at  least  one  village  in  every  state  and  union  territory  with  state 
government officials and commercial banks to give focused attention on financial inclusion. 
This  has  been  highly  enriching  experience  for  us  to  understand  the  ground  realities. 
Accordingly, we have decided to continue these programmes.  
Policy challenges 
First, the developmental activities pursued so far have been propelled by direct involvement 
of government in all areas of economic activities. However, there is a need for broad-based 
economic strategy with greater involvement of the private sector.  
Second, the limited size of the local market is a major constraint to growth. The UT should 
focus on a outward-looking policy of exports to the mainland in areas in which it has a natural 
advantage such as marine products, horticulture and floriculture.  
Third, the islands have an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) which is about 30 per cent of the 
country’s  EEZ  and  endowed  with  unique  marine  habitat  and  coral  diversity.  However,  this 
resource  is  not  adequately  tapped.  There  is  a  need  to  develop  fishery  for  export  to  the 
mainland. This will not only boost the income of the UT but also significantly reduce transport 
cost as currently ships ferrying goods to the islands return empty to the mainland.  
Fourth, there is a need for renewed thrust on agriculture. Horticulture, floriculture, plantation 
crops, medicinal plants and dye plants offer a lot of opportunities for the potential investors.  
Fifth,  given  the  high  level  of  literacy  and  strategic  location  there  is  strong  potential  for 
development of information technology.  
Sixth,  tourism  potential  of  the  islands  can  be  promoted  through  high-value  low-volume 
eco-tourism. This will need greater investment in tourism infrastructure. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Seventh, the Great Nicobar Island is located centrally between Singapore/Colombo and just 
north of the sea traffic route to South East Asia and beyond. This is an extremely busy route 
and substantial part of the world’s commercial traffic flows through this area. Development of 
South Eastern tip of Nicobar as a trans-shipment port for container handling, bunkering and 
refuelling of international/national ships passing through this route has great economic and 
strategic potential.  
Eighth, with the step-up in economic activity, the investment demand can be enhanced. The 
banks need to be more proactive in supporting private investment and enterprise. This will 
help in improving the current low level of C-D ratio through greater penetration of banking.  
Conclusion 
The comparative isolation of the Andaman and Nicobar islands from the mainland, scattered 
landscape,  difficult  communication  system,  heavy  reliance  on  government  departments  for 
supply  of  inputs  and  smaller  base  of  local  market  are  the  main  impediments  to  the  rapid 
growth of the economy. However, the UT of ANI has immense potential for achieving higher 
growth  aided  mainly  by  extensive  marine  resources,  high  literacy  rate,  conducive  work 
environment  and  strategic  location.  In  achieving  this  goal,  government  efforts  need  to  be 
supplemented by private initiatives where the banking sector has an important role to play. 
This will help in further improving the well-being of masses in the islands. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
