Jürgen Stark: Towards a safer financial system 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Transatlantic  Business  Conference,  organised  by  the  American  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Frankfurt am Main, 9 November 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to speak to you tonight at the Transatlantic Business Conference.  
Looking back to 2008/09 
1. 
It is exactly three years ago that the G20 Finance Ministers and Governors met for the first 
time after the Lehman default. In Sao Paulo, on 9th of November 2008, the Group of Twenty 
recognized that “the global economy is facing its most serious financial crisis and economic 
slowdown in decades”.1 In that meeting, they also pointed to the root causes that have led to 
the crisis: “[…] the current financial crisis is largely a result of excessive risk taking and faulty 
risk management practices in financial markets, inconsistent macroeconomic policies, which 
gave rise to domestic and external imbalances, as well as deficiencies in financial regulation 
and supervision in some advanced countries.” The G20 members drew the conclusion that 
“all countries […] must improve their regulatory and supervisory regimes.” 
Let me in  my remarks tonight discuss where we stand  with this G20 process and assess, 
particularly, what has been achieved regarding the financial market regulations agenda. My 
focus will be on the Basel III framework and the priorities for the future. I will then broaden 
my  perspective  and  turn  to  the  question  on  the  role  of  finance  for  economic  growth  more 
generally. 
So let me briefly discuss how we reached the point where we stand. Following the November 
2008 meeting in Sao Paulo, the G20 meetings in Washington in the same month, in London 
in spring 2009 and finally in Pittsburgh in autumn 2009 led to an agenda for putting financial 
regulation on better footing. Already the declaration of the Washington Summit established 
the major principles that should henceforth guide the reform of financial markets:  
first, strengthening transparency and accountability;  
second, enhancing sound regulation;  
third, promoting integrity in financial markets;  
fourth, reinforcing international cooperation;  
fifth, reforming international financial institutions.  
As  for  the  call  for  better  regulation,  the  declaration  pledged  “to  strengthen  our  regulatory 
regimes, prudential oversight, and risk management, and ensure that all financial markets, 
products  and  participants  are  regulated  or  subject  to  oversight,  as  appropriate  to  their 
circumstances.”  
The G20 Leaders’ Statement of Pittsburgh in 2009 foresaw “strict and precise timetables” for 
the implementation of the reforms. However, after the initial impetus following the impression 
of the climax of the financial crisis, the steps to reform have been frequently criticized to have 
lost momentum. In fact, the Financial Stability Board has put in place a framework to monitor 
the  progress  on  implementing  the  G20  financial  reforms.  This  shows  that  for  some  of  the 
                                                 
1   See http://www.g20.org/index.aspx for the G20 statements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
identified  priority  areas,  achievements  have  not  reached  beyond  a  settlement  of  general 
agreements, but significant progress has been made.  
Important  reforms  are  expected  to  be  finalized  only  in  the  years  to  come.  This  is  true.  for 
instance for the important field of regulating and supervising the shadow banking system, in 
which only next year work will begin on setting the details of the respective policies. Also the 
necessary  regulations  or  legislation  to  implement  the  Basel  III  framework  –  especially  the 
strengthening  of  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  standards  –  will  start  to  be  put  in  place  as  of 
January 2013. The full set of regulations will only be phased in by 2019, more than ten years 
after the recent financial crisis had seen its peak.  
The  G20  leaders  at  the  2009  Pittsburgh  meeting  have  warned  that  “a  sense  of  normalcy 
should not lead to complacency”. Indeed, the first signs of a re-stabilizing global economy 
has  withdrawn  the  necessary  push  behind  the  process  of  reforming  financial  regulation. 
While  regulators  have  correctly  adopted  the  view  that  it  is  more  important  to  make 
regulations right and waterproof, we have to ensure that the financial sector reform is put in 
place in a thorough but also swift manner.  
Reforming financial system regulations: a snapshot of the current state 
2. 
Let me turn to outlining the current state of the financial sector reform and focus in particular 
on the new international agreement on capital and liquidity standards – known as Basel III 
framework. This framework mainly contains five central elements: 
The first is the strengthening of the quality and quantity of bank capital, and a harmonisation 
of the calculation of regulatory capital across jurisdictions. Better and higher bank capital is 
needed  in  order  to  foster  the  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  banks.  To  this  aim,  Basel III 
increased the minimum common equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio from 2% to 4.5% of risk weighted 
assets. 
The  second  is  the  requirement  for  banks  to  build-up  buffers  above  the  required  minimum, 
particularly  when  the  economy  is  booming,  thereby  providing  for  additional  cushions  to 
absorb  losses  in  periods  of  financial  distress.2  In  addition,  further  buffer  requirements  are 
foreseen for systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) as well. 
The  third  element  is  directed  to  enhance  the  “risk  coverage”  of  the  regulatory  framework, 
providing  a  more  comprehensive  treatment  of  banks’  exposures  to  complex  financial 
products whose risk to the system has been neglected so far. 
The fourth element is the adoption of a simple and transparent rule to prevent the excessive 
reliance on debt by the banking sector. 
And last, but not least, the new framework intends to improve banks’ resilience to liquidity 
shocks  and  to  increase  market  confidence  in  the  liquidity  position  of  banks.  The  intended 
improvements in the liquidity position of banks aim at containing the excessive reliance on 
short-term funding and give incentives to hold safe and liquid assets. 
Once the new regulatory framework will be fully implemented in Europe and worldwide, the 
scope and magnitude of changes in regulatory requirements will yield – in my view – several 
long-term benefits.  
First, the implementation of harmonised, world-wide rules on capital requirements will level 
the playing field for banks with international reach, boosting competition and increasing the 
availability of financial services to both households and non-financial corporations.  
                                                 
2   The capital conservation buffer will equal 2.5% of risk weighted assets, setting the target CET1 ratio (together 
with the 4.5% minimum requirement) at 7%. The counter-cyclical capital buffer will vary between 0% and 2.5% 
of risk weighted assets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, cyclical buffers will help to protect the banking sector and the real economy from the 
system-wide risks associated with the boom-bust cycle in aggregate credit growth. 
And third, the new liquidity requirements will ensure that the banking sector has enough high-
quality liquid assets to withstand acute funding stress, as well as guarantee that longer-term 
assets are funded by more stable medium or longer-term sources. 
Perhaps the most important benefits of a safer financial system are those stemming from an 
effective  prevention  and  mitigation  of  banking  crisis  that  are  associated  with  substantial 
economic and social costs. Indeed, as history shows, systemic banking crises can produce 
losses that are multiples of annual GDP, which undoubtedly makes the benefits of reducing 
the likelihood of costly financial crisis very high. 
The costs of the recent crisis were in fact sizeable. For the year 2009, a GDP loss of about 
4 percent  was  recorded  for  the  OECD  countries.  There  is  possibly  also  a  permanent 
depressing effect on medium-term potential output.3  
Governments and central banks took unprecedented action globally in response to the perils 
originating from the financial market turmoil. Euro area governments, for instance, increased 
their deficits on average by more than 5 percentage points of GDP in 2010. This was a joint 
consequence  of  rescue  packages  for  financial  institutions,  cyclical  stimulus  packages  and 
operations  of  automatic  stabilizers.  In  2010,  Ireland  recorded  a  deficit  of  over  30  percent, 
resulting  from  a  one-off  support  for  its  banking  sector.  Debt-to-GDP  ratios  in  advanced 
economies have increased on average by about 25 percentage points since 2007. 
Central banks around the world expanded their balance sheets, though to different extents 
and with different asset-liability structures.  
It is clear that in our democracies, such measures taken by fiscal and monetary authorities 
can only be an exception. They are not at all repeatable, neither in nature nor in scale. The 
disasters that we witnessed in the financial system must not repeat themselves. It all leads to 
one conclusion: Reforms are urgent! 
The  Basel  III  framework  means  some  progress  on  the  way  towards  a  more  sound  and 
resilient financial system and in my view it is at the core of financial regulation. 
Nonetheless, to complete the G20 Action Plan, further policy actions need to be taken. Let 
me  just  highlight  three  initiatives  that  I  consider  as  key  elements  of  the  new  regulatory 
framework:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Concerning credit rating agencies, the FSB published in October 2010 a set of principles that 
aim at reducing reliance on external credit ratings. International standard setters and national 
authorities now have to translate these principles into specific policy actions. However, the 
work  in  this  field  remains  at  an  early  stage,  and  the  progress  has  to  be  accelerated 
significantly in several jurisdictions. 
But  let  me  also  mention  that  important  steps  have  already  been  taken  in  this  field.  For 
example, the Dodd-Frank Act in the US requires authorities to remove all references to or 
requirements  for  credit  ratings  from  regulations.  An  important  challenge  for  authorities, 
however, is to develop alternative standards that could reliably indicate the creditworthiness 
of borrowers.  
the regulation of credit rating agencies,  
the regulation of the shadow banking system, including hedge funds, and  
the establishment of effective bank resolution regimes. 
                                                 
3   See OECD (2010), “Economic Policy Reforms – Going for Growth”, Part 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Concerning  the  regulation  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  it  is  important  to  close  the  gaps 
between  strengthened  banking  regulation  and  the  non-regulated  entities.  Work  is  currently 
underway at the FSB level to define the perimeter of the “shadow banking system”4 and to 
analyse its role in financial intermediation and in risk transfer to the wider financial system. 
Detailed recommendations on the regulatory treatment of shadow banking are expected to 
be prepared only by 2012. In the EU, work on shadow banking, however is at a relatively 
early  stage,  currently  focussing  on  a  stocktaking  of  existing  regulations  and  conducting  a 
data sharing exercise. 
Finally, let me also mention that the development of effective bank resolution regimes, which 
has been on the top of the global and EU regulatory agendas, is also a key element of a 
successful  policy  response  to  the  recent  crisis.  There  is  now  a  broad  consensus  that  all 
distressed institutions, particularly systemic ones, should be dealt with by authorities in a way 
which safeguards the stability of the financial system as a whole and minimises public costs 
and economic disruption. 
In the US several banks were allowed to fail in an orderly manner in the recent years, which 
could  provide  an  example  for  other  countries  as  well  concerning  the  set-up  of  an  efficient 
resolution  regime  in  a  national  context.  However,  it  has  to  be  acknowledged  that  most  of 
these banks in the US were rather small compared to average European bank sizes and they 
were almost exclusively national based with no or very little cross-border operation.  
Therefore,  substantial  challenges  remain  for  authorities  around  the  globe  to  establish 
effective cross-border resolutions schemes, in particular for global systematically important 
banks. The new frameworks should be guided by the FSB’s new international standard for 
resolution  regimes,  as  endorsed  by  G20  Leaders  at  their  Cannes  Summit  of  4  November 
2011.5  This  standard  could  mean  a  substantial  improvement,  since  it  not  only  contains  a 
broad arsenal of effective resolution tools, but also provisions to facilitate cooperation among 
national authorities. Nonetheless, in my view, a greater centralization of crisis management 
and  resolution  responsibilities  for  cross-border  SIFIs  would  also  be  needed,  with  a  strong 
coordinating role for the home authority. In this regard, I would very much welcome a move 
towards  an  EU-level  resolution  authority,  the  same  way  as  our  supervisory  system  moved 
already partly from national to the EU level. 
A bird’s eye view: the size and role of the financial sector 
3. 
With this quick résumé of where we stand in overhauling financial regulation in mind, let me turn to 
the more general question what role the financial sector is playing in our economies at large.  
A major German newspaper recently published a poll that had asked respondents to name 
those  five  professions  for  which  they  have  the  highest  respect.6  The  results  of  the  survey 
found  the  respect  for  “Bankers  and  bank  employees”  ranking  at  the  bottom.  Even  the 
profession of “Politicians” was considered more – albeit marginally – respectable. Only “TV 
moderators” fared inferiorly to bankers.  
Such a derogatory view of the financial industry is not a new phenomenon, though. Churchill 
apparently uttered in 1925 that he “would rather see finance less proud and industry more 
content.”  
                                                 
4   Currently no exact definition of the “shadow banking system” exists. According to the FSB, it can broadly be 
described as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system” (See 
Shadow Banking: Strengthening Oversight and Regulation, Recommendations of the Financial Stability Board, 
27 October 2011). 
5   Financial Stability Board: Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes, 4 November 2011. 
6   See Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, 30 October 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The negative perception of the financial industry often focuses on compensation practices. In 
fact, commentators have frequently expressed their scepticism on whether the activities of 
bankers  and  market  players  deserve  those  high  wages  and  bonuses  compared  to  the 
economic rewards earned in other industries. Already Keynes wondered “… how long will it 
be necessary to pay City men so entirely out of proportion to what other servants of society 
commonly receive for performing social services not less useful or difficult?”  
It is by now well understood that excessive wage and bonus packages in some segments of 
financial  markets  have  encouraged  irresponsible  risk-taking.  Thus,  incentives  were  set 
inappropriately.  Against  this  backdrop,  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that  the  overhaul  of 
compensation  practices  in  the  financial  sector  appears  to  have  dragged  the  most  broad-
based public attention among all the components of the financial sector reforms.  
Let me remark en passant that for improving financial institutions’ own corporate governance 
as well as its public acceptance it will be key that compensation schemes will set incentives 
to  take  into  account  the  long  term  viability  and  success  of  such  institutions.  This  includes 
internalising  the  repercussions  of  the  risks  involved,  and  not  just  the  maximization  of  the 
short term profit objectives.  
While the growth of wages and compensation in the financial sector is striking, it is not the 
only dimension at which the financial industry is being criticized to have “outgrown”.  
Let  me  illustrate  this  with  some  key  figures.  A  telling  measure  of  the  size  of  the  financial 
sector is given by the share of stocks, bonds and loans to the private sector as a percentage 
of GDP. With the exception of Japan, this measure has also trended upwards in major OECD 
economies. This measure of the size of the financial sector stood around 430% of GDP in 
the United Kingdom, 315% in the United States, and 262% in the euro area, averaged over 
the period 2005 to 2009.7  
Finally, the so-called shadow banking system has been likewise growing rapidly before the crisis. 
Estimates of the assets in the shadow banking system, based on a proxy measure for non-bank 
credit intermediation for Australia, Canada, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, the United States 
and the euro area, saw a rise from $27 trillion in 2002 to $60 trillion in 2007. Following a slight 
subsequent decline, that number stood again at a similar magnitude in 2010.8 
The  two  or  three  decades  before  the  crisis  have  seen  a  strong  increase  of  the  financial 
sector in advanced economies. Viewed together with the negative experiences of the recent 
financial crisis, it is thus tempting to assert that the financial sector has in fact grown out of 
proportion. In what follows, I will address this assessment in more detail.  
The idea that “too much finance” can be detrimental for economic growth, has found some 
empirical  and  theoretical  confirmation  in  the  academic  literature.9  It  evidences  a  non-
monotonic relation between the size of the financial sector and average growth: if the size of 
the financial system exceeds a certain threshold, it may have a negative growth impact. One 
mechanism  behind  such  pattern  may  be  that  a  larger  financial  sector  would  contribute  to 
exacerbating  the  positive  relation  between  average  growth  and  the  probability  of  sizeable 
economic downturns. Another explanation would be that even in tranquil times, an oversized 
financial sector may represent a misallocation of financial and human resources that could 
be better utilized elsewhere in the economy. 
Clearly, 
in  particular  a 
in 
characterization of the optimal size of the financial sector. Nevertheless, it should be already 
clear that it cannot be the sheer scale of activity in the financial sector per se that matters for 
growth and economic welfare, but rather the types and qualities of financial sector activity.  
this  respect.  This  regards 
further  research 
is  needed 
                                                 
7   The figures are based on calculations using data from WFE, IMF, Datastream and Eurostat. 
8   Financial Stability Board (2011), “Shadow Banking: Strengthening Oversight and Regulation”, October 2011. 
9   See, e.g., Arcand, J.-L., Berkes, E. and Panizza, U. (2011), “Too much finance?”, on www.voxeu.org. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
providing information about investment projects and allocating capital;  
monitoring investments and exerting corporate governance after providing finance;  
facilitating trading, diversification and management of risk;  
and mobilizing and pooling savings.11  
This  applies  in  particular  to  our  assessment  of  the  years  before  the  crisis.  Beyond  merely 
stating – somewhat bluntly – that “the financial sector had become too big”, I think that we 
can draw the more specific conclusion: 
“The financial sector had stepped out of its role of serving the real economy.” 
Let me explain in more detail what I mean by this.  
It has long been recognized that the financial sector does not exist in the economy “for its 
own sake”, but its role is one of servicing the real economy. Or as Joseph Schumpeter put it 
in 1934: “He (the banker) stands between those who wish to form new combinations and the 
possessors  of  productive  means…  He  is  the  ephor  (the  overseer)  of  the  exchange 
economy.”10  
In fact, all the elements that have been identified in the finance and economics literature as 
the key functions of the financial sector are eventually directed towards the support of the 
real economy:  
 
 
 
 
In providing these services, the financial industry plays its role to contribute to sustainable 
economic growth. 
I would argue that, during the recent years, the financial sector has lost focus in playing this 
role. In a period characterized  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the financial sector has become to some extent self-referential.  
Rather than helping with a proper diversification and management of risk, the financial sector 
itself created a huge tail risk for the rest of the economy. As Raguram Rajan summarized in 
his  book  “Fault  Lines”:  “The  financial  sector  is,  in  many  ways,  the  brain  of  a  modern 
economy.  When  it  functions  well,  it  allocates  resources  and  risk  effectively  and  thereby 
boosts economic growth. [...] It works for all of us. Of course, when it works poorly, as has 
done recently, it can do enormous damage while befitting a very few.”12 
Part  of  the  failures  was  certainly  attributable  to  deficiencies  in  financial  regulation  and 
supervision.  The  regulatory  overhaul  of  the  financial  sector  is  intending  to  correct  this  and 
thus help the financial sector to refocus on its servicing role.  
by search-for-yield with inadequate risk assessment and pricing, 
by weak underwriting standards,  
by inadequate risk management practices, 
by fragile short-term funding of long-term assets,  
by a proliferation of opaque financial products, 
and by excessive leverage,  
                                                 
10   See Schumpeter, J.A. (1934), “The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, 
Interest and the Business Cycle”, Harvard University Press. 
11   For this list of functions see Levine, R. (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms”, in 
P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds), The Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland. 
12   See Rajan, R.G. (2010), “Fault Lines”, Princeton University Press. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 financial  market 
Strengthening of bank capital and liquidity standards,  
addressing systemically important financial institutions,  
improving  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets  and  core 
infrastructures,  
and a reform of compensation practices, that I mentioned before,  
these are all important elements in this process.  
 
 
At  the  same  time,  regulatory  reforms  themselves  require  regular  revaluation.  As a  case  in 
point, the ongoing sovereign debt crisis has put into question the treatment of sovereign debt 
risk on banks’ balance sheets. When the financial crisis started, few would have suspected 
how prevalent a risk some of these allegedly safe and liquid assets could become for banks. 
Now, however, it has to be seriously reflected whether debt should no longer be assigned a 
zero risk weight under the EU’s Capital Requirements Directive and rather be subjected to a 
regulatory capital charge. Government bonds are not risk-free anymore. 
Looking forward, a system that serves its role of serving the real economy requires a safer 
and more narrowly focused banking system, equipped with sufficiently high capital. Indeed, 
the fact that a sound and role-focused financial system has to be smaller than the status quo 
ante  is  apparently  becoming  recognized  on  a  broad  basis.  Recently,  Peter  Fisher,  senior 
managing  director  of  Fixed  Income  Portfolio  Management  at  BlackRock,  was  reported  to 
have  claimed  “I  understand  we  want  to  make  individual  firms  stronger  but  our  banking 
system is too large”, and he asserted that the financial sector in Western Europe and North 
America has to shrink by 25%. I daresay that this is a rather unsuspicious voice supporting 
the call for a smaller, more stable and re-focused financial system.13 Others go even further, 
arguing that the financial sector should shrink by one third. 
Conclusion  
has outgrown in size,  
lost track of its core functions,  
and became a major source of risk itself.  
4. 
Let me conclude. Recent years have seen a financial system that  
 
 
 
Overall, the financial sector has veered from its genuine role of servicing the real economy. 
The current process of overhauling financial system regulation are an important factor to help 
the financial sector become safer and thus eventually to contribute to sustainable economic 
growth.  
It  is  now  important  not  to  lose  momentum  and  to  strictly  follow  the  schedules  for 
implementation.  At  the  same  time,  the  adequacy  of  the  regulatory  system  needs  to  be 
assessed on a regular basis. This helps avoiding the mistake of the past that regulators fail 
to spot new sources of risk arising in the financial sector. 
The  guiding  principle  on  all  regulatory  measures  and  any  re-dimensioning  of  the  financial 
sector  must  be:  finance  has  to  regain  its  core  role  of  servicing  the  real  economy  without 
becoming a source of risk itself.  
In this way we are heading towards a safer financial system for the benefit of all of us.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
13   See http://www.marketwatch.com/story/blackrocks-fisher-banks-must-shrink-by-25-2011-09-23. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
