Daniel Mminele: A delicate balancing act – how to reconcile upside 
medium term inflation risks with near term growth concerns 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Daniel  Mminele,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank,  at  the  Bank  of  America  Merrill  Lynch  10th  Annual  Investor-to-Corporate  Conference 
2011, Cape Town, 18 October 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
The topic I have been asked to speak on is quite an appropriate one at this juncture, but also 
a  very  difficult  one,  consuming  the  minds  of  many  central  bankers  around  the  world, 
particularly in emerging market countries. The world has never fully come out of the crisis 
that started in 2008; we have just seen the form of the crisis evolving over time. Now, four 
years later, the global economy appears to be once again on the precipice and could tilt in 
either  direction,  depending  on  the  resolve  of  policy  makers  to  finally  put  in  place 
comprehensive and credible plans to fully address sovereign debt and banking sector risks, 
in  order  to  deal  with  current  near-term  downside  risks  to  the  global  economy.  This  should 
then  open  the  way  for  undertaking  the  necessary  structural  reforms  required  to  tackle 
underlying  root  causes,  and  thus  put  the  global  economy  on  a  stronger,  sustainable  and 
more balanced footing in the medium term. 
My comments this morning will focus more generally on the dilemma facing many emerging 
market  economies  today,  notably,  elevated  inflation  and  slowing  growth.  This  is  in  stark 
contrast  to  the  situation  one  year  ago,  when  emerging  markets  were  faced  with  rising 
inflation  and  stronger  growth.  Thereafter,  I  will  delve  a  little  deeper  into  the  inflation  and 
growth dynamics in South Africa.  
Reconciling inflation and growth  
2. 
Real  economic  activity  in  advanced  economies  has  slowed  considerably,  confidence  has 
fallen  sharply  and  financial  sector  risks  have  intensified.  This  has  added  to  an  already 
complicated  environment,  characterised  by  high  levels  of  public  debt.  Growth  dynamics  in 
emerging  market  economies  are  in  much  better  shape  than  advanced  economies,  but 
interlinkages in the global economy render emerging markets vulnerable and they may not 
be in a position, as they were in the past, to carry the global economy. Ultimately, emerging 
market growth is highly dependent on growth in advanced economies, as we saw recently 
after  China  recorded  a  sharp  slowdown  in  exports,  due  to  softer  growth  in  the  US  and 
Europe. Emerging market central banks have also had to contend with strong capital inflows 
over the past few years owing to a search for yield, and resulting in appreciating currencies. 
We were, however, provided with a stark reminder a few weeks ago about the inherent risks 
associated with volatile capital flows, when we saw abrupt and sizeable outflows in the wake 
of  sudden  changes  in  investor  sentiment,  and  the  associated  impact  on  currencies  and 
emerging market assets in general.  
Signs  have  emerged  of  a  slowdown  in  emerging  market  economies,  while  inflationary 
pressures  continue  to  be  somewhat  elevated.  South  Africa’s  situation  has  been  a  little 
different,  as  growth  has  been  somewhat  more  subdued  as  compared  to  other  emerging 
market economies and demand driven inflationary pressures largely absent. The Monetary 
Policy  Committee  statement  after  our  most  recent  meeting  in  September  highlighted  the 
challenges facing monetary policy presently and going forward. These challenges are driven 
by recent data which have confirmed that while the domestic economic activity has slowed 
down  considerably  in  the  second  quarter,  at  the  same  time,  there  is  upward  pressure  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
domestic  inflation  driven  by  a  number  of  exogenous  factors.  The  worst  case  scenario  for 
monetary policy of course, is a combination of slow growth and higher inflationary pressures, 
a real double whammy scenario.  
Different shocks, depending on whether they be demand or supply driven, require different 
policy  responses.  What  is  important  is  to  understand  the  source  of  the  shocks,  their 
magnitude and possible duration, as well as the associated inflationary consequences, and 
only once we understand this, judge what the suitable policy response will be. Sounds much 
easier than it is in practice! In the case of a demand driven shock or demand-pull inflation, 
monetary policy would generally be tightened sufficiently in an effort to bring inflation back 
towards any stipulated target.  
Cost push inflation on the other hand is caused by rising costs of production, such as a rise 
in oil prices, which will tend to drive up petrol prices and in turn, the prices of other goods as 
transportation costs increase. This type of inflation causes a certain level of inflation across 
the economy, but also tends to have a dampening effect on growth, as consumers will tend 
to adjust their spending habits to take into account increased spending on these items. The 
policy response in this case is not quite as straightforward. A tightening of policy may bring 
down inflation, but will not have any impact on the root of the problem being rising oil prices, 
and in fact would most likely exacerbate the fall in output and worsen the impact of the shock 
for households and businesses. Having said that, however, discarding a supply side shock, 
such  as  a  spike  in  oil  prices,  may  not  always  be  advisable.  What  needs  to  be  carefully 
assessed  are  the  reasons  for  any  supply  shocks,  whether  such  shocks  are  viewed  to  be 
transitory or permanent, and most importantly, whether or not they carry with them the risk of 
feeding  through  to  underlying  inflation  or  core  prices.  A  feed  through  to  core  inflation  and 
evidence of second round effects would most likely occur when there is very little slack in the 
economy and prices in general are under pressure, or if inflation expectations rise alongside 
the  rise  in  inflation,  and  translate  into  higher  nominal  wage  demands,  which  in  turn  would 
feed through to higher core prices. In this event, the supply shock will result in general price 
levels going up, generating inflation. Depending on the extent of this, policy makers at some 
point  have  to  make  a  choice  to  either  accommodate  these  pressures  or  seek  to  counter 
them.  
The  manner  in  which  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  approached  such  supply  side 
shocks, is to allow the initial price level effects to flow through to final prices, but to look out 
for second round effects that would push inflation above the target on a sustained basis. In 
the longer-run, the impact of the supply shock on prices of other goods will depend largely on 
how inflation expectations respond to the shock. The best case scenario would be if inflation 
expectations signal that the rise in inflation will only be temporary. However, if expectations 
show a more permanent rise in inflation, in response to the supply shock, then it is likely that 
wages  and  salaries  will  also  rise  across  the  economy  and  prices  throughout  the  economy 
could be affected and adjusted higher. In this case, core inflation will generally tend to rise 
and converge with the higher measure of headline inflation. In this instance, monetary policy 
would  need  to  ensure  that  relative  price  changes  do  not  alter  inflation  expectations  to  the 
extent that it becomes difficult to achieve a moderate and acceptable inflation rate over the 
medium term1.  
South Africa’s inflation/growth profile 
3. 
South  Africa’s  year-on-year  consumer  price  index  has  remained  within  the  3  –  6  per  cent 
target range since February 2010. A combination of supply side shocks, administered price 
                                                 
1  Eric  S  Rosengren,  “A  look  inside  a  key  economic  debate  –  how  should  monetary  policy  respond  to  price 
increases driven by supply shocks?”, 4 May 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increases  and  wage  settlements  well  in  excess  of  inflation,  resulted  in  the  targeted  CPI 
measure increasing from a low of 3.2 per cent in September 2010 to 5.3 per cent in August 
2011. Administered prices increased well above the upper end of the target range for more 
than 20 months, accelerating from 7.1 per cent in September 2010 to around 12.0 per cent in 
August 2011. Rising prices for food, petrol and electricity contributed 1.1 percentage points, 
1.6  percentage  points  and  1.0  percentage  point  respectively  to  the  August  reading,  and 
greatly  influenced  what  otherwise  would  have  been  a  somewhat  more  benign  inflation 
environment.  Core  inflation  has  also  edged  up  in  recent  months,  although  the  overall 
underlying inflation trend appears relatively well contained for now.  
Alongside the increase in inflation, inflation expectations, as measured by both the Reuters 
survey of financial analysts, and the Bureau for Economic Research, have adjusted higher 
towards the upper end of the inflation target range. Whereas inflation expectations remain on 
average within the target range for the forecast period ending 2013 and as such appear to be 
relatively  well  anchored  at  present,  future  developments  in  this  regard  will  require  careful 
monitoring.  Nominal  wage  settlements,  although  well  above  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation 
target  range,  have  moderated.  The  average  wage  settlement  rate  in  the  first  half  of  2011 
amounted  to  7.5  per  cent,  compared  to  8.2  per  cent  in  2010.  Nominal  unit  labour  costs 
decelerated  from  10.7  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2010  to  5.3  per  cent  in  the  first 
quarter of 2011, despite a marked decline in productivity.  
Demand-side  pressures  are  currently  relatively  subdued  and  not  expected  to  exacerbate 
inflationary pressures in the short term. Economic activity in South Africa decelerated from 
4,5 per cent real GDP growth in the first quarter of this year to 1.3 per cent in the second 
quarter.  South  Africa  is  currently  growing  at  below  its  potential  growth  rate,  which  we 
estimate to be around 3.5%, with an output gap of around 3% in the second quarter of 2011. 
During this quarter the deceleration in economic activity was recorded across the agriculture, 
mining and manufacturing sectors, with only a marginally stronger performance recorded in 
the  services  sector.  The  combination  of  adverse  weather  conditions,  industrial  action  and 
safety-related stoppages at certain mines contributed to this disappointing performance. High 
frequency  data  points  to  continued  weak  conditions  in  the  mining,  manufacturing  and 
construction sectors and this is also reflected by declining business confidence, to well below 
the neutral level of 50.  
The  manufacturing  sector,  which  contributes  about  15  per  cent  to  GDP,  contracted  by 
7 per cent year-on-year during the second quarter. The monthly manufacturing data and the 
Kagiso Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) indicate that the manufacturing sector will likely 
record another disappointing performance in the third quarter. The PMI remained below the 
50 threshold for two consecutive months, before recovering to a level of 50,7 index points in 
September  2011,  while  the  employment  index  has  remained  below  the  50  index  level. 
According  to  Kagiso,  the  PMI  leading  indicator,  measured  as  the  ratio  between  new  sales 
orders and inventories, remained at an early-2009 low of 0.85 in September. This is reflective 
of  high  inventory  levels,  well  above  the  demand  for  factory  goods.  Furthermore,  the  PMI 
average  for  the  third  quarter  was 47.2  index points  (55.1  recorded in  the  second  quarter), 
which does not bode well for actual factory output and growth in the third quarter.  
Weak conditions on the production side reflect both the poor state of the global economy, as 
well  as  the  deceleration  in  domestic  demand  conditions.  Domestic  expenditure  grew  by 
1.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2011, from an annualised rate of 7.9 per cent in the first 
quarter.  Household  consumption  expenditure  decelerated  significantly  and  government 
expenditure  contracted.  The  combined  impact  of  rising  inflationary  pressures  that  affect 
households’ disposable income, falling consumer confidence, the still relatively weak housing 
market,  declines  in  the  value  of  assets,  high  debt  burdens  and  reduced  access  to  credit 
further adds to households cautiousness in their spending decisions. Strong wage inflation 
during 2010 is also starting to take its toll on employment creation and the unemployment 
rate increased to 25.7 per cent in the second quarter of this year (although even through the 
boom  periods,  unemployment  still  remained  high  around  22  per  cent).  Continued  labour 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
shedding is expected to weigh on consumer spending going forward, while the lower growth 
trajectory, in turn, does not bode well for employment creation. Other indicators pointing to a 
slowdown in economic growth, include the weaker growth and/or in some instances a decline 
in retail sales, vehicle sales and house prices. 
Against  this  background,  policy  makers  and  economists  have  downgraded  their  growth 
forecasts  for  the  year.  The  Bank  has  lowered  its  growth  forecast,  due  to  the  lower-than-
expected GDP outcome in the second quarter, the impact of industrial action on key sectors 
such as manufacturing, as well as a downward adjustment to the global growth assumptions. 
The Bank’s latest projections show growth to average 3.2 per cent in 2011, lower than the 
previous forecast of 3.7 per cent, while the forecast for 2012 has been reduced from 3.9 per 
cent  to  3.6  per  cent.  The  risks  to  this  outlook  are  seen  to  be  on  the  downside,  mainly  on 
account of risk to the global economy.  
The Bank’s inflation forecast has been adjusted higher on a few occasions this year to take 
into  account  higher  oil  and  food  prices.  At  the  last  sitting  of  the  MPC  in  September,  the 
inflation  forecast  was  left  largely  unchanged.  It  is  expected  that  inflation  could  breach  the 
upper end of the target range in the final quarter of 2011 and to peak in the first quarter of 
2012 at around 6.2 per cent, but then to return within the target range in the second quarter. 
In the final quarter of 2012, inflation is expected to ease to around 5.5 per cent. The Bank’s 
measure of core inflation shows a rising trend, peaking at around 5.1 per cent in the second 
and third quarters of 2013. What is important for the Bank is the trajectory of inflation and to 
what extent any breach of the target is sustained. Our assumptions at this stage point to a 
temporary breach of the inflation target. 
However,  there  are  a  number  of  upside  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  which  require  careful 
monitoring. The main upside risks continue to emanate from exogenous factors, as well as 
administered prices, and despite the easing in wage pressures this year, this could become a 
factor  going  forward.  The  stronger  currency  to  some  extent  helped  to  contain  inflationary 
pressures domestically, but more recently, the depreciation of the rand brought to the fore 
the  potential  upside  risk  emanating  from  a  sharply  weaker  currency.  To  what  extent  one 
should be concerned about the recent depreciation in the rand exchange rate is a function of 
many  factors,  including  whether  it  is  short-term  or  longer-term  in  nature,  the  eventual 
magnitude of the depreciation, the pricing power of firms, the stickiness of prices, the history 
of inflation and the domestic content of traded goods.  
Clearly,  the  MPC  is  having  to  deal  with  a  delicate  balance  at  present  between  the  upside 
risks to inflation and the downside risks to growth. Much is dependent on the unfolding global 
environment, in particular growth prospects in the US, and the sovereign debt crisis in the 
euro zone, whether or not this turns into a banking crisis and spills over to other areas of the 
world. Should European leaders manage to avert a full-blown crisis, this will go a long way to 
restoring the health of the financial system and injecting confidence into financial markets, 
business  and  consumers.  The  MPC  will  keep  a  close  watch  on  underlying  inflationary 
pressures,  and  to  what  extent  these  are  reflected  in  inflation  expectations  and  wage 
settlements, in addition to which, we will pay close attention to global economic and financial 
market events as they unfold.  
Conclusion  
4. 
Monetary  policy  makers  across  the  world  have  to  make  difficult  decisions  in  a  highly 
uncertain  and  volatile  economic  and  financial  market  environment,  and  have  to  be  careful 
and ensure that higher inflation expectations do not become entrenched, but also ensure that 
actions  taken  to  contain  inflation  are  not  premature  and  risk  a  further  slowing  in  growth. 
However, it is also important to also accept that while monetary policy has to contribute its 
fair  share,  shifting  a  disproportionate  amount  of  the  responsibility  to  resolve  current 
challenges to monetary authorities can only result in sowing the seeds of future problems. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In South Africa recent supply shocks have placed upward pressure on inflation, but there is 
no  evidence  this  far  to  suggest  that  these  pressures  are  becoming  entrenched  and  that 
inflation  expectations  are  becoming  less  anchored.  Nonetheless,  it  is  important  to  monitor 
these dynamics to ensure that second round effects do not take hold, that there any pass 
through to other prices is carefully assessed, and that inflation expectations do not diverge 
significantly from the recent past. As indicated, the key challenge will be to strike a delicate 
balance  between  a  monetary  policy  stance  which  is  appropriate  to  support  the  hesitant 
economic  recovery,  while  ensuring  that  incipient  inflationary  pressures  are  managed,  and 
that there is no doubt about the Bank’s commitment to its mandate.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
