Jürgen Stark: Economic adjustment in a monetary union 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Bank  of  Latvia  annual  conference  “Global  Challenges  and  Local  Opportunities: 
Achievements and Prospects in the Baltic States”, Riga, 12 October 2011. 
 Exactly three years ago, in October 2008, the global financial crisis started to hit the Latvian 
economy. A strong policy reaction was unavoidable to stabilise the situation and correct past 
excesses.  Latvia  embarked  on  a  remarkable  economic  adjustment  process,  laying  the 
foundations  of  a  renewed  upturn.  Although  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go,  strong  policies, 
supported  by  international  financial  assistance,  have  resulted  in  a  significant  reduction  of 
Latvia’s macroeconomic imbalances. 
Right  now,  some  euro  area  countries  are  facing  similar  challenges  to  those  facing  Latvia 
during the past three years. Although the magnitudes and some other features may differ, 
the broad characteristics are the same. In both cases, there is a need for adjustment as a 
result of macroeconomic imbalances, losses in competitiveness and unsustainable economic 
policies. For both Latvia and euro area countries, the challenge is to implement an economic 
adjustment  without  using  the  nominal  exchange  rate  as  an  instrument.  In  Latvia,  the 
authorities chose not to use that option, whereas in the euro area that option is no longer 
available.  
Adjusting without the nominal exchange rate is the topic of my speech today. The loss of the 
exchange  rate  as  a  policy  instrument  has  important  implications  for  economic  policies, 
especially  in  a  world  where  countries  are  faced  with  economic  shocks  that  require 
adjustment.  After  discussing  some  conceptual  issues,  I  will  draw  some  lessons  from  the 
crisis for the euro area. Those lessons very clearly highlight that, in order to reap the benefits 
of a common currency, participating countries need to satisfy certain economic conditions. 
Finally, I will also reflect on Latvia’s experience.  
Conceptual considerations: economic adjustment in a monetary union 
How do countries in a monetary union adjust to asymmetric macroeconomic shocks? In the 
absence  of  nominal  exchange  rate  flexibility  vis-à-vis  the  other  countries  participating  in  a 
monetary  union,  adjustment  has  to  occur  via  other  channels.  Many  years  ago,  Mundell 
argued that if a group of countries wanted to adopt a common currency, the shocks that they 
were exposed to had better be similar. If that were not the case, they would need to have 
strong alternative adjustment mechanisms.1 
Mundell  and  others  identified  key  conditions  for  such  alternative  adjustment  mechanisms: 
price flexibility, factor mobility and fiscal transfers. Price flexibility is important in order to let 
countries  affected  by  adverse  economic  shocks  recover  by  adjusting  wages  and  reducing 
relative  prices  in  order  to  rebuild  competitiveness.  The  second  adjustment  mechanism, 
cross-border factor mobility, or in particular labour mobility, helps to adjust to adverse shocks 
as  people  move  out  of  the  depressed  economy  until  it  regains  competitiveness  and  the 
labour market in the country finds a new equilibrium. A third adjustment mechanism identified 
in  the  literature  is  fiscal  transfers,  flowing  from  the  stronger  countries  or  regions  to  the 
weaker parts of the monetary union.  
                                                 
1  Mundell, R. (1961), “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas”, American Economic Review, 51, pp. 657–665. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Although these adjustment mechanisms are often referred to as being substitutes, they are in 
fact not. While the first two are important to solve the problem facing a country affected by an 
adverse shock, the third, fiscal transfers, only hides the problem. Temporary transfers can 
play a stabilising role and may be needed – subject to strict conditionality – if a country is 
affected by a very serious adverse shock. Open-ended transfers, however, are not a mode of 
adjustment. In fact, they are the opposite. They finance non-adjustment. 
Therefore, the key adjustment mechanism in a monetary union is price and wage flexibility, 
assuming  that  cross-border  labour  mobility  is  limited.  Wages  and  prices  are  essential  for 
country  adjustments,  as  they  directly  impact  on  the  real  exchange  rate,  and  thus  on  a 
country’s  competitiveness.  In  fact,  wages  and  prices  are,  by  definition,  the  only  remaining 
component  of  the  real  exchange  rate  that  can  be  adjusted  in  the  absence  of  nominal 
exchange rate flexibility.  
It is also important in this regard to distinguish between temporary and permanent adverse 
shocks.  Options  that  are  attractive  in  the  face  of  temporary  shocks  may  be  less  so  if  the 
shock is permanent or highly persistent and vice versa. In the case of a permanent adverse 
shock, the country in question faces an adjustment to a permanently lower standard of living.  
Economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the institutional barriers to flexible wage 
and price-setting mechanisms. If wages and prices are flexible enough and able to adjust to 
changes in economic conditions, then this will not only speed up the adjustment, but it will 
also help to avoid unwelcome fluctuations in output and unemployment. In a monetary union, 
most of the adjustment has to take place through national labour markets. Therefore, wage 
setting should appropriately reflect the different situations of sectors, of firms and of overall 
labour market conditions. 
Lessons from the crisis 
Let me move from conceptual issues to the actual situation in the euro area. What are the 
causes of imbalances in EMU that need to be adjusted now? What are the implications of 
these developments for the functioning of the monetary union? What lessons can we draw 
from this experience for economic adjustment in EMU? 
The  key  point  I  want  to  make  here  is  that  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  unsustainable 
fiscal policies are the root cause of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. The existing 
economic governance framework has not been able to prevent the emergence of excessive 
macroeconomic imbalances. Moreover, fiscal policy coordination in the euro area turned out 
to be completely insufficient. 
Before I discuss what needs to be done to improve EMU’s institutional framework, let me first 
say something on the causes of the macroeconomic imbalances in euro area countries.  
Some countries have built up significant internal and external economic imbalances during 
the  past  decade,  and  recorded  inflation  rates  persistently  above  the  euro  area  average 
(see Slide  2,  HICP  inflation).  The  ECB  repeatedly  warned  against  emerging  imbalances. 
Increases  in  labour  compensation  in  some  countries,  driven  in  most  cases  by  high  public 
sector  wage  increases,  exceeded  productivity  gains  by  a  significant  margin,  leading  to 
increases in unit labour costs in excess of the euro area average and a gradual erosion of 
competitiveness  (see  Slide  3,  ULC  indices).  At  the  same  time,  growth  in  the  unregulated 
financial sector and unsustainably strong domestic demand growth, coupled in some cases 
with excessive credit growth and large and sustained increases in real estate prices, resulted 
in  large  current  account  deficits  (see  Slide  4,  CA  deficits)  and  high  levels  of  public  and 
private debt (see Slide 5, public debt ratios).  
Many 
including  unrealistically  optimistic 
expectations  about  future  income  developments  and  the  underestimation  of  credit  risks  by 
financial  institutions.  A  key  factor  was  that  wage  and  income  policies  were  not  sufficiently 
these  developments, 
factors  contributed 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  early 
framework 
institutional 
focusing  on 
geared  towards  preserving  competitiveness  in  a  monetary  union.  Governments  failed  to 
address  structural  rigidities  in  the  euro  area  economies  –  relating  to,  among  other  things, 
wage-setting  institutions,  including  wage  indexation,  and  to  labour  and  product  market 
regulation.  
An 
identification  and  correction  of 
macroeconomic imbalances would have helped to prevent these problems. But the ongoing 
crisis  is  also  a  symptom  of  policy  failures  and  deficiencies  in  the  existing  institutional 
framework governing economic policies in EMU. The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, the 
central  link  in  coordination  of  the  Member  States’  economic  policies,  did  not  work.  The 
instruments  and  procedures  were  available.  But  they  were  either  not  implemented  or 
ignored, or they were watered down. Peer pressure among the Member States – potentially 
a strong tool of mutual fiscal surveillance – fell short of what was needed as countries did not 
attach sufficient importance to their joint responsibility for the stability of the euro area.  
Several  proposals  have  been  made  on  how  to  overcome  the  flaws  in  the  EMU  governance 
framework and I will only say a few words on the changes we need here.2 Addressing EMU’s 
difficulties requires a major strengthening of the rules and organisations that govern fiscal and 
other  economic  policies.  The  identification  of  the  necessary  reforms  has  to  begin  with  the 
ultimate objective: institutional arrangements that provide credible incentives for sound policies. 
Euro  area  countries  and  countries  preparing  for  euro  adoption  should  be  aware  that  this 
requires the transfer of sovereignty to a central institution with much stronger powers. It also 
requires stricter rules on the preparation and implementation of budgets at the national level. 
The  recent  agreement  reached  by  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  on  the 
economic  governance  package  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  But  it  falls  short  of  the 
“quantum leap” in economic governance that the ECB has long advocated for the euro area.3 
I particularly regret that one of the key aspects of such a quantum leap – greater automaticity 
in  decision-making  through  the  use  of  reverse  qualified  majority  voting  to  the  maximum 
extent possible – has only partly been achieved. I therefore believe that, in the medium term, 
the review clause included in the package should be used to enable further enhancements to 
euro area economic governance that will contribute to a smoother functioning of EMU. 
Reaping the benefits from the euro 
The  experience  of  the  crisis  has  shown  that  participation  in  a  monetary  union  places 
important  demands  on  national  economic  policies.  What  economic  conditions  need  to  be 
satisfied  for  a  country  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  from  adopting  the  euro?  I  believe  that  the 
fundamental logic of the Treaty, and the convergence framework embedded in the Treaty, 
remains  correct:  countries  have  to  make  sure  that  they  pursue  sound  macroeconomic 
policies. They should first and foremost focus on establishing sound fiscal and sustainable 
macroeconomic developments in their own country and complement this with the necessary 
structural reforms. By doing so, they will actually kill two birds with one stone, as they then 
also follow the best possible strategy for ensuring smooth integration into the euro area in a 
lasting manner. 
Reaping the benefits of the euro is thus in the hands of the national authorities themselves. 
Not only can they improve market flexibility, but they can also conduct a well-designed fiscal 
policy. As I have stressed on many occasions, the best contribution fiscal policy can make to 
the proper functioning of the euro area is by being sustainable and medium-term oriented. 
                                                 
2  For  more  details  on  fiscal  reform  proposals,  see,  for  example,  Schuknecht,  L.,  Moutot,  P.,  Rother,  P.  and 
Stark,  J.  (2011),  “The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  –  crisis  and  reform”,  Occasional  Paper  Series,  No  129, 
European Central Bank, September. 
3  See European Central Bank, Reinforcing economic governance in the euro area, 10 June 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Moreover  fiscal  policy  can  and  should  also  help  mitigate  undesirable  trend  growth 
differentials  through  “high  quality”  expenditure  and  tax  policies.  In  particular,  high  and 
inefficient  public  expenditure  can  put  a  brake  on  economic  activity  by  imposing  a  high  tax 
burden on the economy and channelling resources into unproductive uses. 
Let  me  stress  that  governments  and  social  partners  share  responsibility  for  ensuring  that 
wage  determination  sufficiently  takes  into  account  labour  market  conditions  and  does  not 
jeopardise competitiveness and employment. Governments should also be aware that wage 
setting  in  the  public  sector  can  serve  as  a  role  model  for  the  private  sector.  And  social 
partners  need  to  take  into  account  the  different  conditions  at  the  firm  and  sectoral  level, 
internalising 
thus 
employment  at  their  company  and  in  their  industry,  sector  or  region.  Sufficient  wage 
differentiation  would  improve  employment  opportunities  for  less  skilled  workers  and  in 
regions or sectors with high unemployment. In this respect, excessive regulations – both in 
labour  and  product  markets  –  undermine  job  creation,  in  particular  for  young  and  less 
qualified workers, as well as for all those who face problems entering the labour market. 
the  repercussions  of  wage  settlements  on  competitiveness  and 
The Latvian experience 
Let me turn from the euro area to Latvia. Following years of excessive demand growth and 
serious  overheating,  Latvia  recorded  severe  losses  in  output,  particularly  in  2009  (see 
Slide 6,  GDP  levels).  This  contraction  was  triggered  by  a  major  adverse  shock,  the  global 
financial  crisis,  but  would  have  occurred  sooner  or  later  anyway,  as  the  macroeconomic 
imbalances that had been built up were unsustainable. The crisis that started in 2008 marked 
the  beginning  of  a  painful  but  remarkable  adjustment  process.  Thanks  to  strong  domestic 
policies combined with international support, this adjustment has laid the foundations for an 
economic  recovery,  underpinned  by  healthier  balance  sheets  and  improvements  in 
competitiveness. 
I  believe  that  Latvia’s  experience  harbours  important  lessons  for  countries  inside  the  euro 
area that have to undergo a similar adjustment. The adjustment process in Latvia during the 
past few years shows that it is possible to reduce large macroeconomic imbalances without 
adjusting  the  nominal  exchange  rate.  Such  an  adjustment  benefits  from  a  high  degree  of 
flexibility of the economy and needs to rely on a determined and strong policy response to 
rebalance  the  economy,  regain  competitiveness  and  lay  the  foundations  for  sustainable 
output  growth.  A  sizeable 
fiscal 
sustainability and critical in regaining market confidence. Cuts in wage costs and prices were 
necessary to regain competitiveness that had been lost during the boom years. Exactly three 
years  after  the  crisis  hit,  Latvia  now  seems  close  to  concluding  its  international  financial 
assistance programme. 
What were the specific elements that underpinned this adjustment? I want to mention four 
elements  in  this  regard.  First,  in  the  absence of  nominal exchange  rate  flexibility,  any  real 
exchange rate adjustment had to be delivered via cuts in wage costs and prices combined 
with enhancements in labour productivity. The adjustment in wages was both market-driven, 
owing to a sharp decline in the demand for labour, and supported by policies aimed at cutting 
public sector wage costs. The labour market adjustment was not only achieved through wage 
cuts, but also through employment cuts, reductions in hours worked and a restructuring of 
production  processes.  As  a  result,  unit  labour  costs  declined  significantly,  partly  offsetting 
their previous excessive gains (see Slide 7, ULC levels).  
Second, sizeable fiscal consolidation was targeted at bringing Latvia’s fiscal position back to 
a  sustainable  path,  lowering  sovereign  funding  needs  and  regaining  market  confidence. 
Efforts also focused on strengthening the budgetary framework and procedures. Following a 
sharp increase in fiscal deficits, Latvia’s fiscal position has started to improve, but the deficit 
remains at a very high level (see Slide 8, fiscal balances).  
fiscal  adjustment  was  essential 
for  strengthening 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A third element of the adjustment strategy comprised structural reforms to enhance market 
flexibility and medium-term growth. Measures focused on both labour and product markets, 
such  as  revisions  to  labour  market  legislation  to  strengthen  labour  market  flexibility, 
improving the business climate by streamlining start-up procedures and tax administration, 
supporting exporting firms and combating the informal economy. Although clear progress has 
been made, I believe that the structural reform agenda remains unfinished. 
Fourth  and  finally,  the  adjustment  strategy  comprised  measures  to  strengthen  financial 
stability and reduce private sector debt burdens. The authorities initially focused on securing 
liquidity  in  banks.  Subsequently,  adequate  capitalisation  became  increasingly  important, 
given the deterioration in the quality of banks’ loan portfolios in the wake of the economic 
downturn. As a result, financial stability was maintained, although more time is still needed to 
repair private sector balance sheets. 
Despite  Latvia’s  adjustment  so  far,  ensuring  the  continued  success  of  the  strategy  will 
demand resolute implementation of further reforms on several fronts. Key challenges remain 
to ensure fiscal sustainability, strengthen the economic structure and improve the ability for 
the economy to grow without generating inflationary pressures. Latvia still has a low GDP per 
capita relative to many other EU countries (see Slide 9, GDP per capita), implying that it has 
an important potential to catch up vis-à-vis the rest of the EU. This catching-up process is 
likely to have a bearing on inflation in the medium term. Given the tightly pegged exchange 
rate and the limitations of alternative counter-cyclical policy instruments, it may be difficult to 
prevent macroeconomic imbalances from building up again. Moreover, the severe economic 
downturn in Latvia has left its legacies in the form of a destruction of supply capacity and a 
very  large  decline  in  employment  (see  Slide  10,  employment).  It  is  essential  for  Latvia  to 
strengthen  the  fundamental  drivers  of  sustainable  and  balanced  growth  by  enhancing  the 
quality and quantity of labour supply and improving the quality of the business environment, 
which is hampered by, among other things, a large informal economy.  
As regards euro adoption, the challenges that some euro area countries are currently facing 
illustrates very clearly the importance of sustainable convergence. Very careful preparation is 
required to make sure that convergence continues after euro adoption. Measures to reduce 
inflation temporarily or easily-reversible measures to lower the fiscal deficit do not represent 
sustainable  convergence.  The  decision  to  adopt  the  euro  is  a  very  fundamental  one  and 
should not be taken lightly.  
the  need 
to  avoid  macroeconomic 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  Economic  shocks  are  a  fact  of  life  and  countries  should  be  prepared  to 
deal  with  them.  This  is  all  the  more  the  case  in  a  monetary  union,  where  the  nominal 
exchange  rate  is  no  longer  available  as  an  instrument  of  adjustment.  The  challenges  that 
some  euro  area  countries  currently  face  underline  the  critical  importance  of  strong 
adjustment  mechanisms  and 
imbalances  and 
unsustainable  fiscal  policies.  This  all  underlines  the  responsibility  of  national  economic 
policy-makers. Stability begins at home. Strong economic adjustment mechanisms not only 
help to absorb adverse shocks, but they are also essential to reap the benefits of the euro.  
The  Latvian  experience  shows  that  adjusting  to  major  adverse  shocks  and  reducing  large 
macroeconomic  imbalances  is  not  impossible.  Using  a  combination  of  fiscal  and  nominal 
wage adjustment, structural reforms and measures to preserve financial stability, as well as 
international support, Latvia has been able to lay the foundations for its economy to stabilise 
and  recover,  although  important  challenges  remain  and  the  policy  agenda  remains 
unfinished. What matters is a broad political consensus, and a broad consensus in society, 
about the need for adjustment and the correction of past behaviour. I wish Latvia all the best 
in its efforts in this regard.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
