Rundheersing Bheenick: Bank of Mauritius – improving financial literacy 
Transcript  of  impromptu  remarks  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius,  at  the  prize-giving  ceremony  to  reward  record-setters  and  champions  of  the 
2011 Inter-Youth  Championship  as  well  as  winners  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Challenge  and 
Essay Competition, Port Louis, 20 December 2011. 
 Thank you all for honouring us with your presence here this afternoon.  
I  can  safely  say  that  when  I  came  here  five  years  ago,  this  kind  of  event  would  not  have 
taken place. You would probably never have been invited to the central bank, for the central 
bank was a very closed institution. It dealt only with banks and not with anything else.  
For our 40th anniversary in 2007, we decided to open up gradually. Part of that opening up 
was  to  reach  out  to  other  operators  in  the  economy  beyond  bankers. We  thus  started  the 
dialogue with private sector operators and real sector operators. While we were doing that, 
we  thought  we  should  also  reach  out  to  the  younger  generation.  We  launched  several 
initiatives. We opened up the Bank to financial education and financial literacy and to many 
things which the Bank had never done before, for example the creation of a Bamboo garden. 
I  am  happy  to  say  that  gradually,  staff  started  embracing  the  concept  of  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility  (CSR)  within  the  Bank  itself.  And  what  we  are  doing  today,  guiding  the 
tentative steps of the young in the direction of a brighter future, is precisely in the context of 
CSR.  
We believe strongly in what we are doing. We believe that inspecting banks, keeping them 
well-capitalized and well-supervised, is not enough. We must educate you and inform you of 
what we are trying to do – we must have informed citizens.  
Most people have not even heard of the central bank and when they happen to hear about it 
they hear bad things. When the press expects the central bank people to reduce rates, they 
are hiking up rates; when commentators on radios expect them to do one particular thing, 
they  are  doing  the  opposite.  But  when  you  look  back  over  the  years  you  find  that  the 
economy and the financial sector have been quite stable, and inflation is more or less tamed. 
So, the central bank people have not been doing things so badly after all. We are not as bad 
as you might tend to believe if you only read the press or the boohoos all day long on the 
different radio stations.  
We hope that you, young people who participate in our Monetary Policy Challenge will help 
us to get our message across much better and in a more efficient manner.  
I  understand  that  the  Monetary  Policy  Challenge,  now  in  its  fifth  year,  has  been  attracting 
more and more participation. Originally, we were not very sensitive to the academic year and 
the claims that having to sit for exams had on your time. Gradually, we learnt to live with your 
programme, hence the wider participation. We are glad to see so many of you and I want to 
congratulate all the winning teams. This year, on the boys’ side the two Royal Colleges have 
doubled the top prizes and on the girls’ side, it’s all Loreto and nothing else. So I look forward 
to more competition for both the boys’ side and the girls’ side.  
Competition is what keeps us going. Competition is what makes the country more efficient. 
Competition  is  what  makes  our  bankers  more  efficient.  A  more  informed  citizen,  a  more 
financially-literate  customer  base  is  what  is  required  in  our  country  to  make  sure  that  our 
banks do not make what I call “supernormal profits”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We also welcome the young athletes who participated in the Interclub Youth Championships 
– the other part of our CSR outreach. Our athletes have been doing very well. Some of the 
early winners in the first year have actually made the whole country proud by turning in an 
excellent  performance  at  the  last  Jeux  des  Iles1.  And  I  understand  from  my  good  friend 
Vivian  Gungaram2  that  we  have  high  hopes  for  a  few  who  are  present  here.  He  even 
mentioned one to me as a future Buckland3. I hope that those dreams will be realized and we 
at the central bank are very happy to accompany you for part of that journey.  
We  have  a  record  number  of  records  established  this  year.  The  year  before  we  had 
10 records  established.  This  year  I  understand  14  records  have  been  established.  That’s 
what I mean when I tell you that you must become more efficient and more competitive.  
So, thank you very much Mauritius Athletics Federation for the work that you are doing and 
for which I encourage you. We hope that we  have still better performance, bringing a rich 
harvest of gold medals next time not just bronze.  
Good luck therefore to our young athletes who are here, to your parents and your mentors. I 
say bravo, well done and wish you to persevere in your sporting career. And you can rest 
assured that your Bank will continue to take care of its major business which is to take care 
of the value of the rupee. I think we have taken a fairly good approach to it so far – the rupee 
has been quite stable and I see no reason why it should not continue on that track.  
I  would  like  to  thank  all  those  who  have  participated  in  these  competitions,  all  those  who 
made the competitions possible, all those who  marked the  papers, Deputy  Governors and 
my colleagues from the Bank who participated in the different activities that led up to making 
all this possible.  
Let  me  wish  you  all  –  the  teams,  parents,  teachers,  everybody  dear  to  you,  a  very  merry 
Christmas and a happy new year.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
1  The Jeux des Iles (games of the islands) of the Indian Ocean is a multi-sport competition whereby athletes 
from  the  various  islands  of  the  Indian  Ocean  meet  since  1979.  They  are  held  every  four  years  and  are 
currently gathering seven delegations: Mauritius, Seychelles, Comoros, Madagascar, Mayotte, Reunion Island 
and the Maldives. 
2  Mr Vivian Gungaram is the Secretary of the Mauritius Athletics Association. 
3  Stephan Buckland is a retired Mauritian track and field athlete who competed in the 100 and 200 metres. In 
2001,  Buckland  became  the  first  athlete  in  history  to  win  the  100m,  200m  and  the  4x100m  relay  at  the 
Francophone Games in Ottawa, Canada. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
