Narayana Kocherlakota: Looking back at four years of Federal Reserve 
actions 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, at the CFA Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, 22 November 2011. 
 Thank you for that generous introduction. It’s a huge pleasure to be back in Winnipeg. I’ve 
been gone a long time. How long? After living here for 13 years, I moved back to the States 
right after the Winnipeg Jets won their last AVCO Cup as champions of the World Hockey 
Association  –  that  is,  1979.  Consequently,  my  words  today  will  be  those  of  an  American 
policymaker speaking on American policy issues. More specifically, I’ll provide a look back at 
Federal Reserve decision-making over the past few years. However, I’ll close with my views 
on how I think that the Federal Open Market Committee – the FOMC – can work to reduce 
the  level  of  uncertainty  surrounding  future  monetary  policymaking.  As  always,  any  views  I 
express here today are my own, and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve 
System, including my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.  
Some FOMC basics 
Let  me  begin  with  some  basics  about  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  The  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  Minneapolis  is  one  of  12  regional  Reserve  banks  that,  along  with  the  Board  of 
Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System. Our bank represents 
the  ninth  of  the  12  Federal  Reserve  districts,  and  by  area,  we’re  the  second  largest.  Our 
district  includes  Montana,  the  Dakotas,  Minnesota,  northwestern  Wisconsin  and  the  Upper 
Peninsula of Michigan.  
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of monetary policy over the next six to 
seven weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve banks – including me – 
and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  including  Chairman  Bernanke, 
contribute to these deliberations. (Currently, there are only five governors – two positions are 
unfilled.)  However,  the  Committee  itself  consists  only  of  the  governors,  the  president  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a group of four other presidents that rotates annually. 
Right now, that last group consists of the presidents from the Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Dallas 
and Chicago Federal Reserve Banks.  
I’ve said that the FOMC meets (at least) eight times per year. But how do these meetings 
work? At a typical meeting, there are two so-called go-rounds, in which every president and 
every governor has the opportunity to speak without interruption. The first of these is referred 
to  as  the  economics  go-round.  It  is  kicked  off  by  a  presentation  on  current  economic 
conditions  by  Federal  Reserve  staff  economists.  Then,  the  presidents  and  governors 
describe their individual views on current economic conditions and their respective outlooks 
for future economic conditions. The presidents typically start by providing information about 
their district’s local economic performance. We get that information from our research staffs, 
but also from our interactions with business and community leaders in industries and towns 
from across our districts.  
The Committee next turns to the second go-round, which focuses on policy. Again, the staff 
begins, with a presentation of policy options. After that, each of the 17 meeting participants 
has  a  chance  to  speak  on  what  each  views  as  the  appropriate  policy  choice.  This  set  of 
remarks is followed with a summary by the chairman, in which he lays out what he sees as 
the Committee’s consensus view for future policy. The voting members of the FOMC then 
cast their votes on this policy statement and thereby set monetary policy for the next six to 
seven weeks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This description of an FOMC meeting highlights how the structure of the FOMC mirrors the 
federalist structure of our government. Representatives from different regions of the country 
– the various presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. And, as I’ve described, their 
input relies critically on information received from district residents. In this way, the Federal 
Reserve  System  is  deliberately  designed  to  give  the  residents  of  Main  Street  a  voice  in 
national monetary policy.  
FOMC objectives 
I’ve  said  that  FOMC  participants  seek  to  adopt  what  they  view  as  the  appropriate  policy 
choice. That provides a natural segue into my next topic: the policy objectives of the FOMC. 
The FOMC has a dual mandate, established by Congress: to set monetary policy so as to 
promote price stability and maximum employment. The heart of the price stability mandate is 
the Federal Reserve’s inflation objective. The FOMC communicates its inflation objective to 
the  public  in  a  number  of  ways.  Most  prominently,  at  quarterly  intervals,  FOMC  meeting 
participants  publicly  reveal  their  forecasts  for  inflation  in  the  longer  run  (maybe  five  or 
six years), assuming that monetary policy is optimal. Those forecasts usually range between 
1.5 percent and 2 percent per year. They are often collectively referred to by saying that the 
Federal Reserve views inflation as being “mandate-consistent” if it is running at “2 percent or 
a bit under”.  
Congress has also mandated that the FOMC set monetary policy so as to promote maximum 
employment. An important and ongoing communications challenge for the FOMC is that it is 
much harder to quantify the maximum employment mandate than the price stability mandate. 
Changes  in  minimum  wage  policy,  demography,  taxes  and  regulations,  technological 
productivity, job market efficiency, unemployment insurance benefits, entrepreneurial credit 
access  and  social  norms  all  influence  what  we  might  consider  “maximum  employment”. 
Trying to offset these changes in the economy with monetary policy can lead to a dangerous 
drift in inflationary expectations and ultimately in inflation itself.  
Looking back over the past four years: actions 
The National Bureau of Economic Research’s Business Cycle Dating Committee serves as 
the  official  arbiter  of  precisely  when  recessions  begin  and  end  in  the  United  States.1  The 
committee has determined that what is commonly referred to as the Great Recession began 
in  December  2007  and  ended  in  June  2009.  During  that  time  period,  real  gross  domestic 
product  (that  is,  GDP  adjusted  for  inflation)  fell  by  5 percent  and  unemployment  nearly 
doubled.  
The Federal Reserve responded to the Great Recession and the associated financial crisis in 
a number of ways that fall roughly into two classes. First, the Fed engaged in a vast amount 
of lending to firms believed to be in sound condition. It lent through conventional vehicles like 
the discount window and currency swaps with foreign central banks. But it also lent through 
relatively  unconventional  vehicles  like  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility.2 
Second, the Fed lowered the real interest rate facing borrowers and lenders. 
Here, I should clarify some terminology. By the term “real interest rate”, I’m referring to the 
interest  rate  received  by  lenders  net  of  inflation.  Thus,  if  the  interest  rate  on  the  loan  is 
5 percent per year and lenders expect inflation to be around 2 percent, the real interest rate  
 
                                                 
1  See National Bureau of Economic Research’s Business Cycle Dating Committee. 
2  See Willardson (2008) and Willardson and Pederson (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is roughly 3 percent. Economists generally think that it’s the real interest rate that matters for 
economic decision-making.  
I’ll first discuss the Fed’s lending responses and then talk about the interest rate cuts. 
Lending 
To understand the Fed’s lending response to the events of 2007–09, we need to step back to 
the second half of 2006. At that time, firms and people around the world held a wide array of 
financial  assets  that  were  ultimately  backed  by  U.S.  residential  land.  They  viewed  those 
assets as being largely risk-free. Investors may have understood that a fall in the value of 
U.S. land would impose large losses on them. However, they put low odds on such a decline 
taking place. Rather, they seemed to believe that U.S. land prices would continue to rise at a 
steady clip, as they had over the preceding 10 years.  
By the second half of 2007, that belief began to unravel in the face of incoming data. People 
were learning the hard way that U.S. land was a risky investment. Now the only question was 
how risky. That uncertainty planted the seeds for global financial panic. 
What do I mean by the term “financial panic”? Financial panics are events that blur the line 
between  liquidity  and  solvency.  A  firm  is  solvent  if  its  revenues  (in  a  discounted  present-
value  sense)  exceed  its  expenditures.  A  firm  is  liquid  if  it  is  able  to  raise  enough  funds  
– either by borrowing or by selling assets – to pay its current costs. In a financial market that 
is  functioning  well,  solvent  firms  are  typically  liquid  because  they  can  borrow  against  their 
future  profits.  During  a  financial  panic,  however,  lenders  feel  unable  to  assess  the  future 
profits and/or collateral of borrowers. Borrowing becomes highly constrained, credit markets 
cease to function as well, and even highly solvent firms may become illiquid.  
As  I’ve  said,  many  forms  of  collateral  around  the  world  were  either  implicitly  or  explicitly 
backed by U.S. residential land in the mid-2000s. But by mid-2007, as those land prices fell, 
financial  markets  became  increasingly  uncertain  about  how  to  evaluate  mortgage-backed 
securities and other assets backed by U.S. land. That translated into uncertainty about the 
ultimate solvency of institutions holding those assets – and then about the ultimate solvency 
of any of their creditors. Spreads in credit markets between Treasury returns and other bond 
returns  began  to  widen  –  at  first  slightly  and  then  alarmingly  as  the  panic  conditions  took 
firmer hold.  
Most  economists  agree  that  central  banks  should  respond  to  financial  panics  by 
communicating that they are willing to lend freely to solvent firms, against a wide range of 
good collateral, at some kind of penalty rate. This policy is useful for two reasons. First, it 
provides a source of funds to potential borrowers who are illiquid but nonetheless solvent. 
Second, it provides a floor to collateral valuation. Private lenders know that they can always 
use  collateral  seized  from  a  defaulting  borrower  as  a  vehicle  to  borrow  money  from  the 
central bank. That baseline use serves to spur private lending.  
Beginning  in  mid-2007,  the  Fed  took  a  number  of  actions  consistent  with  this  operating 
principle.  It  lent  money  to  financial  institutions  through  the  discount  window  and  its  close 
cousin,  the Term  Auction  Facility.  It  injected  liquidity  into  a  broad  range  of  essential  credit 
markets through a veritable alphabet soup of special lending vehicles. In some sense, these 
interventions were typical for a central bank operating in the context of a financial panic. But 
the  size  of  the  problem  meant  that  the  operations  were  unprecedented  in  their  scale.  The 
interventions ultimately made up more than $1 trillion of Federal Reserve assets.  
There is no doubt that these interventions saved many solvent firms from collapse during the 
financial crisis. Over time, panic eased and spreads in financial markets normalized. Once 
that happened, the private sector stopped borrowing from the Fed because it found the Fed’s 
penalty rates too onerous. As a result, the Fed shut down its special lending facilities in 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It is plausible that the Fed’s loans through the various special facilities exposed it – and by 
extension,  the  American  public  –  to  some  risk  of  loss.  However,  it  is difficult  to  know  how 
much risk was involved. We generally try to measure a financial asset’s risk by the spread 
between its yield and that of a safe benchmark like U.S. Treasuries. But as I’ve mentioned, in 
a  financial  panic  a  relatively  large  fraction  of  such  a  spread  is  attributable  to  illiquidity  as 
opposed to intrinsic risk. The goal of the central bank’s intervention is exactly to eliminate this 
panic-driven  illiquidity.  Accordingly,  we  cannot  gauge  the  Fed’s  risk  exposures  without 
somehow correcting spreads for this illiquidity factor. Calculating this, however, is extremely 
difficult. What we can say with certainty is that the Fed has not lost a penny on any of these 
transactions: all such loans have been repaid in full. 
I should be careful to distinguish the lending that I’ve described from the institution-specific 
assistance  the  Federal  Reserve  provided  to  firms  like  AIG.  These  institution-specific 
interventions were deemed necessary by the Fed and the Bush administration because they 
believed  that  there  were  no  adequate  procedures  in  place  for  liquidating  the  assets  of 
systemically important financial institutions in an orderly fashion. In 2010, the U.S. Congress 
passed  an  act  that  provides  these  procedures.  Simultaneously  –  and  correctly  –  the 
Congress removes the Fed’s ability to engage in institution-specific assistance. The act does 
leave in place the Fed’s ability to engage in broad-based market interventions of the kind that 
I’ve described, albeit with more congressional and White House oversight. This ability of the 
Fed could be useful in the event that financial market turmoil in other parts of the world ever 
threatens to spread to U.S. credit and capital markets. 
Cutting interest rates 
I’ve talked about how the fall in land prices generated a sharp increase in risk perceptions in 
financial markets and how that in turn led to a financial crisis. I now want to turn to what I see 
as the second key effect of the fall in land prices. This fall reduced the net worth of many 
households  and  firms.  According  to  Fed  calculations,  household  net  worth  fell  by  over 
25 percent  from  the  second  quarter  of  2007  to  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  Households 
responded to this change in their balance sheets by forgoing consumption, which led in turn 
to a fall in output and employment,3 and put downward pressure on the price level.  
The FOMC reacted by lowering its target interest rate from 5.25 percent in August 2007 to a 
range  of  0  to  0.25 percent  in  December  2008;  it  now  remains  at  this  lower  bound.  Since 
inflation expectations remained stable, the FOMC’s action has had the effect of lowering the 
real interest rate facing households. Households, of course, typically respond to lower rates 
by  saving  less  and  demanding  more  consumption.  Similarly,  firms  undertake  more 
investment  projects.  In this  way,  the  FOMC  can  and  has partially  offset  the  impact  on  the 
economy of the loss of net worth. 
Indeed, the FOMC would probably have liked to respond by cutting its target interest rate still 
further. The problem is that this target interest rate cannot go below zero. Instead, the FOMC 
has  engaged  in  large-scale  purchases  of  long-term  assets  issued  or  backed  by  the 
government. The goal of these transactions is to lower long-term real interest rates and again 
offset the impact on the economy of the net worth shock.  
So, to sum up, the fall in land prices triggered an increase in risk perceptions and a decrease 
in household net worth. The increase in risk led to a major financial crisis, which the Federal 
Reserve  addressed  through  a  large  amount  of  broad-based  lending.  The  decrease  in  net 
worth led to a major recession and ongoing slow recovery. The Federal Reserve’s reduction 
in interest rates has lessened the impact of this change in net worth.  
                                                 
3  See Kocherlakota (2010) for a more extensive discussion of the relevant transmission mechanisms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Looking back over the past four years: outcomes 
How  has  the  Federal  Reserve  performed  relative  to  its  dual  mandate  over  the  past 
four years,  since  the  onset  of  the  Great  Recession  at  the  end  of  2007?  In  terms  of  price 
stability,  the  answer  is  remarkably  well.  The  personal  consumption  expenditure  (PCE) 
inflation rate has averaged 1.8 percent per year from the fourth quarter of 2007 through the 
third quarter of 2011. In my view, this outcome is essentially consistent with price stability.  
Now, I want to be clear here about what I mean when I say “inflation”. That number I just 
gave  you,  1.8 percent  per  year  for  nearly  four  years,  refers  to  what’s  termed  headline 
inflation. It includes all goods and services, including food and energy. When the Fed says 
that  it  is  committed  to  keeping  inflation  at  2 percent  or  a  little  less,  it  means  prices  for  all 
goods and services, including the gas we put in our cars and the food we put on our tables. 
When we make reference to year-over-year core inflation – that is, inflation without food and 
energy  –  it’s  only  because  we  believe  that  core  inflation  is  a  helpful  predictor  of  headline 
inflation over the next three or four years.  
It is important, I think, to understand why there is no longer an intrinsic connection between 
the size of the Fed’s balance sheet and inflation. In the past three years, the Fed has bought 
over $2 trillion of securities issued or backed by the government. The Fed has funded that 
purchase  by  tripling  the amount  of  deposits held  by  banks with  the  Fed  –  what  are  called 
bank reserves.  
The  standard  reasoning  is  that  this  kind  of  reserve  creation  is  inflationary.  Banks  are  only 
allowed  to  offer  checkable  deposits  in  proportion  to  their  reserves.  Economists  view 
checkable deposits as a form of money because, like cash, checkable deposits make many 
transactions easier. In this sense, bank reserves held with the Fed are essentially licenses 
for banks to create a certain amount of money. By giving out more licenses, the FOMC is 
allowing banks to create more money. And if you took any economics in school you learned: 
more money chasing the same number of goods – voilà, inflation.  
But this connection between bank reserves and inflation is simply not  operative right now. 
Banks have few good lending opportunities, and so they’re not trying to attract deposits. As a 
result, they are keeping nearly $1.6 trillion of reserves at the Fed in excess of what they need 
to  back  their  deposits.  In  other  words,  banks  have  the  licenses  to  create  money,  but  are 
choosing not to do so.  
I’m confident, though, that at some point in the future, the economy will improve and banks 
will once again have good lending opportunities. Some observers are concerned that once 
this happens, the banks’ excess reserves will serve as kindling for an inflationary fire. This 
concern  would  have  been  entirely  appropriate  three  years  ago.  But  in  October  2008, 
Congress  granted  the  Federal  Reserve  the  power  to  pay  interest  on  bank  reserves.  Right 
now, that interest rate is 25 basis points, or 0.25 percent. By raising that rate judiciously, the 
Fed has the ability to deter banks from using their reserves to create money, and through this 
mechanism,  the  Fed  can  prevent  inflation.  The  Fed’s  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves 
means  that  the  old  and  familiar  link  between  increased  bank  reserves  and  higher  inflation 
has been broken. 
Of course, this requires the Fed to raise the interest rate on reserves in response to changes 
in economic conditions. You might well ask: will the Fed raise interest rates in a sufficiently 
timely and effective manner to keep inflation at 2 percent or a little less? But that’s always 
been  the  key  question  to  ask  about  Fed  policy,  even  when  the  Fed  had  a  much  smaller 
balance sheet. And that’s my point: because the Fed can pay interest on reserves, the size 
of its balance sheet does not, in and of itself, undercut the credibility of its commitment to 
keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under. I believe that’s why both survey and market-based 
measures  of  expected  inflation  over  the  next  five  to  10  years  have  remained  remarkably 
stable as the Fed has expanded its liabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In  terms  of  the  Fed’s  employment  mandate:  unemployment  remains  disturbingly  high  at 
9 percent. But – and this is important to keep in mind – it would likely be much higher without 
Federal  Reserve  interventions.  Suppose  the  Fed  had  not  followed  its  aggressive  lending 
policies or its imaginative forms of monetary accommodation. What would have happened to 
the  economy?  While  a  definitive  answer  is  impossible,  the  evidence  from  the  Great 
Depression is suggestive. In the early years of the Great Depression, the United States was 
on the gold standard and the Fed could not easily adjust the quantity of bank reserves. As a 
result, the Fed did not engage in broad-based lending during the 1929–33 period. Nor did it 
cut interest rates aggressively. By 1933, hosts of financial institutions had failed, real GDP 
had  fallen  by  over  25 percent,  unemployment  was  25 percent  and  the  nation  had 
experienced annual double-digit rates of deflation. The Fed’s passiveness in 1929–33 was 
associated with an economic catastrophe.  
Let  me  summarize  my  review  of  Federal  Reserve  performance  since  the  beginning  of  the 
Great  Recession  in  December  2007.  My  assessment  is  that,  despite  profound  economic 
shocks, the Federal Reserve – led by Chairman Bernanke – has successfully met its price 
stability  mandate  through  its  lending  programs  and  through  innovative  forms  of  monetary 
accommodation.  These  actions  also  helped  keep  the  unemployment  rate  from  rising  even 
higher.  As  part  of  its  accommodative  policy,  the  FOMC  has  greatly  expanded  its  balance 
sheet. But it is important to understand that this expansion need not trigger inflation now or in 
the future, because the Federal Reserve can now pay interest on bank reserves. 
Going forward 
I’ve spent most of this speech looking back. Let me close by offering some thoughts about 
future policy. 
I’ve underscored the Federal Reserve’s success in meeting its price stability mandate over 
the  past  four  years.  And  the  Fed’s  actions  have  helped  keep  unemployment  from  rising 
higher.  But  the  unemployment  rate,  currently  9 percent,  remains  disturbingly  high  –  and 
FOMC meeting participants are projecting that it will fall to only about 8 percent over the next 
two years.  
The FOMC does have tools remaining. It could put downward pressure on long-term market 
interest rates in at least two ways. First, it could buy more long-term Treasury securities or 
securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 
Second, the Committee could extend its prediction for how long it will keep its target short-
term interest rate exceptionally low. So, tools – and choices – remain.  
However, the FOMC should do more than simply decide at each meeting whether or not to 
buy more assets or to keep interest rates low for longer. Any current decision is based on the 
FOMC’s  forecast  of  the  future,  and  no  forecast  can  be  perfect.  The  Committee  should 
provide a public contingency plan – that is, provide clear guidance on how it will respond to a 
variety  of  relevant  scenarios.  For  example,  the  Committee  recently  projected  that  in  2011, 
core  inflation  will  be  1.9 percent  and  that  it  will  fall  back  in  2012  and  2013  to  around 
1.7 percent. Suppose hypothetically that core inflation, and the outlook for core inflation, has 
risen to 3 percent by the end of 2013, while unemployment has fallen to between 8 percent 
and  8.5 percent.  A  public  contingency  plan  would  allow  the  public  to  know  what  the 
Committee intends to do in that eventuality.  
I believe that public contingency planning will have many benefits. Let me mention two. First, 
in recent statements and speeches, I have described why the FOMC actions in August and 
September seemed inconsistent with the evolution of the macroeconomic data in 2011. This 
kind of inconsistency is much less likely to occur once the FOMC has formulated an explicit 
public  contingency  plan.  Second,  I’ve  heard  from  businesses  that  policy  uncertainty  is 
curbing  their  incentive  to  hire  or  invest.  Similarly,  I’ve  heard  from  consumers  that  policy 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
uncertainty  is  curbing  their  incentive  to  spend.  A  public  FOMC  contingency  plan  can  help 
reduce the level of policy uncertainty being created by the Fed.  
No contingency plan can ever be definitive. Inevitably, the FOMC will learn things that it did 
not expect to learn. And so there may be conditions that force the FOMC to deviate from a 
chosen plan. However, having a public plan, and couching its decisions against the backdrop 
of  that  plan,  will  enhance  Federal  Reserve  transparency,  credibility,  accountability  and 
consistency.  
Thank you for listening. I’d be happy to take your questions. 
References 
Kocherlakota,  Narayana  R.  2010.  “Two  Models  of  Land  Overvaluation  and  Their 
Implications”. Presented at “A Return to Jekyll Island: The Origins, History, and Future of the 
Federal Reserve”, Jekyll Island, Ga.  
Willardson,  Niel.  2008.  “Actions  to  Restore  Financial  Stability”.  The  Region  (December), 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.  
Willardson,  Niel,  and  LuAnne  Pederson.  2010.  “Federal  Reserve  Liquidity  Programs:  An 
Update”. The Region (June), Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
