Subir Gokarn: Growth, resilience and reform – reflections on post-crisis 
policy challenges 
Text of the 45th A D Shroff Memorial Lecture by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the 
Reserve Bank of India, at the Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 2 November 2011. 
Inputs from Bhupal Singh are gratefully acknowledged.  
 Introduction 
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to be delivering the 45th A. D. Shroff Memorial Lecture. 
The list of speakers who preceded me reads like an honour roll of the business and policy 
establishment  in  our  country  and  I  am  proud  to  be  a  part  of  this  very  distinguished  set  of 
people. I am also very glad that the venue of the lecture is the Indian Merchants’ Chamber. 
2011 marks the 20th anniversary of the reform initiative of 1991. Early that year, IMC and the 
Indira  Gandhi  Institute  of  Development  Research  (IGIDR),  where  I  was  a  member  of  the 
faculty, collaborated to produce a document entitled “Policy Options for Economic Reform”, 
which laid out reform blueprints in four domains – trade, finance, labour markets and small 
and  medium  enterprises.  The  sharing  of  perspectives  between  businesspersons  and 
academics that went into that document was a critical learning experience for me in the early 
stages  of  my  career.  It  motivated  me  to  sustain  professional  contact  with  industry 
associations throughout my career. I certainly benefitted from this contact and I hope that the 
associations did too! 
These  last  20  years  have  undoubtedly  been  a  period  of  dramatic  change  for  the  Indian 
economy. Significantly, much of that change has come about because of the adoption of a 
policy framework, which was founded essentially on the proposition that the late Mr. Shroff 
attached  great  value  to  –  the  prominent  role  of  private  enterprise  in  the  development 
process.  Of  course,  as  we  observe  the  20th  anniversary  of  what  was  clearly  a  big-bang 
reform  initiative,  we  can  afford  to  take  a  more  objective  and  nuanced  look  back  over  the 
period  to  see  how  the  entire  process  of  change  impacted  the  economy.  To  put  it  very 
broadly,  reforms  hugely  expanded  the  opportunities  for  economic  activity.  This  resulted  in 
more rapid growth, to which higher productivity contributed significantly. 
However,  it  also  brought  with  it  increased  risks,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  increased 
exposure to the global economy that the reform process generated. These risks occasionally 
manifested themselves during the past 20 years – the Asian crisis of 1997–98 and the impact 
of the US recession of 2001 on the Indian IT sector in 2001 are two illustrative examples. 
But, none of these episodes came anywhere close to the magnitude of the impact that the 
financial crisis of 2008 had on either the global or the Indian economy. 
Globally, the debate on policy and regulation has been significantly affected by that crisis. 
Across a number of domains, the emphasis has shifted from the opportunities created by the 
spread of market forces and free enterprise to the risks that they have introduced into the 
system.  Unbridled  enthusiasm  about  the  virtues  of  the  market  has  given  way  to,  at  best, 
nervousness  and  at  worst,  disdain  and  contempt.  Like  all  such  debates,  however,  the 
eventual  outcome,  on  which  long-term  policy  thinking  and  action  will  be  based,  will  be 
somewhere in the middle. The relationship between effectively functioning market forces and 
economic  performance  cannot  be  ignored,  certainly  in  an  economy  in  India’s  state  of 
development.  Sustaining  rapid  growth  is  something  that  market  forces  have  contributed  to 
and that remains an imperative. 
Equally,  the  vulnerabilities  caused  by  the  greater  integration  and  exposure  of  domestic 
markets  to  the  global  economy,  which  was  one  of  the  significant  outcomes  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
development strategy initiated in 1991, cannot be wished away. If economic performance is 
not  to  be  held  hostage  by  global  turbulence,  certain  safeguards  have  to  be  built  in  to  the 
strategy.  The  productivity  and  efficiency  gains  that  emerge  from  domestic competition  and 
global exposure have to be balanced with safety and stability concerns that might require the 
imposition of certain boundaries on these forces. The crisis of 2008 has highlighted the need 
for maintaining a balance between efficiency and stability. Too much emphasis on the former 
can  cause  severe  problems,  as  we  saw  in  2008.  Given  the  degree  of  global  integration, 
these can spread very quickly around the world. On the other hand, excessive concerns with 
safety  can  dilute  the  benefits  that  accrue  from  effectively  functioning  market  forces,  both 
domestically and globally. 
The central proposition that I want to put forward in this lecture is that the balance between 
efficiency and stability must be built into the development strategy. Reforms that engender 
competition, both internal and external, and thereby contribute to greater efficiency and more 
rapid growth must be complemented with safeguards that address the risks that these forces 
generate.  I  will  argue  that  achievement  of  this  balance  contributed  to  both  the  sharp 
acceleration in growth that the Indian economy experienced in the five years preceding the 
crisis and the resilience that it demonstrated in the face of the crisis. I will then go on to talk 
about  some  policy  challenges  in  the  broad  context  of  this  balance  between  efficiency  and 
stability. 
An organizing framework 
It is meaningful to analyze the performance of the Indian economy over the past decade or 
so  in  terms  of  the  simple  framework  displayed  on  Slide  1.  The  2x2  matrix  shows  four 
scenarios emerging from favourable and unfavourable global and domestic conditions. It is 
quite easy to classify the period from 2003 to 2010 into two of the boxes. The first five years 
of  this  period,  i.e.  the  years  preceding  the  crisis,  clearly  fall  into  the  top  right-hand  box, 
reflecting favourable conditions both globally and domestically. From a growth perspective, 
this  was  a  dream  run  for  the  Indian  economy,  which  averaged  8.9  per  cent  per  year  over 
those five years. To illustrate the power of this rate of growth, GDP would increase by over 
50  per  cent  during  a  five-year  run  at  this  rate  and  double  in  about  eight-and-a-half  years. 
Many sectors in the economy have experienced the impact that this can have on the demand 
for their products and services. 
From  both  economic  policy  and  business  strategy  perspectives,  this  period  provides  a 
benchmark for future performance. However, the framework should inject a dose of reality 
into those expectations. It highlights the fact that this rate of growth was achieved in a clearly 
favourable global environment, which may not be a characteristic of the next few years! 
Getting back to the framework, the crisis period, 2008–10, clearly falls into the bottom left-
hand  box,  reflecting  unfavourable  global  and  domestic  conditions.  The  financial  crisis,  of 
which the tipping point was perhaps the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, 
was  the  most  vivid  feature  of  the  hostile  global  environment,  but  there  were  several  other 
threats  that  also  manifested  themselves  in  that  period.  Food  inflation  soared  around  the 
world  in  the  first  half  of  2008,  as  did  oil  prices.  Both  these  trends  reinforced  the  inherent 
inflationary  pressures  that  were  being  felt  domestically  as  a  result  of  the  sustained  high 
growth. In these circumstances, the monetary policy stance had to be firmly anti-inflationary, 
culminating in the repo rate reaching its highest ever level of 9 per cent in July 2008. The 
combination  of  global 
turbulence  and  domestic  demand  compression  would  have 
undoubtedly caused growth to fall, which it did. However, what may have come as a surprise 
is that it didn’t fall by very much. The economy grew by 6.8 per cent in 2008–09 and by a 
relatively robust 8 per cent in 2009–10, at a time when much of the global economy was still 
very sluggish. This was clearly a sign of resilience in the face of a very severe shock, which, I 
want 
from  unfavourable  conditions,  both  globally  and 
domestically. 
to  re-emphasize,  emanated 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I will now go on to talk about the relationship between the reform process and growth on the 
one hand and between boundaries and resilience on the other. 
Reforms and growth 
The core premise of the reform process initiated in 1991 was that greater competition, both 
internal  and  external  would  help  accelerate  economic  growth.  The  entire  spectrum  of 
reforms, from the abolition of industrial licensing to the sharp reduction in trade barriers and 
the termination of allocative controls on finance, were intended to simultaneously introduce 
competitive  forces  into  the  economy,  while  freeing  up  the  choices  that  producers  had  in 
terms of what, where and how to produce. These choices, in turn, could be supported by a 
financial  system  that  was  allowed  to  make  its  own  risk-return  calculations.  Although  some 
essential requirements of a truly competitive market economy, notably the elimination of exit 
barriers,  were  not  introduced  with  the  same  degree  of  enthusiasm,  the  reforms  that  were 
done turned out to have a powerful impact. 
Of  course,  it  did  not  happen  all  at  once.  As  the  line  in  Slide  2  indicates,  the  early  growth 
dividends from the 1991 reforms were somewhat short-lived. Growth accelerated to cross the 
seven per cent threshold during the three years from 1994 to 1997, but slumped back to a 
rather  tepid  five  per  cent  for  the  five  years  following.  This  performance  legitimately  raised 
questions about the merits of the entire reform process; if the growth dividend was going to 
be  this  small,  was  it  worth  all  the  institutional  disruption  and  political  challenges  that  it 
entailed?  As  it  turned  out,  the  acceleration  in  growth  that  took  place  from  2003  onwards 
quelled that particular debate. 
Looking  back  over  that  period,  a  reasonable  interpretation  of  events  is  that  the  reform 
process  took  long  time  to  fall  into  place.  Trade  reform,  for  example,  manifested  in  a  two 
stage transition, first from quantitative restrictions on imports to tariffs and then the lowering 
of tariff rates to internationally comparable levels. Similarly, financial sector reforms did not 
fall into place all at once; they unfolded slowly, across domestic banks, market mechanisms 
and  liberalization  of  the  capital  account.  The  exchange  rate  regime  went  through  some 
intermediate  steps  before  current  account  convertibility  was  achieved.  While  industrial 
licensing for domestic investors was eliminated early on in the process, the policy regime for 
foreign direct investment also unfolded slowly, contributing to uncertainty about the evolving 
competitive environment. In a nutshell, this was an evolutionary rather than a revolutionary 
process. Its full impact, therefore, would only manifest when all of the different forces at work 
reached a critical threshold – the tipping point. 
This evidently arrived in 2003, when the growth rate accelerated sharply to over 8 per cent in 
2003–04 and, with the exception of a slight dip in the following year, stayed well above that 
mark for a five-year period, which was represented in the top right-hand box in the scenario 
matrix. 
The  bars  in  Slide  2  display  a  pattern,  which,  to  my  mind,  is  a  critical  driver  of  the  growth 
acceleration. The higher set represents the investment-GDP ratio, which clearly accelerated 
from  the  25–30  per  cent  range  before  2003  to  over  35  per  cent  during  the  high-growth 
period. An important contributor to this though by no means the only one, was precisely the 
tipping point; the evolution of reforms in different domains had more or less come to an end, 
resulting in a significant reduction in uncertainty about the domestic investment environment. 
A stable environment clearly encouraged investment activity, which was further buoyed by 
emerging optimism about the huge potential that the domestic market offered. Accelerating 
investment  provided  a  double  bonus;  it  created  new  capacity,  while  speeding  up  the 
assimilation of new technology. As a result, more was produced with higher productivity. 
The  lower  set  of  bars  also  represents  a  development  of  enormous  significance.  The 
government committed to a fiscal consolidation process through the Fiscal Responsibility and 
Budget Management Act in 2003. Notwithstanding the transition in the regime in 2004, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
financial  sector  reforms,  which,  once  stabilized,  greatly  enhanced 
consolidation  path  was  adhered  to.  Very  significantly,  this  was  not  a  commitment  of  the 
central  government  alone;  the  states  contributed  as  well.  The  combined  centre  and  state 
fiscal deficit-GDP ratio steadily declined from 2003–04, bottoming out at about four per cent 
in 2007–08, the last year before the crisis hit. 
We  should  not  underestimate  the  role  of  this  very  dramatic  expenditure  switch  between 
investment and government spending. Keep in mind the fact that the investment-GDP ratio 
includes  public  investment,  while  the  fiscal  deficit  largely  comprises  a  revenue  deficit,  i.e., 
what  the  government  borrows  in  order  to  meet  its  operating  (as  opposed  to  capital) 
expenditure.  Cutting  consumption,  while  raising  investment  is  a  textbook  formula  for 
accelerating growth. Its validity was amply demonstrated in the Indian high-growth period of 
2003–08.  And,  this  switch  was  achieved  by  two  reform  drivers.  First,  the  set  of  industrial, 
trade  and 
the 
attractiveness  of  investment.  Second,  government  finances  were  brought  under  control,  in 
effect, freeing up resources for investment. 
Having seen the virtues of the reform process in terms of their eventual impact on growth, let 
us  now  take  a  look  at  the  risks  that  they  introduced  into  the  system.  Competition  is,  of 
course, an inherently risky process and the failure of individual businesses in an intensely 
competitive environment is only to be expected. But, in the domestic context, this is hardly a 
disruptive  force,  since  there  are  also  successful  outcomes.  In  other  words,  there  is  no 
systemic  risk  that  emerges  from  a  more  competitive  domestic  environment  in  most 
circumstances. However, it is a somewhat different matter when it comes to global exposure. 
The  greater  is  the  degree  of  integration  between  the  domestic  and  global  economies,  the 
larger are both the opportunities and threats that come with integration. I will focus on two of 
the risk factors. 
The first one is the risk stemming from the degree of global integration. As Slide 3 indicates, 
the  Indian  economy  became  significantly  more  globally  integrated.  The  bars  on  the  slide 
reflect  the  gross  volumes  of  activity  on  the  different  dimensions  depicted.  The  trade  bar 
represents  the  sum  total  of  exports  and  imports,  the  current  account  bar  the  sum  total  of 
receipts and payments on that account and so on. On every dimension, the Indian economy 
has  become  significantly  more  globally  integrated  over  the  past  20  years,  which  is  an 
outcome of reforms in both current and capital account transactions as well as very strong 
performance on both goods and services exports. Significantly, at the time of the crisis, the 
aggregate of all balance of payments transactions was more than GDP. 
This is precisely where risk considerations come in. When the crisis hit, across the Emerging 
Market  Economies  (EMEs),  including  India,  capital  flowed  out  in  large  quantities,  exerting 
enormous pressure on exchange rates and domestic liquidity conditions. These channels of 
transmission highlighted the vulnerability that global integration created for these economies, 
which  were  otherwise  relatively  healthy.  Fortunately  for  them,  they  had  the  capacity  to 
respond  with  appropriate  policy  measures.  I  will  address  this  issue in  the  Indian context  a 
little later in the lecture. 
The  second  risk  factor  that  we  need  to  pay  attention  to  is  the  economy’s  dependence  on 
imported energy. Although this is a structural condition, which would have an influence on 
domestic  conditions  under  any  circumstances,  the  fact  is  that  the  rapid  growth  of  the 
economy did contribute to an overall increase in energy consumption and energy intensity, 
which made the economy more vulnerable to global energy price shocks. Slide 4 provides an 
indication  of  this  vulnerability  from  the  inflation  perspective.  The  blue  segment  of  the  bar 
represents  the  contribution  of  energy  prices  overall  to  headline  inflation.  Although  energy 
prices are certainly not the only driver of inflation in India, the pattern suggests that, over the 
past decade, high energy prices have typically been concomitant with high inflation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Boundaries and resilience 
As  it  turned  out,  the  adverse  growth  impact  of  the  crisis was  relatively  short-lived.  Growth 
dropped below 7 per cent in 2008–09, the year in which the crisis precipitated, but recovered 
to 8 per cent in the subsequent year. Although the numbers varied across countries, this was 
a broader characteristic of EMEs. It was striking to see that the impact of the crisis on the 
growth  performance  of  developed  economies  was  both  large  and  persistent,  while  being 
relatively small and transitory for the EMEs. Clearly, there were some common features that 
EMEs  shared,  which  contributed  to  this  resilience,  but  that  is  too  broad  a  subject  to  be 
addressed  here.  I  will  confine  myself  to  the  possible  sources  of  resilience  in  the  Indian 
context. 
To  my  mind,  four  factors  are  important.  First,  notwithstanding  the  very  large  increase  in 
global  linkages,  the  fact  is  that  the  Indian  economy  remains  primarily  driven  by  domestic 
factors.  From  the  demand  side,  as  Slide  5  indicates,  the  relatively  large  share  of  private 
consumption  spending  has  been  a  contributory  factor  to  the  overall  stability  of  demand. 
Consumption  tends  to  be  relatively  resilient  in  the  face  of,  particularly,  transitory  shocks, 
because  individuals  and  households  take  time  to  adjust  their  spending  patterns.  It  is  only 
when the shock turns out to be persistent that patterns will change significantly. In this sense, 
it  is  a  stabilizing  force,  giving  other  sources  of  demand  that  can  be  quickly  influenced  by 
policy actions, time to respond to and help mitigate the impact of the shock. 
Second, the capacity to launch a strong policy response was in place when the crisis hit. On 
the monetary front, the tight, anti-inflationary stance that preceded the crisis had taken policy 
rates and the cash reserve ratio to relatively high levels. As the crisis precipitated, it had a 
dramatic impact on commodity, particularly energy, prices, which then helped inflation move 
rapidly  down,  along  with  other  drivers.  This,  in  turn,  provided  the  basis  of  for  a  quick  and 
large  reversal  in  the  monetary  stance.  As  Slide  6  shows,  both  policy  rates  and  the  cash 
reserve ratio were significantly reduced over a relatively short period of time. 
I earlier referred to the risks that increased global integration brought with it. One of the most 
significant adverse impacts of the crisis on the Indian economy was caused by rapid capital 
outflows in the immediate aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Even for businesses 
whose fundamentals remained intact, the massive constriction of liquidity could easily have 
been life-threatening, with a prolonged liquidity shortage escalating into a solvency problem. 
The massive amount of liquidity that the reversal of the monetary policy stance infused into 
the system helped to avert that possibility. 
Fiscal policy also contributed, as was displayed in Slide 2. As indicated earlier, the process 
of fiscal consolidation that preceded the crisis had put government finances in relatively good 
shape. In doing so, it had created the capacity to respond to a slowdown in private demand, 
particularly investment, by quickly ramping up public spending. Of course, the risk inherent in 
this kind of policy response is that the increased fiscal commitments persist beyond the time 
they are required. This is a major issue of debate globally. Some countries have attempted to 
exit  from  crisis-induced  fiscal  commitments  while  private  demand  is  still  soft,  while  others 
have made more lasting commitments, which, on the back of resilient private demand, have 
contributed to rising inflationary pressures. Be that as it may, it is important to recognize the 
fact that fiscal space and the willingness to use it was an important reason for resilience. 
However, beyond these two contemporaneous sources of resilience, I would like to suggest 
two structural reasons for why the Indian economy was resilient to the shock. These are what 
I would describe as “boundaries”. The first of these is the nature of bank portfolios. Slide 7 
shows the balance sheet composition of the Indian banking system. The relatively large and 
stable proportion of loans is an important contributor to resilience. Both in India and across 
EMEs  in  general,  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  typically  comprised  a  larger  share  of  loans 
relative  to  investments.  The  latter,  being  subject  to  mark-to-market  requirements,  are 
vulnerable  to  sharp  downward  movements  in  asset  prices.  The  former  also  carry  balance 
sheet risks through provisioning requirements for non-performing assets, but in economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that  are  growing  reasonably  fast,  these  are  probably  less  onerous  than  vulnerabilities  to 
asset prices, which move very sharply in times of market turbulence. 
Balance  sheet  adjustments  played  a  critical  role  in  the  impairment  of  financial  systems  in 
developed  economies,  by  sharply  reducing  their  capacity  to  provide  finance.  In  turn,  this 
probably contributed to both the magnitude and persistence of the slowdown in growth. By 
contrast, while EMEs were hit by liquidity constraints, which I referred to earlier in the Indian 
context, the stability of balance sheets as a result of a more “traditional” structure helped to 
preserve  the  systems’  capacity  to  provide  finance.  Liquidity  infusions  quickly  transmitted 
through to businesses and helped prevent the escalation from liquidity to solvency problems. 
The  second  structural  factor  in  the  Indian  context,  in  my  view,  is  the  capital  account 
management  framework.  Before  the  crisis,  capital  controls  were  generally  seen  as  a 
hindrance  to  smooth  global  integration  and  a  source  of  inefficiency.  The  perspective  has 
changed somewhat, with an emerging view that some kinds of capital controls may provide 
temporary  relief  from  the  instability  being  transmitted  from  global  shocks  through  high 
volatility  in  capital  flows.  This  is  still  an  evolving  global  debate,  but  the  Indian  experience 
perhaps makes some contributions to it. 
Broadly speaking, the Indian approach to capital controls is based on a preference ordering. 
There  are  virtually  no  limits  on  foreign  direct  investment,  apart  from  some  sector-specific 
restrictions, which are not directly motivated by macroeconomic considerations. This channel 
is seen as being growth and productivity enhancing. There are virtually no limits on foreign 
portfolio investment into equities. In this channel, both market risks and exchange rate risks 
are fully borne by the foreign investor. However, there are limits on debt flows. These are the 
least preferred, essentially because the domestic borrower is obliged to repay and bears the 
exchange rate risk. Within this category, long-term debt is preferred to short-term debt. 
External  debt  obligations  can  put  enormous  strain  on  the  capital  account  if  they  are 
redeemed  in  the  face  of  a  global  shock.  Putting  some  kind  of  limits  on  them  reduces  the 
vulnerability of the economy to this strain. Looking back over the crisis period, when outflows 
from  equity  investments  were  so  large,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that  the  pressure  and  the 
consequent  impact  on  domestic  markets  would  have  been  far  more  intense  if  debt 
obligations were also being redeemed at the same time. 
I would describe the restrictions on debt inflows with respect to quantum, tenure and pricing 
which  are  currently  in  place  as  “strategic”  in  nature.  They  are  motivated  by  the  need  to 
impose some limits on the risks of global exposure and not by day-to-day considerations of 
exchange  rate  volatility.  Consequently,  the  rupee  moves  in  response  to  daily  supply  and 
demand  patterns  against  the  backdrop  of  these  strategic  restrictions.  In  turn,  these 
restrictions can be lowered in response to strategic considerations, such as the increasing 
demand for foreign funds for infrastructure investment, which has been done over the past 
year.  But,  to  return  to  the  issue  of  resilience  in  the  face  of  the  crisis  of  2008,  it  could  be 
argued that the preference ordering reflected in the capital account management framework 
helped to minimise the severity of the impact on the domestic economy. 
Policy challenges 
Let me repeat the basic argument I am advancing. Reforms were a critical contributor to the 
acceleration of growth in the Indian economy. However, the reform strategy, as productive as 
it  was,  brought  with  it some  risks. Recognition  of  these  risks  and  the response  to  them  in 
terms of some boundaries helped the economy to be resilient in the face of a very severe 
shock.  The  essential  message  from  this  argument  is  that  the  combination  of  growth  and 
resilience  comes  from  a  reform  process  that  balances  expansion  of  opportunities  with 
mitigation of risks – efficiency with stability. 
With this in mind, let me return to the organizing framework that I began the lecture with. The 
recent past has been categorized into two of the boxes. Let us look at the future in terms of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the other two. Of these, the top left-hand box appears at this point in time to be irrelevant. It 
is difficult to foresee a situation for some time to come in which the Indian economy will be 
beset by problems while the rest of the world is doing relatively well. That leaves the bottom 
right-hand box, in which the Indian economy is experiencing favourable conditions, while the 
rest of the world is not. 
The  unfavourable  global  conditions  postulated  in  this  scenario  are  certainly  a  realistic 
assumption. The question then is: how do we ensure that the domestic economy moves into 
the  favourable  zone?  This  is  essentially  where  the  policy  challenge  lies.  Drawing  on  the 
reform-growth-resilience triangle, what are the policy priorities, which will help the economy 
to sustain growth while keeping risks in check? 
This  opens  up  a  wide  canvas,  but  I  will  confine  myself  to  issues  I  have  covered  in  this 
lecture, viewing them from the growth-resilience perspective. First, let me return to the issue 
of inflation, which I raised in the context of vulnerability to global forces in the form of rising 
energy prices. This clearly calls for an integrated energy strategy, with the objective of both 
conserving overall use of energy and shifting the balance to domestic resources, preferably 
renewable ones. 
However,  from  a  somewhat  broader  perspective,  the  continuing  vulnerability  to  inflationary 
shocks  from  energy  can  also  be  mitigated  by  addressing  other  sources  of  inflation,  over 
which there is a greater degree of control for domestic policy. In this context, I would like to 
emphasize the very real threat from food inflation. A growing demand-supply imbalance in 
some major food items – protein sources, vegetables and fruits – is helping entrench food 
inflation.  Slide  8  shows  clear  signs  of  an  escalating  trend.  This  raises  the  average  rate  of 
inflation,  making  the  system  even  more  vulnerable  to  external  energy  shocks  or,  for  that 
matter, any other source of inflation. 
There  are  some  direct  growth-resilience  implications  of  this  pattern.  It  is  a  historical  given 
that  people  diversify  their  diets  as  they  become  more  affluent.  One  key  common 
characteristic of long-term development is that the food economy has accommodated this by 
more efficient supply (either through production or trade) of the foods that people want more 
of. If this does not happen, households tend to spend more money on food and less on other 
things,  which  acts  as  a  damper  on  the  growth  of  demand  for  non-food  products.  As  was 
suggested earlier, aggregate private consumption expenditure can be a stabilizing force; the 
more diversified it is, the more it can contribute to stability. But, macroeconomic implications 
apart, from a development and welfare perspective, it is a matter of concern that increased 
access to better nutrition is hindered by rising food prices. Rapidly expanding supply is really 
the only solution to this problem. 
Second,  continuing  with  the  theme  of  diversification  as  way  to  promote  growth  with 
resilience,  the  sectoral  composition  of  GDP  and  employment  suggest  key  policy  priorities. 
Slide  9  displays  a  striking  contrast  between  the  drivers  of  GDP  growth  and  the  pattern  of 
employment. While agriculture has been steadily shrinking in terms of its share of GDP, its 
share  in  employment  remains  both  dominant  and  relatively  static.  In  effect,  a  constant 
proportion of the labour force is generating a declining share of output. On the other hand, 
industry, which is expected to be a natural absorber of workers from agriculture, providing 
them more productive and better paying jobs, has not just about maintained its share in both 
GDP  and  employment.  It  has  clearly  not  played  the  role  of  an  engine  of  either  growth  or 
employment. 
High dependence on services for GDP growth and on agriculture for employment is clearly a 
source  of  vulnerability.  Balancing  out  the  share  of  GDP  with  the  share  of  the  labour  force 
does  not  necessarily  have  to  be  one-for-one;  however,  the  shares  should  be  moving  with 
some rough correspondence to provide stability to the growth process. 
What needs to be done to facilitate rapid growth in industry is well known. Infrastructure is a 
key  requirement.  Labour  regulations  need  to  be  streamlined.  Workers  need  to  be 
appropriately skilled. Taxes need to be streamlined. This is a long and familiar agenda on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
which,  there  are  many  welcome  signs  of  progress  –  the  New  Manufacturing  Policy,  the 
Goods and Services Tax, the National Skill Development Corporation, amidst others, are all 
initiatives  that  provide  a  foundation  for  the  sector  to  emerge  as  an  engine  of  growth  and 
employment.  But,  all  these  various  dimensions  need  to  reach  certain  thresholds  together 
before their full benefits will be realized. Earlier in the lecture, I spoke about the cumulative 
impact of a variety of reforms causing a sudden and massive acceleration in growth – the 
tipping point. We must learn from that experience the lesson that the more various reform 
initiatives are synchronized, the quicker that tipping point will arrive. Time is not a luxury we 
can count on in this context. 
Third, growth with stability requires strong support from a financial system that can also grow 
with  stability.  The  post-crisis  perspective  on  financial  sector  development  emphasizes 
strongly  capitalized  banks  along  with  restrictions  on  deployment  of  funds,  with  a  view  to 
maintaining robust balance sheets. In India as well as in many EMEs, a more conventional or 
traditional  approach  to  banking,  with  its  emphasis  on  lending  as  opposed  to  investment, 
appears to have been a source of resilience. At the same time, too much conservatism may 
reduce  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  meet  the  evolving  financial  requirements  of  a 
rapidly  growing  economy.  In  this  context,  a  strategy  for  financial  development  needs  to 
continually balance the ability to introduce new ways of financing new opportunities with the 
means to measure and mitigate the risks that these opportunities bring. It really is a tightrope 
walk, from which it is very easy to fall off on either side! 
Finally, with respect to capital account management, the key lesson from the experience of 
the  crisis  is  that  a  combination  of  strategic  capital  controls  and  a  floating  currency  can 
provide an effective buffer against global financial turbulence. The controls described earlier 
impose some limits on the vulnerability of the domestic economy to external shocks. Within 
these  boundaries,  a  floating  exchange  rate  acts  as  a  shock  absorber.  It  eliminates  the 
burden  on  policymakers  to  either  absorb  surplus  inflows,  with  potentially  inflationary 
consequences, or accommodate outflows, with potentially adverse implications for credibility. 
Concluding remarks 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  re-emphasizing  three  key  messages  from  the  lecture.  First, 
reforms,  which  balanced  growth  opportunities  with  risk  mitigation  contributed  to  both  the 
Indian  economy’s  growth  performance  before  the  crisis  of  2008  and  its  resilience  to  the 
crisis. Second, the future performance of the Indian economy depends even more heavily on 
reinforcing  domestic  drivers  of  growth  and  stability  in  a  generally  unfavourable  global 
environment.  Third,  drawing  on  lessons  from  past  experience,  speed,  synchronization  and 
the balance between exploiting opportunities and managing risk, will maximize the dividends 
from any reform strategy. 
Let me end by thanking the Forum of Free Enterprise for honouring me with the invitation to 
deliver the 45th A.D. Shroff Memorial Lecture, the Indian Merchants’ Chamber for hosting the 
event, the New India Assurance Company for sponsoring it and all of you for participating. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
