Jens Weidmann: Managing macroprudential and monetary policy – a 
challenge for central banks 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the SUERF/Deutsche 
Bundesbank Conference 2011/IMFS – The ESRB at 1, Berlin, 8 November 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In the event of an earthquake, the question that decides between life and death is whether 
the  buildings  are  stable  enough  to  withstand  the  tremor  of  the  earth.  In  the  event  of  a 
financial  shock,  a  crucial  factor  for  the  severity  of  the  crisis  is  to  what  extent  the  financial 
sector  is  stable,  and  whether  it  is  possible  to  contain  negative  feedback  effects  within  the 
macroeconomy.  The  financial  system’s  recent  track  record  in  this  respect  has  not  been 
wholly  convincing,  to  put  it  mildly.  Therefore,  one  central  question  on  the  global  political 
agenda is “how to better ensure financial stability?”.  
Comparing  the  stability  of  our  financial  and  monetary  system  with  a  building  that  has  to 
withstand  a  substantial  earthquake,  the  two  columns  monetary  policy  and  microprudential 
supervision – which supported that building and which we believed to be strong enough – 
turned out to be insufficient. Shocks caused by turbulences on local markets may propagate 
much  more  quickly  and  widely  than  it  had  been  previously  expected.  Hence,  an  explicitly 
systemic view on financial markets is needed as an additional element in our policy-making 
building, namely macroprudential policy. 
In the following, I would like to elaborate on the question as to how this new column should 
be designed. First, I will address the more conceptual aspect of the interrelations between 
financial  stability  and  monetary  policy,  and  point  out  that,  since  both  policy  fields  pursue 
separate  objectives,  an  individual  set  of  instruments  for  macroprudential  policy  is  needed. 
Second, I will concentrate on operational aspects of macroprudential policy. In particular, I 
will highlight that macroprudential policy will rightly gain in importance and that central banks 
ought to make a substantial contribution without, however, compromising their main objective 
– price stability – and their independence. Finally, I will outline that, in addition to this, the 
European sovereign debt crisis poses a much more fundamental question: How can central 
banks  fulfil  their  mandate  if  risks  to  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  emanate  from 
unsound  public  finances  and  structural  economic  weaknesses,  yet  policymakers  do  not 
succeed in putting these deficiencies right? 
Interrelations between financial stability and monetary policy  
2. 
The question as to what extent monetary policy can contribute to financial stability is certainly 
not new. However, the answer had to be and has been adjusted in the light of experiences 
throughout the recent crisis. In the decade preceding the financial crisis, central banks kept 
interest  rates  at  very  low  levels,  partly  due  to  an  environment  of  seemingly  exceptional 
macroeconomic  stability.  Another  important  factor  was  certainly  the  widespread  opinion 
prevailing at that time, that monetary policy should not lean against a bubble that is building 
up,  but  intervene  after  a  bubble  has  burst.  From  today’s  perspective  we  know  that  by 
applying  such  an  asymmetric  monetary  policy  approach  two  important  aspects  were 
underestimated.  First,  in  the  low  interest  environment  the  search  for  yield  caused  market 
participants to take riskier positions and contributed to the build-up of systemic risk. Second, 
the  turbulences  when  the  bubble  burst  could  not  easily  be  contained  by  making  use  of 
traditional monetary policy instruments but necessitated unconventional measures in several 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
policy areas. In addition, serious repercussions in the financial sector and the real economy 
could not be prevented. 
Against this background, the role of monetary policy has been stated more precisely. There 
is  still  no  doubt  that  price  stability  should  be  the  key  goal  of  a  central  bank.  Fulfilling  this 
mandate  forms  the  basis  of  our  credibility,  and  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  this  goal  when 
becoming  involved  in  crisis  management.  In  addition,  we  should  be  aware  that  monetary 
policy is not able to fully avoid the build-up of bubbles and the event of crises. Pretending 
otherwise  would  lead  to  expectations  in  monetary  policy  that  cannot  be  satisfied,  and  this 
would  ultimately  undermine  central  banks’  credibility  with  negative  consequences  for  our 
ability to maintain price stability.  
However, as a central lesson from the crisis, monetary policy has to take a closer look at the 
possible  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  –  because  these  have  implications  for  price 
stability. In the case of the Eurosystem, this implies that monetary analysis, which already 
focuses on longer-term risks for price stability stemming from increasing money supply, will 
gain  in  importance.  This  will  allow  monetary  policy  to  extend  its  horizon  and  to  apply 
monetary  policy  more  symmetrically  across  the  financial  cycle,  in  line  with  the  fact  that 
financial imbalances regularly build up over a longer period of time. 
Such a more symmetric approach to monetary policy is based on central banks’ primary goal 
of  price stability,  and  will contribute  to  financial  stability.  However,  while  price  stability  is  a 
necessary  prerequisite  for  financial  stability,  it  is  far  from  being  the  only  one.  In  addition, 
central banks equipped with only one main instrument, i.e. the interest rate are not able to 
meet  several  goals,  that  is  price  stability  and  financial  stability  at  the  same  time.  For 
monetary policy to be able to concentrate on price stability, it is therefore indispensable that 
macroprudential policy is equipped with an individual set of instruments.  
This  notwithstanding,  monetary  and  macroprudential  policy  cannot  be  seen  completely 
separately from each other due to potential spillovers. Therefore, some coordination between 
both policy fields is warranted, although without blurring the individual objectives. 
to 
the 
facilitate 
transition 
from  analysis 
to  action,  a  clear  mandate 
How to design macroprudential policy 
3. 
With  this  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  more  practical  issues  associated  with  the 
question “how to design macroprudential policy?”. For efficient macroprudential policy, two 
things  are  crucial:  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk  to  be  able  to  issue 
warnings  and  recommendations,  and  the  translation  of  such  warnings  into  policies  and 
action. 
In  order 
for 
macroprudential  supervision  is  needed.  And  there  are  good  reasons  why  central  banks 
should be involved as long as their independence and the hierarchy of their objectives, with 
price  stability  as  the  primary  goal,  are  respected.  Their  extensive  knowledge  of  financial 
markets  and  the  macro  economy  is  very  valuable  for  macroprudential  purposes,  and  their 
participation will facilitate forming a consistent view for both monetary and macroprudential 
policy.  In  this  regard,  I  highly  welcome  that  the  Bundesbank  is  to  be  given  an  explicit 
macroprudential mandate. 
With  the  introduction  of  countercyclical  capital  buffers,  the  first  truly  macroprudential 
instrument  will  be  at  the  disposal  of  national  supervisory  authorities.  By  dampening 
excessive credit growth, countercyclical capital buffers will make it possible to “lean against 
the wind” beyond the scope of monetary policy and thereby enable monetary policy to better 
focus  on  price  stability.  This  is  especially  important  in  a  monetary  union  such  as  the  euro 
area.  As  the  common  monetary  policy  has  to  ensure  price  stability  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole, it is not suitable as a means of preventing excessive credit growth in single countries, 
which is often aligned with the build-up of systemic risk. For example, it is beyond the reach 
of monetary policy to counteract regional overheating in housing markets, which often goes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
along  with  excessive  credit  growth.  In  such  a  case,  nationally  calibrated  countercyclical 
capital buffers may prove to be effective. 
However,  we  have  to  make  sure  that  monetary  and  macroprudential  policy  complement 
rather  than  counteract  each  other.  For  example,  it  would  be  inefficient  and  detrimental  to 
both  objectives  if  macroprudential  policy  tightened  its  stance  to  dampen  credit  expansion, 
while  at  the  same  time  monetary  policy  was  loosened  because  there  is  no  medium  term 
inflation  risk  and  an  expected  economic  downturn  may  contribute  to  even  reduced  price 
pressure.  In  order  to  avoid  an  inconsistent,  suboptimal  policy  mix,  a  close  exchange  of 
assessments in both policy fields is necessary – however, it should not lead to a blurring of 
the  responsibilities  of  the  respective  policy  areas.  It  goes  without  saying  that  to  ensure  a 
comprehensive surveillance of the financial system, such an exchange of information is also 
necessary between macroprudential policy and microprudential supervision, not just in order 
to take on board the expertise of microprudential supervision but also to share any relevant 
information. 
While  final  decisions  about  the  use  of  macroprudential  policy  instruments,  such  as  the 
calibration of countercyclical capital buffers, should be taken on the national level, which has 
the greatest expertise on the national financial system and has to bear the cost of regulatory 
failure,  a  purely  national  perspective  of  macroprudential  oversight  remains  too  narrow.  As 
became  all  too  clear  in  the  course  of  the  crisis,  systemic  risk  does  not  respect  national 
borders  and  the  close  integration  of  capital  markets  and  the  risks  of  regulatory  arbitrage 
require international cooperation, for instance in the design of macroprudential instruments.  
In this process, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), whose anniversary we celebrate 
with  this conference,  is  a  key  player.  About  one  year  after  it  was  established, its  tasks  as 
central  guarantor  for  financial  stability  within  Europe  have  increasingly  taken  shape. 
Consisting  of  representatives  of  national  central  banks  and  microprudential  surveillance 
bodies, the ESRB builds on the expertise of national authorities with the task of assessing 
systemic  risk  on  the  European  level  and  issuing  recommendations  and  warnings  across 
Europe.  In  addition,  its  scope  is  about  to  be  broadened  to  playing  a  coordinating  role  for 
macroprudential policies and guarding against protectionism in the regulatory framework.  
Challenges from the sovereign debt crisis 
4. 
While the work on a better framework for ensuring global financial stability is in full progress, 
the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  turned  the  focus  to  the  foundations  on  which  the 
stability of our monetary and financial system rest: a sound and competitive macroeconomic 
base  and  solid  public  finances.  The  specific  challenge  for  monetary  and  macroprudential 
policy in the current debt crisis stems from the fact, that while both policy goals are affected 
the  possibilities  to  contribute  to  crisis  resolution  are  limited.  Specifically  with  respect  to 
monetary policy, there is the substantial risk that involvement in crisis resolution may entail a 
burden shifting from fiscal to monetary policy, and the ultimately necessary political action to 
address the root cause of the crisis might be delayed, incomplete, or not happening at all. 
One of the severest forms of monetary policy being roped in for fiscal purposes is monetary 
financing,  in  colloquial  terms  also  known  as  the  financing  of  public  debt  via  the  money 
printing press. In conjunction with central banks’ independence, the prohibition of monetary 
financing,  which  is  set  forth  in  Article  123  of  the  EU  Treaty,  is  one  of  the  most  important 
achievements in central banking. Specifically for Germany, it is also a key lesson from the 
experience of the hyperinflation after World War I. This prohibition takes account of the fact 
that  governments  may  have  a  short-sighted  incentive  to  use  monetary  policy  to  finance 
public  debt,  despite  the  substantial  risk  it  entails.  It  undermines  the  incentives  for  sound 
public finances, creates appetite for ever more of that sweet poison and harms the credibility 
of the central bank in its quest for price stability. A combination of the subsequent expansion 
in money supply and raised inflation expectations will ultimately translate into higher inflation. 
In a monetary union of independent countries, one additional aspect that is often missed in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the current discussion is particularly relevant. Monetary financing in a monetary union leads 
to  a  collectivisation  of  sovereign  risks  among  the  tax  payers  in  the  monetary  union.  It  is 
equivalent  to  issuing  Eurobonds.  However,  the  redistribution  of  such  risks  and  the  related 
transfers between the members of the monetary union are clearly the task of national fiscal 
policies,  and  only  the  national  parliaments  have  the  democratic  legitimation  to  make  such 
decisions. For this reason, the Eurosystem’s mandate to ensure price stability rightly involves 
the prohibition of any kind of monetary financing.  
Proposals to involve the Eurosystem in leveraging the EFSF – be it through a refinancing of 
the EFSF by the central bank or most recently via the use of currency reserves as collateral 
for  an  SPV  buying  government  bonds  –  would  be  a  clear  violation  of  this  prohibition. 
Incidentally  a  support  of  this  scheme  by  governments  would  have  also  circumvented  the 
parliamentary approval for additional rescue funds provided by Germany. These proposals 
have met the staunch opposition of the Bundesbank. The current crisis cannot be solved by 
destroying  its  stability  oriented  basis.  Hence,  I  am  glad  that  also  the  German  government 
echoed our resistance to the use of German currency or gold reserves in funding financial 
assistance to other EMU members.  
It  is  sometimes  requested  that  Germany  should  contribute  more  strongly  to  international 
stabilisation.  However,  in  my  view  the  most  important  contribution  at  the  moment  is  that 
Germany  remains  a  stability  anchor  in  EMU  with  regard  to  fiscal  sustainability  and  with 
regard to its stability orientation. For example, the new national fiscal rules in Germany may 
increase  confidence  in  sound  public  finances,  which  I  believe  is  currently  more  important 
than any short-lived fiscal stimulus. Therefore, I would advise the German government not to 
weaken its fiscal stance by spending any revenue windfalls, but rather to continue the timely 
consolidation of the budgets at all levels of government. 
From  a  short  sighted  perspective  flirting  with  monetary  financing  may  be  perceived  as  a 
seemingly easy way out, but policymakers have to implement a true long-term solution to the 
crisis. The course of the crisis leaves no doubt about what this requires. First, on the national 
level  the  determination  of  the  affected  countries  to  return  to  a  sustainable  path  of  public 
finance  and  to  undertake  the  necessary  structural  reforms  is  required.  Second,  as  such 
action will inevitably entail painful and initially contentious adjustments, we need a framework 
within the monetary union which ensures sufficient incentives for the member states to follow 
this  way  nevertheless. So  far,  the  decisions  taken  for  crisis  resolution  within  the monetary 
union have not addressed these issues sufficiently as the recent aggravation of the crisis has 
shown. 
The October summit dealt with a number of important crisis issues. One definitely positive 
outcome  of  the  summit  was  the  decision  to  ensure  sufficient  capitalisation  in  the  banking 
sector, given that contagion effects are a major reason for the severity of the crisis.  
However, as we currently see, even positive outcomes of the summit fall short of expectation 
without the necessary consolidation and structural adjustments in the countries which are at 
the heart of the crisis. More generally, the euro area is currently caught up in the fact that its 
framework has, in the course of the crisis, increasingly lost consistency. This is harming the 
credibility  of  the  current  rescue  packages.  While  risks  stemming  from  undesirable  and 
self-inflicted developments in individual countries have been increasingly communalised by 
the assistance packages, the ultimate decision-making power has remained on the national 
level  and  the  conditionality  that  was  intended  to  rein  in  national  policymakers  has  been 
increasingly relaxed. 
As a first step, a consistent strategy requires strict conditionality of the agreed financial help 
to  be  enforced  in  order  to  prevent  the  incentives  to  implement  painful  reforms  and 
consolidation measures from weakening further. In the case of Greece, this must imply that 
the financial help, which is bound to strict consolidation and reforms, will be halted if Greece 
decides against the agreed adjustment process. It is an important and promising signal that 
policymakers  from  EMU  member  countries  have  stressed  this  point,  too.  What  is  often 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
overlooked, however, is that uncertainty about the future of the adjustment programme can 
quickly make untenable the situation of central banks which continue to provide liquidity to 
Greek banks. 
Furthermore, however, policymakers have to decide which direction the currency union is to 
take.  As  I  have  discussed  in  more  detail  in  earlier  speeches,  there  are  in  principle  two 
conceivable ways to a consistent and economically sustainable framework for the monetary 
union. While the first would be a return to the founding principles of the system, but with an 
enhanced framework that really ensures sufficient incentives for sound public finances, the 
second way would imply a major shift entailing a fundamental change in the federal structure 
of the EU and involving a transfer of national responsibilities, particularly for borrowing and 
incurring  debt,  to  the  EU.  Only  a  clear  decision  for  either  option  lays  the  foundation  to 
preserve the monetary union as a stability union in the long-run. It is up to governments in 
Europe to make this decision. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Before we had time to implement all the lessons learnt from the financial crisis, the European 
sovereign debt crisis has posed new and substantial challenges. This is particularly true for 
central  banks,  as  their  primary  mandate  of  ensuring  price  stability  not  only  has  to  be 
internally reconciled with efforts to better ensure financial stability, but is at the same time 
exposed to a crisis situation in which the line between monetary and fiscal policy is growing 
increasingly blurred. 
In this situation, we are well advised not to overburden central banks. Primarily, they should 
continue to focus on maintaining price stability, a task at which they have an excellent and 
proven track record. In addition, central banks will play an important role in macroprudential 
policy,  both  at  the  national  and  at  the  international  level,  for  example  as  members  of  the 
ESRB. But, as I said before, the stability of our financial and monetary systems depends on 
more  than  these  columns  and  microprudential  supervision.  A  sound  macroeconomic  and 
fiscal basis is equally important, and it is not central banks but policymakers that have the 
means and the legitimacy to ensure this basis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
