Norman T L Chan: 3Ds – an era of awakening? 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the 4th Santander International Banking Conference: “A Global Financial System for a Global 
Economy”, Madrid, 18 October 2011. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
I am honoured to receive the invitation to attend and speak at the 4th Santander International 
Banking Conference today.  
It is only a few short years ago that the world economy was shaken to its core by the Global 
Financial Crisis. That we again face the threat of profound and traumatic disruption so soon 
is  a  measure  of  the  urgency  that  governments  must  employ  to  correct  the  structural 
imbalances necessary to get the economy back on song for the long term. 
Today  I  want  to  take  up  a  little  bit  of  your  time  explaining  what  I  see  as  fundamental  to 
righting the ship so that it can survive in the roughest of seas. 
Collapse of Bretton Woods System 
After World War II, the World’s Superpowers tried to maintain a system of semi (or quasi) 
Gold Standard in which major currencies were fixed to the US dollar, which was in turn fixed 
to Gold at US$35 an ounce. This global monetary system was basically a fixed rate regime, 
which imposed an external discipline to restrain monetary expansion globally. 
The Bretton Woods System became unsustainable as the US began to allow money supply 
to  grow  well  beyond  the  gold  reserves  held  by  the  US  Government.  When  the  System 
collapsed  in  1972,  the  world’s  monetary  system  was  converted  to  a  fiat  money  regime  in 
which  major  international  currencies  freely  floated  against  each  other.  The  post-Bretton 
Woods era represented a new era in which governments would be given more or less a free 
hand  to  pursue  their  national  interests  and  domestic  policy  agenda  without  the  rigid 
constraints  imposed  by  a  Gold  Exchange  Standard.  Unfortunately,  the  initial  experience 
under the new regime was far from satisfactory. 
In my view, financial and macroeconomic stability cannot exist without an effective monetary 
anchor.  For  many  centuries,  the  linkage  to  the  precious  metals  had  provided  an  external 
monetary anchor. Of course, the Gold Standard or Silver Standard had many shortcomings 
but  it  nevertheless  provided  an  externally  imposed  discipline  against  monetary  expansion. 
However,  under  the  fiat  money  and  floating  rate  regime,  financial  and  macroeconomic 
stability  can  only  be  achieved  if  we  have  “3  Ds”!  What  does  “3Ds”  stand  for?  The  first  D 
stands  for  “Monetary  Discipline”,  the  second  “Fiscal  Discipline”  and  the  third  “Market 
Discipline”. Conceptually, the removal of the external monetary anchor in the form of backing 
by precious metals must be replaced by these three types of discipline. If any of these three 
disciplines breaks down, then serious consequences or even a financial crisis may occur. Let 
me address these three disciplines in turn. 
Monetary discipline 
Unlike a fixed rate regime in which a national government can only issue currency if it can 
provide the backing (such as gold reserves), a floating rate regime allows national authorities 
to issue currency freely to suit their domestic needs. As we know, national central banks play 
a crucial role in controlling or influencing the supply of money. By changing interest rates or 
the price of money, central banks indirectly influence the expansion of credit and thus money 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
supply. Good monetary discipline is clearly needed to ensure that money or credit expansion 
does not become out of control. The initial experience in the US with the fiat money regime 
was not at all successful or pleasant. There was runaway inflation, rising from 5.8% in 1970 
to 11.2% in 1979, and, as a result, Paul Volcker of the Fed had to introduce drastic measures 
to combat inflation by pushing interest rates to as high as 19%. It is now widely accepted that 
the  breakdown  of  monetary  discipline  will  lead  to  financial  chaos  with  huge  shocks  to 
macroeconomic and financial stability. 
After  the  recent  Global  Financial  Crisis,  we  have  come  to  realise  how  important  it  is  to 
maintain the appropriate monetary discipline. It has been argued by many economists that 
one of the contributing factors leading to the Crisis was that the US policy interest rate was 
set too low for a prolonged period, which further fuelled credit growth and the housing bubble 
in the US. Of course financial innovation and the creation of highly opaque and leveraged 
financial derivative products, such as CDOs, also helped amplify the severity of the problem 
and  transmit  the  shockwaves  across  the  global  financial  system.  The  result:  the  global 
financial system nearly collapsed.  
Fiscal discipline 
More often than not monetary discipline breaks down because of the lack of fiscal discipline. 
One  major  reason  why  the  US  had  to  abandon  the  Bretton  Woods  system  was  the  huge 
fiscal burden of financing the war in Vietnam, which also led to a sharp deterioration of the 
current  account  position  of  the  US.  There  have  been  many  examples  of  Government 
spending beyond their means resulting in the piling up of government or public debt. In the 
case of Argentina, the lack of fiscal discipline eventually brought down the Currency Board 
System that had served as an anchor of monetary stability for Argentina since 1991. In the 
case of Europe, the sovereign debt crisis that we are seeing now has been the consequence 
of  a  breakdown  of  the  fiscal  prudence  and  discipline  over  many  years.  Very  few  people 
would now doubt that macroeconomic and financial stability could be achieved in the longer 
run in the absence of fiscal discipline. 
Market discipline 
This is probably the most complex if not intriguing dimension of the three disciplines needed 
to  maintain  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability.  Traditionally,  we  all  believe  that  market 
forces would be the last guard when national authorities failed to exercise monetary or fiscal 
discipline or both. In theory, the market should respond to a breakdown in monetary or fiscal 
discipline  by  demanding  higher  risk  premium  for  the  sovereign  debt  issued  by  those 
countries that are not behaving in a prudent manner. However, market discipline also seems 
to  have  broken  down  in  many  instances.  For  example,  right  after  Greece  joined  the  Euro 
Zone, the market was somehow attracted by the so called convergence play and for 8 years 
from  2001–2008  it ignored  the  fundamentals  of  Greece  and  its  Single A  rating  and  traded 
Greek sovereign debts as a Triple A credit, with a spread of as low as 8 basis points above 
German Bunds in February 2005. Looking back, the rationale for this kind of convergence 
play defies common sense and any analysis of fundamentals. However, the breakdown of 
the market discipline had played a key role in encouraging and facilitating continued erosion 
of fiscal discipline of the national authorities by conveying the wrong signals about the market 
tolerance, and appetite for their sovereign debts. As an illustration, the sharp fall of interest 
cost (10-year government bond yield) from over 10% in the mid 1990s to a low of 3% in the 
mid-2000s had also helped lower the cost of Greek Government borrowings and created the 
illusion of the affordability and sustainability of the rising pile of government debts.  
There  are  many  reasons  why  market  forces  are  failing  to  impose  discipline  when  national 
authorities or firms fail to behave prudently. However, it is fair to say that financial innovation 
in the last decade or so contributed in no small part to the breakdown of market discipline. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Coming back to the US, the proliferation of MBS and complex financial derivatives of CDOs 
had,  as  we  now  know,  greatly  increased  the  leverage  and  thus  risk  of  the  entire  financial 
system. What was worse was that the structure of these financial products was so complex 
and  so  far  removed  from  the  underlying  assets  that it  was  virtually  impossible  for  anyone, 
including the rating agencies, to fully understand the risks involved and to price such risks 
appropriately. We now know that there were thousands and thousands of CDOs sold before 
the Global Financial Crisis that were given Triple-A ratings simply because seriously flawed 
assumptions and models were used in assessing the risk of defaults. As I mentioned earlier, 
these financial derivatives had helped amplify the shocks and transmit these shocks across 
the global financial system during the latest Global Financial Crisis.  
An era of awakening? 
While we have seen many instances where market discipline has broken down, it is hard to 
believe  that  market  discipline  will  break  down  permanently.  As  Europe  has  recently  found 
out,  the  market  can  suddenly  awaken  and  begin  to  doubt  the  fiscal  sustainability  of  some 
members  of  the  Euro  Zone.  This  belated  awakening  has  so  far  created  considerable 
dislocation to the banking system and capital markets. Once the market discipline begins to 
kick in, the national and Pan European authorities have little choice but to push forward a 
series  of  drastic,  painful  but  necessary  austerity  measures  to  quickly  achieve  fiscal 
consolidation and to restore market confidence.  
Another important issue we are facing is to what extent monetary policy could be effective in 
supporting  and  stimulating  economic  growth.  In  other  words,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that 
excessive  accommodative  monetary  policy  would  be  effective  in  boosting  demand  and 
creating jobs in the US and elsewhere and whether such policy, if deployed for a long period 
of time, would have undesirable consequences, both overseas and domestically, that would 
outweigh the likely benefits it could potentially generate. 
I  would  argue  that  we  central  bankers  must  be  able  to  recognise  the  pitfalls  of  trying  to 
achieve goals that are beyond our reach. And I would agree with Chairman Bernanke when 
he  said  in  his  recent  speech  at  the  Jackson  Hole  conference  that  “most  of  the  economic 
policies that support robust economic growth in the long run are outside the province of the 
central bank”. While monetary discipline, fiscal discipline and market discipline are absolutely 
necessary  conditions  for  economic  stability  and  prosperity,  they  are  clearly  not  sufficient 
conditions.  For  the  global  economy  to  recover  and  to  return  to  its  long-term  growth  trend, 
important structural imbalances in the major advanced economies have to be corrected. We 
must recognise that economic growth and prosperity built on excessive debts by households, 
corporates and the Governments are clearly not sustainable. We must awaken to the cruel 
reality that somehow the debt overhang accumulated over the years has to be reduced and 
redressed before consumers and investors can regain confidence on a brighter future.  
To some of you my speech today may have sounded rather gloomy. You might have felt that 
it  is  easy  for  someone  from  Asia,  a  region  that  is  growing  strongly  and  to  some  extent 
suffering from overheating pressures, to lecture colleagues in Europe, which is in the midst of 
a sovereign debt crisis and suffering from low growth and high unemployment, about what 
are  the  right  things  to  do.  But  it  is  far  too  easy  to  overlook  the  fact  that  Emerging  Asia’s 
dynamism today is the result of very painful adjustments that took place after the widespread 
devastation caused by the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997–98. You may or may not know that 
Hong Kong had had a very serious housing market bubble, which collapsed in late 1997. In 
the six years after that, housing prices declined by close to 70%, with unemployment rising 
three  times.  At  the  same  time,  the  economy  contracted  by  8.7%  over  5  quarters  with 
deflation  amounting  to  15%  during  this  period  of  adjustment.  There  was  a  lot  of  pain  and 
sense of gloom during this very difficult period, but Hong Kong people did not give up and 
kept on trying their best to deal with the problems. After this very painful adjustment, Hong 
Kong has re-emerged stronger and more resilient than ever before. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In conclusion, I wish to leave with you the following message: the breakdown of monetary, 
fiscal and market disciplines has contributed to the deepness and severity of the latest crisis 
in  the  advanced  economies.  In  my  view,  there  is  unfortunately  no  easy  way  out  or  clever 
solution  that  could  avoid  the  need  and  thus  the  pain  of  structural  adjustments  that  would 
redress the imbalances built up in the last decade or two. Going forward, we must realise 
that  we  have  to  restore  the  3Ds  or  three  Disciplines,  without  which  the  conditions  for 
sustainable economic recovery would not exist. Are we now in an era of awakening? I am not 
totally sure but I think, or at least I hope, we are. If not, then market forces would eventually 
push all of us into that position, except that the later the awakening occurs the heavier the 
price we will have to pay. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
