Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at  a  hearing  before  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 4 October 2011. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
It is always a great pleasure to be here as President of the European Central Bank (ECB), 
before  the  directly  elected  representatives  of  the  European  people.  This  interaction  is  a 
cornerstone of our Economic and Monetary Union.  
Today,  I  appear  before  your  committee  with  particular  emotion.  This  is  the  last  of  my 
35 immensely fruitful dialogues with you. 
Members of the European Parliament, you are the heart of the living democracy in Europe. 
We  at  the  ECB  are  the  guardians  of  the  currency  of  our  fellow  citizens.  And  we  are  fully 
independent in our actions to protect the currency whilst you ask us to report to you.  
Indépendance  et  responsabilité  sont  indissociables.  Afin  de  conserver  sa  légitimité,  une 
banque  centrale  indépendante  doit  être  prête  à  rendre  des  comptes  au  Parlement  et  au 
public. Tout au long de mon mandat, j’ai attaché autant d’importance à l’une qu’à l’autre. La 
BCE  est  farouchement  indépendante.  En  même  temps,  elle  ne  peut  pas  se  passer  d’une 
interaction régulière et étroite avec le Parlement européen: c’est cela même qui lui permet 
d’accomplir ses missions en toute transparence et responsabilité. C’est pourquoi j’ai toujours 
répondu  présent  lorsque  vous  m’avez  convié  à  venir  échanger  ici,  que  ce  soit  en  session 
plénière ou en Commission, et plus fréquemment que d’habitude lorsque des circonstances 
exceptionnelles l’exigeaient.  
Ich  möchte  in  meiner  Einleitung  mit  dem  vereinbarten  Thema  beginnen,  nämlich  den 
Prinzipien der Geldpolitik der EZB seit ihrer Gründung. Danach werde ich eingehen auf die 
Beziehungen  zwischen  der  EZB  und  dem  Europäischen  Parlament  in  den  letzten  acht 
Jahren,  und  den  Beitrag  unserer  beiden  Institutionen  zur  europäischen  Integration.  Mit 
einigen  Überlegungen  zur  Zukunft  der  EU,  und  insbesondere  der  Wirtschafts-  und 
Währungsunion, werde ich dann schließen. 
1) 
The ECB’s actions since its creation: permanent alertness, resolute action and 
fierce independence 
Let me first reflect on the ECB’s actions since its creation. With current discussions sharply 
focused on how to deal with the financial and sovereign debt crisis, it is sometimes forgotten 
that our primary objective is to maintain price stability in the euro area.  
More precisely, we aim to maintain inflation rates in the euro area below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term.  
This is what the Treaty demands from us. This is what the citizens of the euro area expect 
from us. And this is what we have delivered.  
Price stability is a necessary condition to foster sustainable economic  growth, job  creation 
and to ensure the well-being of Europe’s citizens. 
One  fundamental  indicator  is  medium  and  long  term  inflation  expectations.  Inflation 
expectations  that  are  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability  help  employers  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
employees in the euro area to agree fair wages. They help businesses small and large to 
make  longer-term  investments.  They  ensure,  all  things  being  equal,  a  more  favourable 
financial  environment  because  market  medium  and  long  term  interest  rates  incorporate 
stable  price  expectations.  And  they  help  governments  to  play  their  role  in  macroeconomic 
stabilisation.  
Preserving inflation expectations in line with price stability has been far from easy. Let me 
remind you of a few of the many shocks to the economy since 1999. 
The early 2000s saw the bursting of the “dot-com” bubble. Medium and long term inflation 
expectations remained stable. Then came the terrorist attacks of 9/11. Inflation expectations 
remained stable. We saw dramatic surges in oil prices. Once again, medium and long term 
inflation expectations remained stable. 
Then,  in  2007,  there  were  the  first  signs  of  an  unprecedented  financial  crisis,  the 
repercussions of which continue to this day. What happened in late 2008 in particular could 
have resulted in an economic catastrophe not seen since 1929. Authorities across the world 
took  action  to  avoid  another  Great  Depression.  We  at  the  ECB  responded  by  lowering 
interest  rates  and  introducing  our  non-standard  measures.  We  experienced  a  very  short 
period of negative inflation, with some commentators expecting a long period of deflation. Yet 
medium and long term inflation expectations remained stable.  
As you know, 2010 and 2011 have been extraordinary years for the economy, with parts of 
the euro area confronting serious problems in sovereign debt markets. But I can say once 
again: inflation expectations remain stable.  
Dealing with these diverse shocks has required constant alertness, resolute action and fierce 
independence.  
Permanent  and  credible  alertness  in  2004,  when  the  ECB  kept  interest  rates  at  2%  while 
governments and international institutions were calling for more cuts.  
Fierce independence in 2005 when the ECB started increasing its policy rates despite, again, 
the strong opposition of many governments and against the advice of international financial 
organisations. The ECB was criticised for that decision; with hindsight, that criticism turned 
into respect.  
Alertness  in  August  2007,  at  the  very  start  of  global  money  market  turbulences,  when  the 
ECB  was  the  first  central  bank  to  take  non  standard  measures  to  ensure  the  smooth 
transmission of monetary policy.  
At the very  beginning of the financial crisis the ECB decided to stick to a strict separation 
principle between the “standard measures” and the “non-standard measures”. The “standard 
measures” are designed to deliver price stability  in the medium term: they are the interest 
rate  decisions.  The  “non-standard  measures”  are  designed  to  help  restore  a  better 
transmission  of  our  “standard”  monetary  policy  decisions  at  times  when  the  crisis  is 
disrupting markets or segments of markets: the “non-standard measures” include the supply 
of  liquidity  at  full  allotment  and  fixed  rates  and  the  interventions  in  private  and  public 
securities markets. 
This separation principle permits us to preserve, including in the present deep crisis, a strong 
sense of our direction in the medium term – price stability – whilst taking into account the 
reality of the disruption of markets due to the crisis. 
Like  actions,  numbers  speak  louder  than  words.  Let  me  mention  one  number:  2.01%,  the 
average  inflation  rate  in  the  euro  area  since  1999  until  today,  over  a  period  of  almost 
13 years during which oil prices have soared.  
This  number  has  become  so  deeply  embedded  in  our  society  that  people  have  almost 
forgotten it.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But this number reflects the lowest annual average change in prices that any large euro area 
country  has  experienced  since  the  beginning  of  the  European  project,  over  50  years  ago. 
Price stability is now so self-evident to the citizens of Europe, and so much expected from 
their central bank, that achieving it is taken for granted.  
Even our regular exchanges of views have sometimes dealt less with the “M” than with the 
“E” of EMU! 
Economic and monetary developments 
2) 
Achieving price stability through alertness and  fierce independence sets the framework for 
our  day-to-day  actions.  In  this  context,  let  me  report  on  recent  economic  and  monetary 
developments.  Note  that  as  we  have  entered  the  Purdah-period,  nothing  I  say  has  any 
bearing on upcoming monetary policy decisions.  
We expect real GDP growth in the euro area to be very moderate in the second half of this 
year. Growth is dampened by a slowing pace of global growth, by declines in equity prices 
and  business  confidence,  and  by  continuing  tensions  in  segments  of  financial  markets  as 
well as in some sovereign debt markets. The more moderate economic outlook is confirmed 
in  the  ECB’s  September  projections.  The  risks  to  the  economic  outlook,  which  previously 
were  balanced,  are  now  on  the  downside,  mainly  relating  to  tensions  in  some  financial 
markets. 
Turning to prices, inflation was 2.5% in August, and rose to 3% in September according to 
the  Eurostat  flash  estimate,  almost  exclusively  as  a  result  of  oil  price  developments.  We 
expect inflation to stay above 2% over the coming months. Next year, it should fall below that 
level, depending on commodity price and wage developments. This pattern is also reflected 
in the latest ECB projections of inflation ranging between 1.2% and 2.2% next year. The risks 
to the medium-term outlook for inflation were broadly balanced in the eyes of the Governing 
Council in its last meeting, whereas before they were seen as being on the upside.  
Our  monetary  analysis  indicates  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  remains 
moderate. Liquidity accumulated prior to the period of financial market tensions continues to 
be ample but recent data indicate that part of it may be held more for precautionary reasons 
than for spending. 
Finally, in the context of our continuing analysis of the euro area economy, let me draw your 
attention to today’s release of the 2011 Structural Issues Report. This deals with structural 
features of distributive wholesale and retail trade and their impact on prices in the euro area. 
The distributive trade sectors are not only economically important in their own right, but also 
relevant  to monetary  policy.  Ultimately,  it  is  retailers  who set  the  prices  of  most consumer 
goods and they are a key interface between producers and consumers. I very much ask you 
to take note of the report. It suggests ample scope for further improving effective competition 
and removal of unwarranted barriers to cross-border trade. 
3) 
The European Parliament and the ECB – a constructive relationship to the 
benefit of Europe 
Let me turn to the relationship between our two institutions. The ECB’s fierce independence 
and its accountability to the Parliament are two sides of the same coin. In this endeavour, 
and especially throughout the recent turbulent times, our two institutions have interacted very 
constructively. The quality of our relations has been instrumental to the exercise of our tasks 
and, I believe, more generally to the process of European integration.  
The  hearings  in  your  Committee  are  naturally  the  cornerstone  of  the  ECB’s  Treaty-based 
accountability obligations. But they are more than that: beyond monetary policy stricto sensu, 
they  have  allowed  two  genuine  European  institutions  –  two  institutions  that  only  have  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
whole in mind and not just the parts – to have a continuous dialogue on a number of issues 
of great relevance for the smooth functioning of the single market of the European Union and 
of EMU.  
This  holds  in  particular  for  legislative  dossiers  on  which  you  decide,  together  with  the 
Council, and to which the ECB has contributed. I feel reassured when I see the numerous 
occasions when you have used your powers to bring Europe forward rather than settling for 
the lowest common denominator. I am confident that this will continue. 
The latest example is of course the economic governance package. Long before the crisis, 
our two institutions had sent similar messages to governments, in our own ways and through 
different fora.  
In November 2003, three weeks into my mandate, the ECB lambasted the fateful decision of 
the Council that effectively watered down the Stability and Growth Pact. Let me quote what I 
said eight years ago during my first regular hearing before your Committee: “The failure to 
respect the rules and procedures foreseen in the Stability and Growth Pact risks, in our view, 
undermining the credibility of the institutional framework and confidence in the sustainability 
of public finances across the euro area.”  
In 2005, six years ago, in the name of the Governing Council I both expressed our “grave 
concerns” as regards the conclusion of the negotiations on the new text of the Stability and 
Growth Pact, and I raised alarm bells as regards the evolution of the competitive indicators of 
the various countries member of the Euro area. 
Well before some sovereigns run into trouble in 2008, the Parliament also  “requested that 
Member  States  in  the  euro  area  strengthen  the  effective  coordination  of  economic  and 
financial policy” 1. 
When the time came to transform these messages into ambitious legislation, the Parliament 
immediately seized the opportunity. You were fully supported by the ECB.  
A second telling example of the fruitful interaction of our institutions is the new architecture of 
financial  supervision.  Throughout  the  2000s,  the  Parliament  regularly  called  for  the 
reinforcement of a true level playing field at the European level, while pointing out significant 
failures in the supervision of ever more integrated financial markets.2 When the Commission 
put forward the financial supervisory package, the Parliament did its utmost to strengthen the 
powers of the new supervisory authorities. Here again, you could also count on the support 
of the ECB.  
Visions for Europe from 2011 
4)  
Honourable Members,  
In  the  middle  of  the  deepest  financial  crisis  since  World  War  II,  it  is  important  to  remind 
ourselves  that  Europeans  can  take  pride  in  what  our  continent  has  achieved  over  the  last 
66 years. The unprecedented level of prosperity, peace and stability that the European Union 
and the Economic and Monetary Union have provided for their citizens is something we need 
to cherish.  
                                                 
1   European Parliament resolution of 18 November 2008 on the EMU@10: The first ten years of Economic and 
Monetary Union and future challenges (2008/2156(INI)). 
2   See e.g. García-Margallo y Marfil Report on the Commission communication on implementing the framework 
for  financial  markets:  Action  Plan  (2000),  Van  den  Burg  Report  on  prudential  supervision  rules  in  the 
European Union (2002), Van den Burg Report on financial services policy (2005–2010) – White Paper (2007) 
and Van den Burg & Daianu Report with recommendations to the Commission on Lamfalussy follow-up: future 
structure of supervision (2008). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
An important debate is underway on how to ensure that Europe continues to deliver well into 
the  future.  Important  and  much  needed  reforms  have  been  adopted  over  the  past  few 
months. But this is not the end of the road. On the contrary: further steps must be taken on 
our  way  to  an  ever  closer  economic  union.  In  the  short  to  medium  term,  it  is  essential  to 
implement  and  enhance  the  newly  agreed  legislation  as  far  as  possible.  Here,  this 
Parliament has a pivotal role.  
On economic governance, there is no doubt that you will make extensive use of tools such 
as the “economic dialogue” to support economic integration with the required legitimacy. This 
will  open  up  the  process  of  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  surveillance  and,  by  enhancing 
transparency,  it  should  encourage  Member  States  to  abide  by  the  new  rules  as  strictly  as 
possible.  
I am also confident that, both in the financial supervisory and governance package, you will 
seize the opportunity of the review clause to go one step further. In 2013 and 2014, you will 
have a rendez-vous with the Council to take stock and explore possible improvements. This 
will once again be an occasion to bring forward European integration in key policy areas.  
You  have  always  pushed  the  frontiers  of  what  is  impossible  by  putting  forward  new  ideas 
which have eventually become political reality. As a citizen of Europe, I very much hope that 
the Parliament will maintain this track record. 
When  I  received  the  Karlspreis  a  few  months  ago,  I  was  reflecting  on  the  future  of  the 
European  Union  and  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  “tomorrow”  and  the  “day  after 
tomorrow”.  As  a  citizen  of  Europe  I  see  the  necessity  of  deepening  the  institutional 
framework of the European Union. In my personal view, Europe will need to make significant 
progress  towards  political  unity  with  an  executive  branch  and  a  Parliament,  both  with 
extended  responsibilities  as  in  any  democracy.  Part  of  this  executive  branch  would  be  a 
European  finance  ministry  which  will  be  responsible,  not  necessarily  for  a  large  federal 
budget, but certainly for a strong economic and fiscal surveillance and governance, for the 
handling  of  the  financial  sector  and  for  the  external  representation  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. 
Such  a  strengthening  of  the  EU  executive  will  not  be  possible  without  one  absolutely 
necessary  condition:  democratic  legitimacy.  This  Parliament  is  the  only  institution  that  can 
ensure this for Europe as a whole. Collective responsibility for the destiny of EU and EMU 
and  strong  democratic  control  by  the  Parliament  are  two  complementary  and  necessary 
dimensions. The future belongs largely to this Chamber; the future depends very much on 
this Chamber. 
Mrs  Chair,  honourable  members  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the 
European Parliament: let me convey to all of you my most sincere thanks for our very fruitful 
cooperation over the past eight years. I have very much enjoyed working with you in such a 
constructive spirit. I wish you, as well as my successor, Mario Draghi, the Executive Board 
and  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  great  success  with  the  challenges,  as  well  as  the 
opportunities, that lie ahead.  
I can assure you that from its side, the ECB will continue to guard our currency, the euro, and 
deliver price stability to Europe’s citizens.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
