DeLisle Worrell: General financial sector issues and policies 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Financial Institutions Conference “General Financial Sector Issues and Policies”, Bridgetown, 
3 November 2011. 
 This  is  our  second  annual  conference  for  all  financial  institutions.  We  have  a  full  day  of 
discussion, which allows us to study current issues of the financial sector in depth. With the 
participation of all financial institutions, and with the collaboration of the Financial Services 
Commission,  we  are  able  to  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  financial  system,  including 
banks, finance companies, insurance, pensions, mutual funds, credit unions and securities. 
This conference deals with financial institutions that do domestic business; in March this year 
we held a conference for financial institutions in our international financial centre, and that is 
also intended to be an annual event. 
Since last year we have taken important steps to further strengthen financial oversight, and 
to increase the efficiency of the delivery of financial services. The most important of these 
was  the  establishment  of  the  FSC,  with  responsibility  for  the  supervision  of  non  deposit 
takers.  The  FSC  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  staff  and  setting  up  systems,  and  Central 
Bank is lending its expertise wherever we can be helpful. This morning you will hear more 
about its activities from the FSC themselves. 
We  have  also  been  strengthening  cooperation  with  banks  which  have  domestic  retail 
operations, through regular quarterly meetings, as well as ad hoc meetings when we need to 
make policy changes, such as the change in our foreign exchange margins. 
We are constantly strengthening cooperation with Canadian and other overseas regulators, 
with the Bank of Canada and with the Head Offices of banks operating in Barbados. We do 
consolidated  supervision  of  all  the  operations  of  multinational  banks,  together  with  the 
regulators of all the countries in which these banks operate, through a variety of channels 
and  mechanisms,  including  collective  overview  by  the  regulators  and  discussion  with  the 
banks  in  meetings  which  have  come  to  be  known  as  “colleges”.  Regulators  also  arrange 
conference calls and have informal contact, as well as more formal arrangements such as 
information-sharing  memoranda  of  understanding.  Two  weeks  ago  I  led  a  team  of  my 
colleagues on a most successful visit to Toronto and Ottawa, where we had discussions with 
the major Canadian banks, including those active in our international financial centre, with 
the  Office  of  Supervisor  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI),  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the 
Financial  Institutions  Supervisory  Committee,  which  also  includes  their  deposit  insurance 
corporation,  their  consumer  protection  agency  and  the  Treasury  Department.  We  took  the 
opportunity  to  meet  with  the  newly  established  Toronto  chapter  of  BIBA,  and  our  High 
Commission in Ottawa arranged a reception for potential investors in Barbados. 
As we all know, the largest of our financial institutions operate at a regional level, and therefore 
as supervisors we need to be concerned about risks that arise from regional linkages. A project 
for the publication of a regional Financial Stability Report got underway last month. The target 
for publication of the first regional financial stability report is December 2012. In the meanwhile 
preparation  work  on  Barbados’  own  financial  stability  report  is  advanced,  and  publication  is 
slated for end-December this year. 
Together  with  our  regional  partners,  Barbados  has  sought  to  have  a  voice  in  the  ongoing 
efforts  for  reform  of  the  international  financial  system.  We  have  been  invited  to  join  the 
Regional Consultative Group for the Americas, set up by the Financial Stability Board, the 
body  established  by  the  Group  of  20  countries  to  oversee  the  process  of  international 
financial  reform.  Shane  Lowe  and  I  are  preparing  a  paper  on  Caribbean  perspectives  on 
international  financial  reform  for  presentation  at  the  inaugural  meeting  of  the  Regional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Consultative  Group,  on  December  2  in  Mexico  City.  This  year  at  the  time  of  the  Annual 
Meetings  of  the  World Bank  and  IMF,  the  Caribbean  countries  were invited  to  a breakfast 
meeting with the Managing Director of the IMF to offer our perspective on the Fund’s work 
and to share our concerns. This is the second year that we had such a meeting. 
On  the  Clico  matter,  we  have  had  very  encouraging  cooperation  with  OECS  countries 
through the Advisory Group which has been established by the Judicial Managers, and which 
I co-chair with my friend and colleague Timothy Antoine, the Permanent Secretary of Finance 
of  Grenada.  The  Judicial  Managers  have  done  an  outstanding  job  in  providing  a 
comprehensive  menu  of  options  for  the  resolution  of  the  Clico  insolvency,  from  which  the 
option which is in the best interests of policy holders may be chosen. 
The topics we will cover today are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Today’s sessions are not for decision making; their value is in the discussion of the issues. If 
we  are  to  make  good  policy,  we  must  be  fully  informed  and  the  issues  must  be  fully 
ventilated.  Today  we  will  share  information,  and  there  is  an  opportunity  for  everyone  to 
contribute  their  views  on  the  issues  presented.  Half  the  time  allotted  to  each  session  is 
intended for Q and A. Presenters are asked to keep their eyes on the clock, to ensure that 
you do not erode the audience’s time. 
We look forward to your active engagement in today’s activities. Our philosophy of regulation 
has  always  been  cooperative,  never  coercive  or  confrontational.  It  is  an  approach  which 
works very well, because it recognizes the interests of everyone, in a context where we all 
agree that we must, in the end, do what is in the best interests of the country. 
The impact of the global crisis 
The Role of the FSC 
Financial institutions and the financing of government 
Things that affect credit quality 
Changes in the operation of the FX market; and 
Considerations for interest rate policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
