Matthew Elderfield: Mortgage arrears – Central Bank of Ireland 
supervisory strategy 
Address by Mr Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Association  of  Compliance  Officers  in  Ireland,  University  College  Cork,  Cork,  14  October 
2011. 
 Introduction  
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. It is good to be back in Cork again and particularly in 
UCC  where  I  am  honoured  to  have  been  appointed  an  adjunct  professor.  I  am  looking 
forward to being a regular visitor to the College and arranging a smaller student seminar at 
some point in the New Year. 
This afternoon I would like to focus on the very difficult issue of mortgage arrears which is a 
top  priority  for  the  Central  Bank.  I  welcome  the  opportunity  today  to  outline  in  turn  the 
different elements of our supervisory strategy in this area. I will also tell you about the new 
work  the  Central  Bank  is  undertaking  in  this  area  which  will  involve  setting  out  our 
expectations on the structures and processes regulated lenders should put in place to handle 
their  arrears.  I  will  also  describe  a  planned  supervisory  review  of  how  firms  are  handling 
arrears in practice, with the threat of enforcement sanctions where appropriate.  
Earlier this week I met with the Senior Management at the main mortgage lenders where the 
Central Bank set out very clearly to them our expectations of them. Today I am taking this 
opportunity to communicate our position publically.  
The vast majority of Irish borrowers are meeting their commitments on their mortgages and 
other  debt,  despite  the  more  difficult  economic  circumstances.  But  it  is  clear  too  that  the 
sharp increase in unemployment, against a background of the heavy indebtedness built up in 
previous years, has led to an exceptional increase in the number of households who have 
missed  payments  on  their  mortgages.  For  some  this  will  be  a  transitory  or  temporary 
situation  and  they  will  in  due  course  be  in  a  position  to  resume  full  servicing  of  their 
commitments. For others, however, their circumstances have deteriorated so severely that 
they may not be able to recover sufficiently over time to fully repay their mortgage loans. This 
is the difficult situation to which the lenders, the Government and other stakeholders must try 
to  find  equitable  solutions.  Following  their  recapitalisation  earlier  this  year  the  Irish  banks 
have more capacity to address individual arrears cases, but it is important to be very clear 
that neither the banks nor the taxpayer have unlimited financial resources. 
Data collection  
Before getting into the important questions of consumer protection and bank capital, I want to 
set out the data we have gathered on mortgage arrears to ensure we have a clear factual 
basis  for  discussion.  Yesterday  the  Central  Bank  hosted  a  conference  on  the  mortgage 
market,  where  invited  speakers  from  the  US  and  UK  as  well  as  speakers  from  the  Bank 
addressed this important topic.  
Since  September  2009  the  Central  Bank  has  collected  and  published  data  on  mortgage 
arrears and repossessions. This on-going monitoring of the mortgage arrears situation helps 
to  inform  consumer  protection  and  prudential  policy.  We  collect  data  from  19  lending 
institutions.  In  its  final  report  in  November  2010,  the  Mortgage  Arrears  and  Personal  Debt 
Group  (also  known  as  the  Cooney  Group)  recommended  that  the  mortgage  arrears  and 
repossessions  data  be  extended  to  include  mortgage  restructuring.  We  implemented  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
change  in  December  2010  and  the  data  now  shows  the  number  of  restructured  loans,  at 
69,800 in June 2011, up from just over 59,000 in December 2010.  
As part of our March 2011 Prudential Capital Assessment Review (also known as the PCAR) 
and our work with BlackRock, the Central Bank collected detailed loan level data from each 
of the banks. This has enabled us to analyse the arrears situation at a very granular level. 
This  kind  of  approach  underpins  much  of  our  analytical  work  in  this  area,  and  I  would 
commend  you  to  look  at  the  papers  presented  yesterday  which  will  be  available  on  the 
Central Bank website. Another important reference document is our publication of the results 
of  the  PCAR,  which  set  out  the  projected  loan  losses  under  a  base  and  stress  scenario 
modelled by BlackRock: this is also available on the website.  
The detailed data now available helps us to identify more clearly where the problems lie and 
where targeted policy responses are required:  
 
The  significant  increase  in  arrears  over  time  is  clear  –  the  number  of  primary 
dwelling mortgage loans in arrears of more than 90 days past due, increased from 
3.3% in September 2009 to 7.2% in June 2011. But this is only the owner-occupier 
side  of  the  market.  The  buy-to-let  market  (BTL)  is  also  an  area  of  concern  to  the 
Central Bank. From a very small share of the market in the early 2000s, BTL loans 
grew to account for around one quarter of outstanding balances by the end of the 
decade. The data shows that the 90-day arrears rate in this category is growing at a 
faster rate as well.  
It is clear that a significant degree of restructuring is taking place – in many cases 
this  will  be  sufficient  to  buy  time  for  borrowers  until  economic  circumstances 
improve.  But  clearly  this  will  not  work  for  all  borrowers,  for  example,  where  a 
mortgage is unsustainable. I want to talk about this in some detail shortly.  
Affordability is the key factor driving arrears, not negative equity. Negative equity is 
nonetheless  important,  particularly  when  considering  potential  mortgage  losses. 
Continuing house price falls are not helping on this front. It is also worth pointing out 
that of those households in negative equity, we estimate that only one-tenth of these 
are in deep arrears. As it stands, therefore, we do not believe that negative equity is 
the key driver of mortgage arrears and it is hard to see justification for expensive 
policy actions directed at negative equity alone.  
  I should note that we are aware that some banks are providing limited offerings of negative 
equity  mortgages  to  their  customers.  These  clearly  have  risks,  involving  increased 
indebtedness  for  example,  but  may  be  useful  for  particular  types  of  customers  who  have 
negative equity but need to move home and have the capacity to service the new debt. We 
have asked the banks involved to assess the experience to date of this product and based 
on this information we will reassess the guidance we have provided them concerning credit 
standards and suitable marketing.  
It  is  primarily  for  households  caught  in  a  trap  of  affordability  because  of  changing 
circumstances that restructuring solutions need to be put in place. We believe that the report 
from the Department of Finance mortgage arrears working group confirms this. 
The  data  show  a  wide  variety  of  circumstances.  Each  different  segment  or  category  of 
mortgage  arrears  requires  different  responses.  There  is  no  easy  solution,  no  silver  bullet. 
There are the vast majority of customers who continue to make payments on time, including 
many  who  are  in  negative  equity.  In  addition  to  households  that  have  fallen  into  arrears, 
others in a fragile “pre-arrears” position need to be identified and assisted ideally before they 
slip into arrears as their savings are used up. Some households have already rescheduled 
mortgages  to  give  them  some  temporary  breathing  space  to  get  over  a  transitory  difficulty 
and can have a reasonable prospect of recovery. However, there are others whose present 
rescheduling  arrangements  are  unrealistic,  and  merely  postponing  a  more  intractable 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
problem  of  an  unsustainable  mortgage  that  requires  different  approaches.  Within  each 
category there will be a need to assess the individual circumstances of each borrower.  
Treating customers fairly  
At  the  Central  Bank  we  have  a  statutory  duty  to  protect  consumers  in  addition  to 
safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Ensuring  that  regulated  firms  treat  their 
customers  fairly  is  at  the  heart  of  our  consumer  protection  strategy.  Getting  it  right  for 
consumers is at the centre of what we do and the area of mortgage arrears is an important 
priority for us.  
In  early  2009  we  added  to  our  consumer  protection  arsenal  by  launching  a  new  code  of 
conduct  setting  out  how  regulated  lenders  must  deal  with  consumers  who  were  in  arrears 
with  their  mortgage  payments.  While  our  Consumer  Protection  Code  already  required 
regulated lenders to treat customers fairly, we felt we needed to strengthen the requirements 
to  protect  consumers  who  were  facing  difficulties  repaying  the  mortgage  on  their  family 
home. In February 2009 we launched our Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears which set a 
moratorium  of  six  months  before  a  lender  could  commence  legal  action  against  a 
homeowner who was in arrears on their mortgage. In February 2010 we amended the Code 
to increase this moratorium protection to 12 months. 
The CCMA now requires all regulated mortgage lenders: 
 
to communicate promptly and clearly with mortgage holders as soon as difficulties 
arise,  
to agree with borrowers a plan for clearing their mortgage arrears that is consistent 
with the interests of both the borrower and the lender, and,  
to handle all genuine cases of mortgage arrears sympathetically and positively with 
the objective of assisting borrowers to meet their obligations.  
  We added new protections to the Code in December 2010 based on the recommendations of 
the Cooney Group as I mentioned earlier. Set up by the Government in February last year 
under the chairmanship of Hugh Cooney, this Group examined measures that could be put in 
place to assist genuinely distressed mortgage holders.  
The recommendations of the Group included specific measures to strengthen the protections 
for consumers in the Code, including a proposal that lenders must not apply penalty interest 
or arrears charges to borrowers who take part in a mortgage arrears resolution process. We 
recommended a Deferred Interest Scheme for some borrowers and suggested that lenders 
should consider facilitating borrowers in negative equity who wished to trade down to a more 
affordable  home.  Where  a  mortgage 
the 
householder should be assessed for social housing before repossession takes place and that 
there should be a mechanism in place whereby repossessed borrowers could remain in their 
homes for a time to allow housing authorities to find appropriate alternative accommodation.  
Acting  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Cooney  Group,  the  Central  Bank  strengthened  the 
Code. These new protections came into effect on 1 January this year and now include the 
Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution  Process  or  MARP.  The  MARP  sets  out  the  framework 
regulated  lenders  must  follow  in  handling  cases  of  arrears  and  pre-arrears  and  adds  very 
important  protections  for  consumers.  Regulated  lenders  now  must  have  a  centralised  and 
dedicated  arrears  support  unit  to  manage  and  assess  arrears  cases.  They  must  use  a 
Standard Financial Statement or SFS to gather the information from borrowers that will allow 
an assessment of possible alternative payment arrangements to help borrowers meet their 
commitments. We worked with the Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) to develop 
a SFS that could be used by all lenders and we also worked with MABS to produce a guide 
to help consumers complete an SFS.  
is  unsustainable,  we  recommended 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Lenders must also set up an appeals process to examine appeals by borrowers. Pre-arrears 
borrowers must also be treated under the MARP which  requires specific information to be 
provided to borrowers in a clear and customer friendly manner. Borrowers in arrears cannot 
be changed from a tracker mortgage to another type of mortgage.  
Where  a  borrower  is  cooperating  with  their  lender,  the  lender  must  wait  at  least  twelve 
months  before  applying  to  the  courts  to  commence  enforcement  of  any  legal  action  on 
repossession  of  a  primary  residence.  In  addition,  lenders  may  only  attempt  to  make 
unsolicited contact with arrears customers three times in a calendar month. 
We  are  determined  to  ensure  that  we  have  the  necessary  measures  in  place  to  protect 
distressed  and  vulnerable  mortgage  customers  who  are  trying  to  meet  their  commitments. 
For  this  reason  we  are  monitoring  the  effectiveness  of  the  Code  and  we  will  review  the 
measures  again  next  year.  I  can  assure  you  that  we  will  further  strengthen  this  Code  as 
required.  
At this stage I would like to send a message directly to worried homeowners who feel they 
are at risk of getting into arrears – we have put the measures in place to protect you, for 
your part what you need to do is to come forward and engage with your lender to find 
a workable arrangement to deal  with your loan.  The  Code  provides  the  space  and  the 
protection to allow you to do this. 
Transparency and improved communication 
A key part of the Code is improving communication to consumers and this is the first step in 
the MARP process. As soon as a borrower goes into arrears, a lender must communicate 
promptly and clearly with the borrower to establish why the repayment schedule agreed in 
the  mortgage  contract  has  not  been  adhered  to.  The  lender  must  ensure  that  all 
communication  with  the  borrower  about  arrears  and  pre-arrears  is  timely  and  that  all 
information  relating  to  a  lender’s  handling  of  arrears  and  pre-arrears  is  presented  to  the 
borrower in a clear and consumer friendly manner. The language used in communications by 
lenders must be in plain English so that it is easily understood. A lender must prepare and 
make  available  to  the  borrower,  an  information  booklet  providing  details  of  its  MARP, 
including the alternative repayment measures available to borrowers and outline, in general 
terms,  the  lender’s  criteria  for  assessing  requests  for  alternative  repayment  measures.  It 
must  also  include  a  statement  that  the  borrower  will  not  be  required  to  change  from  an 
existing tracker mortgage to another mortgage type plus other helpful information. 
There is also some very useful information on the Central Bank website for consumers facing 
mortgage  arrears,  including  our  booklet  –  “Mortgage  Arrears  –  A  Consumer  Guide  to 
Dealing with your Lender” and some answers to frequently asked questions.  
I  referred  earlier  to  the  Code  requirement  that  lenders  set  up  dedicated  units  to  handle 
arrears  cases  and  lenders  must  also  have  a  dedicated  section  on  their  websites.  That 
website section must include the information booklet I referred to earlier, information about 
the charges that may be imposed on borrows who do not co-operate with the lender; and a 
link to the website operated by the MABS that contains information about mortgage arrears. 
Information on the website must be easily accessible from a prominent link on the lender’s 
home page. The Code also requires lenders to inform borrowers in writing when they have 
appointed a third party to engage with the borrower about their case and must explain the 
role of the third party.  
The Code requires lenders to ensure that the level of contact and communications from the 
lender, or any third party acting on its behalf, is proportionate and not excessive.  
When a mortgage loan goes into arrears and remains in arrears for 31 days, the lender must 
write  to  inform  the  borrower  within  3  working  days.  This  letter  must  include  the  date  the 
mortgage  fell  into  arrears,  the  number  and  total  amount  of full  or  partial  payments  missed 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and the monetary amount of the arrears to date. It must confirm that the lender is treating the 
borrower’s  situation  as  a  MARP  case  and  let  the  borrower  know  the  importance  of  co-
operating with the lender during the MARP process as well as notifying the borrower that if 
co-operation ceases, the protections of the MARP no longer apply and the lender may start 
legal proceedings for repossession.  
A  key  element  in  the  Code,  and  an  important  protection  for  mortgage  holders,  is  the 
requirement for banks to set out their different restructuring options and the criteria used for 
applying  these.  This  is  designed  to  allow  consumers  to  understand  better  the  options 
available  and  to  help  them  to  prepare  for  their  meeting  with  the  bank.  As  part  of  our  next 
phase of the Central Bank supervisory work we are going to review how the lenders’ process 
of  determining  the  most  suitable  option  for  the  borrower  is  working  in  practice.  As  I  said 
earlier, following this review we will decide if we need to add further protections and whether 
some  of  the  measures  already  in  the  Code  need  to  be  strengthened.  Active  outreach  by 
lenders to consumers in pre-arrears is one area not currently covered in the Code that we 
want to address. While some banks are showing best practice in this regard, and while some 
customers in pre-arrears are making early contact with their lenders, we will look closely at 
whether lenders could communicate more proactively in this area.  
We are vigorously policing this Code. As I will explain shortly we are about to undertake a 
major supervisory initiative on mortgage arrears to assess the implementation of the Code. In 
anticipation  of  this  earlier  this  week,  I  advised  bank  chief  executives  to  examine  very 
carefully their compliance with the Code and to ensure their processes and resources are up 
to the task.  
Providing a breathing space  
As I said earlier, the CCMA provides important protections for distressed consumers who are 
trying to meet their commitments. Where a borrower co-operates with their lender, the lender 
must wait at least twelve months from the date the borrower is classified as a MARP case, 
before  applying  to  the  courts  to  commence  legal  action  for  repossession  of  a  borrower’s 
primary residence. Importantly, legal action is also not permitted if the borrower is complying 
with the terms of any alternative repayment arrangement agreed with the lender or when an 
appeal by the borrower is being processed.  
A  lender  can  commence  legal  action  where  the  borrower  does  not  co-operate,  where  the 
borrower commits fraud, or in the event of breach of contract.  
As  you  can  see  the  Code  is  designed  to  buy  time  to  allow  a  mortgage  holder  to  reach 
agreement with their lender. It provides a de facto moratorium which continues so long as the 
mortgage  holder  is  meeting  their  obligations  of  the  new  rescheduled  agreement.  The 
strengthened Code also added in other measures to help provide some breathing space for 
distressed  borrowers  such  as  prohibition  on  penalty  interest  –  prohibiting  lenders  from 
applying penalty interest or arrears charges to borrowers who take part in a mortgage arrears 
resolution process. This prohibition was introduced on the basis that banks shouldn’t make 
matters worse and add to arrears problems. 
The thinking behind the prohibition on charging penalty interest is that banks’ actions should 
not exacerbate the financial problems of customers in distress. There is something to be said 
for looking at the treatment of standard variable rate customers from a similar perspective. 
Traditionally,  SVRs  were  understood  to  adjust  in  line  with  competitive  market  conditions. 
Current  conditions  are  unusual  in  several  respects.  When  the  interest  rate  on  so  much  of 
their mortgage portfolio is fixed at a very modest (tracker) spread over the ECB’s policy rate, 
some  banks  have  found  that  even  the  performing  part  of  their  mortgage  book  as  a  whole 
may  be  unprofitable  given  their  increasing  cost  of  funds  in  the  market.  The  increases  in 
SVRs  implemented  by  some  banks  may  thus  be  going  beyond  the  traditional  passing-
through  of  the  cost  of  funds,  instead  seeking  to  make-up  for  what  has  proved  to  be  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
inadequate spread on trackers. The Central Bank does not have the power to set standard 
variable rates or other interest rates – nor does the government (although as shareholder in 
many of the domestic banks it does have the opportunity to influence management actions.) 
However,  it  may  be  that  these  actions  are,  on  balance,  self-defeating  if  they  push  more 
customers into arrears, adding to the mortgage arrears problem and ultimately costing more 
in  terms  of  capital.  We  are  looking  closely  at  this  issue,  and  we  do  have  a  statutory 
responsibility so far as it concerns the soundness of banks. Accordingly we have decided to 
require any bank that has received government capital support to provide an impact analysis 
of any proposed standard variable rate increase in terms of the implications for its arrears 
position and future capital requirements, and that the bank’s Board of Directors be required 
to review and approve this analysis to ensure that proper attention is given to the costs of 
such actions. We informed lenders in February of this year to allow at least 30 days notice to 
be given in advance of any SVR mortgage rate increases and we are now introducing this as 
part of the revised Consumer Protection Code. These are admittedly limited actions in light of 
the  absence  of  direct  powers  by  a  public  authority  concerning  rate  setting.  If  the  banks 
continue  to  act  in  a  way  which  is  so  damaging  to  customers  and  which  appears  to  take 
advantage of the current dysfunctional competitive environment, it seems they are courting 
the risk of a public policy response involving powers to impose direct restrictions on their rate 
setting capacity by the competition or financial regulatory authorities. 
Unsustainable mortgages  
Let  me  spend  a  moment  to  specifically  address  what  the  Cooney  Group  has  called 
“unsustainable mortgages.” These might be described a number of ways. Most simply, they 
are  mortgages  where  the  homeowner  has  such  severe  affordability  problems  that  there  is 
very little prospect of eventually servicing the debt and retaining ownership of the home. The 
Cooney Group proposed an initial simple rule of thumb according to which being in arrears 
for more than, say, 18 months accumulated overdue interest, and where the property is in 
significant  negative  equity  (making  it  impossible  to  trade  down  and  unlikely  that  improved 
housing prices will provide a benefit in a reasonable time period) are in combination strong 
indicators  of  an  unsustainable  mortgage.  That  can’t  be  a  definitive  test,  because  in  some 
cases  individuals  might  be  able  to  come  back  into  stronger  earnings  situations,  repay  the 
interest arrears and start to rescue the situation. And of course a strategic decision to go into 
arrears when one can  afford not to is certainly not  what the criterion has in mind. Bear in 
mind that the longer the period of arrears, and the more missed payments the harder it will 
be for the household to get back on track.  
Standard  mortgage  rescheduling  or  forbearance  techniques  are  unlikely  to  be  successful 
where a household has run up substantial arrears – this is the group where the problem is 
being deferred rather than resolved. Indeed, from the perspective of treating customers fairly 
it could be argued that forbearance is actually making the position for the homeowner worse 
– if default or loss of ownership is pretty much inevitable every intervening month of interest 
roll up and capitalisation is actually adding to the shortfall that the borrower will eventually 
owe  the  bank.  It  is  unclear  how  many  mortgages  might  be  in  the  unsustainable  category, 
and, as I said, the evaluation needs to be on case-by-case basis. However, we do know from 
our analysis of the loan data that of those mortgages 90 days or more in arrears, 70% are at 
least 180 days past due, and 40% are at least 360 days past due.  
The unsustainable mortgage group is the portion of the overall arrears group that requires 
more  effort,  fresh  thinking  and  clarity  about  the  future  bankruptcy  regime.  Even  when  the 
bankruptcy  code  has  been  reformed  to  streamline  the  process  and  remove  some  of  the 
overly burdensome elements, bankruptcy – whether judicial or non-judicial – will remain an 
unpleasant and costly experience. Better in most cases for both borrower and lender if a fair 
restructuring can be achieved without recourse to the bankruptcy procedures.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
At  the  same  time,  unsustainable  mortgages  are  very  much  in  the  minority.  Existing 
rescheduling approaches will be appropriate for many, if not the majority of arrears cases. 
And  it  is  hard  to  see  there  is  a  case  for  action  to  simply  reduce  negative  equity  where 
customers are continuing to make their payments – this would be a prohibitively expensive 
undertaking for the State, and even if it could be afforded, clear questions of horizontal equity 
would arise.  
The  discussion  on  unsustainable  mortgages  is,  to  my  mind,  sometimes  characterised  by 
either denial or simplicity. Some banks are only now beginning to face up to this challenge, 
and re-thinking the existing menu of options for customers in distress. Where this problem is 
correctly recognised, it is equally important to be wary of the simple allure of debt forgiveness 
and the costs that would impose on the taxpayer. The awkward truth is that it is likely that 
repossessions  will  increase  over  time.  However,  the  challenge  to  the  banks  and  policy 
makers alike is to minimise that outcome while also recognising another awkward truth, that 
for most in this group, ownership of the home will be lost, in whole or in part. However, there 
should  be  solutions  like  mortgage  to  rent  schemes  that  allow  homeowners  to  stay  in  their 
homes. It is in the banks’ own economic interest to consider modification arrangements such 
as  debt  for  equity  and  shared  ownership  solutions.  This  is  preferable  to  denial  about  the 
severity of the problem and the hope that the ever growing shortfall of capitalised interest will 
eventually be recovered in full. 
It may be that uncertainty about the legal framework for dealing with shortfalls is one reason 
for the denial – or perhaps the hesitation – about dealing with unsustainable mortgages. The 
key  question  is:  in  the  absence  of  rescheduling  or  modification,  what  will  happen  to  the 
shortfall  when  ownership  of  the  home  is  surrendered  and  the  negative  equity  amount  is 
crystallised and due to the bank. There is a logic in both bankers and borrowers holding back 
from taking action on the unsustainable mortgage problem in the knowledge that the legal 
framework that will govern this shortfall is due to change in the near term through bankruptcy 
reform and the introduction of a non-judicial debt settlement mechanism. That points to the 
importance of settling the key policy issues in this reform as a matter of some urgency and, if 
you like, bringing the debate on mortgage arrears public policy more generally to a settled 
conclusion so that there is certainty about the rules of the game. Until that happens it will be 
difficult  to  make  progress  on  the  unsustainable  mortgage  problem,  despite  the  additional 
efforts being encouraged by the supervisory strategy I will describe today. In the meantime, 
we will use our engagement with the banks to require them to focus on the unsustainable 
mortgage problem. 
Rescheduling options 
The Code does not prescribe that a lender must agree to a rescheduling with a customer. 
That decision still ultimately rests with the lender based on an individual assessment of the 
borrower’s particular circumstances. That assessment needs to be on an individual, case-by-
case  basis,  although  banks  will  have  standardised  procedures  to  facilitate  their  decision 
making  process  –  and  will  have  a  suite  of  different  rescheduling  options  which  might  be 
applied, of which more in a moment. However, again, the decision on rescheduling, like that 
of originally granting credit, is for the lender. That is the role that banks play in society and 
despite the opprobrium that they have rightly earned from their performance in the financial 
crisis, it is hard to see that the fundamental role of banks in the economy has – or should – 
change in this respect.  
That  said,  it  is  clear  that  many  lenders  have  been  slow  to  acknowledge  the  extent  of  this 
problem and to put in place sufficient operational infrastructure to deal with it. It is a task from 
which the lenders should not be relieved. Neither the lender nor the borrower is well-served 
by  delay  in  recognising  the  existence  of  an  inability  to  service  debt.  Banks  must  put  the 
framework and resources in place to examine additional measures to address the individual 
unsustainable cases of distressed borrowers. The sooner they do this the better.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
As I will explain shortly, a major focus of our supervisory efforts in the next period will be to 
encourage the banks to improve their organisational capacity to tackle this problem. 
Central Bank data shows that the main restructuring options currently offered include moving 
to interest-only payments, extending the loan term and interest holidays with capitalisation of 
the missed interest. In some cases these measures will buy time for the mortgage holders 
who can recover. However, as I have explained, in other cases they just delay addressing a 
more intractable problem and could make the shortfall greater for the consumer in the event 
of a later default.  
Banks need to recognise the shortcomings of these measures and should work much harder 
to  widen  their  range  of  options  for  dealing  with  affordability  to  bear  on  this  problem,  in 
particular in individual cases where there is little prospect of servicing the original loan terms. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  banks  must  husband  their  available  capital  in  a  prudent 
manner.  
As  explained  previously,  under  the  Code  lenders  are  required  to  publish  details  of  their 
approaches and the criteria that must be met to be considered for the different options. As 
part of our review we will be gathering information on the various options each lender offers. 
We  intend  to  include  a  summary  of  this  information  as  part  of  our  wider  public  feedback 
following  the  completion  of  this  review.  In  addition  to  this,  we  plan  to  require  lenders  to 
conduct a review of the efficacy of the existing restructuring arrangements that they have in 
place and to formally provide an assessment of whether additional rescheduling approaches 
are  required.  We  want  this  to  be  debated  carefully  at  Board  level  as  part  of  agreeing  the 
bank’s  mortgage  arrears  resolution  strategy.  We  want  banks  to  give  closer  attention  to 
whether  the  existing  range  of  rescheduling  approaches  are  adequate  for  the  scale  of  the 
problem and whether sufficient recognition is given to individuals who have little prospect of 
servicing  even  the  rescheduled  loan  terms.  Requiring  customers  to  roll  up  and  capitalise 
interest and arrears is not appropriate where those customers have unsustainable mortgages 
or can only stay in their home through loan modification: the bank is likely only adding to the 
size of the shortfall that the customer ultimately faces in a default. Boards of directors need 
to  take  a  direct  interest  in  whether  the  rescheduling  arrangements  that  have  been  put  in 
place  are  working  and  treat  their  customers  fairly  on  this  point.  They  need  to  satisfy 
themselves that the banks’ strategy for mortgage arrears is up to the task. More of that in a 
moment. 
At  the  heart  of  the  MARP  process  is  the  case-by-case  determination  by  the  bank  as  to 
whether a rescheduling is appropriate and which scheme is to be offered. Under the Code all 
lenders are required to carry out formal six monthly reviews to assess the appropriateness of 
each arrangement. We plan to lift the lid on this process as part of our inspections and look 
very closely at how the banks are working through individual cases. We would expect banks 
to  develop  and  share  with  us  their  decision-making  trees  for  determination  of  individual 
cases. We want to understand the staffing arrangements for these decisions. We think that it 
would  be  best  practice  for  banks  to  establish  the  net  present  value  of  the  alternative 
rescheduling  approaches  (much  as  US  lenders  are  doing)  and  we  want  to  see  whether 
lenders are developing such best practice approaches. 
These  various  efforts  are  designed  to  encourage  the  development  of  a  wider  menu  of 
rescheduling options to address the arrears problem. In introducing any of these measures to 
assist distressed borrowers it is essential to ensure that people who can service their debts 
are not given an opportunity to escape from their obligations. The State through its taxpayers 
has already assumed too great a burden in this crisis. Careful calibration of measures and a 
targeted, case-by-case, approach must be the hallmarks of current and future policy for the 
resolution  of  arrears  problems.  While  loan  modification  may  be  necessary  in  some  cases, 
there will be adverse consequences for the homeowner – while they may be able to stay in 
their homes, there will likely be a loss of ownership. These arrangements must be targeted at 
those who genuinely cannot make the normal menu of rescheduling options work.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As the Governor of the Central Bank, Patrick Honohan, recently explained, resolution will be 
effective only if it is guided by clear principles. These include;  
1. 
affordability  for  the  borrower  of  any  modified  repayment  plan  (that  is  to  say, 
recognising  the  true  scale  of  the  problem  based  on  a  sufficiently  comprehensive 
assessment  of  household  financial  conditions;  avoiding  unrealistic  plans  likely  to 
result in recidivism);  
avoidance of unnecessarily formal legal procedures;  
avoidance of perverse incentives for strategic default by those who can truly afford 
to pay; and  
no unavoidable losses to lenders, but the banks to absorb such unavoidable losses 
using their increased capital.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
Prudential capital  
The  mortgage  arrears  problem  clearly  has  capital  implications  for  banks  and  has  been  a 
subject  of  close  attention.  At  the  Central  Bank  we  recognised  the  deteriorating  trend  in 
mortgage arrears when we carried out our Prudential Capital Assessment Review earlier this 
year.  In  setting  the  level  of  additional  capital  required  for  the  banks  we  provided  for  the 
absorption  of  potential  losses  arising  out  of  situations  where  mortgage  holders  were 
genuinely unable to fully repay their loans. The 2011 PCAR was conducted in a transparent 
way, using conservative assumptions and external validation and this review will be updated 
again in 2012 to take account of developments in the market. The additional capital received 
by  the  banks  after  PCAR  –  much  of  it  injected  by  the  Government  –  now  provides  more 
capacity for banks to address individual mortgage arrears cases and to restructure mortgage 
loans on a case by case basis.  
It  is  important  that  banks  face  up  to  the  scale  of  the  problem  and  provision  accordingly. 
However,  it  is  clear  too  that  neither  the  banks  nor  the  taxpayer  have  unlimited  financial 
resources to eliminate all the adverse developments in the mortgage market. The taxpayer 
cannot  afford  –  and  should  not  be  asked  to  –  write  off  the  negative  equity  in  the  housing 
market  or  underwrite  open-ended  debt  forgiveness  schemes.  As  we  tackle  the  mortgage 
arrears issue we need to be mindful that the design of any restructuring or modification by 
banks-  and  of  the  broader  bankruptcy  policy  framework-  if  not  calibrated  properly,  could 
create incentives for some to cease payment on their commitments which could exacerbate 
the arrears problem and the cost to taxpayers.  
Operational capacity 
It is clear that if lenders need to make case by case decisions then they must put in place the 
operational capacity to work through the problem properly and to meet their obligations under 
the Code. It is clear too from information we are receiving from consumers and other sources 
that that the practice so far has been mixed. This is now a major focus of our supervisory 
effort .Frankly, we intend to be breathing down the necks of the banks to make sure they are 
coming up to the mark. 
I said earlier that we have spoken to the CEOs of the banks on this issue. We used these 
meetings to spell out very clearly what our expectations are for implementing the Code and 
for being properly resourced for the task, including: 
1. 
An  expectation  for  each  mortgage  lender  to  adopt  a  formal  Mortgage  Arrears 
Resolution  Strategy  which  sets  out  all  the  work  streams  and  resourcing  of  their 
organisational strategy for addressing all aspects of the mortgage arrears issue;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
An  expectation  that  this  strategy  will  be  agreed  at  Board  level  and  progress 
reviewed by the full Board on a semi-annual basis;  
An  expectation  that  each  bank  set  up  a  dedicated  mortgage  arrears  strategy 
committee  to  monitor  progress  with  the  strategy  and  to  challenge  management’s 
performance in this area;  
An expectation that the bank’s CEO, CFO and other relevant senior management 
have specific personal objective linked to the execution of the strategy.  
An expectation for each bank to report to the Central Bank on a quarterly basis on 
its progress with its strategy.  
An expectation that the strategy include a specific resourcing plan which provides a 
detailed assessment of the staffing and training arrangements to ensure that there is 
sufficient organisational capacity to implement its strategy.  
An  expectation  that  the  plan  include  the  following  work  streams,  with  clearly 
articulated proposals covering:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communications  
Identification and assessment of pre arrears and at risk cases  
Compliance monitoring of CCMA requirements  
A review of rescheduling options and their efficacy  
Development of decision tree and NPV calculation guidelines to staff  
A specific strategy for BTL arrears cases  
A  process  for  identification  of  unsustainable  mortgages  where  standard 
rescheduling approaches are not suitable  
Modelling the Capital Impact of different arrears approaches  
 Hopefully, the best banks are already doing much of this, but we shall see. The mortgage 
arrears issue is a large and pressing problem facing the banking sector and Irish society as a 
whole. The response of banks’ boards and management teams needs to match that through 
the  dedication  of  adequate  resources,  discipline  of  project  management  and,  above  all, 
through  their  responsiveness  and  adaptability  to  developing  appropriate  solutions  for 
customers. We recognise that it is big and difficult task. We will work with the banks to help 
them with this process. But we will also be relentless in pressing for substantial progress. We 
will devote significant resources to tracking progress with each institution and we will publish 
the best practice we see so as to encourage improved standards across the industry. 
Enforcement 
Enforcement is an important deterrent tool to encourage improved standards of compliance 
as  part  of  our  overall  strategy  and  that  applies  to  mortgage  arrears  as  well.  We  have 
considered  an  intensive  inspection  exercise  to  test  compliance  with  the  Code  and  take 
enforcement  cases.  For  now,  we  have  decided  against  that  –  because  we  don’t think  that 
would help consumers as it would divert resources at the banks to respond to our inspection 
activity  where  they  could  be  better  deployed  to  dealing  directly  with  the  problem.  And  we 
already know that that banks need direction and encouragement to build up their operational 
capacity and to move to the next phase of modification work. 
However, be warned, there are exceptions to this strategy where specific evidence of non-
compliance  comes  to  our  attention  with  respect  to  the  prohibition  against  harassment  and 
penalty interest charges: we will take enforcement action where we find patterns of abuse. 
This  information  will  help  us  inform  where  to  target  our  investigations  and  enforcement 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activities.  We  will  focus  on  cases  of  unacceptable  harassment  of  customers.  But  it’s 
important that for their part customers do engage with their bank and respond to the attempts 
to make contact to avail of the protections under the code. I would be concerned if any large 
numbers of customers who can but won’t pay purposefully avoids contact from their bank by 
using the no harassment provisions of the Code as it is ultimately not in their best interests. 
And  let  me  be  clear  –  the  decision  not  to  investigate  further  enforcement  cases  is  a 
temporary measure – we will be conducting inspection work next year and we will consider 
enforcement action then: – banks have been given fair warning.  
Wider public policy developments 
As I stressed earlier there is no silver bullet solution to the mortgage arrears problem. It is 
clear from the data collected by the Central Bank and from the range of recommendations of 
the  Expert  Group  that  this  is  a  multi-faceted  problem  which  requires  a  wide  public  policy 
response in addition to focused action by lenders. At the Central Bank we will play our part in 
so far as we can. 
The  most  important  public  policy  area  that  needs  to  be  settled  relates  to  bankruptcy  law 
reform. There appears to be common agreement on the need to reform bankruptcy law, and, 
to introduce a non-judicial statutory debt settlement mechanism. It is essential that progress 
is made to deliver this and that the work in this area is properly resourced. The calibration of 
this framework will be crucial and will require very careful judgment. Reform will allow a fresh 
start to those who have no hope of repaying their debt. But it is important that the approach 
doesn’t  incentivise  behaviours  which  stop  repayment  and  add  to  costs  for  the  taxpayer.  A 
sensible debate followed by a carefully balanced solution is required.  
The  fine  tuning  of  the  new  framework  for  non-judicial  debt  settlement  will  need  particular 
care.  I  note  that  while  the  UK  IVA  regime  allows  for  a  one  year  discharge  period,  my 
understanding is that it only covers unsecured debts and does not include mortgage debts. 
Mortgage  debts  are  long-term  debts  of  typically  20  years  or  more  and  short  discharge 
periods  need  to  be  approached  with  caution.  To  take  an  extreme  but  by  no  means 
implausible example, should a BTL investor be allowed to walk away from a debt after, say, 
three or even five years when they have the capacity to make payments for a longer period 
and if the consequence of their non-payment is a greater burden on the taxpayer? That is a 
question that needs to be decided by politicians and the public at large, not by regulators. But 
it  is  a  regulator’s  responsibility  to  highlight  the  implications  for  the  financial  position  of  the 
banks and the potential of almost certain additional costs to the taxpayer. While the banks do 
have  more  capacity  to  address  individual  mortgage  arrears  cases  due  to  their  recent 
recapitalisation, this is not an unlimited source of funds and even a conservative stress test 
would  be  undermined  by  poorly  judged  changes  to  this  fundamentally  important  legal 
framework.  
This argues for a very careful debate on the calibration of the new reforms and perhaps for 
differentiation in the treatment of secured and unsecured debts or between long and short-
term debts when setting discharge periods. That is not to argue for punitive approaches, but 
to caution that the calibration of these rules will have very big consequences for behaviour 
and therefore possible additional costs to the taxpayer through the banks’ balance sheets. 
Conclusion 
I have covered a lot of ground here today, so let me finish by drawing together some key 
conclusions.  
A key overall message is that borrowers in arrears need to engage with their lenders and that 
in doing so they have the numerous protections of the Code of Conduct of Mortgage Arrears 
in place to ensure they are treated fairly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Another key conclusion is that the mortgage arrears problem needs to be addressed on a 
case-by-case basis by lenders. This has been widely acknowledged, although perhaps not 
universally accepted. However, I have today sought to draw out some important and specific 
implications that follow from this: 
First, this case by case approach will only work if the situation of unsustainable mortgages is 
addressed  properly.  As  a  result,  the  Boards  of  Directors  and  senior  management  of  the 
lenders  will  be  required  by  the  Central  Bank  to  formally  reassess  their  approach  to 
unsustainable mortgages.  
Second,  the  banks’  own  actions  need  to  take  care  not  to  exacerbate  the  arrears problem. 
This  speaks  to  the  exact  design  and  calibration  of  any  new  rescheduling  or  modification 
techniques. Also, continuing standard variable rate increases risk making the situation worse 
–  and  prompting  the  introduction  of  new  powers  to  impose  restrictions  on  the  banks’  rate 
setting ability. 
Third, the banks need to have the operational capacity – including structure, resourcing and 
senior sponsorship – to address the arrears problem effectively, implementing best practice, 
rigorously tackling all the dimensions of the problem and ensuring compliance with the Code. 
We have this week communicated directly with the senior management teams at the major 
lenders to set out our expectations in these areas. I will be writing shortly to their Chairmen 
as  well  to  emphasise  that  the  Boards  of  Directors  must  take  personal  responsibility  for 
approving and monitoring implementation of these strategies. 
As  I  have  explained  today,  the  Central  Bank’s  supervisory  and  enforcement  strategy  is 
aligned  to  deliver  these  outcomes  from  the  mortgage  lenders.  We  are  gearing  up  for  an 
intensive  period  of  supervisory  engagement,  breathing  down  the  necks  of  the  banks  to 
ensure that progress is made. In the short term, we are signalling a lack of tolerance with 
harassing behaviour and are inviting information from the  public to assist our enforcement 
work. In the medium term, we will consider enforcement action on other aspects of the Code 
or where our expectations have not been met. 
There are two final points I would like to underline from my remarks.  
It is important to emphasise that in addition to accelerating their work on mortgage arrears, 
the banks must also be required to prudently conserve their financial resources. Following 
their  recapitalisations  earlier  this  year,  the  Irish  banks  have  more  capacity  to  address 
individual  arrears  cases,  but  it is important  to  be  very  clear  that  neither  the  banks nor  the 
taxpayer  have  unlimited  financial  resources.  What  is  needed  is  a  careful  husbanding  of 
financial resources to apply to cases of genuinely unsustainable mortgages. This is a difficult 
balancing act, but one that cannot be avoided. 
My  final  conclusion  is  to  highlight  the  importance  of  sensibly  concluding  the  public  policy 
debate on bankruptcy reform and, indeed, bringing the debate on mortgage arrears public 
policy  more  generally  to  a  settled  conclusion  so  that  there  is  certainty  for  bankers  and 
borrowers alike. But here, too, care is needed as well as speed, to ensure that the calibration 
of the framework for non-judicial debt settlement does not incentivise behaviour that imposes 
unnecessary costs to the taxpayer. 
Making swifter progress on these fronts, while avoiding unintended consequences which add 
to the costs of the financial crisis, is the key challenge. The Central Bank’s supervisory and 
enforcement  strategy  outline  here  today  is  designed  to  firmly  press  the  banking  sector  to 
meet its responsibilities to resolve this issue  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
