Guy Debelle: Bank funding 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, 
the  24th  Annual  Finance  &  Treasury  Association  Congress,  Sydney, 
19 October 2011. 
to 
 Thanks to Justin Fabo, Claudia Seibold and Dan Fabbro for their help. 
One aspect of the current heightened risk aversion in financial markets has been an increase 
in funding pressures for some banks, particularly in Europe. In my talk today, I will discuss 
some aspects of these developments, comparing and contrasting the situation in Europe with 
that in Australia.1 
A summary indication of investors’ assessment of the financial sector can be gleaned from 
the share prices of banks globally. Graph 1 shows the movements in bank share prices over 
the past four years and compares them to developments in the rest of the market. It shows 
that,  in  most  cases,  bank  share  prices  have  significantly  underperformed  the  rest  of  the 
market. Many banks are now trading at a sizeable discount to their book value. Graph 1 also 
shows that European bank share prices have fared worse than those in other parts of the 
world.  Volatility  has  also  been  very  high  at  times,  with  some  banks  in  Europe  recording 
intraday  share  price  movements  of  20 per cent!  The  share  prices  of  the  Australian  banks 
have not fallen as far as those in the major countries, although it is interesting to note that the 
share prices of Canadian banks have been even stronger. Over the period since June 2007, 
banks have actually outperformed the rest of the Australian market.  
Graph 1 
 With  the  share  prices  as  a  backdrop,  today  I  will  focus  on  one  particular  aspect  of  the 
banking  sector  that  is  causing  concern,  primarily  in  Europe,  namely  the  resilience  of  the 
funding structure. This issue has implications for all of you as corporate treasurers as it flows 
on to you in terms of price and volume, although not necessarily always in a negative way: 
                                                 
1  A number of these developments are discussed in detail in the Reserve Bank’s September Financial Stability 
Review. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
we  have  seen  some  corporates  able  to  access  markets  directly  on  better  terms  and 
conditions than financials. 
As  the  concerns  about  the  fiscal  sustainability  of  the  euro  area  have  intensified  in  recent 
months,  and  have  spread  to  the  financial  system,  there  has  been  increased  pressure  on 
bank  funding.2  The  cost  of  funding  for  European  banks  generally  has  risen,  while  many 
banks in the European “periphery” countries have all but been locked out of funding markets. 
As an illustration of this, the cost for banks to borrow euros from each other has risen sharply 
since significant concerns re-emerged about Greece in May this year. Graph 2 shows that 
the cost of European banks borrowing from each other in the short-term unsecured market 
has risen to its highest level in the post-Lehman period, reflecting heightened counterparty 
concerns.  
By way of contrast, the equivalent spread in the Australian market (the spread between the 
bank bill rate and the expected cash rate), while higher than earlier in the year, has remained 
markedly lower than that in Europe. There have been spikes in this spread on occasion in 
the past few months, but they have reflected sharp downward movements in the expected 
cash rate, rather than upward movements in the bank bill rate.3 
Graph 2 
 To mitigate the impact of the sharp increase in the cost of unsecured interbank lending for 
European  banks,  the  ECB  has  recently  announced  an  expansion  of  its  open  market 
operations.  Since  May  2010,  the  ECB  has  stood  willing  to  provide  three  month  funding  to 
banks in unlimited amount (against acceptable collateral) at its policy rate. At its most recent 
meeting in early October, it lengthened the maturities for which it was willing to provide this 
funding to terms as long as 13 months. That is, banks can source unlimited euros from the 
ECB at fixed interest rates for periods of at least one year. Thus European banks should not 
have  difficulty  in  sourcing  euro  funding  for  some  time  to  come,  provided  they  hold  the 
appropriate  collateral.  The  ECB 
thereby 
interbank  market, 
intermediating 
the 
is 
                                                 
2  See the discussion in the ECB’s latest Financial Stability Review. 
3  On occasion, the sharp movements have also reflected factors including around the middle and end of the 
month as the reference bank bills move from one half of the month to the next. See Boge M and I Wilson 
(2011), “The Domestic Market for Short-term Debt Securities”, RBA Bulletin, September, pp 39–48. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
circumventing  the  counterparty  concerns,  as  has  long  been  the  proper  practice  of  central 
banks in periods of stress at least since Bagehot.  
Graph 3 
Graph 4 
  The take-up of this short-term liquidity by banks in Europe is reflected in the expansion in the 
balance sheet of the ECB.4 Since April this year, the ECB’s lending to banks has grown by 
about  €180  billion  (or  40 per cent)  as  a  result  of  these  operations,  with  the  bulk  of  the 
increase  occurring  since  July.  Graph  3  shows  a  breakdown  of  the  lending  for  selected 
                                                 
4  The ECB’s balance sheet has also expanded as a result of its Securities Markets Program, whereby the ECB 
has purchased securities issued by Greece, Portugal and Ireland, and more recently Italy and Spain too. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
countries. It shows that banks in the euro area periphery, particularly those in Greece and 
Ireland, have been relying heavily on ECB loans for the past year or two (Graph 3).5 This is 
even more stark if shown as a share of total banking sector assets (Graph 4). These data are 
mostly up until the end of September (except France and Greece which are August). They 
show the pick-up in borrowing from the ECB by Italian and Spanish banks since the middle of 
the year and a rise in borrowing by French banks in August. 
By  way  of  contrast,  the  RBA’s  provision  of  liquidity  has  not  changed  in  recent  times. 
Australian banks’ deposits with the RBA (ES balances)6 have remained around $1¼ billion 
for over 18 months now.7 More generally, we see little sign of strain or counterparty concern 
in the local interbank market.  
Bond  issuance  by  banks  globally  has  fallen  sharply  in  recent  months.  A  partial,  but  not 
complete, explanation for the low level of issuance is that bank balance sheet growth globally 
has been very low and even negative in some cases. Graph 5 shows that unsecured bond 
issuance  by  euro  area  banks  has  been  at  very  low  levels,  but  until  recently,  secured 
issuance  in  the  form  of  covered  bonds  had  been  relatively  robust.  This  is  indicative  of  a 
general  trend  for  investors  to  take  greater  comfort  in  secured  rather  than  unsecured 
exposures.  
Graph 5 
 Graph 6 shows the issuance by Australian banks. The secured issuance by the Australian 
banks has been in the form of mortgage-backed securities (RMBS). However, the Australian 
Parliament  last  week  passed  legislation  permitting  the  issuance  of  covered  bonds  by 
Australian banks. As a result, one might expect to see some covered bond issuance by local 
banks in the near future, given the apparent preference of global investors for this product in 
the current environment. As market volatility has increased in recent months, issuance by the 
                                                 
5  The decline in ECB lending to Irish and Greek banks in recent months has been partially offset by an increase 
in lending to those banks from their home central banks through Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA), which 
permits  a  broader  range  of  collateral  than  the  ECB.  It  also  reflects  the  fact  that  their  balance  sheets  are 
shrinking. 
6  One can assess the provision of liquidity from either side of the balance sheet. Here I am using lending for the 
ECB and deposits for the RBA. 
7  Except for the temporary increases in ES balances at month-, and particularly, quarter-end. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Australian  banks  has  also  declined.  As  the  Reserve  Bank  has  noted  on  a  number  of 
occasions,8 the Australian banks are much better placed to ride out these periods of volatility 
than  in  the  past.  This  is  for  a  number  of  reasons,  including  that  deposit  growth  has 
outstripped credit growth for more than two years now, thereby reducing the banks’ need to 
access  wholesale  debt  markets,  and  that  banks  have  increased  their  use  of  longer-term 
funding. 
Graph 6 
 Let  me  make  a  brief  detour  into  the  world  of  credit  default  swaps  (CDS).  A  number  of 
commentators have pointed to the large rise in CDS premia for Australian banks in recent 
months. Graph 7 shows this rise, and also shows that, to a large extent, it is reflective of a 
rise in bank CDS globally. The rise in CDS appears to be much larger than the rise in primary 
unsecured issuance costs, although it is difficult to gauge exactly where the latter are, given 
the low level of issuance recently. But earlier in the month, the Commonwealth Bank issued 
an unsecured 3-year bond at a spread of 115 basis points over swap, 20 basis points wider 
than a similar issue earlier in the year, while the three-year CDS premium for the CBA has 
risen by 80 basis points over the same period.  
This divergence between CDS premia and issuance costs reflects the fact that, while subject 
to the same forces, they are not the same thing. While one is an insurance premium and the 
other  contains  a  premium  to  compensate  for  a  risk  of  default,  there  are  other  important 
elements too which differ. This is true for sovereigns, financials and corporates. To further 
illustrate this, it is interesting, particularly for you as corporate treasurers, to look at the CDS 
premium  on  BHP  Billiton.  As  you  may  know,  BHP  has  an  extremely  low  gearing  ratio.  Its 
cash  holdings  have  generally  been  about  the  same  size  as  its  outstanding  debt. 
Notwithstanding this, at one point during the past month, BHP’s CDS premium had increased 
by as much as 110 basis points since the beginning of the year. It appears that there are 
typically 2 or 3 trades in BHP CDS a day. From DTCC data, we know that there are certainly 
less than 50 trades a week in BHP CDS (this is also true of the Australian banks and the 
Australian sovereign CDS contracts), as that is the minimum number of trades that the DTCC 
reports.  So  the  CDS  premium  does  not  have  a  lot  of  trading  volume  behind  it,  which 
potentially allows traders a cheap way (relative to a debt security) to take a position either on 
                                                 
8  See recent RBA Board Minutes and the RBA’s September Financial Stability Review, as well as my speech 
delivered  at  the  23rd  Australasian  Finance  and  Banking  Conference,  “Bank  Funding  and  Capital  Flows”, 
Sydney, 15 December 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the entity in question or as a proxy for a broader position, such as the Chinese economy in 
the case of BHP and the Australian sovereign CDS contracts. 
Graph 7 
 After  that  little  detour,  back  to  the  bank  funding  story.  So  far  I  have  talked  about  banks 
borrowing in their own currencies. But European banks have also experienced a substantial 
increase in the cost of borrowing US dollars to fund their US dollar assets.9 While BIS data 
indicate that these US dollar asset positions of European banks have declined since 2008, 
they remain sizeable in some cases.10 An important point to note is that these are US dollar 
assets which require US dollar funding. Many of these assets are of long maturity, but the 
associated  funding  of  these  positions  tends  to  be  at  much  shorter  maturities.  Therefore, 
these  banks  face  “rollover  risk”,  both  in  terms  of  price  and  availability,  on  this  US  dollar 
funding.  
European banks have a number of ways of obtaining US dollars including: 
 
 
 
 
 
Exacerbating  European  banks’  US  dollar  funding  pressure  has  been  a  pull-back  by  US 
money market funds (MMFs) from holding debt issued by these banks.11 These funds invest 
in  highly  rated  short-term  debt  and  that  issued  by  European  banks  has  traditionally 
accounted for a large share of their assets. Since concerns about a Greek default escalated 
in May, US MMFs have experienced significant investor outflows (Graph 8). The majority of 
short-term debt issuance, including to money market funds;  
deposits;  
secured borrowing;  
swapping euros for US dollars through the swap market;  
from the Fed or ECB, including via the US dollar swap line.  
                                                 
9  This has been a topic I have had a keen interest in for some time, including through chairing a working group 
for  the  BIS  Committee  on  Global  Financial  Stability  (CGFS)  on  the  effect  of  central  bank  swap  lines.  See 
CGFS, “The Functioning and Resilience of Cross-border Funding Markets”, CGFS Publication No 37. 
10  See BIS Quarterly Review, September 2011. 
11  Useful analyses of the US money market funds are provided on a regular basis by JP Morgan and Fitch. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this has been reflected in reduced holdings of European bank debt. Notably, these funds now 
hold no or negligible amounts of debt issued by banks in Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and 
Spain. US MMFs have also shortened the average maturity of their asset holdings.  
Graph 8 
As  this  and  other  sources  of  funding  have  diminished,  European  banks  have  increasingly 
sought to obtain US dollars via foreign exchange swaps. As a result, the cost of doing this 
relative to the cost of unsecured interbank funding – the “basis” – has increased substantially 
since May this year, although it remains below the peaks post-Lehman (Graph 9).  
 Graph 9 
To counter the impact of this, in addition to sourcing more US dollars via foreign-exchange 
markets, some European banks are tapping US dollar repo markets for funding, reportedly, 
in some cases, with increased haircuts applied, and are also actively reducing their US dollar 
asset  positions.  European  banks  also  appear  to  have  built  up  cash  buffers  in  US  dollars 
earlier  in  the  year.  Cash  holdings  of  foreign  banks  in  the  United  States,  presumably  a 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
reasonable  share  of  which  are  European,  had  risen  to  over  US$1 trillion  from  less  than 
US$400 billion earlier this year before declining (Graph 10).  
Graph 10 
 One important reminder from the financial crisis was that central banks can substantially help 
market  functioning  when  liquidity  strains  emerge.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  European  banks 
can access liquidity in their own currency (euros) effectively in unlimited amounts (as long as 
they have collateral). But to fund US dollar asset positions requires US dollars, not euros. 
Euros  are  useful  if  the  swap  market  is  functioning,  but  in  the  current  circumstances,  that 
market may not be open to all market participants. This certainly was the case in late 2008 
and early 2009, when the provision of US dollar liquidity by the Federal Reserve to foreign 
banks through swap lines with other central banks clearly helped to alleviate European and 
other  foreign  banks’  US  dollar  funding  pressures  (Graph  11).  These  swap  lines  effectively 
provided unlimited US dollar funding to these banks (again against appropriate collateral).  
Graph 11 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The swap lines ran off in early 2010 and while the major central banks maintained them at 7-day 
terms, they were barely utilised. In September 2011, three-month terms were re-introduced by 
the major central banks. But despite the recent tensions in US dollar funding markets, recourse 
to these central bank US dollar swap lines with the Fed has been negligible. At the ECB’s three-
month auction conducted in mid October, the take-up was only US$1.4 billion in aggregate by 
six  banks.  Nevertheless,  the  major  central  banks  will  conduct  further  US dollar  liquidity 
operations with maturities of around three months in November and December. 
Turning  now  to  look  at  the  Australian  banks’  offshore  funding,  there  are  some  important 
differences  to  the  situation  in  Europe.  Graph  8  also  shows  that  the  cost  of  swapping 
Australian dollars for US dollars has not increased in the most recent episode and indeed 
has gone negative at times.  
There  are  some  fundamental  differences  in  the  nature  of  the  Australian  banks’  offshore 
funding. The funding that the Australian banks raise offshore, in US dollars predominantly, is 
swapped back into Australian dollars to fund Australian dollar assets. That is, the Australian 
banks  are  funding  Australian  dollar  assets,  not  US  dollar  assets.  Thus,  if  they  experience 
increased difficulty in accessing US funding markets, this is resolved by sourcing Australian 
dollar  liquidity,  including  in  stressed  circumstances  from  the  Reserve  Bank,12  rather  than 
trying to source liquidity in a foreign currency.  
The  swaps  are  generally  of  the  same  maturity  as  the  funding,  so  there  is  no  maturity 
mismatch. Moreover, given the use of CSAs and the net underlying position of the Australian 
banks,  in  the  event  of a  depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar,  such  as  has  occurred  in  the 
past two months, the Australian banks receive large inflows of US dollars into their collateral 
accounts, effectively increasing their supply of US dollar funding.  
In  contrast  to  the  recent  experience  of  some  European  banks,  the  Australian  banks  have 
found that US MMFs have been more than willing to maintain their exposures, including at 
longer  maturities.  Indeed,  recently  the  Australian  banks  have  been  beneficiaries  of  a 
reallocation by the MMFs away from the European banks.  
Conclusion 
The  banking  system  globally  has  been  under  scrutiny  for  much  of  the  past  four  years  to 
varying degrees. At the moment, we are in another period where that scrutiny is intense. My 
aim  today  has  been  to  provide  you  with  some  context  to  that  scrutiny,  particularly  around 
bank funding. The actions by the ECB, together with the Fed through the provision of the US 
dollar  swap  facility,  should  alleviate  some  of  the  funding  tensions  for  European  banks.  In 
effect,  provided  they  have  appropriate  collateral,  European  banks  should  be  able  to  meet 
their liquidity needs in the period ahead both in euros, and in US dollars.  
I have also provided some comparison with the situation facing the Australian banks. We are 
not seeing the same sort of stresses for the Australian banks, as are present for some of the 
European banks. The Australian banks’ funding structures are considerably more resilient to 
periods of stressed markets than they were previously, given the changes that have occurred 
over recent years.  
                                                 
12  See my speech delivered earlier in the  year: “Collateral, Funding and Liquidity”, Address to Conference on 
Systemic Risk, Basel III, Financial Stability and Regulation, Sydney, 28 June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
