Ewart S Williams: Caribbean countries and global financial regulation – a 
practitioner’s forum 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Regulatory Workshop “Caribbean countries and global financial regulation – a 
practitioner’s 
the  Commonwealth  Secretariat,  Port-of-Spain, 
26 August 2011. 
forum”,  organised  by 
 Salutations:  
 
One thing you could say about the international institutions is that they never allow a 
Senator  the  Honourable  Brigadier  John  Sandy,  Minister  of  National  Security, 
Trinidad and Tobago.  
Dr. Delisle Worrell, Governor, Central Bank of Barbados.  
Participants and Lecturers.  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
 
 
 
 
Special thanks to the Commonwealth Secretariat for organising a workshop on a topic 
of extreme importance to us in the Caribbean and indeed for many developing countries. Let 
me congratulate Cheryl for putting together a formidable array of participants representing 
the region as well as the major players involved in global regulation. Let me give a special 
welcome  to  representatives  from  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank,  the  BIS,  the  OECD  and  the 
FATF.  
 
good crisis to go to waste.  
 
After  any  crisis,  we  could  safely  predict  that  our  IFIs  will  make  a  quick  diagnosis, 
identify  the  fault  lines  and  come  up  with  a  package  of  reforms  that  seek  to  guarantee 
financial stability until, of course, the next crisis comes along.  
I was in the Fund at the time of the Tequila crisis in 1994. It started in Mexico but had 
 
contagion  effects  on  the  emerging  market  economies  of  Latin  America.  And  true  to  the 
pattern,  that  setback  gave  rise  to  a  slew  of  reforms,  including  a  virtual  revolution  in  data 
dissemination  standards  (the  GDDS  and  SDDS)  to  help  guide  capital markets  and  it  gave 
rise  to  the  search  for  higher  standards  for  bank  soundness,  transparency  and  good 
governance.  
 
Unlike  the  1994  crisis,  which  started  in  and  affected  mostly  the  emerging  market 
economies, the international financial crisis of 2008/09 originated in Wall Street and had its 
direct  effects  on  financial  markets  and  economies  of  the  advanced  countries.  Its  indirect 
effects  were  however,  felt  far  and  wide,  including  the  poorest  developing  countries  which 
were  affected  through  lower  exports,  lower  remittances  and  lower  foreign  aid,  all  of  which 
forced these economies to adopt austerity measures.  
 
It is widely agreed that the international financial crisis of 2008/09 was by far the most 
severe in recent history and I guess, on this score alone, we should have expected the wide 
range of reforms that have been proposed and are currently being implemented.  
 
As you know, in the aftermath of the crisis there was widespread concern for building a 
stronger global financial system and for more pro-active oversight. The regulatory response 
to the crisis, which has focused largely on the advanced countries, has been the proposal to 
upgrade  Basel  II  into  Basel  III,  as  a  step  towards  creating  a  stronger  and  safer  financial 
system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  cornerstone  of  the  new  regulatory  system  is  revised  capital  and  liquidity 
 
requirements.  A  lack  of  high  quality  capital  was  rightly  identified  as  a  major  cause  of  the 
financial crisis and thus Basel III seeks to raise the quality and quantity of capital. Similarly, 
the  crisis  highlighted  the  crucial  importance  of  liquidity  and  Basel  III  provides  for  detailed 
liquidity standards at a global level.  
 
The regulatory reform agenda provides, inter alia, for additional measures (higher loss-
absorption  buffers,  more  intense  supervision  and  stronger  resolution)  to  deal  with 
systemically-important financial institutions (SIFIs). In addition, countries are expected to put 
in place macro-prudential oversight bodies and frameworks to support and complement the 
above micro-prudential measures.  
 
One notable off-shoot of the recent financial crisis is enhanced visibility that has to be 
given to the G20 which was given the mandate to prepare the action plan for financial market 
stability and global growth and to supervise the implementation of the reforms to the global 
financial  system.  The  G20,  in  turn,  gave  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (the  FSB)  the 
responsibility  for  monitoring  the  implementation  of  and  raising  the  level  of  adherence  to 
international standards.  
 
Along with the FSB, the G20 also re-created the Global Forum for Transparency and 
Exchange  of  Information  (referred  to  as  the  Global  Forum),  whose  mandate  is  to  perform 
peer  reviews  on  standards  and  codes  in  the  area  of  taxation.  These  institutions  are 
complimented  by  the  FATF  whose  responsibility  is  to  enforce  standards  and  codes 
concerning anti-money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities.  
 
The  mandate  of  the  FSB,  which  consists  of  the  G7  and  the  larger  emerging  market 
economies, was to take the lead in the introduction of the regulatory reforms and adherence 
to  other  international  standards  and  to  encourage  other  countries,  both  developed  and 
developing, to do likewise. It was envisaged that the FSB would lead by example and would 
conduct  peer  reviews  and  ensure  implementation  of  international  standards  through  peer 
reviews.  
 
In early 2010, responding to a request by the G20, the FSB launched an initiative to 
encourage  the  adherence  of  all  countries  and  jurisdictions  to  international  financial 
standards, including the identification of non-cooperative jurisdictions. The FSB indicated its 
interest in assisting these jurisdictions to improve their compliance and waived the threat of 
sanctions  for  non-cooperating  jurisdictions.  The initial  focus of  the  initiative  (particularly  for 
developing  countries)  was  on  adherence  to  international  cooperation  and  information 
exchange standards in the financial regulatory and supervisory area. The rationale was that 
financial  markets  are  global  in  scope  and  that  weakness  in  cooperation  and  information 
exchange presented risks to the global financial system.  
 
There is a considerable lack of clarity as to how the FSB and its partner institutions are 
expected  to  operate  in  relation  to  the  small,  developing  economies  including  those  in  the 
region. This ignorance has given rise to a high degree of suspicion as to motives and as to 
whether the mandate of these institutions is consistent with the developmental aspirations of 
our small Caribbean economies.  
 
There is a perception that the G20 is seeking to implement its reform agenda in a non-
discriminatory manner, with all jurisdictions – large or small – being asked to adopt broad, 
common standards. There is also the perception that failure to implement this agenda in the 
manner and at the speed determined by the standard-setters, could lead to marginalization. 
The reality is, however, that the pursuit of an exogenous agenda that lacks national “buy-in” 
could  present  serious  challenges  for  the  small  Caribbean  economies  that  have  fragile 
domestic financial systems and are short on implementation capacity.  
 
Regional  policy-makers,  in  particular,  are  concerned  about  the  impact  that  the  new 
reform agenda is having on their offshore financial centers, which are an important element 
of their diversification strategy. They see the new information-sharing requirements as being 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
onerous and leading to a migration of business to other centers in Europe and Asia. In the 
absence of compensatory mechanisms, the complete elimination of these offshore centers 
could have a heavy toll on income and activity in the domestic economy.  
 
I  noted  earlier  that  the  reforms  being  proposed  by  the  standard-setters  were  largely 
targeted to the advanced countries. While the Caribbean did not suffer serious direct effects 
from  the  international  financial  crisis,  the  subsequent  collapse  of  the  CL  Financial 
conglomerate and the recent failure of a few banks in the OECS should be a stark reminder 
of  the  weakness  of  our  regional  regulatory  systems.  Several  of  our  countries  have  been 
taking  steps,  on  an  individual  basis,  to  upgrade  their  regulatory  structures.  However,  as  a 
region  we  have  been  slow  to  adopt  an  agreed  reform  agenda.  Perhaps  this  lack  of  a 
coordinated regional response undermines our ability to dialogue effectively with the IFIs on 
appropriate regional standards.  
 
articulate the various dimensions of the issue.  
 
I would hope that our discussions today would clarify the role of the FSB and the other 
G20  institutions  and  advance  the  discussion  on  a  regional  reform  agenda,  perhaps 
developed with the technical support of these global bodies that has been placed on offer. 
This is the surest way of helping the region in “the race to the top”. 
We are indeed fortunate to have assembled here today a group of people who could 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
