G Padmanabhan: Getting “IT” right 
Keynote address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  seminar  on  “Beyond  Core  Banking”,  organized  by  the  Institute  for  Development  and 
Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Kochi, 14 November 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Shri P K Chophla, Smt Nikhila Koduri, Shri A Madhavan and Smt Radha Somakumar is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Dr  V  A  Joseph,  Managing  Director  and  CEO,  South  Indian  Bank,  Shri  B  Sambamurthy, 
Director, IDRBT, other senior bank officials, ladies and gentlemen, it is indeed a matter of 
great  pleasure  for  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  the  workshop  on  “Beyond  Core 
Banking”. I am extremely grateful to IDRBT for giving me this opportunity. 
The city of Kochi brings many thoughts to my mind, but I would confine myself mainly to the 
topic of our round table today. Kochi had the unique distinction of being the forex capital of 
this State (which required the RBI to even set up an office here many years ago), and many 
a decision relating to foreign exchange management has been shaped by the international 
trade  activities  of  this  region.  Kochi  also  had  the  unique  distinction  of  having  two  clearing 
houses – one in the island area and the other in Ernakulam till a few years ago; these two 
were  merged  thanks  to  technology  and  the  advent  of  computerised  clearing  using  MICR 
technology about a decade ago. Thus, in a way, this city got technology in the right manner 
for its benefit and today this region is striving to attain the status of being a trend setter in IT. 
If that be so, can IT based techno-banking, which is the norm of the day, lag behind? It is 
thus, most appropriate that we are gathered here today to discuss the future of banking, now 
that we should look beyond Core Banking. 
I would like to begin by reflecting on why we are, today, discussing Core Banking or to be 
precise, “beyond Core Banking”. The reasons are not far to seek. Indian banking has taken 
rapid  strides  in  the  last  few  decades  and  is  growing  at  a  healthy  pace.  According  one 
estimate, Indian banking sector may become 3rd largest in asset size by the year 2025 (cf. 
IBA-FICCI-BCG  report  –  Being  five  star  in  Productivity-Roadmap  for  excellence  in  Indian 
banking). The growth achieved so far and the one projected ahead has many facilitators, but 
implementation and leveraging of technology is, by far, amongst the biggest enablers in the 
context. 
I have divided my talk today into three parts. In the first part we would look at core banking, 
the journey so far and the need to look “beyond Core Banking”. In the second part I would be 
touching upon the initiatives taken by IDRBT and the areas and technologies that the banks 
should set their focus on. In the concluding part I would be speaking on the initiatives taken 
by the Reserve Bank of India in the area of Information technology. 
Part I 
Core banking solution – an assessment 
Core banking Systems (CBS) have facilitated building up customer-centric, service oriented 
architecture  of  banking  services  at  front  end  and  also  created  the  capacity  to  efficiently 
handle  large  volumes  of  transactions,  data  and  book-keeping  requirements.  CBS  is 
positioned as an integrated solution to the basic banking operations pertaining to deposits, 
withdrawals,  credit  delivery,  and  attendant  backend  jobs,  mainly  in  the  retail  and  small 
business  segments.  It  has  enabled  the  introduction  of  efficient  and  convenient  delivery 
channels  like  ATMs,  Net  banking,  tele  banking  etc.  So,  when  the  banking  industry  has 
reached, so to say, a critical mass as far as using CBS is concerned, what’s next? Do we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
need to go “beyond core banking” and if so, what should be the areas and technologies that 
the banks need to focus on? 
Let us now look at the banking services in India from a different perspective. It is said that 
India  lives  in  its  villages.  Then,  isn’t  it  strange  that  only  5%  of  them  have  proper  banking 
services  and  that  there’s  only  1  branch  per  15,000  persons.  It  is  also a  fact  that  although 
banking  in  India  is  fairly  well  developed  in  certain  areas,  it  is  fairly  under-penetrated  and 
grossly under-served in other areas. If one views the areas which have not been served, it 
may be said that that until now, banks have not seen banking in rural areas as an attractive 
business,  although,  in  the  recent  past,  the  opportunity  and  growth  in  rural  markets  is 
equalising  with  urban  markets.  The  fact  that  there  is  tremendous  potential  for  inclusive 
banking is, now, making banks recognise rural banking as economically-viable, at least to a 
certain extent. To make this become attractive, technology provides solutions. Banks need to 
utilise technology to harness this potential by providing products suitable for such markets 
along with appropriate delivery channels. 
Another aspect to look at banking services in India and technology deployment is that while 
developing products, services, channels and strategies, focus was mostly on providing better 
and  efficient  services  to  the  existing  class/  classes  of  customers,  since  the  existing  set  of 
services was in itself way behind the requirements/ expectations. Many industry participants 
perceived that their operations were customer-centric, simply because they had customers. 
However, to their credit, when the banking sector was opened up, they adapted very quickly 
to  the  new  rules  of  the  game.  But,  the  rules  of  the  game  are  changing  as  the  banking 
industry  is  undergoing  a  rapid  transformation  phase.  Unlike  in  the  past,  banks  today  are 
market driven and market responsive. The top concern for every bank is to increase or at 
least  retain  the  market  share.  This  makes  it  imperative  that  banks  provide  best  possible 
products  and  services  to  ensure  customer  satisfaction.  With  the  customers  getting 
increasingly  tech  savvy,  irrespective  of  the  age  profile,  banks  have  greater  challenges  to 
ensure customer satisfaction. With the advent of advanced technologies there is significant 
scope  to  utilise  the  information/  data  base  gathered  through  the  tech  enabled  service 
bouquet. I intend to revisit some of these issues in more detail later. 
Part II 
Initiatives taken by IDRBT 
I  must  congratulate  IDRBT  for  its  continuing  contribution  towards  Indian  Banks’  journey 
“beyond  core  banking”.  It  has  been  organizing  Seminars  in  association  with  banks  on  this 
theme and this is the fifth in the series. What is commendable is the enthusiasm and zeal 
with  which  this  institution  has  been  discharging  its  role  and  responsibilities  in  times  where 
technology is changing quickly, constantly evolving and transforming the way business ought 
to be done. 
Next steps – seize the opportunity 
Extensive use of technology is bringing about upgrades in general banking environment for 
all stakeholders. In this context, banks may look at opportunities to introduce technologies 
that balance the three Cs in their operations, namely, Cost, Control and Customer Service. 
CBS implementation has ostensibly addressed all the 3 Cs. But has it? I often wonder why 
should a customer be charged extra if his passbook is updated at a so-called “non-home” 
branch. Does CBS add on to cost for the bank in this regard? Has CBS really provided better 
control?  I  am  told  that  for  certain  types  of  transactions,  it  is  very  difficult  to  trace  the  full 
etymological  details.  If  this  be  so,  then  whither  effective  controls?  What  is  the  logic  in 
returning “at par” cheques with the legend “not drawn on us” in a CBS scenario? It is, thus, 
time we really revisited the entire gamut of issues pertaining to continued traditional practices 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
even  under  CBS  before  we  proceed  further.  This,  I  would  think,  is  the  most  important 
precursor  to  “Beyond  Core  Banking”.  I  am  sure  that  IDRBT  will  be  more  than  keen  to 
collaborate  with  banks  in  addressing  these  essential  concerns  –  which  incidentally,  is 
another C! 
CRM: deliverance is the key 
Let  me  now  move  over  to  the  next  step  after  CBS.  We  are  aware  of  the  significance  of 
Customer  Relationship  Management  (CRM)  and  the  role  it  can  play  in  establishing  and 
retaining a customer by providing better value. Banks now routinely calculate customer value 
based  on  factors  such  as  account  average  balances,  account  activity,  services  usage, 
branch visits and other variables. CRM solutions which are based on CBS inputs, however, 
offer  end-to-end  functionality  to  effectively  address  the  needs  of  the  complete  cycle  of 
marketing,  sales  and  service  for  banking  products,  resulting  in  customer  retention  as  well. 
What is needed is the effort on the banks’ part to improve their service delivery levels and 
exploit the large information base effectively to design segment specific products, offer just 
the right bundle to the customers as also communicate product availability to the potential 
clientele.  Appropriate  use  of  CRM  analytics  arms  banks  with  the  technology  muscle  to 
increase their reach through effective marketing campaigns. It helps in making the service 
product  and  delivery  levels  scalable  enough  to  meet  the  needs  of  growing  banks.  It  also 
enhances  capabilities  to  explore  cross  selling  options  for  efficient  and  cost  effective 
marketing. 
To  my  mind,  if  the  basis  of  competition  till  now  is  interest  elasticity,  it  could  soon,  if  not 
already, be “techno-elasticity” – the bank equipped with better and sophisticated technology 
but  simple  to  operate  financial  services  would  garner  higher  share  of  customer  business. 
Today’s customer first asks how many ATMs the bank has, how many user_ids would the 
bank give for net banking, how much it charges for net banking/NEFT/RTGS, how to conduct 
business from non-home branches, to quote a few. Clearly, better the technology, finer the 
edge over the competitors. Today’s customer maintains accounts in not less than 3–4 banks 
and if a survey is conducted on the usage and turnover in those accounts, I am sure, it would 
reveal a distinct positive bias towards technology facilitation. I would therefore, sum up by 
stating that effective CRM systems are the natural offshoot of CBS and banks now need to 
focus in this arena. 
Analytics and business intelligence – use the right technology 
Today’s  banks  are  trying  to  build  more  direct  and  lasting  relationships  with  more  carefully 
selected  customers  instead  of  the  age  old  practice  of  extending  services  to  any  customer 
who  comes  along.  How  do  banks  select  their  value-adding  customers  and  products  for 
them?  Answers  lie  in  the  use  of  analytics.  Banks  can  use  the  huge  information  that  is 
stockpiled  in  its  databases.  Mining  this  database  can  yield  rich  information  on  individual 
preferences, which would help in segmenting the customer base and providing new products 
targeting  a  particular  segment.  How  does  a  bank  pull  ahead  of  the  pack?  I  feel  analytics 
could be the differentiator. Use of sophisticated data collection technology and analytics can 
be of tremendous use to the banks. Analytics has the power to transform technology from a 
supporting tool into a strategic weapon. The ability to instantly explore, augment and analyse 
all data in near-real time could deliver the competitive edge any bank would need. Serious 
analytics requires a firm data strategy, good business intelligence software and a matching 
computing hardware to work on. 
Financial inclusion – taking technology to the last rural mile 
Financial Inclusion has become an important area of focus as it would enable the base of the 
pyramid  to  participate  in  mainstream  economic  and  social  processes.  A  successful  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
sustainable  rural  banking  model  is  one  that  packs  innovative  servicing  ideas  that  instil 
confidence;  offers  convenient  access  to  credit;  and  literally  draws  the  rural  cash  based 
population into the mainstream banking economy. Delivery of banking services through the 
conventional  banking  model  is  not  always  feasible  in  rural  areas,  but  with  the  kind  of 
technology available today, I am sure that new, implementable mechanisms can be created/ 
adopted which, far from burdening a bank’s balance sheet, will indeed strengthen it. Banks 
can use innovated products through alternative channels of payment and these can play a 
decisive  role  in  bringing  about  cost-effective,  improved  products  and  services  to  the  poor. 
The time has come for the banks to be looking for exploiting technology to improve business, 
whether  it’s  through  mobility,  low-cost  ATM  rollouts,  revenue  sharing  models  or  service 
management. Banks should therefore be proactive and work towards transforming this into 
an opportunity. I would not rule out the significant role played by the service providers in this 
transformation. Though banks are taking baby steps in this direction, it is time now for more 
confident strides. 
IT governance 
The large scale dependence on IT for not only day-to-day operations but also on managerial 
decision making raises the need for banks to have better focus on the IT implementations at 
their end. In addition, ever changing nature of technologies and the imperative need to have 
the updated technology in an increasingly competitive and secure business environment, the 
costs involved in implementing technology projects require appreciation of these aspects for 
taking  appropriate  decisions  and  providing  guidance  as  well  as  assuming  adequate 
oversight. It is here that IT Governance assumes significance. IT governance encompasses 
areas  related  to  IT  Projects/architecture,  IT  security,  internal  controls  and  also  has  an 
advisory role. Board level technology governance is becoming increasingly important where 
top  management  of  the  bank  understands  the  degree  to  which  they  are  accountable  for 
technology, for project expenditures, and for monitoring the return on investment from IT. 
Here, I would commend the work done by IDRBT in bringing out the publications in the IT 
Governance Series. The first being a booklet on Organisational Structure for IT in the Indian 
Banking  Sector  and  latest  one  is  a  handbook  on  Information  Security  Governance  for  the 
Indian  Banking  Sector.  The  booklet  on  the  Organisational  structure  in  the  Indian  banking 
Industry  gives  insights  for  banks  on  how  to  set  up  the  IT  governance  committees  and  the 
various roles and responsibilities that have to be taken up by the members of the Committee. 
In order to achieve a better alignment between IT and business, create efficiencies, improve 
overall  IT  performance  as  also  enable  better  control  and  security,  banks  need  to  move 
towards adoption of well structured IT Governance models. 
Along with all the other areas of concern of increasing efficiency, cost optimisation, speed 
and  accuracy  of  processing,  straight-through-processing  etc.  one  issue  which  can  either 
make  or  mar  a  technology-based  offering  is  the  safety  and  security  of  operations.  Certain 
imperative  security  controls,  checks  and  balances  need  to  be  in  place  in  the  form  of  IT 
Security in banks. The handbook on Information Security Governance published by IDRBT, I 
hope,  would  provide  banks  with  useful  inputs  to  implement  appropriate  strategies  for 
achieving the objectives of a safe and secure environment. I am sure this handbook will also 
help in putting in place a framework for effective Information Security Governance in banks. 
Innovate or perish 
Historically,  banks  have  innovated  at  a  slower  pace  compared  to  other  businesses. 
Regulation  and  risk  mitigation  has  as  much  to  do  with  this  as  the  fact  that  the  results  of 
innovation take time to show. But, the pace is picking up. Structured financial products like 
derivatives  are  the  result  of  product  innovation.  Simultaneously,  systems  and  process 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
innovation have transformed the back-office, streamlined customer interaction and enabled 
several cost management strategies such as outsourcing. 
Banks need innovation to sustain in future. Only those banks that can successfully develop 
new  products,  services  and  channels  in  response  to  the  changed  market  and  technology 
environment will survive. What are the other trends that will reinvent the delivery of banking 
services? So far, the Internet has been at the forefront of channel innovation, heralding first 
online and then, direct banking. But now, other innovative channels are emerging such as 
mobile technology, near field communications and the like. The most successful banks will 
be those that combine visionary technology with strong customer centricity. 
While  talking  about  innovation,  I  cannot  but  talk  about  one  of  the  greatest  innovators  in 
recent times, who has been compared with greatest scientists of all times – and you rightly 
guessed – Steve Jobs. You would agree with me that the products that Apple makes are also 
considered by users as perfect pieces of art as well whether it be the iPod, i-Phone or the  
i-Pad. This is what innovation is all about. Here I would like to quote the master innovator 
himself  which  shows  the  level  of  perfection  that  he  believed  in:  “We  do  these  things  not 
because we are control freaks. We do them because we care about the user, and we want to 
take responsibility for the entire experience rather than turn out the rubbish that other people 
make.” 
Agility and change: reflections of one another 
There’s a symbiotic relationship between agility and change. By definition, an agile bank is 
surrounded  by  and  is  constantly  creating  change;  and  only  an  agile  bank  can  manage 
change successfully. Often, it is a change driver that makes the bank realise that it needs to 
become more agile. This is why it is very important for the bank to spot change drivers early, 
as  well  as  identify  those  factors  that  will  enable  it  to  mount  an  agile  response  to  change. 
Sometimes  this  change  identification  and  response  mechanism  may  involve  big  decisions, 
such as the introduction of service automation or a new banking channel. 
Hence, it is crucial that the management of change and agility receives adequate attention 
from the top, and is backed on the ground by departmental teams responsible for ensuring 
smooth  communication,  implementation  and  transition.  Also,  best  in  class  technology  and 
analytics  solutions  can be  valuable  assets  while  formulating  change  management  strategy 
and decisions. 
Emerging trends 
The Big Bang – mobile banking revolution 
When it comes to revolution in mobile technology, I think of two types of revolutions. One is 
the Mobile Revolution as such and the other is Mobile Banking Revolution. Mobile revolution 
refers to rapid innovations in mobile devices with customers being overwhelmed with a slew 
of  new  handheld  devices  right  from  Google’s  Android  operating  system,  Research  in 
Motion’s BlackBerry OS and Apple’s latest iOS iPhone platform, tablet computer etc. Mobile 
banking  revolution  refers  to  a  buffet  of  potential  services  that  a  banker  can  provide 
leveraging on mobile technology. In the USA for example, the value provided by banks with 
mobiles  is  the  remote  deposit  capture  i.e.  where  the  customers  increasingly  use  online 
mobile services to deposit paper checks. Although it is a driver for mobile banking adoption, 
increasing  efficiency  in  usage  of  checks  is  an  important  value  addition  particularly  to  be 
noted from the Indian perspective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Cloud computing – “pay only for what you use” 
It  is  becoming  evident  that  cloud  computing  is  getting  cost  effective  in  setting  up  IT 
infrastructure.  The  big  and  medium  enterprises  are  now  migrating  to  hybrid  cloud  models. 
While non-financial industry has taken huge strides in this arena, the banking sector, at least 
in India, also seems to be moving in this direction. Security is often quoted as a concern for 
the  banks  adopting  cloud  computing,  but  with  robust  and  modern  security  devices  and 
software  available,  the  bankers’  security  concerns  regarding  protection  of  data  can  be 
addressed. The cloud concept is here to stay and therefore, the focus should be rather on 
how to use the technology in a secure manner. 
Virtually automate branch? 
Although the trend towards online banking through internet or mobiles is evident, in a country 
like India the core of the banking habit is personal banking, meaning visit to the bank branch. 
Hence  a  parallel shift  towards smarter, more efficient, friendlier and more automated brick 
and mortar experience is the need of the hour. Integrating self service capabilities into bank 
branches would be a smart way. Why not make the customers walk virtually into their “home 
branch”? Why not think of using collaboration technology to have video chats with the valued 
customers? This leads me to the next line of thought. 
How about Social Media? 
We  have  been  active  in  social  networking  among  peer  group  through  various  social 
networking sites like Facebook and Twitter etc. The customers have been discussing about 
the services good and bad about their banks and sharing their banking experiences too. But 
have the banks thought of, apart from advertising in those social sites, about participating in 
such  conversations  to  extract  the  best  and  improvise?  Although  bankers  in  the  west  are 
increasingly  starting  to  participate  in  the  social  media,  they  still  mull  over  the  security  and 
other  concerns  such  as  accountability  in  participating  in  social  media.  But  as  it  always 
happens in technology or any other dynamics, the bankers tend to tread with caution and this 
area is no exception. 
Balancing business gain with added risk 
The most universal risk worry for banks large and small is the credit risk. Regulators will want 
to see banks with least credit risk, yet keep credit standards high. Credit risk will continue to 
be a big focus as long as depositors’ interest is paramount. As a result, banks will need to 
obtain more and better data to make credit decisions and to create analytics based on that 
data. But the essence of analytics lies in the fact that the qualitative data is not fragmented 
for  consolidation.  The  dashboard  should  effectively  give  drill  down  view  of  the  underlying 
credit risk of the top layer of the credit portfolio. 
Why not modernise the core? 
I  am  happy  that  no  bank  today  advertises  that  “we  are  100%  computerised  or  100% 
branches under core banking solution”. That marketing trend is behind us. But after a decade 
of CBS wave, the moot point is how many banks have upgraded to the next best level? Have 
we  migrated  to  the  latest  OS,  application  technology,  security  devices  et  al?  How  many 
banks have migrated to the latest CBS platforms? Perhaps, those who migrated had faced 
issues  and  therefore,  other  may  be  diffident.  But  upgrade  is  the  only  way  to  sustain  the 
competitive  edge  and  remain  close  to  reality.  Core  banking  renewal  also  comes  with  the 
prospect of delivering on the promise of conducting business in real time. So being modern 
to the Core has to be the focus for banks for the days to come. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Why not collaborate? 
The modern collaboration has rendered the ability to work together in real time. With the rise 
of new collaboration technologies – be they based on the web or in the cloud, and whether 
they  are  powered  by  videoconferencing,  voice,  wikis,  software  or  hosted  solutions  – 
collaboration tools have reached a point where cost and familiarity are no longer a barrier to 
adoption but the content they deliver are making great impact. Imagine the SMS alert of a 
stolen card swipe and the resultant card block! In this context, I also wish to flag the issue of 
banks  investing  huge  amounts  in  Data  Warehousing  and  Modeling.  Why  are  the  banks 
embarking  on  these  efforts  individually?  Can  the  industry  and  IDRBT  think  of  some 
collaborative models? 
PART III 
Initiatives of RBI 
The Reserve Bank has been a guiding force for banks in their endeavour for implementation 
of IT initiatives. As the central bank, it has played a pivotal role by providing a environment 
conducive  to  promoting  technological  adoption  in  the  financial  sector.  The  Reserve  Bank 
has, in the last one year, released two documents which are of immense significance for the 
banks. 
Recommendations of the Working Group on Information Security, Electronic Banking, 
Technology Risk Management and Cyber Frauds 
You  would  be  aware  that  following  the  recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  on 
Information Security, Electronic Banking, Technology Risk Management and Cyber Frauds, 
guidelines have been issued to the banks. The guidelines are not “one-size-fits-all” and the 
implementation  of  these  recommendations  need  to  be  risk  based  and  commensurate  with 
the nature and scope of activities engaged by banks, the technology environment prevalent 
in  the  banks  and  the  support  rendered  by  technology  to  the  business  processes.  Banks 
would  be  required  to  conduct  a  formal  gap  analysis  between  their  current  status  and 
stipulations as laid out by RBI and put in place a time-bound action plan to address the gap 
and  comply  with  the  guidelines.  Banks  would  need  to  pro-actively  create/fine-tune/modify 
their  policies,  procedures  and  technologies  based  on  new  developments  and  emerging 
concerns. 
Recommendations of the IT Vision document 2011–17 
You would also be aware of the contents of the IT Vision document released during the early 
part of the year. The Vision Document sets priorities for commercial banks to move forward 
from  their  core  banking  solutions  to  enhanced  use  of  IT  in  areas  like  MIS,  regulatory 
reporting,  financial  inclusion  and  customer  relationship  management.  The  document  also 
dwells on possible operational risks arising out of adopting technology in the banking sector 
which  could  affect  financial  stability  and  emphasizes  the  need  for  internal  controls,  risk 
mitigation  systems,  fraud  detection  /  prevention  and  business  continuity  plans.  Although 
banks have deployed technology for transaction processing, analytical processing by banks 
is  still  in  a  nascent  stage.  The  Report  urges  banks  to  work  towards  reaping  benefits  of 
technology  in  terms  of  cost  reduction  of  small  value  transactions,  improved  customer 
services and effective flow of information within the banks and to the regulator. 
Next Generation RTGS (NG-RTGS) 
The RBI is replacing the existing RTGS with the NG-RTGS system which would be using the 
latest technology and several new features such as advanced liquidity management facility; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
extensible markup language (XML)/ISO 20022/SWIFT Compatible based messaging system 
conforming to international standards; and real time information and transaction monitoring 
and control system. 
lead 
increased 
to  significantly 
Conclusion 
To summarise, Indian banks have traversed a long way in their journey to provide efficient, 
customer  centric  services.  Banks  have  to  adapt  to  greater  regulation,  competition  and 
consolidation  as  also  meet  increasingly  diverse  and  demanding  customer  expectations.  In 
such  a  scenario,  adoption  of  Information  technology  and  CBS  in  particular  has  been 
immensely useful in the progress made, so far. But, there is need to look beyond CBS for 
leveraging technology for still better and efficient growth. 
While the advent of state-of-the-art technologies and global best practices undoubtedly offer 
improved agility, efficiency, and faster implementation cycles, banks need to be  mindful of 
the  challenges  associated  with  deployment  of  IT.  These  challenges,  once  understood  and 
mitigated  properly,  are  perfectly  manageable.  The  times  to  come  will  require  much  more 
professional  and  sophisticated  IT  leadership  with  vision  than  ever  before.  As  history 
indicates, successful banks are those that have understood the potential of new technologies 
and aligned themselves to fully leveraging its power. These are banks that have focused on 
the adaptive change that made the technology transformation process successful. 
While  talking  of  challenges,  one  of  the  challenges  that  the  entire  banking  Industry  and 
service providers will increasingly face is the ability to provide required services to customers 
in an uninterrupted manner in normal times, and more so while facing adverse circumstances 
like catastrophes, sabotage, war, riots, power supply failures, endemics etc. Extensive use of 
technology  has  also 
infrastructure  sharing  and 
interdependence.  Moreover,  since  financial  markets  are  in  a  state  of  high  integration, 
problems in one segment like payment and settlements can lead to severe impact in several 
other  areas,  particularly  if  some  problems  occur  at  some  significant  market  participant/ 
service  provider’s  end.  Business  Continuity  management  and  Disaster 
recovery 
preparations, therefore, need to be given high importance. Gone are the days when BCP and 
DR were generally documented, but not effectively monitored and DR was understood to be 
limited to data backup arrangements. Recently, there was an incident where a large number 
of  customers  in  a  large  bank  had  to  face  inconvenience  as  the  working  of  the  bank  was 
impacted  for  considerable  time  due  to  technical  issues.  It  is  possible  that  something 
important  might  have  been  missed  out  in  the  planning,  implementation  or  testing  of  BCP 
arrangements. Fortunately, it left no systemic impact in other market segments. But, we may 
not be so lucky next time and, therefore, I would exhort all banks to look at the need to have 
an effective BCM as more than a mere technology issue, although technology may be the 
most important component in the arrangements. 
I had earlier mentioned about the need for taking care of a few Cs. I shall add one more C to 
this.  This  pertains  to  Clarity.  There  are  many  challenges  (yet  another  C  which  can  be 
overcome)in respect of appropriateness of the IT model for each bank. More often than not, 
IT  provides  solutions  for  business  and  not  the  other  way  around.  With  the  stabilisation  of 
CBS, it is now the optimal time for business to commence their process of demanding from 
IT. And once the clarity of requirements is established, the choice (one more C) of the correct 
( C again!) IT solution would be smooth. To this end, we need to re-orient our efforts so that 
IT systems are our slaves and not vice-versa. 
Finally,  in  banking,  it  is  imperative  to  create  income  efficiencies,  technology-driven 
efficiencies  and  service  efficiencies  to  reduce  cost  structures.  As  technology  matures  and 
improves, so will the skills, processes, and bottom lines. And once the banks get IT right, 
they will get much more for far less. 
I wish the Workshop all success. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
