Narayana Kocherlakota: Making monetary policy – public contingency 
planning using a mandate dashboard 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  Stanford  Institute  for  Economic  Policy  Research  (SIEPR),  Stanford, 
California, 29 November 2011. 
 I  thank  Doug  Clement,  Ron  Feldman,  David  Fettig,  Terry  Fitzgerald  and  Kei-Mu  Yi  for  their  many  insightful 
comments and ideas. 
John, thanks for the introduction and for the invitation to be here today. It’s great to be back 
on the Farm. I have to say that there have been lots of changes. I’ve been away only six 
years, but I hardly recognize the place. This building is, in particular, a fantastic addition to 
the economics scene here on campus.  
In my remarks today, I’d like to touch on several topics. I’ll begin with a quick description of 
the  structure  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  deliberative  process  of  the  Federal 
Open Market Committee – the Committee that makes monetary policy for the nation. Then I’ll 
describe the FOMC’s objectives. Next, I’ll discuss how the FOMC can enhance the pursuit of 
its  objectives  by  formulating  a  public  contingency  plan,  based  on  what  I  term  a  “mandate 
dashboard”.  Finally,  I’ll  close  with  a  discussion  of  considerations  for  near-term  monetary 
policy actions. 
After that, I’ll be pleased to answer any questions you may have. And before I begin, I should 
remind you that my comments here today reflect my views alone and not necessarily those 
of others in the Federal Reserve System, including my FOMC colleagues. 
Some FOMC basics 
Let  me  begin  with  some  basics  about  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  The  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  Minneapolis  is  one  of  12  regional  Reserve  banks  that,  along  with  the  Board  of 
Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System. Our bank represents 
the  ninth  of  the  12  Federal  Reserve  districts,  and  by  area,  we’re  the  second  largest.  Our 
district  includes  Montana,  the  Dakotas,  Minnesota,  northwestern  Wisconsin  and  the  Upper 
Peninsula of Michigan.  
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of monetary policy over the next six to 
seven weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve banks – including me – 
and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  including  Chairman  Bernanke, 
contribute to these deliberations. (Currently, there are only five governors – two positions are 
unfilled.)  However,  the  Committee  itself  consists  only  of  the  governors,  the  president  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a group of four other presidents that rotates annually. 
Right now, that last group consists of the presidents from the Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Dallas 
and Chicago Federal Reserve Banks.  
I’ve said that the FOMC meets (at least) eight times per year. But how do these meetings 
work? At a typical meeting, there are two so-called go-rounds, in which every president and 
every governor has the opportunity to speak without interruption. The first of these is referred 
to  as  the  economics  go-round.  It  is  kicked  off  by  a  presentation  on  current  economic 
conditions by Federal Reserve staff economists. Then the presidents and governors describe 
their individual views on current economic conditions and their respective outlooks for future 
economic  conditions.  The  presidents  typically  start  by  providing  information  about  their 
district’s local economic performance. We get that information from our research staffs, but 
also from our interactions with business and community leaders in industries and towns from 
across our districts.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Committee next turns to the second go-round, which focuses on policy. Again, the staff 
begins, with a presentation of policy options. After that, each of the 17 meeting participants 
has  a  chance  to  speak  on  what  each  views  as  the  appropriate  policy  choice.  This  set  of 
remarks is followed with a summary by the chairman, in which he lays out what he sees as 
the Committee’s consensus view for future policy. The voting members of the FOMC then 
cast their votes on this policy statement and thereby set monetary policy for the next six to 
seven weeks. 
My description of an FOMC meeting highlights how the structure of the FOMC mirrors the 
federalist structure of our government. Representatives from different regions of the country 
– the various presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. And, as I’ve described, their 
input relies critically on information received from district residents. In this way, the Federal 
Reserve  System  is  deliberately  designed  to  give  the  residents  of  Main  Street  a  voice  in 
national monetary policy.  
FOMC objectives 
I’ve  said  that  FOMC  participants  seek  to  adopt  what  they  view  as  the  appropriate  policy 
choice. That provides a natural segue into my next topic: the policy objectives of the FOMC. 
The FOMC has a dual mandate, established by Congress: to set monetary policy so as to 
promote price stability and maximum employment. The heart of the price stability mandate is 
the Federal Reserve’s inflation objective. The FOMC communicates its inflation objective to 
the  public  in  a  number  of  ways.  Most  prominently,  at  quarterly  intervals,  FOMC  meeting 
participants  publicly  reveal  their  forecasts  for  inflation  in  the  longer  run  (maybe  five  or 
six years), assuming that monetary policy is optimal. Those forecasts usually range between 
1.5 percent and 2 percent per year. They are often collectively referred to by saying that the 
Federal Reserve views inflation as being “mandate-consistent” if it is running at “2 percent or 
a bit under”.  
Congress has also mandated that the FOMC set monetary policy so as to promote maximum 
employment. An important and ongoing communications challenge for the FOMC is that it is 
much harder to quantify the maximum employment mandate than the price stability mandate. 
Changes  in  minimum  wage  policy,  demography,  taxes  and  regulations,  technological 
productivity, job market efficiency, unemployment insurance benefits, entrepreneurial credit 
access and social norms all influence what we might consider “maximum employment”.  
It is important to keep in mind that these changes in maximum employment can be short run 
or long run in nature. Like the rest of my colleagues on the FOMC, I expect unemployment to 
normalize at 5 percent or 6 percent in the longer run under optimal monetary policy. But I 
want to stress that that estimate of long-run unemployment does not reflect my assessment 
of the current level of “maximum employment”.  
Over the past year, the FOMC has communicated through its statements that it perceives the 
current unemployment rate to be elevated relative to levels that it views as consistent with its 
dual mandate. In this situation, there is a trade-off involved in the making of monetary policy. 
On  the  one  hand,  adding  monetary  accommodation  reduces  unemployment,  other  things 
equal. On the other hand, adding accommodation increases the risk of generating inflation 
markedly higher than the Committee’s objective of 2 percent for a significant period of time. 
In choosing whether to add monetary stimulus or not, the Committee must resolve this trade-
off between reducing unemployment and increasing the risk of inflation.  
Public contingency planning based on a mandate dashboard 
I’ve described how an FOMC meeting works, the FOMC’s objectives and the tensions that 
currently  exist  between  those  objectives.  I  now  want  to  turn  to  the  formation  of  policy 
designed to achieve the FOMC’s objectives. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Right now, the FOMC has two types of accommodation in place. First, it is targeting a short-
term interest rate, the federal funds rate, between 0 and 0.25 percent, and it plans to keep 
that interest rate that low at least through mid-2013 – that is, for at least the next six to seven 
quarters.  This  low  interest  rate  is  intended  to  stimulate  consumption  by  households  and 
investment by firms.  
Second,  the  FOMC  has  bought  a  large  amount  of  long-term  government-issued  and 
government-backed  assets.  These  asset  holdings  are  designed  to  stimulate  longer-term 
investment. More specifically, any holder of a long-term bond is exposed to interest rate risk, 
because the value of that bond fluctuates as interest rates vary. When the Fed buys long-
term bonds from the private sector, the private sector as a whole is exposed to less interest 
rate risk. As a result, some private investors will demand a lower premium for holding other 
bonds  that  are  exposed  to  interest  rate  risk.  Consequently,  all  long-term  yields  fall  –  and 
corporations  should  correspondingly  lower  their  hurdle  rates  for  long-term  investment 
projects. 
The FOMC does have additional tools. It could exert further downward pressure on long-term 
market  interest  rates  by  buying  more  long-term  Treasury  securities  or securities  issued  by 
government-sponsored  enterprises  like  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  Alternatively,  the 
Committee could extend its prediction for how long it will keep its target short-term interest 
rate exceptionally low. So, tools – and choices – remain.  
However,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC  should  do  more  than  simply  decide  at  each  meeting 
whether  or  not  to  buy  more  assets  or  to  keep  interest  rates  low  for  longer.  Any  current 
decision is based on the FOMC’s forecast for the future, and no forecast can be perfect. The 
Committee should provide a public contingency plan – that is, provide guidance on how it will 
respond to a variety of relevant scenarios. I believe that public contingency planning would 
have many benefits. Let me mention two.  
First,  without  appropriate  context,  the  FOMC’s  actions  may  at  times  suggest  that  its 
formulation of its dual mandate objectives has changed. For example, I’ve spoken to many 
members of the public who believe that the FOMC’s current highly accommodative policies 
imply  that  the  FOMC’s  inflation  objective  has  shifted  upward.  I’ve  certainly  argued  that 
they’re wrong. But I’m sure that, by articulating a clear public contingency plan and sticking to 
it,  the  FOMC  can  inspire  greater  public  confidence  that  FOMC  actions  represent  the 
systematic pursuit of its dual mandate objectives.  
Second, I’ve heard from businesses that policy uncertainty is curbing their incentive to hire or 
invest. Similarly, I’ve heard from consumers that policy uncertainty is curbing their incentive 
to spend. An FOMC public contingency plan can help reduce the contribution of monetary 
policy  to  this  general  background of  uncertainty.  But  how  should  the FOMC  formulate  this 
public contingency plan? I believe that it is useful to think of a driver who is trying to maintain 
a car speed. To do so, he’ll vary pressure on the accelerator in response to changes in road 
conditions,  current  and  expected:  hills,  valleys,  rough  pavement,  headwinds.  In  the  same 
way, the FOMC varies its chosen level of monetary accommodation in response to changes 
in current and expected economic conditions.  
This kind of systematic response to changing economic conditions strikes me as an essential 
part of good monetary policy for at least two reasons. First, there is a great deal of empirical 
evidence and theoretical support for the idea that following a policy rule, as economists call 
it, is what enables the Committee to achieve its dual mandate goals. Second, and perhaps 
more importantly, actions speak louder than words. The Committee can claim that it intends 
to make monetary policy so as to fulfill its dual mandate. But the public can and does watch 
its  actions  carefully  in  this  regard.  If  the  Committee  fails  to  adjust  its  chosen  level  of 
accommodation appropriately in response to changes in economic conditions, the public may 
well begin to doubt the Committee’s claims about its goals.  
What economic conditions are relevant? Again, I think that it’s useful to think of a car driver 
who is trying to maintain his speed. To know how much (or how little) acceleration to provide, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the driver would certainly like to know his current speed. As well, he would like to know how 
future road conditions – like hills – are likely to affect his future speed. The FOMC’s problem 
is quite similar. Just like the driver needs to know his current speed, the FOMC needs an 
accurate  measure  of  current  inflation  and  unemployment.  Just  as  the  driver  needs  an 
estimate of his future speed, based on anticipated road conditions, the FOMC should have 
an assessment of the future levels of inflation and unemployment.  
I find it helpful to summarize the relevant information in what I term a mandate dashboard. 
The  dashboard  provides  real-time  readings  on  current  and  expected  inflation  and 
unemployment.  Here’s  what  the  dashboard  looked  like  in  the  FOMC  meeting  earlier  this 
month.  
 I’ll explain the dashboard starting with the inflation side. The first cell from the left is current 
inflation. The second cell is what inflation is projected to be in one year’s time. Finally, the 
third  cell  contains  a  forecast  for  inflation  in  two  years’  time.  The  unemployment  side  is 
similar.  The  first  cell  from  the  left  represents  current  unemployment.  The  second  cell 
represents a forecast for unemployment in one year’s time, and the third cell is a forecast for 
unemployment in two years’ time. 
Of course, I have to be a little more precise in what I mean by inflation and unemployment. 
By “inflation”, I mean the change in the Personal Consumption Expenditure Price Index over 
the preceding four quarters, excluding changes in the prices of food and energy.1 Hence, my 
measure of inflation in the dashboard is what is commonly called “core inflation”. I’m using 
core inflation because I view it as a good measure of overall inflationary pressures over the 
next two to three years. 
By “unemployment”, I mean the unemployment rate averaged over the three months in the 
current quarter.2 The forecasts for future inflation and unemployment are the midpoints of the 
central tendencies of the projections of FOMC participants that they released in November.  
It is important to note that the dashboard includes information from other current variables 
besides  inflation  and  unemployment.  The  forecasts  for  inflation  and  unemployment  could 
potentially  be  based on  a  wide  range  of  information  –  anticipated changes  in  fiscal  policy, 
changes  in  European  financial  markets  and  so  on.  So,  basing  policy  on  the  mandate 
dashboard  does  allow  policy  to  react  to  changes  in  these  other  economic  variables. 
                                                 
1  The fourth quarter of 2011 has not ended. Hence, what I’m calling “current inflation” is actually the FOMC’s 
projection of inflation from fourth quarter 2010 to fourth quarter 2011. With three quarters of data already in, 
this projection is likely to be an accurate one. 
2  The  fourth  quarter  of  2011  has  not  ended.  Hence,  what  I’m  calling  “current  unemployment”  is  actually  the 
FOMC’s projection of the average unemployment rate in this quarter. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However,  using  this  kind  of  dashboard  does  require  monetary  policy  to  respond  to  any 
economic  variable  only  insofar  as  that  variable  affects  current  and  future  inflation  or 
unemployment.  This  restriction  seems  appropriate  given  the  limited  nature  of  the  FOMC’s 
statutory assignment from Congress.  
Given this mandate dashboard, how should the level of accommodation evolve over time in 
response  to  changes  in  dashboard  readings?  There  are  many  subtleties  associated  with 
providing  a  general  answer  to  this  question,  including  the  key  trade-off  that  I  mentioned 
earlier  between  the  two  mandates.  But  there  are  two  relatively  common  and  important 
instances in which the mandate dashboard becomes straightforward to use in a qualitative 
way.  Suppose  inflation  and  expected  inflation  rise  and  unemployment  and  expected 
unemployment fall, as is often true in a recovery. Then, regardless of how it weights the two 
mandates,  the  FOMC  should  reduce  the  level  of  accommodation.  In  contrast,  suppose 
inflation and expected inflation go down and unemployment and expected unemployment go 
up,  as  is  often  true  when  the  economy  slows.  Then,  regardless  of  how  it  weights  the  two 
mandates, the FOMC should increase the level of accommodation.  
A  public  contingency  plan  for  2012  would  specify  the  FOMC’s  actions  under  a  number  of 
scenarios for the mandate dashboard in a year’s time. It is natural to start with the scenario 
that the current FOMC’s projections for 2012 turn out to be correct.  
 Notice that the second cell of the November 2012 row is the forecast for inflation over the 
course of 2013, and the second cell of the November 2011 row is the forecast for inflation 
over the course of 2012. We generally think that monetary policy operates with a one- or two-
year lag. Accordingly, the dashboard keeps track of what we expect the economy to be like 
in a year or two.  
By comparing the second row of the table with the first row, we can see that in this scenario, 
core inflation, and its outlook, will be about the same in a year’s time. Unemployment will be 
lower.  These  changes  in  the  dashboard  readings  suggest  that,  in  the  scenario  that  the 
economy evolves in 2012 as the Committee expects, the Committee should reduce the level 
of monetary accommodation over the course of 2012.  
How would the Committee accomplish this reduction? Right now, the Committee is projecting 
that it will keep its target short-term interest rate extraordinarily low for at least six to seven 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
quarters. In my view, it would be simplest to reduce the level of accommodation by changing 
that estimate to a shorter period of time.3 
But,  like  those  of  many  private  sector  forecasters,  the  FOMC’s  projections  have  proven 
imperfect over the past few years. With that in mind, the Committee should provide public 
guidance on how it will respond to other scenarios in 2012. Suppose, for example, that the 
following scenario occurs in 2012, in which economic conditions are worse than expected. 
 In this alternative scenario, inflation has fallen since November 2011 and unemployment has 
risen since November 2011. These changes imply that the Committee should increase the 
level of accommodation over the course of the year. Recall that the Committee is currently 
projecting that it will keep interest rates extraordinarily low for at least six to seven quarters. 
The Committee could increase the level of accommodation in 2012 by changing the estimate 
of at least six to seven quarters to some longer period of time. Alternatively, it could increase 
accommodation  by  purchasing  additional  long-term  securities  issued  by  the  federal 
government or by government-sponsored enterprises.  
An inconsistency in the making of recent monetary policy 
I’ve  been  talking  about  how  a  mandate  dashboard  can  be  helpful  in  formulating  a  public 
contingency plan for monetary policy in 2012. However, the mandate dashboard also clarifies 
an important inconsistency in the making of recent monetary policy.  
I became president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in October 2009. I attended 
my  first  FOMC  meeting  in  November  2009,  as  a  nonvoter.  So,  when  I  think  about  current 
monetary policy, I find it natural to look back at the position of the mandate dashboard at my 
first meeting: 
                                                 
3  Under this scenario, the economy has evolved over the coming year as the Committee expected in November 
2011. Hence, it would be natural for the Committee to continue to reduce the anticipated duration of the period 
of  extraordinarily  low  interest  rates  by  one  year  –  that  is,  to  two  or  three  quarters  instead  of  six  to  seven 
quarters. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 low 
last  November, 
The  dashboard  points  out  that  economic  conditions  were  quite  grim  at  that  meeting.  The 
Committee  expected 
inflation,  and  ongoing  disinflation,  over  2010  and  2011. 
Unemployment was expected to average well above 9 percent over 2010 and 2011.  
The situation two years later, while hardly ideal, has improved markedly. Hence, I would say 
that the evolution of the dashboard readings suggests that monetary policy should be less 
accommodative now than it was in November 2009. But in fact, through choices dating back 
to 
the  Committee  has  made  monetary  policy  considerably  more 
accommodative.  
I  should  underscore  one  point.  Like  many  private  sector  forecasters,  the  FOMC  has 
overestimated the strength of the recovery over the past two years. Thus, in November 2009, 
the  Committee  expected  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2011  to  be 
8.4 percent instead of around 9 percent. This observation does imply that the Committee’s 
current level of accommodation should be larger than what the Committee expected it to be 
two years ago. It does not imply that the Committee’s current level of accommodation should 
be higher than what the Committee had in place two years ago. 
How  should  an  outside  observer  interpret  this  inconsistency  between  the  evolution  of  the 
mandate  dashboard’s  readings  and  the  Committee’s  actions?  Earlier  in  my  speech,  I  set 
forth  what  I  see  as  a  key  trade-off  involved  in  the  making  of  monetary  policy.  There  is  a 
benefit  to  adding  monetary  accommodation:  It  reduces  unemployment.  There  is  a  cost  to 
adding  monetary  accommodation:  It  increases  the  risk  of  inflation  running  above  the 
Committee’s objective of 2 percent for multiple years. The FOMC’s actions in 2011 suggest 
that the Committee is now more concerned about high unemployment, and correspondingly 
less concerned about the possibility of higher-than-target inflation.  
Just to be clear: I view the Committee’s current resolution of the trade-off between inflation 
and  unemployment  as  being  justifiable.  I  also  viewed  the  Committee’s  resolution  of  this 
trade-off  in  2009  as  being  justifiable.  However,  what  I  see  as  problematic  is  that  the 
Committee’s  resolution  of  this  trade-off  seems  to  be  changing  over  time.  In  particular,  the 
Committee’s actions in 2011 suggest that it is now more willing to tolerate higher-than-target 
inflation than it was in 2009. If this possible drift in inflation tolerance were to persist, or were 
expected  to  persist,  it  could  give  rise  to  a  damaging  increase  in  inflationary  expectations. 
Undoing such an increase in inflationary expectations, as Americans discovered in the early 
1980s,  requires  drastic  policy  steps  that  have  extremely  painful  consequences  for 
employment.  It  is  exactly  in  this  sense  that  I  have  said  in  earlier  speeches  that  the 
Committee’s actions in 2011 served to weaken the Committee’s credibility.  
I believe that it is critical for the Committee to avoid further drift in its resolution of the key 
trade-off between inflation and unemployment. It can accomplish this goal by formulating and 
following  a  public  contingency  plan  that  is  explicitly  grounded  in  metrics  like  the  mandate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
dashboard. Of course, no contingency plan can ever be definitive. Inevitably, the FOMC will 
learn  things  that  it  did  not  expect  to  learn.  And  so  there  may  be  conditions  that  force  the 
FOMC  to  deviate  from  a  chosen  plan.  However,  having  a  public  plan,  and  couching  its 
decisions  against  the  backdrop  of  that  plan,  will  enhance  Federal  Reserve  transparency, 
credibility, accountability and consistency.  
In  May  2010,  Chairman  Bernanke  stated,  “Transparency  regarding  monetary  policy  …  not 
only  helps  make  central  banks  more  accountable,  it  also  increases  the  effectiveness  of 
policy”.4 I agree completely with this sentiment. And I see a public contingency plan, based 
on the explicit use of metrics like the mandate dashboard, as promoting exactly the kind of 
transparency that Chairman Bernanke then described.  
Thanks for listening. I’m happy to take your questions.  
                                                 
4  See  Chairman  Bernanke’s  May  25,  2010,  speech,  “Central  Bank  Independence,  Transparency,  and 
Accountability”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
