Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  October  2011  Inflation  Report,  Ankara, 
26 October 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests,  
Unlike former press conferences held to present inflation reports, today I would like to start 
my  presentation  by  explaining  a  five-point  action  plan  entailing  price  stability,  interest  rate 
policy, foreign exchange reserves policy, required reserves policy and financial stability.  
We are living through a period marked by global developments that call for taking timely, and 
if  necessary,  daily  counter-cyclical  measures  against  capital  flows.  Therefore,  with  the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s decision of October 20, 2011 we achieved the flexibility needed 
to  effectively  implement  the  two-objective  and  three-instrument  monetary  policy  on  a  daily 
basis.  After  briefly  mentioning  the  outlook  for  our  primary  objective  of  price  stability,  I  will 
summarize how and in which direction the three instruments will be employed from now on. 
Lastly, I will also briefly talk about the positive impacts of decisions that have already been or 
will be taken regarding financial stability.  
Firstly,  I  will  talk  about  price  stability.  We  expect  inflation  to  rise  significantly  in  the 
upcoming months due to recent excessive depreciation of the Turkish lira, the base effects 
from unprocessed food prices and the recent adjustments in administered prices. I would like 
to  reiterate  that  we  will  not  allow  these  developments  to  affect  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  and  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook  adversely.  Indeed,  we  have  already 
started the necessary monetary tightening to keep inflation under control and to ensure that 
inflation realizations remain in line with the target set for 2012. Details on this issue can be 
found in the Inflation Report that I will summarize shortly.  
Secondly, I will talk about our interest rate policy. After the last Committee meeting, banks’ 
funding costs from the Central Bank were set within the interest rate corridor, in other words, 
between  5.75  and  12.5  percent  on  average,  or  at  a  level  that  the  Central  Bank  considers 
appropriate. In cases where funding is effected at 12.5 percent, the Central Bank will meet 
banks’ demand with no upper limit and against eligible collateral. Tightening or easing to be 
achieved via the funding channel will be implemented even on a daily basis depending on 
the course of economic and financial developments. In the event that risks to price stability 
are observed, the Central Bank will allow banks’ overnight borrowing rates to hover around 
12.5 percent for some time.  
Thirdly,  I  will  provide  you  with  some  information  about  our  reserve  requirement  policy. 
Depending on the outcome of the EU Leaders Summit and the foreign markets’ perception of 
this outcome, the Central Bank may introduce a limited reduction in the Turkish lira required 
reserve ratios if deemed necessary. Moreover, we may also allow holding of up to 40 percent 
of  Turkish  lira  reserve  requirements  in  foreign  currency.  Meanwhile,  technical  studies  are 
underway  for  enabling  a  facility  that  allows  holding  of  10  percent  of  Turkish  reserve 
requirements in gold. We believe that these three decisions will have positive impacts on our 
banks,  especially  through  the  cost  channel.  Consequently,  the  Turkish  lira  liquidity  to  be 
supplied to the market will significantly and permanently diminish the funding needs of our 
banks; thus, favorably affecting the banking sector via the liquidity channel as well.  
Now, I would like to talk about our reserve policy. Following the enabling of the facility that 
allows holding precious metal deposit accounts and a part of FX reserve requirements in the 
form of “standard gold”, starting from October 28, 2011, we expect to see a rise in Central 
Bank  gold  reserves  from  for  the  first  time  since  1991.  Central  Bank’s  gold  reserves  may 
continue to increase once it holding of Turkish lira reserve requirements in the form of gold is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
also allowed. The Central Bank purchased USD 26 billion-worth of foreign currency between 
August 2009 and July 2011. These purchases were primarily aimed at prudently supplying 
FX liquidity to our financial system, when needed, in order to support both price stability and 
financial stability. Accordingly, should unhealthy price formations arise due to loss of depth in 
the  FX  market,  we  can  resume  FX  selling  auctions  or  directly  intervene  in  the  FX  market 
without  undermining  the  basic  principles  of  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime.  In  addition, 
depending on the global economic developments, we may resume intermediary activities in 
our FX Deposit Market with the aim to enhance FX liquidity flow in the interbank FX market. 
Lastly,  I  will  briefly  mention  the  issue  of  financial  stability.  We  can  summarize  the  core 
objective of the policies we have been implementing since November 2010 as slowing down 
the  excessively  rapid  growth  of  the  private  sector’s  external  liabilities  and  improving  the 
quality of these liabilities. Accordingly, the downward trend in the seasonally adjusted month-
on-month current account deficit, which started in July 2011, will continue in the final quarter 
after a pause in September 2011. The steady rise in the shares of direct foreign investments 
and long-term borrowing in the financing of the current account deficit continues. We believe 
that further slowing down of the current pace of growth, especially in consumer loans, in the 
rest  of  the  year  would  contribute  to  the  sustainability  of  the  rebalancing  of  domestic  and 
external  demand.  Thus,  the  rise  in  the  private  sector’s  propensity  to  save  in  Turkey  will 
ensure  a  more  rapid  and  sound  correction  in  the  current  account  deficit.  In  the  upcoming 
period,  effective  liquidity  management  through  the  interest  rate  corridor  will  become  an 
important policy instrument that will also contribute to financial stability.  
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
Now,  in  order  to  provide  more  detailed  information  on  the  price  stability  pillar  of  the 
framework that I have just mentioned, I would like to share with you the main messages of 
the October Inflation Report.  
The  Report  typically  summarizes  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and 
presents our revised medium-term inflation forecasts, along with our monetary policy stance. 
In  addition  to  the  main  sections  of  the  Report,  we  have  provided  nine  boxes  that  analyze 
various topics. These boxes, like usual, evaluate the findings of studies on some interesting 
current topics. For instance, we have a box on the crisis and debt sustainability in the Euro 
area. Also, we have boxes that elaborate two popular topics that have been occupying the 
top  of  the  agenda  for  some  time.  In  one  of  these  boxes,  the  method  of  taxing  tobacco 
products and its impact on consumer prices is analyzed, while in the second box, we share 
our current forecasts on exchange rates and import price pass-through. You can see titles of 
other  boxes  on  the  other  slide.  All  of  them  contain  informative  analyses  on  the  Turkish 
economy. These boxes will be published shortly on our website; I recommend you to read 
them.  
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
Global  economic  developments  have  been  influential  on  our  policies  for  quite  a  long  time. 
Therefore,  in  the  first  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  continue  with  a  brief  summary  of 
these developments.  
In  the  third  quarter  of  2011,  mounting  concerns  regarding  sovereign  debt  sustainability 
across the euro area, coupled with the slower-than-expected recovery in U.S. real estate and 
labor markets intensified the downside risks regarding global economic activity. Accordingly, 
global  economic  activity  forecasts  were  revised  downwards  and  expectations  for  a  further 
delay  in  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  grew  stronger. 
Mounting  uncertainties  regarding  the  global  economy  and  the  deterioration  in  risk  appetite 
led to capital outflows from emerging economies. This outlook not only fed into short-term 
inflationary pressures in emerging economies, but also highlighted concerns over growth and 
financial stability.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Monetary policy developments and monetary conditions 
1. 
The  policies  that  we,  as  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  (CBRT),  have  been 
implementing since end-2010, aimed at gradually rebalancing the economy towards a robust 
growth  composition  without  hampering  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook.  Accordingly,  we 
pursued  policies  to  prevent  excessive  deviation  of  exchange  rates  from  economic 
fundamentals in either direction, while also taking the necessary measures with the support 
of other institutions to ensure reasonable levels in loan growth rates (Chart 2 and 3).  
As a consequence of measures taken by the Central Bank and the Banking Regulation and 
Supervision  Agency  (BRSA),  loan  rates  continued  to  rise  in  the  third  quarter  (Charts  4 
and 5).  A  marked  slowdown  is  observed  in  credit  growth  owing  to  the  lagged  effects  of 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
measures taken and a deceleration in economic activity. Despite the role of seasonal factors, 
this slowdown is more apparent compared to that of recent years (Chart 3). Accordingly, the 
exchange-rate-adjusted  annual  credit  growth  rate  is  expected  to  converge  at  around 
25 percent by year-end, as envisaged. 
 In the baseline scenario presented in the July Inflation Report, global economic activity was 
assumed to continue to improve gradually; however, it  was also highlighted that downside 
risks on the global economy were growing stronger. Indeed, right after the publication of the 
Report,  risk  perceptions  deteriorated  rapidly  and  debt  problems  in  the  euro  area  further 
intensified  changing  the  baseline  scenario.  In  response,  we  introduced  a  comprehensive 
package  of  measures  to  contain  the  potential  adverse  effects  of  these  developments  on 
financial  stability  and  economic  activity.  The  objective  of  these  measures  was  to  supply 
liquidity  to  markets  in  a  timely,  controlled  and  effective  manner  in  the  event  of  financial 
turmoil that may be driven by developments in the global economy. Moreover, we opted for a 
modest cut in the policy rate in order to contain the risk of recession in domestic economic 
activity that may be posed by escalating global economic problems. Moreover, Turkish lira 
required  reserve  ratios  were  adjusted  in  order  to  extend  the  maturities  of  liabilities  of  the 
banking system (Chart 6). The mounting uncertainties facing the global economy since the 
July Inflation Report and accelerating capital outflows from emerging economies called for a 
series of measures intended to contain fluctuations in the foreign exchange market.  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ongoing  deterioration  in  the  global  risk  appetite,  which  started  in  August,  has  led  to 
excessive depreciation of the Turkish lira. The accumulated depreciation of 30 percent since 
November  2010  started  to  pose  risks  on  the  inflation  outlook.  Moreover,  in  October, 
adjustments made to administered prices, which were far beyond the assumptions of the July 
Inflation Report, necessitated a sizeable upward revision of short-term inflation forecasts. At 
this  point,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  we  would  not  allow  the  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  and  outlook  to  be  affected  by  these  developments,  and  we  will  take  all 
necessary policy measures. The policy measures that I mentioned earlier in my speech and 
the Committee decision of October stipulating a significant increase in the overnight lending 
rate should be viewed from this perspective (Chart 6).  
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
2. 
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
I would now like to discuss the macroeconomic outlook and the assumptions underlying our 
forecasts.  First  of  all,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments  and  then  I  will 
compare  the  short-term  forecasts  we  announced  in  July  with  data  realizations  in  the  third 
quarter.  In  the  third  quarter,  prices  of  core  goods  posted  a  more-than-envisaged  increase 
amid  excessive  depreciation  of  the  Turkish  lira.  The  annual  rate  of  change  in  food  prices 
declined significantly due to the base effect in unprocessed food prices. As seen on the slide, 
inflation followed a flat course during the third quarter as these two effects largely offset each 
other  (Chart  7).  However,  exchange  rate  developments  ended  up  being  more  dominant 
which led inflation to exceed the forecast range presented in the July Inflation Report. 
In the third quarter, exchange rate developments led to an increase in the underlying trend of 
core inflation indicators as well (Chart 8). This was mainly triggered by the increase in prices 
of  core  goods,  while  the  underlying  trend  of  services  inflation  remained  relatively  modest 
(Chart 9).  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Distinguished Guests, 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data indicated more robust economic activity in the second 
quarter of 2011 compared to the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report. Therefore, the 
output gap estimates of this period were revised upwards. Private sector consumption and 
investment  expenditures  became  the  main  drivers  of  growth  in  this  period.  While  exports 
followed  a  weak  course  amid  developments  in  the  global  economy,  imports  recorded  a 
significant decline following the slowdown in domestic demand due to the policy measures 
adopted.  Thus,  the  net  external  demand  made  a  positive  contribution  to  growth  on  a 
quarterly basis for the first time after a long stretch. In other words, the composition of growth 
started to change in the desired direction (Chart 10).  
Owing to the lagged effects of the contractionary reserve requirement and liquidity policies, 
domestic demand continued to lose pace in the third quarter. Also, due to measures taken by 
the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (BRSA) and the tight fiscal policy stance, 
domestic  demand  growth  was  brought  to  a  sustainable  level  in  the  third  quarter.  In  this 
period, credit, production and sales data, as well as confidence indices, indicated ongoing 
loss of momentum in private consumption demand. In this context, the outlook for the third 
quarter was based on an ongoing slowdown in domestic demand (Chart 11). 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Driven mainly by advanced economies, global growth forecasts were subject to substantial 
downward  revisions  in  the  third  quarter.  In  this  respect,  projections  for  Turkey’s  export-
weighted  global  growth  index  point  to  a  weaker  medium-term  outlook  compared  to  the 
previous  period  (Chart  12).  Therefore,  forecasts  were  based  on  an  outlook  of  weaker 
external demand compared to the previous period.  
Consequently, the output gap was revised upwards for the short-term and downwards for the 
medium  term.  Moreover,  assumptions  on  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  were  revised 
slightly downwards (Chart 13). You can see the effect of these revisions on 2011 and 2012 
year-end inflation forecasts (Table 1).  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
Esteemed Guests, 
In  the  July  Inflation  Report,  the  price  increases  in  tobacco  products  were  assumed  to  be 
consistent with the inflation target, adding approximately 0.3 percentage points to inflation. 
However, considering recent developments, the estimated contribution of price increases of 
tobacco products to inflation is revised upwards to 0.9 percentage points. This has led to an 
increase in short term inflation forecasts by 0.6 points (Table 1). 
 The  assumptions  about  fiscal  policy  used  for  medium-term  forecasts  were  based  on  the 
outlook  presented  in  the  Medium  Term  Program  (MTP).  Therefore,  the  baseline  scenario 
envisages  that  the  ratio  of  primary  expenditures  to  GDP  would  gradually  be  reduced  from 
2012, the public debt-to-GDP ratio would continue to fall, and the risk premium would remain 
broadly unchanged. Moreover, tax adjustments and administered prices are assumed to be 
consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms.  
Distinguished Members of the Press,  
As  I  have  already  stated,  since  the  publication  of  the  July  Inflation  Report,  emerging 
economies  have  faced  rapid  capital  outflows  due  to  the  deteriorating  risk  appetite.  In  this 
respect,  excessive  depreciation  in  the  Turkish  lira  has  become  more  evident.  This 
development, coupled with the increase in prices of administered goods, has raised the risk 
of  deterioration  in  pricing  behavior.  We  responded  to  these  developments  strongly  by 
increasing our overnight lending rate markedly in our October meeting (Chart 6). We expect 
monetary tightening to contain inflationary pressures in the period ahead. However, inflation 
is forecasted to increase significantly in the  short term with the contribution from low base 
effects in unprocessed food prices.  
Assuming  that  the  annual  rate  of  credit  growth  decelerates  gradually,  and  monetary 
conditions are tightened significantly in the final quarter in line with policy measures taken in 
October, inflation is expected to be, with 70 percent probability, between 7.8 and 8.8 percent 
with a mid-point of 8.3 percent at the end of 2011, and between 3.7 and 6.7 percent with a 
mid-point of 5.2 percent at the end of 2012. Inflation is expected to stabilize around 5 percent 
in the medium term (Chart 14). 
I would like to reiterate that any new data or information regarding the inflation outlook might 
lead  to  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Therefore,  assumptions  regarding  the 
monetary  policy  outlook  underlying  the  inflation  forecast  should  not  be  perceived  as  a 
commitment on behalf of the CBRT. 
In  sum,  short-term  inflation  forecasts  were  revised  on  the  upside  mainly  due  to  exchange 
rate  developments  and  hikes  in  administered  prices.  I  would  like  to  underscore  that  these 
factors reflect a movement in relative prices rather than a permanent increase in inflation, as 
the  monetary  tightening  envisaged  in  the  last  quarter  in  the  context  of  the  CBRT’s  recent 
strong policy reaction will prevent second round effects. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Distinguished Guests, 
I  would  like  to  highlight  once  more  that  the  recent  tightening  in  the  CBRT’s  policy  stance 
aims  mainly  to  prevent  deterioration  in  inflation  expectations  triggered  by  inflationary 
pressures  from  the  exchange  rate.  At  this  point,  it  is  important  to  ask  a  counterfactual 
question: what would the path of inflation have been had the CBRT not reacted? To provide 
more guidance on this matter, I would like to draw your attention to the chart (Chart 15). The 
chart depicts accumulated price increases resulting from exchange rates and administered 
price developments, in the case of no reaction by the CBRT. Accordingly, we estimate that 
the contribution of these developments to inflation would have reached 6 percentage points, 
had the CBRT not taken any policy measures. 
In this scenario, consumer inflation reaches double digits at 10.1 percent, owing mainly to the 
excessive depreciation of the Turkish lira, also coupled with the effect of the deterioration in 
inflation expectations (Table 2). Therefore, given the backward looking pricing-behavior in the 
services sector, inflation would hover at elevated levels for an extended period of time. This 
would  lead  to  a  deterioration  in  inflation  expectations,  and  risk  the  hard-earned  recent 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
achievements  on  the  path  to  price  stability.  In  such  a  case,  bringing  inflation  back  to 
reasonable levels would be more costly. In order to prevent such adverse developments, the 
CBRT intervened actively in the foreign exchange market; and in line with its primary objective 
of price stability, responded boldly by increasing overnight lending rates significantly. Besides, 
we have explicitly stated that the CBRT, in line with the strategy announced today, will not 
allow exchange rates to deviate from economic fundamentals, nor will it allow a deterioration 
in  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  various  measures  will 
continue to be taken in the forthcoming period, in order to ensure price stability. 
 Risks and monetary policy 
3. 
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
In the last part of my speech, I would like to mention risks regarding the inflation outlook and 
how the monetary policy will be shaped should these risks materialize.  
The  fact  that  inflation  will  hover  above  the  target  in  the  short  term  poses  risk  to  inflation 
expectations and price setting behavior. Accordingly, as of October, the CBRT has adopted a 
policy stance aimed at eliminating these risks. These risks will be closely monitored and the 
necessary measures will be taken to avoid deterioration in the medium-term inflation outlook. 
Medium term projections assume that the global outlook will remain weak for a long period, 
but  the  situation  will  not  worsen  further.  Nevertheless,  uncertainties  regarding  the  global 
economy continue to be of significant concern. Especially, mounting problems regarding the 
sovereign  debt  of  euro  area  economies  continue  to  pose  downside  risks  on  the  global 
economy.  Concerns  regarding  the  debt  sustainability  of  euro  area  economies  have  further 
increased since the publication of the July Inflation Report, exacerbated by the concerns of a 
possible contagion to the region’s banking sector. In this context, the CBRT will continue to 
monitor global economic developments closely and will take the required measures promptly 
to maintain stability in domestic financial markets. 
While formulating the monetary policy, we will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments 
closely  as  well.  In  this  respect,  our  forecasts  presented  in  the  baseline  scenario  take  the 
Medium Term Program as given and thus assume that fiscal discipline will be maintained. A 
revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate 
significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-
term inflation outlook. 
In the period ahead, monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability while preserving 
financial stability as a supporting objective. To this end, the impact of the macroprudential 
measures taken by the CBRT and other institutions on the inflation outlook will be carefully 
assessed.  Strengthening  the  commitment  to  fiscal  discipline  and  the  structural  reform 
agenda in the medium term would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign 
risk and thus, facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the fiscal discipline will 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
also  provide  more  flexibility  for  monetary  policy  and  support  social  prosperity  by  keeping 
long-term interest rates permanently at low levels. In this respect, I would like to conclude my 
remarks by underlining that timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the 
new Medium Term Program remains to be of the utmost importance. 
Thank you for your participation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
