Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The reform of the international monetary system 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Conference  in  memory  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  Rome,  16  December 
2011. 
 Introduction  
1. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  attend  this  conference  today  in  honour  and  memory  of  Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa and to be a member of the panel discussing the reform of the international 
monetary system. That was a field Tommaso bore responsibility for at the ECB and which I 
inherited from him.  
I would like to focus my remarks on his main critique – which he shared with Robert Triffin – 
that  the  international  monetary  system  remains  incapable  of  imposing  an  acceptable 
macroeconomic discipline on the world economy. I also wish to examine the reservations he 
expressed about international policy cooperation being enough to ensure stability.  
I would like to organise my remarks as follows. First, I would like to explore the theoretical 
underpinnings of international policy collaboration, and explain why in practice it seems to fall 
short of what is needed in today’s global world and why countries remain trapped in short-
term policy-making. I will then review some proposals made by Tommaso to correct today’s 
international  monetary  system,  including  the  provision  of  an  anchor  and  an  exchange  rate 
mechanism, and consider the consequences of maintaining the status quo. In conclusion, I 
will argue that it is better to prevent volatility than to cure it. The deployment of ever larger 
official resources to cope with potential crises cannot be the solution – neither conceptually 
nor practically.  
The policy implications are that there are three key areas where preventive action could and 
should  be  taken,  and  which  require  structural  change  by  major  economies:  first,  financial 
developments  in  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs);  second,  further  financial  and 
economic integration in Europe; and third, reforms to ensure that financial markets serve the 
real economy and support stability. 
Analysis  
2. 
Let me start with the global financial crisis. There is a broad consensus on some of the main 
factors  underlying  the  global  financial  crisis  –  such  as  the  growing  and  persistent  current 
account imbalances, inadequacies in financial regulation and supervision, the systemic risk 
caused  by  excessive  leverage  combined  with  risky  financial  products,  and  so  on.  As 
Tommaso  argued,  there  is  also  some  lack  of  recognition  of  the  fundamental  flaws  in  the 
present monetary arrangements, or rather non-arrangements. Being a policy-maker, he not 
only  identified  the  flaws,  but  proposed  the  essence  of  a  solution  to  the  problem.  Greater 
cooperation between economies was a critical element in a reformed international monetary 
system.  
Let me elaborate on this point. Why would international policy coordination be beneficial in 
the first place? After all, every country strives to meet its own growth and stability objectives 
in order to produce a strong and stable economy. Isn’t that enough? The message from the 
crisis,  loud  and  clear,  was  “no”.  The  problem  is  that  economic  policy  actions,  particularly 
those  of  larger  countries,  create  quantitatively  significant  spillovers,  or  “externalities”,  for 
other countries. Hence, achieving a global optimum means having to take such externalities 
into account in the decision-making process. Therefore, coordination can be regarded as a 
mechanism  to  encourage  countries  to  include  the  potential  spillover  effects  in  their  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
considerations, in other words, to “internalise these externalities”. Only then is it possible to 
achieve a Pareto optimal outcome1. 
In  practice,  even  though  international  coordination  is  vital  to  optimise  global  welfare,  it  is 
notoriously difficult to attain the necessary level of sensitivity and commitment from policy-
makers. Economic theory provides us with a conceptual framework that helps explain why 
this  is  the  case.  Countries  that  impose  negative  externalities  on  others  create  a  deviation 
from the global Pareto optimal outcome. But since such countries lack sufficient incentives to 
pursue the global optimum, the international community faces a prisoner’s dilemma in which 
systemically  relevant  countries  pursue  policies  that  produce  mutually  reinforcing  negative 
spillovers. This dilemma however becomes smaller if the participants interact with each other 
continually.  To  put  it  into  our  context,  if  countries  repeatedly  interact  with  each  other, 
cooperation  becomes  more  beneficial  than  pursuing  self-interest  alone,  particularly  in 
complex  situations  when  those  involved  have  numerous  options  for  responding  to  the 
strategic actions of others2 
Countries do in fact interact with each other repeatedly, but achieving effective international 
cooperation  and  internalising  externalities  still  appears  to  be  largely  elusive.  As  Tommaso 
said, “the self-sufficiency of national monetary sovereignty”  3 is a “false idol”; countries tend 
to  pursue  policies  which  generate  unsustainable  growth  cum  imbalances  in  the  short  run, 
thereby  neglecting  global  spillovers  and  negative  feedback  loops  that  undermine  domestic 
long-run  performance  and  stability.  I  would  even  go  a  step  further.  I  would  suggest  that 
economic growth which relies on an unsustainable policy framework might even turn out ex 
post to be an “accounting illusion”.  
So why is there such short-termism in policy-making that results in unsustainable domestic 
policy frameworks and global economic and financial instability? Let me offer four thoughts: 
First,  there  is  the  primacy  of  the  electoral  cycle.  Policy-makers  tend  to  maximise  utility 
functions, which incorporate only national objectives over a limited time horizon. In such a 
context, it is difficult to enforce policies resulting from international commitments that may, 
over the short term and particularly in the run-up to an election, be seen to contradict national 
objectives. 
Second, policy-makers face asymmetric opposition to change. Interest groups that profit from 
the current system are usually far more organised and vocal in opposing change than the 
silent  majority,  both  nationally  but  also  internationally,  which  could  potentially  benefit  from 
economic reforms.  
Third, and moving away from political economy considerations, it is very difficult to assess 
equilibrium  values  for  certain  key  variables.  Therefore,  fundamentals  are  often  over-  or 
underestimated  depending  on  the  country  and  the  point  in  time.  Imbalances  are,  thus, 
financed for too long and at too favourable prices, so any eventual corrections turn out to be 
very sudden and sharp.  
Fourth,  there  is  habit  persistence  and  sluggishness  in  the  adjustment  process,  as  large 
international  players  are  sometimes  trapped  in  a  given  policy  framework.  For  example, 
despite the financial crisis, policy incentives arising from the US’s exorbitant privilege remain 
unchanged  in  the  presence  of  sizeable  and  liquid  US  financial  markets  and  the  strong 
international role of the dollar as a reserve currency. At the same time, in the case of China, 
the  current  growth  model  still  delivers  acceptable  results  –  even  if  it  is  at  the  expense  of 
                                                 
1  Amartya K. Sen: Collective Choice and Social Welfare. Holden-Day et al., San Francisco, 1970. 
2  Mailath, G. & Samuelson, L. (2006). Repeated Games and Reputations: Long-Run Relationships. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
3  Padoa-Schioppa,  Tommaso  (2010):  “The  Ghost  of  Bancor:  the  Economic  Crisis  and  Global  Monetary 
Disorder” 25 February 2010, page 4. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
some segments of society and, as such, represents an implicit tax on them. Given that the 
accumulation of major imbalances in China persists and does not disrupt other aspects of the 
economy – thanks to financial repression and a closed capital account – the current growth 
model is perceived as being sustainable. The same could probably be said of other major 
economies, like the US. 
Sooner  or  later,  however,  the  unsustainability  of  domestic  policies  can  be  expected  to 
materialise in a crisis. This is particularly the case if, as we witnessed prior to 2008, rising 
imbalances  go  unchecked  because  of  weaknesses  in  market  discipline  and,  all  the  while, 
negative externalities persist without redress owing to the absence of a collective or higher 
authority  to  rein  in  what  Tommaso  referred  to  as  “robust  political  and economic  interests”. 
Crises  impose  potentially  severe  domestic  economic  and  financial  disruptions  on  an 
economy and, at best, lead to a more sustainable model of growth, albeit at a very high price. 
At worst, they condemn a country to protracted low growth. In both cases, global economic 
performance and stability are undermined to a greater or lesser degree.  
Responses 
3. 
How  should  these  weaknesses  be  corrected?  Is  the  answer  to  be  found  indeed  in 
international policy cooperation?  
I tend to share Tommaso’s view that soft international cooperation alone, though necessary, 
would not be sufficient. In his words, “coordination fails precisely when it is most needed, i.e. 
when policy preferences are most divergent”. My experience confirms that even in the wake 
of the global financial crisis – which brought home global interdependencies and the porosity 
of national boundaries for national policies – international cooperation continues to be based 
on the premise that the pursuit of national interests is the best approximation of the Pareto 
superior result. It is the philosophy underlying the G20 Mutual Assessment Process, which 
seeks to achieve strong, sustainable and balanced growth.  
Another weakness of the current international monetary system is that in its centre of gravity 
– the United States – economic and monetary policy are shaped to suit domestic interests. 
The  current  system  mimics  therefore,  as  I  said  earlier,  a  generalised  version  of  the  Triffin 
dilemma. Tommaso recognised it as such and identified some of the elements of a solution.  
First, he argued for some sort of “common exchange rate mechanism” which would ensure 
that every country agrees to shoulder its responsibility for the appropriate valuation of their 
currency and that exchange rates are determined by the interaction between the market and 
economic  policy.  He  anticipated  that  this  would  be  well  supported  by  floating  regimes  for 
large currencies, while smaller countries may thrive with an intermediate regime consistent 
with the geographic pattern of their economic and financial linkages, possibly a managed peg 
to  the  regionally  dominant  currency.  He  observed,  for  example,  the  very  strong  regional 
interdependencies  in  East  Asia  and  the  momentum  these  create  for  a  regional  monetary 
arrangement  comparable  to  those  which  Europe  sought  after  the  Bretton  Woods  system 
came to an end.  
The distinctions between large and small economies, and floating and managed currencies, 
are particularly revealing at the present time, when we are seeing a large anomaly. We are 
currently facing an unprecedented situation in which a once-small economy that pegged its 
currency to that of a large economy has since grown to become the world’s second-largest 
national economy. The result is a giant economy running a fledgling currency internationally, 
outsourcing its monetary policy and its international requirements for money (as a medium of 
exchange,  unit  of  account  and  store  of  value)  to  the  globally  dominant  currency.  This  has 
been a major source of imbalances in recent years. The way in which it has been addressed 
has been unsatisfactory and the effects on the prospects for the global economy are likely to 
become graver over time.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The major economies, while recognising the domestic impact of the policies of others, have 
yet  to  appropriately  factor  mutual  interdependence  into  their  utility  functions  and  policy 
deliberations. In Europe, we had the luxury of reflecting on European interdependencies in 
decades  of  calmer  conditions  when  making  successive  attempts  to  produce  a  stable 
European monetary order, leading up to European monetary union. And still, we did not learn 
the lessons well enough and are now having to do so the hard way. There is no alternative 
but  for  a  stricter  supranational  disciplinary  element  in  Europe  and,  by  corollary,  at  global 
level.  As  Tommaso  said,  it  is  nonsensical  for  countries  to  believe  that  they  can  reap  the 
benefits  of  economic  and  financial  integration  without  their  policies  acknowledging  the 
two-way street.  
The second issue is the need for an anchor to ensure the stability of a reformed international 
monetary system. More specifically, the interplay of demand for, and supply of, the reserve 
currency  should  be  limited  to  what  supports  global  stability.  Just  as  Triffin  saw  an 
unresolvable tension for global stability arising from the subordination of the management of 
reserve-issuing  currencies  to  domestic  policy  interests,  Tommaso  considered  that  this 
tension  was  keeping  the  disorder  alive.  In  his  view,  what  was  needed  was  a  quantum  of 
supranationality that would hold sway over the global monetary policy stance. And here, he 
thought more could be made of a supranational currency, the Special Drawing Right (SDR). 
Tommaso recognised the hurdles to the SDR assuming its heralded role as the key reserve 
asset,  in  particular,  the  need  for  a  critical  mass  of  SDRs  in  both  public  and  private  sector 
circulation.  
Although the SDR may have the potential to reduce the Triffin dilemma, it cannot remove it. 
As a basket of currencies, it would not reflect the domestic policy interests of the dominant 
economy, but rather the “average” for the economies of all the currencies in the basket. And 
in this respect, it would only improve on global stability to the extent that the “average” policy 
stance was better than the dominant policy. However, a mere average of policies driven by 
national  objectives  is  no  guarantee  for  the  public  good  of  a  stable  monetary  anchor  on  a 
global  scale.  This  would  require  a  policy  framework  anchoring  the  global  standard  to  an 
objective of global stability.  
An alternative view is that of a multi-polar currency system. The emergence of such a system 
would accompany the global rebalancing of economic power that is taking place. It would be 
a  market-driven  process  rather  than  requiring  an  international  agreement,  framework  or 
mechanism. And to be most conducive to global stability, the shift to a multi-currency system 
should ideally occur gradually.  
Like  the  SDR,  it  offers  a  welcome  alternative  to  the  reliance  on  one  dominant  national 
currency for stability, and should have the effect of eroding the exorbitant privilege of the US 
dollar  and  increasing  the  policy  discipline  on all  major,  internationally-used  currencies.  But 
also  like  the  SDR,  stability  under  a  multi-currency  system  would  still  ultimately  rely  on 
nationally-oriented  policies,  though  in  the  case  of  the  multi-currency  system,  market 
participants would choose directly the sets of national policies they prefer. Would this reduce 
volatility, or would it be even greater, as players switch among currencies, particularly in the 
transition phase as the currency composition of reserves is re-weighted?  
Of course, a shift to a multi-currency system requires that the privilege of incumbency of the 
US dollar be removed, that the sovereign debt weaknesses in the euro area be resolved, and 
that the renminbi develop its full international potential.  
Now the suggested reforms pose many new questions. Let me focus on two in particular.  
First,  what  political  and  institutional  conditions  are  necessary  to  form  the  basis  of  greater 
supranationality?  We  have  travelled  along  this  path  in  Europe  and  made  some  progress, 
assisted by the principle of subsidiarity. Federations may find themselves with a conceptual 
headstart,  but  also  highly  open,  integrated  economies  have  an  innate  appreciation  of  the 
benefits of cooperation. All the same, implementing a shift of authority from the sovereign to 
super-sovereign level requires finding a way to overcome the perceived democratic deficit. In 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this respect, Tommaso believed in the cathartic effects of crises – that they exposed flaws in 
a  system  and  pointed  the  way  forward.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in the  G20 
Mutual Assessment Process. Does it go far enough? Might it become a necessary stepping 
stone to an improved framework for global stability? 
This prompts my second question: what kind of world are we heading for in the absence of a 
mechanism or anchor for global stability? The focus is likely to continue to be on measures to 
deal  with  volatility,  such  as  increasing  reserve  buffers,  restricting  capital  flows  and  heavily 
managing currency values. All of these come at a cost: 
 
excessive reserves, especially for EMEs, represent a tax on domestic consumption 
and, if widespread across countries, would produce a systematic excess of planned 
savings over planned investment, leading to a deflationary bias;  
capital  controls  are  an  understandable,  if  unfortunate,  response  to  exceptional 
surges in inflows and outflows, but they produce externalities of their own, including 
increasing inflow or outflow pressures on other countries; and  
devaluing  currencies  can  trigger  beggar-thy-neighbour  retaliatory  measures  that 
push the global economy into a downward spiral.  
  Now the failure to properly address these issues in the past has led to the current scramble 
for  financial  resources  to  shore  up  systemic  stability.  And  the  amount  of  reassurance 
demanded by markets increasingly exceeds the official resources available by an ever higher 
margin.  National  foreign  exchange  reserves  stand  again  at  an  all-time  high;  regional 
financing  arrangements  –  especially  in  Europe  and  Asia  –  are  better  endowed  and  more 
sophisticated than ever before; and the IMF had its resources trebled in 2009, and will soon 
reflect yet again upon the adequacy of its resources.  
It is clear from this that prevention is always better than cure. Therefore, we must find better 
ways to reduce financial market volatility. Policy measures to address the problem need to 
be tailor-made. 
In emerging markets, where financial sectors are underdeveloped, policy measures need to 
foster  financial  development.  Domestic  savings  could  then  be  more  easily  channelled  into 
domestic investment, promoting domestic income growth and consumption, and rebalancing 
economic growth away from exports and reducing the incentive to maintain a low currency 
value. It would also lower the need for reserves and official outflows to advanced countries, 
and the excessive demand for US dollar-denominated financial assets.  
In Europe, especially the euro area, we need deeper financial and economic integration to 
reduce the uncertainties and inefficiencies in the current institutional framework, so that the 
region becomes a core area of stability. 
Financial  markets  need  reform  so  that  their  structure,  conduct  and  performance  supports 
stability. This calls for acute risk awareness, responsible risk analysis and appropriate risk 
pricing.  It  requires  that  participants  are  able  to,  and  do,  bear  the  consequences  of  their 
decisions without jeopardising system stability. And achieving these things necessitates an 
interplay  between  markets  and  regulators  in  such  a  way  that  balances  dynamism  with 
stability.  
Efforts are under way in all these areas, and yet there remains much work to be done. We 
cannot afford to wait for the cathartic effects of the (next) crisis to improve the functioning of 
the international financial system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
