Christian Noyer: After the global crisis, which models of growth? 
Keynote speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  CIGS  (The  Canon 
Institute  for  Global  Studies)  –  EHESS  (Ecoles  des  Hautes  Etudes  en  Sciences  Sociales) 
International  Symposium  “After  the  global  crisis,  which  models  of  growth?”,  Tokyo, 
3 October 2011. 
 Let me begin by saying I am delighted to be here with you today. I am of course conscious 
that  the  world  is  experiencing  major  economic  turbulence  and  that  Japan  has  suffered  this 
year a series of particularly cruel catastrophes. As you know, I have profound admiration for 
your country, and we French wish to show our solidarity with you in the face of these ordeals. 
I would like to warmly thank the organisers of this symposium – which should be fascinating – 
for giving me this opportunity to speak to you. 
I thank the Canon Institute for Global Studies and its Chairman, my friend Governor Fukui. I also 
thank the France-Japan Foundation of the EHESS and its Director, Sebastien Lechevalier. In 
2009, the Banque de France was one of the first institutional sponsors of this Foundation, whose 
objective of promoting greater intellectual and cultural exchange between Japan and France is 
highly commendable. Our two countries have much to learn from each other and a great deal to 
gain from deeper collaboration. I do therefore strongly welcome this initiative. 
The  last  two  months  have  brought  important  changes  to  the  world  economy.  Growth 
perspectives in advanced economies have significantly worsened, markets are increasingly 
volatile, and confidence indices have fallen.  
The continued downward revision of US growth performance has certainly played a role. But, 
most  significantly,  two  almost  simultaneous  shocks  have  occurred:  in  the  US,  reaching  an 
agreement to raise the debt ceiling has met with considerable difficulties; and, in Europe, it 
has  been  recognized  that  Greece,  a  euro  and  OECD  country,  would  not  be  able  to  fully 
honor its signature, unless there is voluntary private sector involvement in its refinancing. In 
the  eyes  of  the  market,  this  has  had  significant  implications  for  other  peripheral  European 
sovereigns. 
Overall, doubts have been cast on the ability of major advanced countries to pay back their 
sovereign debt. In different ways, to differing degrees and with opposite consequences, the 
same question is now being asked on both sides of the Atlantic: what kind of risk is attached 
to sovereign debt? We used to think of public debt in major countries as a riskless asset. Not 
anymore, not to the same extent.  
In that sense, a true regime change has occurred, with deep and long-lasting consequences, 
upon which I will try and reflect today. Much what I will say, of course, relates to Europe. But 
I will also adopt a more global perspective. 
Over  the  last  70  years,  financial  markets  have  developed  on  a  strong,  albeit  implicit, 
assumption. Public debt in advanced economies was considered risk free. On that basis, it 
was  possible  to  build  a  whole  architecture  of  asset  prices,  whose  relative  riskiness  is 
determined  according  to  the  intrinsic  characteristics  of  assets  and  investors’  risk  appetite. 
The important word here is “relative”. To price financial assets, markets need a basis – a risk 
free rate. That basis has now been shaken. 
Immediate consequences seem benign in the US. Markets have judged, and rightly so, in my 
view, that there is currently no alternative to US debt as the most liquid market and it remains 
the ultimate benchmark for assessing risk. So, if anything, the downgrade of US debt was 
followed by new inflows into Treasuries and a decrease in US interest rates across the yield 
curve. At the same time, however, a pervasive uncertainty has been created, which might be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
responsible for the strong decline in confidence and equity prices that has occurred over the 
last weeks. In Europe, of course, sovereign credit risk has had more immediate and dramatic 
consequences,  with  an  abrupt  increase  in  sovereign  spreads  for  peripheral  countries 
following the July 21st statement.  
It remains difficult to foresee how, in the longer run, markets will assess debt sustainability in 
different  countries  and  jurisdictions.  That  assessment  depends  on  a  complex  process, 
where,  together  with  economic  fundamentals,  subjective  probabilities,  self-fulfilling  beliefs 
and other influences play a major role. The certainty that debt would be paid in full strongly 
anchored market perceptions in the past. Now that this certainty is gone, debt sustainability 
may well rest on a more fragile and volatile basis.  
As  we  all  know,  debt  sustainability  depends  on  three  variables:  the  primary  surplus,  the 
growth rate and the interest rate. The relationship between those three parameters and debt 
can be expressed through a simple equation, the famous “unpleasant arithmetic”. Assessing 
sustainability  seems  therefore  relatively  straightforward.  Many  economists  and  market 
analysts  on  sovereign  European  debt  simply  assume  low  growth  and  high  interest  rates 
forever in peripheral countries – which enables them to conclude categorically that debt is 
not  sustainable.  A  (slightly)  more  sophisticated  and  developed  version  of  that  story  takes 
account  of  the  impossibility,  for  Euro  economies,  to  depreciate  their  exchange  rates, 
therefore locking them into a low competitiveness and no growth equilibrium.  
I see three major problems with those analyses. 
First, the competitiveness story does not hold. Take the UK, for instance. Its effective real 
exchange rate has depreciated by 23% over the last four years. And its exports have grown 
by a healthy 15%, in nominal terms, over the first six months of 2011. But Italy, Spain and 
Greece  have  done  even  better,  with  exports  growing  respectively  by  16%,  19%  and  37% 
during  that  same  period,  and,  of  course,  no  exchange  rate  adjustment.  Equating 
competitiveness with exchange rate depreciation is therefore overly simplistic. This does not 
mean that efforts to improve competitiveness in many parts of the euro area should not be 
strengthened. But it certainly shows this can be done, with great efficiency, by proper internal 
adjustment. 
Second, both aggregate and country-based data do not point to widespread and inevitable 
unsustainability in peripheral Europe.  
The euro area’s aggregate budget deficit will stand around 4.1% in 2011, less than half that 
of the UK or the US. The same holds true for public debt, which amounts 85% in the euro 
area while it will soon cross the 100% mark in the US.  
The euro area is also the only major currency union with its external accounts in balance, 
which is an essential element of robustness and a strong guarantee of long-term solvency.  
Peripheral countries are also improving their fundamentals. The primary deficit of Spain for 
2011 will be around 4.7%, half that of the US and the UK. Italy will be one of the very few 
advanced  economies  to  have  a  primary  surplus,  around  0.5%.  Both  countries  announced 
and adopted major fiscal consolidation and structural reform plans aimed at balancing their 
budget by 2013. Ireland provides the perfect example that a country with very high deficit and 
interest rates can reverse the trend if it makes the necessary efforts. The Irish deficit will fall 
from  32%  in  2010  to  around  10%  in  2011,  exceeding  the  requirements  of  the  EU-IMF 
programme. At the same time, growth is back and will probably be around 2% this year.  
The  third  issue  is  more  subtle.  It  relates  to  solvency  and  liquidity.  In  times  of  trouble, 
sovereigns,  like  financial  institutions  can  be  either  illiquid,  or  insolvent,  or  both.  In  many 
cases,  the  distinction  is  blurred.  When  uncertainty  is  high,  sovereigns  face  liquidity 
shortages, and they can only issue new debt at constantly higher interest rates. This, in turn, 
creates  doubts  about  their  ultimate  solvency,  triggering  a  negative  spiral.  This  process  is 
clearly  at  work  in  peripheral  Europe,  especially  Spain  and  Italy,  since  the  beginning  of 
August.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  short,  sovereign  solvency  is  partly  endogenous.  Good  fundamentals  are  an  absolute 
necessity, but not always a sufficient condition. Liquidity spirals, when allowed to develop, 
can lock a country, just like a financial institution, into a bad equilibrium.  
What  is  therefore  the  appropriate  policy  reaction?  We  had  a  continuing  debate  on  that 
question in 2009–2010 when dealing with financial institutions. We are faced with the same 
question now regarding sovereign risk. 
The standard answer is twofold. First, get the fundamentals right. For European countries, it 
means  reverting  to  a  sustainable  fiscal  position  which,  in  most  cases,  necessitates  a 
significant  primary  surplus.  Necessary  efforts  are  greater  now  since  doubts  have  been 
created  about  sovereigns’  ability  to  meet  their  obligations.  And  second,  when  solvency  is 
achieved,  there  is  a  need  for  a  liquidity  backstop  to  ensure  that  bad  equilibria  will  not  be 
allowed to develop.  
Where  that  backstop  is  coming  from  is  a  key  question  in  the  current  debate.  In  most 
jurisdictions,  but  crucially  not  in  the  euro  area,  unconventional  monetary  policies  have  led 
central banks to purchase significant amounts of Government debt: those purchases amount 
to 51% of the total debt issued since 2009 in the UK, 21% in the US and 7.6% in the euro 
area – where they were fully sterilized. Although this was not the primary purpose, this policy 
stance  has  contributed  to  giving  markets  an  insurance,  or  even  an  assurance,  against  a 
potential  dry-up  in  liquidity.  In  all  countries  where  significant  amounts  of  debt  have  been 
purchased  by  monetary  authorities,  long-term  interest  rates  have  been  kept  at  very  low 
levels, irrespective of their fiscal situation.  
By  contrast,  purchases  of  sovereign  debt  by  the  Eurosystem  have  remained  extremely 
limited  and  will  stay  so.  Our  objectives  are  very  circumscribed:  avoid  disruptions  in  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  Any  lasting  liquidity  backstop  has  to  come  from 
the governments. This is why we have been asking for more flexibility in the EFSF and very 
much welcome decisions taken in this regard on July 21st. Whether amounts are big enough 
is a matter of opinion. It would be unrealistic to expect an increase in the EFSF itself but I am 
personally  open  to  any  scheme  that  would  allow  existing  commitments  to  be  leveraged  to 
provide greater intervention capacity.  
At the moment, the kind of insurance that most monetary authorities provide may look cheap 
because inflation is projected to stay low in the foreseeable future. But this equilibrium could 
be unstable in a different inflation environment. While markets are currently rewarding those 
countries which liquefy public debt, they seem to be aware of some inflation “tail risks” and 
hedge themselves through gold and the CHF – whose prices have reached historical highs.  
At this stage, therefore, the euro area is paying a double price. One for its mistakes and one 
for  its  virtues.  The  mistake,  for  governments,  was  to  allow  the  piling  up  of  debt  through 
unsustainable fiscal policies over a decade, and then to create ex nihilo a doubt as to their 
ability to pay those debts. And we are also paying the price for our virtue and our refusal to 
liquefy our debt through massive monetization of our fiscal deficits. 
Will our virtue be rewarded at the end? I believe so and, to explain why, I need to take a 
longer-term perspective. In the next decade, the world will be divided into two: on the one 
hand, advanced economies, with high absorption capacity, low savings and high debt with 
ratios between 85% and 100%; and, on the other, emerging economies, with high savings, 
low  debt  (around  30%  GDP  on  average)  and  less  absorption  capacity.  Our  common 
prosperity will therefore depend on our ability to create stable channels and mechanisms of 
financial  intermediation  between  those  two  parts  of  the  world.  That,  in  turn,  will  crucially 
depend on the existence of assets that can be considered safe stores of value. As I have 
said from the start, public debt may not be able to play that role to the same extent as before. 
The ultimate safe asset, therefore, will be the currency itself. Markets and lenders will trust 
those currencies that, whatever the circumstances, are managed with one overriding priority: 
preserving  price  stability  and  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  currency  unit.  On  this  fundamental 
basis,  we  can  look  at  the  future  of  the  euro  with  strong  and  realistic  optimism.  I  see  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
recent decision by the Swiss central bank to peg the CHF to the euro as a confirmation of 
this statement. 
A few words on the banking sector, and, of course, French banks. I would remark, first, that 
banks  have  been  hit  in  all  advanced  economies  by  the  downward  revision  of  growth 
prospects. Since August, CDS premia on major banks and BOR-OIS spreads have risen in 
all  regions,  although  to  a  larger  extent  in  Europe,  displaying  everywhere  a  sharp  rise  of 
counterparty risk. By the same token, banks’ share prices fell in all major economies, with 
French banks being particularly hit. This overreaction of share prices can be explained by a 
simple  amplification  mechanism:  slower  growth  means  lower  profits,  thus  lower  projected 
dividends.  At  the  same  time,  banks  are  required  to  build  additional  capital  buffers,  which 
further  constrain  their  pay-out  ratio.  So  dividend  prospects  are  doubly  affected  and  that 
explains why, in the current period, share prices are reacting so strongly to negative news on 
growth.  This  global  movement  has  been  more  pronounced  in  Europe,  because  of  a  third 
uncertainty, related to banks’ exposures to peripheral sovereign risk.  
In  addition,  French  banks  have  suffered  from  two  specific  vulnerabilities,  one  real,  one 
exaggerated. The real vulnerability is their dependence on dollar funding, due to the scale of 
their international activities, which they may have been too slow to address effectively. It is 
currently  being  dealt  with  through  a  combination  of  deleveraging  and  consolidation.  In  the 
meantime, and since this is a broader problem for European institutions, in order to ease the 
transition, the Eurosystem, together with other central banks across the world, has decided 
to conduct three US dollar liquidity-providing operations with a maturity of three months.  
A more exaggerated concern about French banks is their exposure to peripheral countries’ 
sovereign risk. Let me just point out some facts and figures: total exposure of major French 
banks  to  the  sovereign  risk  of  so-called  “peripheral  countries”  amounts  to  60€bn  which  is 
only  a  limited  fraction  of  their  core  Tier  One  capital.  In  terms  of  liquidity,  the  Eurosystem 
refinancing policy provides for an unlimited provision and the total collateral of French banks 
amounts to 600$bn in eligible assets.  
I would note that both so-called “vulnerabilities” are a consequence of the internationalization 
of banking activities. And there is a certain paradox in a situation where globalized banks, 
with diversified activities and balanced business models are perceived as riskier than more 
specialized institutions.  
Let  me  now  conclude.  In  these  turbulent  times,  Europe  has  a  special  role  and  a  special 
responsibility. We are at the epicenter of the crisis and very much aware of the necessity to 
take and implement the appropriate decisions. Like in 2009, however, the crisis itself is more 
global in nature. A new uncertainty has been created and the interaction between markets 
and governments has become more complex and more dangerous. We live in democracies 
and  have  to  accept  that  political  decisions  follow  their  own  process  and  obey  their  own 
constraints. In all our countries, rising public debt and the unstable state of public finances is 
creating  enormous  anxiety,  which,  in  turn,  makes  it  more  difficult  to  reach  the  necessary 
decisions.  There  are,  however,  good  reasons  for  optimism.  On  the  supply  side,  our 
economies  are  robust  and  dynamic.  Corporate  balance  sheets  are  very  strong.  Emerging 
economies  are  well  placed  to  enjoy  strong  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  years  to  come. 
Above all, the community of nations seems ready to face the extraordinary challenges we are 
confronted with. Coming back from the IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings, I am struck by the 
spirit of cohesion and the willingness to cooperate that has been displayed by all participants. 
As  you  well  know,  central  banks  themselves  are  constantly  cooperating  in  monitoring  the 
situation and acting when necessary, as they have done recently to provide dollar funding to 
international banks. This spirit of cohesion is our best asset in the current environment. We 
can all look forward to another step forward in international cooperation at the G20 Leaders’ 
Summit, in Cannes, next November.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
