K C Chakrabarty: Microenterprise development – path to creating MNCs 
of tomorrow 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Citi Micro Entrepreneur Awards Ceremony, organised by Citi Bank, Mumbai, 5 December 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Smt L. Vadera in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr. Pramit Jhaveri, CEO, Citi Bank, India, Dr Isher Judge Ahluwalia, Chairperson, ICRIER, 
Mr  Haresh  Shah,  Chairman  of  Confederation  for  the  promotion  of  Khadi  and  Village 
Industries,  Mr  Anami  Roy,  ex-DGP(  Maharashtra)  and  Chairman  Vandana  Foundation, 
Ms Radhika  Haribhakti,  Chairperson,  Swadhaar  Fin  Access,  distinguished  guests  and 
winners, ladies and gentlemen. I am extremely happy to be here for the annual Citi Micro 
Entrepreneur  Awards  Ceremony.  First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  all  the  awardees 
who have come from various parts of the country. These awards recognize and celebrate the 
superior  performance  of  the  recipients.  Coming  as  it  does  from  an  eminent  jury,  they  fully 
deserve  our  wholesome  applause  and  accolades.  We  hope  their  performance  and 
achievement will serve as a beacon to others to emulate and perhaps even exceed. 
I  would  also  like  to  compliment  the  organizers  of  Citi  Micro  Entrepreneur  Awards,  i.e.  Citi 
Bank  especially  Mr  Pramit  Jhaveri  and  other  members  of  his  team  for  recognizing  and 
honouring exemplary micro entrepreneurs who have overcome all challenges to successfully 
build self-sustaining micro enterprises, creating employment and contributing meaningfully to 
the  economic  growth  of  the  country.  The  conferring  of  these  awards  also  entitles  micro 
entrepreneurs an opportunity to receive training in business development in order to develop 
and grow in to “state of the art” micro enterprises. It is universally acknowledged that great 
opportunities open up if one is well trained and skilled. Entrepreneurs need not necessarily 
be  born,  but  can  be  developed  through  well-conceived  and  well-directed  activities. 
Spearheading entrepreneurship movement throughout the nation is the need of the hour and 
I  compliment  Citi  Bank  for  their  commendable  initiative  in  providing  support  to  skill  and 
knowledge  building  of  the  micro  enterprises.  Moreover,  today’s  winners  will  serve  as  role 
models who could inspire and mentor future generations of entrepreneurs. 
Importance of micro and small enterprises 
In a developing nation’s economy, it’s the small and micro enterprises which play a vital role. 
If India has to have a growth rate of 8–10 percent for the next couple of decades, it needs a 
strong micro and small sector and micro entrepreneurs need to be nurtured. They not only 
give employment to a large number of people but also support bigger industries by supplying 
raw  material,  basic  goods,  finished  parts  and  components,  etc.  The  felicitation  of  micro 
entrepreneurs today, is not to be mistaken as the ultimate goal of the enterprise. It is in fact, 
only the beginning of its process in achieving greater heights. A small enterprise today will be 
a  big  enterprise  tomorrow,  and  might  well  become  a  multinational  enterprise  eventually,  if 
given the support, among others, to build their skills and knowledge levels. In MSME sector, 
the failure rate may perhaps be relatively higher – the reasons for which range from delayed / 
inadequate availability of credit to non-availability of backward and forward support system. 
Despite  the  risk,  financing  of  first  time  entrepreneurs  is  a  must  for  financial  inclusion  and 
growth.  Thus,  the  banks  and  other  agencies  should  take  pride  while  servicing  the  micro 
entrepreneurs as they are playing an instrumental role in the formation of MNCs of tomorrow. 
There  is  a  need  for  sensitization  of  the  bank’s  staff  towards  the  needs  of  small 
entrepreneurs.  The  banks  should  develop  systems  such  that  the  field  staff  is  regularly 
updated  and  is  equipped  to  appraise  the  financial  requirements  of  small  enterprises.  The 
banks may use the platform provided by the technical institutions and send their staff to such 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
institutions  on  a  regular  basis.  Training  is  also  required  to  be  imparted  to  the  branch 
managers and their loan officers for change in their mindset away from the perceived risk in 
financing micro and small enterprises. 
Need for microenterprise development 
It is increasingly recognized that microenterprise development forms an essential element in 
the  promotion  of  broad  based,  inclusive  growth  and  improvement  in  the  well-being  of  the 
poor  by  providing  significant  income  –  and  employment-generating  opportunities,  and 
encouraging  indigenous  investment.  Microenterprise  development  projects  can  serve  four 
major  objectives:  (i)  poverty  reduction;  (ii)  the  empowerment  of  women;  (iii)  employment 
generation; and (iv) enterprise development as an end in itself. Microenterprise development 
contributes to widening the pool of entrepreneurship available to the society. Thus, there is a 
need  to  strengthen  the  linkages  between  policy  environment  and  entrepreneurship.  The 
21st century has been acknowledged worldwide as the “knowledge century” and “knowledge 
society”  can  play  a  greater  role  in  taking  India  forward.  In  countries  where  the  number  of 
medium  and  large-scale  enterprises  is  sparse,  the  importance  of  microenterprises  as  an 
incubator  of  new  enterprises  becomes  even  more  important.  In  fact,  development  of 
microenterprises is a fertile source of entrepreneurship for the future, a sort of seedbed for 
the universe of enterprises. 
We are a very young nation – just over 60 years since independence – setting out on a path 
of sustained economic growth, for decades to come. We already have over a billion fellow 
Indians.  As  per  the  National  Commission  on  Population,  the  age-wise  distribution  of  the 
population  of  India  is  going  to  change  significantly  in  the  coming  years.  By  2016, 
approximately  50  per  cent  of  the total  population  will  be  in the  age  group  of  15–25  years. 
Thus, there would be a tremendous increase in the number of youth entering the education 
and  job  market  in  the  ensuing  years,  which  will  result  in  increase  in  demand  for  skill 
development. On an average, it is estimated that around 1.5 crore persons per annum would 
enter  the  employment  market  during  the  next  30  years.  Each  person,  in  this  bold  new 
generation, will be in the prime of his or her life, striving for a better tomorrow – creating, in 
the  process,  new  growth  opportunities, 
for  budding  entrepreneurs!  This  burst  of 
entrepreneurship across the country, spanning rural, semi-urban and urban areas has to be 
nurtured  and  financed.  It  is  only  through  growth  of  enterprises  across  all  sizes  that 
competition  will  be  fostered.  Thus,  entrepreneur  development  should  be  seen  as  an 
investment  for  economic  development  and  prosperity,  since  knowledge  and  information 
would be the principal driving force for economic growth in the coming years. 
Much of the vast and growing population of the country forms part of the economy that lies in 
what is known as the unorganized sector. It is generally agreed that the unorganized sector, 
whether  rural  or  urban,  comprises  small  scale  and  microenterprises  producing  and 
distributing goods and services. These enterprises are generally independent, largely family 
owned,  employ  low  levels  of  skills  and  technology,  and  are  highly  labor  intensive.  It  is 
imperative  that  we  nurture  and  develop  microenterprises  in  view  of  their  significant 
contribution to achieving equity as well as economic growth, and efforts to address gender 
and  poverty  reduction  issues.  With  economic  reforms  in  the  country,  and  with  the  virtual 
removal of all trade barriers, the world is now our market – and our opportunity! The pursuit 
of these opportunities requires an indomitable spirit aimed at nurturing entrepreneurship.  
In  India,  there  is  a  dearth  of  skilled  people  in  micro  small  enterprises,  which  demands 
entrepreneurship development programmes throughout the country for the growth of Indian 
economy. At present, there are various organizations at the national and State levels offering 
support  to  entrepreneurs  in  various  ways.  The  Government  of  India  and  various  State 
governments  have  been  implementing  a  number  of  schemes  and  programmes  over  the 
years. A continuous effort from the society is also needed, where citizens are encouraged to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
come  up  with  their  entrepreneurial  initiatives.  Going  forward,  we  must  develop  an  attitude 
that views innovation positively. 
Lessons from emerging countries 
We  should  learn  from  the  experience  of  Korea  which  has  now  become  a  leader  of  many 
globally important brands. However, barely forty years ago, Korea had no industry at all. The 
Japanese,  who  ruled  Korea  for  decades,  did  not  allow  any.  They  also  did  not  allow  any 
higher education, so there were practically no educated people in Korea. By the end of the 
Korean  War,  South  Korea  had  been  destroyed.  Today  Korea  is  world-class  in  two  dozen 
industries and the world’s largest in ship building and other areas. Not far behind Korea is 
Taiwan,  which  like  Korea  was  preindustrial  in  1950.  Today,  Taiwan  is  a  world  leader  in  a 
number  of  high-tech  areas,  including  microchips.  Entrepreneurship  and  innovation  are  the 
key drivers of success in these two counties and turned them into world class manufacturers 
and  industry  leaders.  The  Koreans  have  set  up  small  groups  of  their  brightest  people  to 
systematically  apply  the  discipline  of  innovation  to  identify  and  develop  new  businesses. 
Innovation requires us to systematically identify changes that have already occurred in the 
business – in demographics, in values, in technology or science – and then look at them as 
opportunities. 
Four pitfalls to avoid 
Many new businesses start out with high promise but suddenly run into trouble after a year or 
two.  There  are  four  typical  mistakes  entrepreneurs  make  and  all  four  are  foreseeable  and 
avoidable. Here, I draw extensively from  what  Peter F. Drucker has very rightly pointed in 
one of his books. He said that there are four typical mistakes entrepreneurs make. Firstly, 
majority  of  successful  new  inventions  or  products  do  not  succeed  in  the  market  for  which 
they were originally designed. To illustrate the point, I would like to tell you of a man by the 
name of John Wesley Hyatt who invented the roller bearing for the axles of railroad freight 
cars.  The  railroads,  however,  were  not  ready  for  radical  change;  and  Mr.  Hyatt  went 
bankrupt. Then Alfred Sloan, the man who later built General Motors, asked his father to buy 
Hyatt’s  bankrupt  business.  Unlike  Hyatt,  Sloan  was  willing  to  broaden  his  vision  of  the 
product.  It  turned  out  that  the  roller  bearing  was  ideal  for  the  automobile,  which  was  just 
coming  to  the  market.  In  two  years  Sloan  had  a  flourishing  business;  for  twenty  years 
Henry Ford  was  his  biggest  customer.  Similarly,  very  few  would  know  that  Novocaine  was 
invented by a German chemist, Alfred Einhorn for use as general anesthetic in major surgery 
but  it  was  not  found  suitable  and  ultimately  it  was  used  successfully  by  dentists.  In  fact, 
Peter Drucker  had  said  that  majority  of  successful  new  inventions  or  products  do  not 
succeed in the market for which they were originally designed. 
Secondly,  entrepreneurs  believe  that  profit  is  what  matters  most  in  a  new  enterprise.  But 
profit is secondary. It is the cash flow that matters. A business that grows fast devours cash. 
Constant investments have to be made to just keep even. 
Thirdly, when a business grows, the person who founded it gets too busy. Rapid growth puts 
an  enormous  strain  on  the  business.  It  outgrows  its  production  facilities  and  management 
facilities.  The  quality  falls,  customers  do  not  pay  and  deliveries  are  missed.  The  best  way 
avoid a crisis is to create a management team. Young entrepreneurs cannot pay to bring in a 
management  team.  So  it  is  necessary  to  identify  the  core  competencies  of  the  people 
working with you. One may be good at marketing, the other, say in, customer service. They 
have to be utilized for their respective competencies to be able to deliver their optimum. This 
planning should take place well in advance. 
Lastly,  when  the  business  is  a  success  the  entrepreneur  needs  to  ask  what  the  business 
needs  at  this  stage  and  whether  he  is  concentrating  on  the  right  things.  While 
entrepreneurship  starts  by  putting  himself  before  business  and  questions  that  are  at  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
forefront is “What do I want to do?” or “What is my role?” , but when it succeeds the right 
questions  to  ask  is  “What  does  the  business  need?”  and  “Do  I  have  these  qualities?”  As 
successful entrepreneurs, having gained experience and wisdom from past mistakes, going 
forward, it is necessary to ensure that the same mistakes are not repeated. First generation 
entrepreneurs can also take a lesson from the successful entrepreneurs to avoid committing 
the same mistakes. 
Support from all stakeholders 
There  are  ample  opportunities  in  small  businesses  in  India  and  such  opportunities  will 
transform the country in the coming future. For such transformation to happen there needs to 
be support from all stakeholders, government, banks, corporate, regulators, civic society, etc. 
Technology universities may be set up and the government can tie up with the best in the 
world to help in research. We need to harness entrepreneurship and look at skill building. A 
scheme  for  utilizing  NGOs  to provide  training  services  to  tiny  micro  enterprises  could  be 
encouraged.  Entrepreneurship  development  is  important  in  view  of  its  visible  impact  on 
wealth creation and employment generation. To facilitate and encourage this, skill building 
has  been  impressed  upon  by  the  Prime  Minister’s  Task  Force  for  MSMEs.  Enterprise 
Development  Centres  (EDC)  should  be  set  up  by  the  Central  /  State  Governments  with 
incubators  to  provide  training  not  just  for  setting  up  of  new  units  but  also  to  provide 
continuing  education  on  different  aspects  like  product  design,  packaging,  technology 
upgradation, financial management and marketing. Entrepreneurship development is the key 
factor to fight against unemployment, poverty  and to prepare ourselves for globalization in 
order to achieve overall economic progress. 
Initiatives by government of India / Reserve Bank of India 
As the level of financial exclusion is very high in the sector, Government and Reserve Bank 
of  India  are  taking  the  lead  in  facilitating  access  to  finance  by  increasing  the  outreach  of 
banking  facilities  to  unbanked  centers.  Financial  access  is  critical  for  MSMEs  growth  and 
development. With an objective of ensuring uniform progress in provision of banking services 
in  all  parts  of  the  country,  banks  have  been  advised  to  draw  up  a  roadmap  to  provide 
banking services through a banking outlet in every unbanked village having a population of 
over 2,000 by March 2012. Such banking services need not necessarily be extended through 
a  brick  and  mortar  branch  but  could  be  provided  through  any  of  the  various  forms  of 
Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)-based  models, 
including  Banking 
Correspondents  (BCs).  About  74,000  such  unbanked  villages  have  been  identified  and 
allotted to various banks through State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs). As at the end of 
September  2011,  as  reported  by  the  State  Level  Bankers’  Committees  of  various  states  / 
Union Territories, banking outlets have been opened in 42,079 villages across the various 
States in the country. This comprises of 1127 branches, 39,998 BCs and 954 other modes 
like rural ATM, mobile van etc. 
Further, the Reserve Bank of India has also advised banks to roll out the Financial Inclusion 
Plans  (FIP),  encouraging  multiple  channels  of  lending  and  enhancing  the  scope  of  the 
Business  Correspondent  model,  improving  credit  delivery  procedures  in  micro  and  small 
enterprises  (MSE)  sectors  and  encouraging  adoption  of  ICT  solutions  in  villages  with 
population less than 2000. 
Both  at  the  district  and  State  level,  Reserve  Bank  has  advised  the  State  Level  Banker’s 
Committee  meeting  and  the  Lead  banks  to  monitor  initiatives  for  providing  “credit  plus” 
services  by  banks  and  State  Governments.  Given  the  importance  of  capacity  building, 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  impressed  upon  banks  on  the  need  for  financial  education  to 
enable  small  and  marginal  borrowers  to  avail  of  the  entire  suite  of  financial  products  and 
services i.e., savings, remittance, insurance and pension from the banking sector, in addition 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to credit. The banks have been advised to set up Financial Literacy cum Credit Counselling 
(FLCC) centres in all districts. As on March 2011, 252 FLCCs were set up in various states of 
the  country.  The  Ministry  of  Rural  Development  (Government  of  India)  embarked  upon  a 
major initiative to set up one Rural Self Employment Training Institute (RSETI) in each district 
of the country to provide training to the rural Below Poverty Line (BPL) persons and ensure 
wage employment / self-employment to them. Ministry of Rural Development would provide 
assistance  to  establishment  of  200  RSETIs.  Public  Sector  Banks  have  been  advised  by 
Reserve Bank of India to associate with the Scheme to ensure credit linkage to the people 
who are trained by the RSETIs. 
The  banks  have  also  been  advised  the  SLBC  convenor  banks,  in  consultation  with  State 
Governments, to formulate a scheme for utilising specified NGOs for providing training and 
other services to tiny micro enterprises, To leverage bank credit for inclusive growth bank’s 
have been advised to develop linkages with such NGOs / Corporate houses operating in the 
area to ensure that the NGOs / Corporates provide the necessary “credit plus” services. In 
fact, success stories could be presented in DCC / SLBC meetings to serve as models that 
could be replicated.  
Each SLBC has been advised to have a dedicated Financial Literacy Division to propagate 
the  various  instructions  and  use  the  local  media  to  frequently  interact  with  the  Financial 
Literacy Division and take their help to reach out to the common persons. 
To ensure enhanced credit flow to the sector, in terms of the recommendations of the Prime 
Minister’s  Task  Force  on  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSMEs)  (Chairman: 
Shri T.K.A. Nair, Principal Secretary, Government of India) constituted by the Government of 
India, banks were advised to achieve a 20 per cent year-on-year growth in credit to micro 
and small enterprises; the allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to the micro enterprises is 
to be achieved in stages viz. 50% in the year 2010–11, 55% in the year 2011–12 and 60% in 
the year 2012–13 and achieve a 10% annual growth in number of micro enterprise accounts. 
The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by banks on a quarterly 
basis. 
Further, based on the recommendations of the Working Group (Chairman: Shri V.K. Sharma, 
Executive  Director,  RBI)  constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  review  the  Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme  (CGS)  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Micro  and  Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE), the limit for collateral free loans to the MSE has been increased from 
the present level of Rs. 5 lakh to Rs.10 lakh and it has been made mandatory for banks.  
On  the  issue  of  alternate  sources  of  credit  and  infrastructure  the  PM’s  Task  Force  has 
examined  the  issues  and  has  made  several  recommendations  to  address  the  bottlenecks. 
The implementation of the recommendations in a time bound manner is being monitored by 
the GOI. In terms of the recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Task Force the proposal 
for setting up venture capital / risk capital Funds are being examined by the Government of 
India and a dedicated exchange for MSMEs would be 
Conclusion 
Let me end by once again congratulating the recipients of this award function and wishing all 
of you all the very best. I hope that the award ceremony will inspire all to strive for excellence 
and thus contribute towards achieving greater  heights in building a strong and prosperous 
India. I would also like to congratulate Citi Micro Entrepreneur Awards for saluting exemplary 
micro enterprises and wish them greater successes in days to come in identifying more and 
more such entrepreneurs throughout the length and breadth of our country. 
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
References: 
1. 
Peter F.Drucker: “Managing in the next Society”, Truman Talley Books, St. Martin’s 
Press, New York.  
Asian  Development  Bank  (1997):  “Micro  Enterprise  Development:  Not  by  credit 
alone”.  
Do Bato: Scope of Entrepreneurship Development in India. 
2. 
3. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
