William C Dudley: The national and regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the University at Albany, Albany, New York, 18 November 2011. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  pleased  to  be  at  the  University  at  Albany.  It  is  always  a  pleasure  to 
speak with students and faculty because of the intellectual leadership role you play in your 
communities. I also welcome the addition of business leaders to this gathering because you 
shape the economic landscape in the region. So, I thank you all for coming today and helping 
make this such a rich audience. 
Over the past 20 months, I have been engaged in a series of outreach meetings all across 
my  Federal  Reserve  District.  I  consider  these  visits  just  as  important  as  my  trips  to 
Washington, D.C., to help formulate monetary policy or to Switzerland to shape international 
bank regulation. The understanding of issues and concerns that I gain today will help ensure 
that my policy decisions reflect the public interest in the broadest sense. 
Each visit within the region helps me deepen relationships with the people I represent. As 
you may know, the New York Fed’s District includes all of New York State; 12 counties in 
northern New Jersey; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico; and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
In  August,  I  met  with  community  leaders,  businesses  and  elected  officials  in  Newark, 
Patterson  and  Jersey  City.  Earlier  this  year  I  went  to  Brooklyn,  the  Bronx,  Queens  and 
Puerto Rico, while last year I visited several upstate cities. 
My trip started yesterday with a policy speech to the West Point cadets and was followed by 
a colloquium with their economics faculty. So, this visit to the upper Hudson Valley brings me 
in contact with some of our country’s future leaders – you and the cadets who will lead our 
country in very important, if different, ways.  
I will also have a chance to see more of what makes Albany so distinct from both downstate 
and  Upstate  New  York.  Of  course,  I  may  have  a  leg  up  on  this  because  I  was  born  and 
raised close by, in western Massachusetts!  
The greater Albany area is home to 900,000 people – roughly the size of three average cities 
in  the  United  States.  You  and  your  fellow  residents  tend  to  be  highly  educated  and  be 
employed as public servants. These factors are all part of what makes Albany feel special. 
Today, I want to talk with you first about the Fed – what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll 
give  you  my  views  on  the  economy  nationally  and  locally.  It’s  a  serious  issue  because  it 
affects your family and students’ job prospects at graduation time. 
What the New York Fed does 
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what the New York Fed does and what makes my 
job so interesting. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as 
the FOMC. 
I am vice chair of the FOMC – a Federal Reserve committee that meets eight times a year in 
Washington  to  set  interest  rates  and  make  other  decisions  about  monetary  policy.  The 
members  of  this  committee  all  strive  to  set  policy  to  advance  the  mandate  given  to  us  by 
Congress  to  promote  the  maximum  level  of  employment  consistent  with  price  stability. 
Sometimes  we  have  different  views  on  the  specific  policy  choice  on  hand,  and  you  should 
view this as completely appropriate: these are hard questions – particularly at times like this – 
and we make better decisions as a committee because we don’t all think alike. But we are 
united in our commitment to our mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to the public interest, because it allows us to take tough decisions insulated from short-term 
political pressures. 
At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region 
and  the  nation.  For  these  assessments,  we  consult  our  researchers  and  add  critical 
information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils 
and  community  leaders,  such  as  you  and  others  I’ll  meet  on  this  visit.  This  trip  includes 
meetings  with  the  people  at  the  SUNY  Nanotech  Center,  Global  Foundries  (an  advanced 
microprocessor  plant),  the  Capital  Region  Economic  Development  Council,  and  the 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  
At the New York Fed, we continually track conditions in our District, and we have created a 
number  of  tools  for  that  purpose.  For  example,  my  staff  produces  monthly  indexes  of 
economic activity for New York City, New Jersey and New York State. These indexes are 
essentially  local  measures  of  output  –  similar  to  gross  domestic  product,  or  GDP  at  the 
national  level.  These  measures  provide  a  more  complete  gauge  of  activity  than  the 
employment report, which is the only other available metric at the state level. We have also 
started  a  consumer  panel  to  track  local  household  credit  conditions,  including  the  amount 
and type of debt owed by an average person and whether payments are being made in a 
timely way. 
In addition, we have a new poll about credit and financing for small businesses, the latter are 
an  important  source  of  new  jobs.  The  survey  asks  firms  about  credit  applications  and 
reasons for not seeking credit. Almost 900 regional businesses responded to our May 2011 
poll,  of  which  nearly  15  percent  were  from  the  upstate  region.  The  next  poll  will  be  in 
January.  If  you,  as  part  of  a  small  business,  would  like  to  participate  in  our  January  poll, 
please pass your card to my colleagues in the audience. 
Next month, we will host a workshop for the New York City metro area’s small businesses  
– to provide information about how they can participate in the global economy and expand 
their companies by exporting their products and services. The Export-Import Bank, the Small 
Business Administration and the U.S. Department of Commerce will be on hand. They will 
tell  participants  how  to  tap  demand  in  the  global  marketplace  and  what  government 
programs are available to enhance credit, reduce payment risk and increase lines of working 
capital.  We  are  also  facilitating  a  “speed  mentoring”  forum  in  which  small  businesses  will 
receive  feedback  on  their  business  plans  and  advice  about  applying  for  financing  from  a 
range of finance professionals. 
In 2012, we’re planning similar events in the capital region. We hope to partner with many of 
you to support the small business sector. 
As you know, even states as wealthy as New York have large pockets of poverty. So, we 
target some key initiatives specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. We have worked 
hard  to  help  neighborhoods  that  face  high  foreclosure  rates.  For  the  past  three  years  we 
have  provided  housing  advocates,  including  the  Empire  Justice  Center,  with  the  latest 
information on mortgage conditions, via roundtables, presentations and newsletters. 
To share what we learn about our diverse District, we have a rich website. I invite you to visit 
newyorkfed.org  to  explore  our  highly  localized  maps  and  information  on  small  business, 
credit and housing conditions and even the latest job openings at the New York Fed. 
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  our 
colleagues  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  at  other  agencies  to  help  put  the  nation’s  financial 
system on a firmer footing. Yet, much remains to be done and we are determined to keep at 
it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis business as usual – whether on 
the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep my colleagues busy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
National economic conditions 
Now, let me update you on national economic conditions.  
We  stand  here  today  several  years  after  the  worst  financial  crisis  in  modern  times.  The 
origins of the crisis are complex, but it had its roots in the bursting of a credit bubble that had 
grown to great size during the middle part of the last decade. 
Prior to the onset of the crisis, a combination of rapid financial innovation and imbalanced 
global economic integration resulted in a mispricing of risk worldwide. This was particularly 
extreme in certain markets such as U.S. housing and housing finance. 
This mispricing of risk led to a misallocation of resources and an excessive build-up of debt 
in many parts of the global economy. Many – though not all – U.S. households responded to 
the  easy  availability  of  credit  and  rising  home  prices  by  taking  on  more  debt.  When  the 
housing boom lost steam and began to burst, expectations about housing prices and wealth 
were disappointed. The bursting of the credit bubble also created instability within the global 
financial  system  and,  this,  in  turn  resulted  in  a  sharp  drop  in  the  credit  available  to 
households and businesses. 
The  result  was  what  is  now  called  the  “Great  Recession”.  Over  the  period  from  late  2007 
through  mid-2009,  real  GDP  declined  by  more  than  5  percent,  making  this  recession  the 
longest and deepest recession of the postwar period.  
The recession was felt in many ways, but one of the most painful was the severe impact it 
had on the labor market. Employment dropped sharply during the recession, contributing to a 
sharp rise in the unemployment rate from around 4.5 percent in the middle of 2007 to over 
10 percent in October 2009.  
Extraordinary  actions  by  authorities  around  the  world,  including  the  Federal  Reserve, 
prevented  full-scale  financial  and  economic  collapse,  and  the  global  economy  stabilized 
around  mid-2009.  But  since  then  the  recovery  has  been  bifurcated.  While  emerging 
economies  have  rebounded  rapidly,  the  developed  world  has  grown  only  slowly.  This  has 
hastened a historic shift in the balance of economic power that was already underway before 
the crisis. 
In  the  United  States,  the  recovery  has  proven  to  be  persistently  weaker  than  expected. 
Growth has been insufficient to either bring down unemployment significantly or to achieve a 
self-reinforcing cycle of strengthening confidence, demand, income and employment. 
Although the latest news on the U.S. economy is somewhat more encouraging than that from 
earlier in the year, we should not take much solace from that. After a very weak first half, 
when GDP growth was less than 1 percent, economic activity has strengthened somewhat 
and inflation pressures are starting to ease. Growth in the third quarter is currently estimated 
to  be  2.5  percent,  and  recent  indicators  suggest  growth  in  the  fourth  quarter  could  be 
somewhat higher. This modest rebound reflects in part the passing of transitory factors such 
as the damping effect on household and business spending power from rises in energy and 
food prices as well as the supply disruptions related to the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. 
However, as we look toward 2012, the U.S. economy continues to face several obstacles to 
a robust recovery. Accordingly I expect growth of about 2.75 percent for 2012. 
Consumer price inflation has begun to moderate. This moderation is just starting to become 
evident on a 12-month time horizon – in which consumer price inflation as measured by the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  rising  at  about  a  3.5  percent  annual  rate.  Given  current 
expectations  for  the  path  of  energy  prices  –  taken  from  futures  markets  –  consumer  price 
inflation on a year-over-year basis should continue to fall over the next few months. 
We cannot be satisfied with the current state of the economy or the outlook for the next few 
years.  The  economy  is  operating  far  below  its  productive  potential  –  leaving  the  level  of 
output,  income  and  employment  much  lower  than  they  would  be  if  the  economy’s  unused 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
resources  were  put  to  work.  One  summary  statistic says  it  all  –  the unemployment  rate  is 
unacceptably  high  at  9  percent.  Given  my  outlook,  the  decline  of  unemployment  over  the 
next year is likely to be modest. Furthermore, we also continue to face significant downside 
risks, mostly related to the stress in the eurozone. 
In a speech yesterday at West Point, I highlighted the need for our nation to deploy a full set 
of  economic  policy  tools  to  secure  the  recovery  and  build  for  the  long  term.  This  includes 
monetary policy, but also requires policies to help repair housing markets, fiscal policy that 
supports  growth 
increase 
competitiveness  and  support  a  shift  in  the  pattern  of  economic  activity  toward  a  more 
sustainable growth path than that which prevailed during the last business cycle upswing.  
long  run,  and  structural  reforms 
the  short  and 
that 
in 
Regional economic conditions 
How is the recovery proceeding in the state and the region? As I mentioned, the New York 
Fed  produces  economic  activity  indexes  to  help  monitor  conditions  in  New  York  State.1 
Based on our index, the downturn in the state’s economy ended in November of 2009. Since 
then, I would describe the state’s economy as recovering at a moderate pace, although there 
appears to have been a pause in September. 
The  New  York  Fed  also  conducts  the  Empire  State  Manufacturing  Survey  to  learn  about 
conditions for regional manufacturers. I am pleased to say that November’s report (issued 
this Tuesday) shows signs of stabilizing after five months of weakening. In November, more 
manufacturers are adopting an optimistic outlook. 
Like many other large states, New York has a bifurcated economy. New York’s downstate 
area differs dramatically from the upstate area in terms of industrial composition, occupations 
and  job  growth.  While  Albany  may  be  geographically  midway  between  the  two  areas,  its 
industry mix resembles neither the downstate’s heavy concentration in the service sector, nor 
the upstate focus on the manufacturing sector. What sets Albany apart is that it is home to 
the  state’s  capital.  About  one  quarter  of  employees  in  the  Albany  area  work  for  the 
government – about a third more than the statewide average. 
The local economy did not fare as poorly as the national economy during this recession, but 
the impact was still severe and the recovery is not yet well established. During the downturn, 
the capital region saw a loss of about 20,000 jobs, or roughly 4 percent of total employment, 
considerably less severe than the 6.5 percent nationwide decline. Over the past year and a 
half, job losses have slowed. But, in contrast to the rest of the state, we cannot confidently 
say that a solid recovery is underway. The Albany area is not yet consistently adding jobs. 
This is not surprising, considering the fiscal difficulties faced by New York State. The state 
has cut a considerable number of government jobs and reduced other expenditures as part 
of  its  effort  to  close  significant  budget  gaps.  These  job  reductions  have  disproportionately 
slowed Albany’s local economy.2 
In contrast, I am pleased to say that Albany’s private sector is showing signs of recovery. 
Your  private  employers  have  been  adding  jobs  at  a  fast  enough  pace  to  offset  the  public 
sector job losses. However, this job creation has not been robust enough to bring down the 
unemployment  rate,  which  remains  at  7  percent  of  the  workforce.  That  is  a  lower  rate  of 
unemployment than the national rate, as is usual for Albany. However, it is almost double the 
jobless  rate  in  early  2007;  and  it  has  barely  budged  since  the  recession  ended.  It  will  be 
                                                 
1  Regional Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators 
2  See, for additional discussion of this topic, William C. Dudley. 2011. Job Creation in the Region. Remarks at 
the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York City. August 12, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
difficult for growth in the region’s economy to resume and for unemployment to decline until 
the public sector stabilizes. 
An  important  plus  for  the  local  economy  is  the  capital  region’s  housing  sector,  which  has 
weathered the economic storm relatively well. As a result, the drop-off in economic activity 
that is connected, directly and indirectly, to the performance of the housing sector has not 
been as severe here as it has been in many other places around the country. Like much of 
Upstate New York, Albany’s housing market has proven more stable than much of the rest of 
the country. During the 2000–2006 housing boom, Albany’s house prices rose by 85 percent, 
much higher than the roughly 50 percent average increase in Upstate New York as a whole 
and almost as high as the doubling of house prices seen nationally. Unlike the rest of the 
nation, though, the region’s housing market has been comparatively stable since then. Prices 
have  declined  by  about  7  percent  from  their  peak  here,  compared  with  a  decline  of 
32 percent nationally.  
Nonetheless,  declining  house  prices  coupled  with  a  sluggish  jobs  recovery  has  increased 
financial pressures on families. During the recession, all across the nation, high levels of debt 
led to a soaring number of delinquencies. Many families found that they needed to reduce 
their debt to more sustainable levels.  
Drawing on the special consumer credit panel  I mentioned earlier I can tell you that these 
trends have certainly affected people in this area.3 But the good news is that the effects have 
not been quite as severe here as they have in much of the country. Households in the Albany 
region  did  not  accumulate  as  much  debt  as  did  households  in  the  rest  of  the  state  and 
country during the run-up to the crisis. Recent data indicate that the average adult in Albany 
has  about  $40,000  of  debt,  which  is  about  20  percent  lower  than  the  average  across  the 
state  and  country  as  a  whole.  Thus,  financial  strains  on  many  families  in  the  Albany  area 
were lower than in many other places around the state and nation. 
However, the number of delinquencies did rise significantly during the recession in the area, 
so it is clear that some households face strong financial pressures. About 4 percent of debt 
balances currently are 90+ days past due in Albany, which is twice the 2 percent delinquency 
rate in 2005. Although this is less than half of the rate in New York State or the nation, this 
doubling of delinquencies in the Albany area still troubles me as a sign of heightened distress 
for many families here.  
Stepping  back  from  the  current  challenges,  the  capital  region  possesses  a  number  of 
fundamental strengths. These strengths show through in some key ways: 
 
Albany  is  growing.  The  recent  Census  shows  that  the  population  in  the  region 
expanded  by  5.5  percent  over  the  past  decade,  more  than  double  the  statewide 
average. Saratoga County saw an especially strong gain of nearly 10 percent.  
Incomes in the region are high. Albany is the state’s most affluent area outside the 
New York City metropolitan region. Median household income was roughly $57,000 
in 2009, moderately above the statewide median and well above the nation’s. Not 
surprisingly,  then,  the  poverty  rate  is  lower  than  the  U.S.  average  –  11  percent 
versus 14 percent nationally.  
Your residents are highly educated. Educational attainment – a critically important 
driver of economic activity – is also well above the national average. A third of adults 
who live in the Albany area hold college degrees.  
  One of Albany’s key strengths is its higher education industry. The colleges and universities 
in  the  capital  region  help  stabilize  the  local  economy  during  downturns  and  recoveries. 
Indeed,  the  private  education  sector  continually  added  jobs  before,  during,  and  after  the 
                                                 
3  Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit, August 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Great  Recession,  both  nationally  and  locally.  For  example,  the  University  at  Albany  has 
taken  a  lead  role  in  shaping  the  next  generation  of  financial  professionals  and  regulators 
through its pioneering curriculums. From my perspective at the Fed, a particularly important 
and  timely  example  is  the  University’s  innovative  National  Science  Foundation-supported 
program for instruction and research in financial market regulation.  
Research conducted by the New York Fed has shown that colleges and universities can help 
build the skills and education of their region’s workforce, which is critical to an area’s ultimate 
economic success.4 They do this in two ways. Most directly, colleges and universities support 
an  educated  workforce  by  producing  new  college  graduates,  some  of  whom  will  stay  and 
work in the area. The University at Albany clearly plays this role in the capital area.  
Perhaps  equally  important  in  terms  of  promoting  local  economic  growth,  colleges  and 
universities  can  play  a  key  role  in  creating  jobs  for  skilled  workers  in  local  businesses. 
Colleges and universities conduct research and development that can have “spillover effects” 
into the local economy. Businesses in the region can take advantage of being close to these 
innovative activities and facilities to develop new products and technologies. This can also 
help  draw  new  companies  to  the  region  to  access  university  resources.  Thus,  successful 
industry–higher education partnerships can provide a quite a boost for a region’s economy. 
The local nanotech sector provides an excellent example of this type of partnership at work. 
During  my  visit  to  the  University’s  College  of  Nanoscale  Science  and  Engineering  this 
afternoon I look forward to seeing the facilities and hearing more about the Center’s plans to 
lead  the  way  in  global  nanotech  research.  More  broadly,  I  understand  that  our  audience 
today includes several members of the Regional Economic Advisory Council – including the 
University at Albany’s president, George Philip and Michael Castellana, the co-chair of the 
Council – who are working to advance such partnerships and the outlook for the region. 
Going  forward,  the  industry–higher  education  partnerships  taking  place  here  will  be 
increasingly important. I expect the strong foundation already in place will help maintain the 
economic vitality of the capital region. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, growth has picked up modestly in the second half of 2011, but not enough to 
bring unemployment down. While there are some bright spots in the U.S. economy and the 
financial system, strong headwinds are preventing a more vigorous recovery. Inflation, which 
has risen in recent months, is poised to moderate soon. The Fed is doing – and will continue 
to do – everything within its power to promote jobs and price stability. 
Looking  ahead,  the  key  challenge  for  the  Albany  area  will  be  to  continue  to  prepare  its 
residents for the best jobs being created here. Expanding education and skills will go a long 
way to broaden participation in the economy to all residents. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                 
4  See  Jaison  Abel  and  Richard  Deitz,  The  Role  of  Colleges  and  Universities  in  Building  Local  Human 
Capital. Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 17, No 6, 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
