Fabrizio Saccomanni: How to deal with a global Triffin dilemma 
Keynote address by Mr Fabrizio Saccomanni, Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 
Conference  on  the  International  Monetary  System:  sustainability  and  reform  proposals, 
marking  the  100th  anniversary  of  Robert  Triffin  (1911–1993),  at  the  Triffin  International 
Foundation, Brussels, 4 October 2011. 
 Introductory remarks 
1. 
 
I  am  very  happy  and  honoured  to  have  been  invited  to  speak  at  this  conference 
celebrating Robert Triffin’s 100th birthday and I am glad that the Bank of Italy has been able 
to support this initiative of the Triffin Foundation.  
 
I  had  a  first  opportunity  to  learn  Triffin’s  provocative  and  prescient  ideas  about  the 
working of the world’s monetary system as a student of international economics at Princeton 
in  1969–70.  Shortly  after  that,  I  was  privileged  to  witness  the  fulfilling  in  August  1971  of 
Triffin’s prophecy about the downfall of the Bretton Woods system from the vantage point of 
the IMF where I served as an economist. In subsequent years, I was fortunate to meet Prof. 
Triffin  in  person  on  several  occasions,  as  he  was  a  frequent  visitor  to  Italy  to  attend 
conferences and seminars on international monetary reform, a topic which has been given 
traditionally a high priority in the research agenda of the Bank of Italy.  
 
Triffin published many of his seminal contributions to international monetary theory in 
the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, a prestigious Italian scientific journal. In 
recognition of his close relationship with the Italian academic and financial community, Triffin 
was awarded, in 1987, the San Paolo Prize for Economics by a jury presided by Prof Paolo 
Baffi, a former Governor of the Bank of Italy.  
 
In his presentation of the award, Baffi praised Triffin as a “cosmopolitan scientist” who 
had  devoted  his  life  to  the  pursuit  of  international  monetary  order  in  Academia,  in  Central 
Banks  and  in  international  organisations,  in  a  splendid  career  that  had  seen  moments  of 
great  satisfaction  as  well  as  of  deep  bitterness. But,  Baffi  noted  “I  do  not  believe  that  any 
intellectual gratification that he may have derived from the infallible accuracy of his forecast 
can  alleviate  his  dismay  of  cosmopolitan  scientist  in  the  face  of  the  utter  mismanagement 
that currently afflicts the international monetary system”.  
 
Indeed I can vividly remember that Triffin in his late years was not only disappointed by 
the  failure  of  the  reform  of  the  international  monetary  system,  but  was  really  angry  and 
indignant at what he regarded as an irrational and incompatible behaviour of the countries 
bearing the main responsibility for the management of the world economy. It was, in his own 
words, an international monetary scandal and he was infuriated by it.  
 
I  have  no  doubt  that  Robert  Triffin  would  be  equally  infuriated,  if  not  more,  by  the 
current state of the international monetary and financial system, still beset by the global crisis 
set in motion by the seizure of the US subprime mortgage market in August 2007. The fact 
that the crisis has now moved to Europe and is destabilising the eurozone would certainly be 
a cause of deep regret for Triffin, who firmly believed that regional monetary integration in 
Europe could contribute to fostering stability in the world’s monetary system. In the age of 
financial globalisation, unfortunately, this assumption no longer holds true.  
 
In my remarks today I will briefly review what is wrong with the present international 
monetary system and will try to argue that there is an urgent need to give new impetus to the 
reform  agenda  originally  agreed  within  the  G20,  if  we  want  to  deal  with  the  “global  Triffin 
dilemma” that is currently threatening the stability of the world economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2. 
 
      2 
 What is wrong with the present international monetary system? 
The  past  twenty  years  have  been  characterised  by  significant  exchange  rate 
misalignments,  large  and  persistent  external  imbalances  and  the  accumulation  of 
huge stocks of official reserves. I believe that these phenomena are symptoms of an 
inefficiency of the present international monetary system.  
Since  the  move  to  floating  in  1973,  flexible  exchange  rates  have  not  behaved 
according to textbook predictions:  
– 
Their  volatility  has  exceeded  what  could  be 
fundamentals.  
Persistent misalignments have emerged among the major currencies.  
Partly as a result, many countries have been reluctant in practice to allow full 
exchange  rate  flexibility  (“fear  of  floating”),  resorting  to  various  forms  and 
degrees of exchange rate management.  
justified  by  shocks 
 to 
Both policy failures and market failures have been responsible for this:  
– 
Misguided  and  unsustainable  policies  have  frequently  been  a  source  of 
macroeconomic uncertainty and structural distortions. Exchange rate policies 
and  capital  controls  have  often  been  used  to  prevent  the  correction  of 
misalignments.  
At the same time, market exchange rates are not guided by fundamentals in a 
reliable way, partly because market participants (as also economists) do not 
seem to share a common view of what those fundamentals are.  
 All this can be summarised by saying that flexible exchange rates have proved not 
to  be  an  effective  and  reliable  mechanism  for  enforcing  policy  discipline.  Markets 
sometimes  fail,  even  for  long  periods  of  time,  to  focus  on  fundamentals,  only  to 
suddenly “wake up” and enforce a correction that, being too late, is often inefficient, 
costly  and  traumatic.  As  we  know  from  recent  experience,  this  pattern  applies  to 
credit risk premia as well as to exchange rates. Market-based discipline alone is not 
enough.  
The emergence of large and persistent external imbalances over the past twenty 
years is closely connected to the lack of an effective policy discipline.  
– 
Some of the countries with the largest surpluses and deficits have been under 
no effective pressure from the markets to correct the imbalances. China and 
oil  exporting  countries  seemed  to  be  able  and  willing  to  continue  to 
accumulate reserves almost indefinitely. As a result, the United States, issuer 
of the principal reserve currency, faced a highly elastic demand for its dollar 
liabilities  and  therefore  did  not  need  to  incur  either  currency  risk  or  a  rising 
cost in financing its deficit.  
However,  exchange  rate  manipulation  was  just  an  element  in  a  broader 
constellation of structural factors and policy settings, in both surplus and deficit 
economies,  that  allowed  the  imbalances  to  persist.  Neither  multilateral 
surveillance nor peer pressure had sufficient “teeth” to induce a correction of 
those policies before the crisis.  
 Although the imbalances declined during the recent recession, this was largely due 
to cyclical factors, and they are now starting to widen again. They remain a potential 
source of strain for the global economy and financial systems.  
The  accumulation  of  large  stocks  of  official  reserves  has  reflected  in  part  a 
widespread  desire  to  accumulate  precautionary  buffers  in  the  face  of  increasingly 
large and potentially volatile capital flows; in part an effort by a number of countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 3. 
 
 to maintain undervalued exchange rates to support export-led growth. Both drivers, 
in different ways, point to weaknesses and inefficiencies of the present international 
monetary system:  
– 
The accumulation of precautionary reserves is costly, as the return on reserve 
assets  is  typically  lower  than  the  country’s  borrowing  costs.  Moreover,  even 
countries holding large a buffer may face constraints in actually using it, if a 
falling reserve stock is perceived by the market as a negative signal.  
Moreover, if a country accumulates reserves to forestall an overdue exchange 
rate appreciation it may eventually face substantial capital losses.  
 In  addition  to  being  inefficient  for  the  reserve  holders,  the  accumulation  of  large 
official  reserves  has  undesirable  spillover  effects  on  the  international  monetary 
system:  
– 
Since  reserves  are  held  predominantly  in  US  Treasuries,  strong  official 
demand  tends  to  compress  yields,  causing  financial  market  distortions.  For 
example, in the years leading up to the crisis it contributed to trigger a global 
“search for yield”.  
In addition the seemingly insatiable global demand for dollar reserves allows 
the  United  States  to  enjoy  the  “exorbitant  privilege”  of  financing  external 
deficits in its own currency at a low cost, thus blunting the incentive to adjust.  
 Towards a multi-polar system? 
The central role of the US dollar is connected to several features of the functioning 
of  the  present  system  that  I  have  just  outlined.  How  can  that  role  be  expected  to 
evolve?  Will  the  system  remain  essentially  dollar-centered  or  become  more  multi-
polar?  
I believe that over the next few decades we will probably see an evolution toward 
multi-polarity,  although  the  shift  is  likely  to  be  gradual.  Some  trends  are  relatively 
easy to identify, others less:  
– 
The US dollar is likely to remain the main international currency in the near 
term. The shares of other currencies may grow over time, but inertia due to 
the  dollar’s  incumbent  advantages  will  tend  to  slow  the  process.  Specific 
events could trigger an acceleration, but this is hard to predict.  
The  future  role  of  the  euro  will  largely  depend  on  how  we  come  out  of  the 
present  crisis.  I  think  we  now  stand  at  a  crossroads:  either  the  euro  area 
institutions are strengthened and this allows the single currency to regain its 
attractiveness  and  to  develop  into  a  true  global  currency;  or,  if  the  crisis  is 
allowed to fester, even the euro’s role as a regional currency will be in doubt.  
Given China’s growing importance in global trade and its links to a fast-developing 
East Asia, it appears almost inevitable that over the next 10–20 years the RMB 
will become an international currency alongside with the yen, at first regionally, 
later perhaps on a broader scale. However, it may take some time for the process 
to  take  off,  as  some  essential  pre-requisites  (such  as  full  convertibility)  are  still 
lacking.  
Regional cooperation arrangements, such as those that exist in the European 
Union  and  the  Chiang  Mai  initiative  in  Asia,  could  become  part  of  this 
multilateral system.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   4 
 How  would  a  multi-polar  system  work?  In  principle,  being  more  “balanced”,  it 
may even alleviate some distortions of the present system. In particular:  
– 
The  demand  for  US  dollar  reserves  should  in  principle  become  less  elastic, 
thus diminishing the United States’ “exorbitant privilege” and allowing market 
discipline to work more symmetrically.  
If a number of Asian countries were to peg their exchange rates to the RMB 
(or to manage their exchange rate policy with reference to it), it may be easier 
for China’s authorities to accept greater exchange rate flexibility vis-à-vis other 
currency areas.  
 But could the coexistence and competition between two or more reserve currencies 
be a source of instability? My own view is that, although not necessarily unstable, a 
multi-polar system probably requires a high degree of international cooperation.  
At present, both the high degree of financial integration among economies and 
– 
the awareness of their interdependence have made the costs of isolationist or 
non-cooperative  behaviour  more  evident  than  in  earlier  periods  of  systemic 
transition such as in the interwar years.  
However,  having  stronger  incentives  to  cooperate  is  not  enough.  We  also 
need  a  greater  capacity  to  do  it,  which  means  having  an  effective  political 
leadership and the right institutions. We know from experience that the ability 
and willingness of national policy-makers to act cooperatively, even in the face 
of a clear and present danger, cannot be taken for granted.  
 Does the SDR have a role to play in the future evolution of the IMS, either as a 
complement to the existing reserve instruments or, in a longer-term perspective, as 
a forerunner of a true global currency on which the IMS could be centered?  
– 
At present, the role of the SDR is very limited. Allocated SDRs cannot be 
used  directly  to  conduct  interventions.  More  than  a  true  reserve  asset,  they 
are a tool for redistributing reserves, for countries that cannot borrow them on 
the market. There is strong resistance to expanding the SDR’s role on the 
part of several IMF member countries. The SDR is seen as an unconditional 
form of credit, giving rise to moral hazard. And central banks see the risk of 
politically-driven SDR allocations stoking global inflation.  
It has been suggested that developing “private SDR markets” (in analogy 
with the experience of the private ECU in the 1980s and 1990s) could be a 
way  of  making  SDRs  more  attractive  as  reserve  assets  and  expanding  the 
SDR’s role as a unit of account in trade and finance. The ultimate goal would 
be  to  create  the  conditions  for  an  expanded  role  of  the  SDR  in  the 
international  monetary  system.  To  jump-start  this  process,  public  authorities 
could undertake coordinated actions such as issuing SDR-denominated debt, 
helping create market infrastructures and providing legal certainty.  
I  believe  that  in  order  to  have  a  chance  to  work  in  practice,  such  actions 
would  need  to  be  part  of  a  long-term  strategy  supported  by  a  strong 
political  commitment.  My  understanding  of  the  experience  of  the  private 
ECU is that a key factor of its success was the link to the long-term process of 
European monetary integration, which provided not only a legal, economic and 
institutional  frame  of  reference  but  also  a  strong  political  constituency.  By 
analogy, making the SDR a credible reserve asset and unit of account for both 
official and private agents would probably require a commitment to eventually 
transform it into something more than a basket, i.e. a currency in its own right. 
As we know, we are still very far from having a broad consensus on such a 
prospect.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
4. 
      the  G20  agenda  early  on  after 
The reform of the international monetary system: the role of the G20 and of 
the IMF 
To  summarize,  we  have  an  international  monetary  system  that  lacks  an  effective 
mechanism  for  ensuring  the  mutual  consistency  of  national  policies.  The  costs  of 
this in terms of distortions and instability are already evident, and will probably be 
further  exacerbated  as  the  world  becomes  more  integrated  economically  and 
financially. On top of this, as we move toward a multipolar system we will need even 
greater cooperation to manage this process and contain the risk of instability.  
Indeed, the need to review the functioning of the international monetary system was 
put  on 
the  crisis.  Following  some  bold 
G20 statements, there was even hope that a “new Bretton Woods” system could be 
shaped under the aegis of the G20.  
In this spirit, a group of former senior policy-makers assembled by Michel Camdessus, 
Alexandre  Lamfalussy  and  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  (the  Palais-Royal  Initiative) 
chose  to  emphasize  in  their  report  the  great  urgency  of  tackling  the  reform  of  the 
international monetary system, and proposed a number of significant and far-reaching 
changes in the current arrangements.  
But  despite  the  best  efforts  of  the  French  Presidency,  the  G20  work  agenda  has 
been  fragmented  into  a  variety  of  “silos”,  which  are  meant  to  distil  specific 
“deliverables” for the Leaders at their next meeting in November. Thus, the global 
vision has been lost. In addition, progress on specific fronts has been rather modest 
so far, reflecting countries’ conflicting views on many such aspects  
– 
The most promising workstream is the Mutual Assessment Process (MAP). 
Quite  frankly,  I  do  not  see  other  substantial  IMS-related  deliverables  for  the 
Cannes  Summit.  On  issues  such  as  global  liquidity,  capital  flows,  reserves, 
and the SDR, countries’ views are too divergent to imagine real progress.  
So far, the record of the MAP has been mixed. The MAP is a peer review 
process  “owned”  by  the  G20  (the  IMF  only  provides  technical  support).  It  is 
aimed  at  defining  (and  then  monitoring  the  implementation  of)  a  set  of 
mutually  consistent  policies  to  achieve  a  rebalancing  of  global  demand  and 
restore  conditions  for  growth.  But  economic  imbalances  are  still  wide  and 
worrisome.  
 The G20 has failed to deliver reassuring massages to markets. Why? I see two main 
reasons. First, the whole process is bound to remain rather cumbersome reflecting 
the  need  to  maintain  G20  “ownership”  –  i.e.,  to  reflect  the  inherent  diversity  of  its 
members and the rule of consensus used in its deliberations. More importantly, the 
MAP has been conceived as an exercise with a medium to long term orientation, not 
as  a  platform  for  discussing  national  policy  changes  dictated  by  the  evolution  of 
G20 economies  in  the  short  term.  Explicit  discussion  of  exchange  rates  has  been 
taboo,  which  is  a  serious  limit.  And  reconciling  short-term  objectives  (supporting 
growth)  with  medium-term  goals  (rebalancing)  is  a  challenge,  particularly  at  the 
present juncture as the global recovery seems at risk.  
Hopefully  this  is  all  part  of  a  necessary  learning  process.  It  is  neither  policy 
coordination  nor  true  multilateral  surveillance  yet,  but  it  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction. While it is still too soon to say whether the G20 can become an effective 
vehicle for steering the governance of the IMS, real progress will depend on whether 
the IMF is allowed to play a central role in the governance of the IMS.  
– 
One  area  where 
is 
IMF surveillance. The systemic importance of financial sector issues and the 
existence  of  cross-border  policy  spillovers  have  highlighted  the  need  to 
improvements  could  be  achieved 
important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
ensure: (a) greater interaction between bilateral and multilateral surveillance, 
and (b) greater focus on the financial sector. Some progress has already been 
made on these fronts, but there are limits to what can be realistically achieved 
on the basis of the existing legal foundations of Fund surveillance.  
One  option  would  be  a  modification  of  the  IMF  Articles  of  Agreement  
–  envisaging  stronger  obligations  on  countries’  domestic  policies.  A  less 
ambitious option would be a new Board Decision on “Multilateral Surveillance”.  
 Concluding remarks 
5. 
 
The  world  economy  is  still  in  the  midst  of  the  most  severe  financial  crisis  of  the  last 
80 years but the reform process of the international monetary and financial system is stalling. 
In Washington at the IMF meetings two weeks ago, it was clearly visible that dealing with the 
worsening  outlook  of  economic  activity  in  the  major  industrial  countries  would  take 
precedence over the reform agenda of the G20.  
 
This is a serious mistake if one considers the origin of the crisis. Since the beginning of 
the third millennium there has been a constant erosion of the creditworthiness of issuers of 
supposedly  “safe”  assets,  be  they  the  shares  of  dotcom  companies  in  Wall  Street,  the 
subprime mortgages marketed with the unforgivable AAA blessing of rating agencies or the 
bonds issued by major financial institutions like Lehman Brothers. This erosion of trust is now 
creeping into the supposedly risk-free world of sovereign debt.  
 
The  history  of  the  international  monetary  system  can  be  interpreted  as  the  endless 
search for safe assets, safe from the erosion of value and the debasement of the currency 
that can derive from the misguided actions of monarchs, elected governments, parliaments 
and central banks.  
 
Gold was initially considered the safest asset as it was nobody’s liability, but then the 
relative shortage of gold led to the creation of the gold-dollar standard, where the safety of 
dollar-denominated assets was indirectly guaranteed by the link of the dollar to gold. When 
that  link  was  severed,  the  world  de  facto  delegated  to  financial  markets  the  task  of 
determining which assets are to be considered safe and which not.  
 
The  problem  with  this  arrangement  is  that  markets  are  fickle  and  they  can  oscillate 
between  one  extreme,  where  all  assets  are  safe,  even  junk  bonds,  Greek  bonds,  or 
Depfa bonds, and the opposite extreme, where there are virtually no safe assets, except a 
happy  few,  where  every  investor  would  like  to  place  his  or  her  money,  irrespective  of  the 
yield.  
 
The age of financial globalisation has brought us to the verge of this second extreme. 
The  extraordinary  growth  of  financial  activity  has  far  outstripped  the  growth  of  real 
economies, leading to the accumulation of financial assets that are largely the liabilities – i.e. 
the  debts  –  of  countries,  banks,  corporations.  The  markets  are  telling  us  now  that  this 
process has gone too far and that a “deleveraging” – i.e. a reduction of the indebtedness – is 
now required by all debtors, public and private.  
 
The  world  economy  is,  in  other  words,  confronted  with  a  “global  Triffin  dilemma”  in 
which the excessive indebtedness of the issuers of financial assets is now affecting the value 
of the assets themselves; of all assets, not just of reserve currencies, as in the early Triffin 
dilemma.  
 
manner and without further destabilising the world economy?  
 
The obvious answer is that it may take time and in any case a longer period of time 
than financial markets, suddenly become aware of the unsustainability of the situation, seem 
willing  to  concede.  At  the  same  time,  financial  market  participants should  be  aware  of  the 
But,  how  is  it  possible  to  carry  out  this  huge  process  of  deleveraging  in  an  orderly 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
simple  fact  if  they  want  to  cash  in  all  their  financial  assets,  at  once,  this  will  result  in  the 
immediate bankruptcy of all debtors, be they private or public.  
 
I do believe that both creditors and debtors have a strong interest in the preservation of 
an  open  financial  system,  well  regulated  but  free  from  protectionist  restrictions.  Thus,  it 
should be possible to agree on some sort of a “truce”, whereby market participants grant the 
time  required  for  an  orderly  deleveraging,  in  return  for  a  credible  commitment  by  national 
governments to pursue stability-oriented macroeconomic policies at home and to carry out a 
sensible reform of the current international monetary system.  
 
Such truce can only be enforced in the G20, which its leaders have elected to be the 
“premier  forum  for  international  economic  cooperation”.  A  credible  reform  agenda  should 
include:  
 
a strong multilateral surveillance procedure managed by the IMF and  designed to 
adjust  global  payments  imbalances  and  to  contain  the  impact  of  the  cross-border 
policy spillovers on the financial system;  
the  implementation  of  the  financial  regulation  reform  elaborated  by  the  Financial 
Stability Board to strengthen the resilience of banks and financial intermediaries and 
to discourage excessive risk taking;  
the implementation of the WTO’s Doha Development Agenda to preserve an open, 
multilateral and rule-based trading system;  
the commitment to establish a new multilateral reserve asset – hopefully with a more 
appealing name than the SDR – to become the “safe asset” that financial markets 
demand  and  that  could  be  the  anchor  and  the  standard  of  a  more  stable 
international monetary system.  
   Is this agenda “politically acceptable” to the G20 leaders? Probably not, but it may become 
soon  the  only  available  alternative  to  the  present  slow-moving,  incremental  approach  to 
reform,  if  they  want  to  prevent  more  serious  troubles  for  the  world  monetary  and  financial 
system and for the world economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
