K C Chakrabarty: Financial inclusion – a road India needs to travel 
Article by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, published on 
www.livemint.com on 21 September 2011. 
PDF charts to the above speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website. 
 India has seen historic progress and growth in the past decade. While the growth story has 
been impressive, there are causes for concern on other dimensions. We have a long way to 
go  in  addressing  concerns  of  absolute  poverty.  Low-income  Indian  households  in  the 
informal  or  subsistence  economy  often  have  to  borrow  from  friends,  family  or  usurious 
moneylenders. They have little awareness and practically no access to insurance products 
that  could  protect  their  financial  resources  in  unexpected  circumstances  such  as  illness, 
property damage or death of the primary breadwinner. 
Unrestrained access to public goods and services is an essential condition of an open and 
efficient society. It is argued that as banking services are in the nature of a public good, it is 
essential  that  the  availability  of  banking  services  to  the  entire  population  without 
discrimination is the prime objective of public policy. Expectations of poor people from the 
financial  system  is  security  and  safety  of  deposits,  low  transaction  costs,  convenient 
operating time, minimum paper work, frequent deposits, and quick and easy access to credit 
and other products, including remittances suitable to their income and consumption. 
It is now well understood that commerce with the poor is more viable and profitable, provided 
there is ability to do business with them. The provision of uncomplicated, small, affordable 
products  can  help  bring  low-income  families  into  the  formal  financial  sector.  Taking  into 
account  their  seasonal  inflow  of  income  from  agricultural  operations,  migration  from  one 
place  to  another,  and  seasonal  and  irregular  work  availability  and  income,  the  existing 
financial  system  needs  to  be  designed  to  suit  their  requirements.  Mainstream  financial 
institutions  such  as  banks  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  this  effort,  not  as  a  social 
obligation, but as a pure business proposition. 
Appropriate financial products 
Financial inclusion is the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products and 
services needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low-income groups at an 
affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and  transparent  manner  by  mainstream  institutional  players. 
Financial  inclusion  has become  one  of  the  most  critical  aspects in  the  context  of inclusive 
growth and development. 
The importance of an inclusive financial system is widely recognized in policy circles and has 
become a policy priority in many countries. Several countries across the globe now look at 
financial inclusion as the means to more comprehensive growth, wherein each citizen of the 
country is able to use earnings as a financial resource that can be put to work to improve 
future financial status and adding to the nation’s progress. 
Initiatives for financial inclusion have come from financial regulators, governments and the 
banking industry. The banking sector has taken a lead role in promoting financial inclusion. 
Legislative  measures  have  been  initiated  in  some  countries.  For  example,  in  the  US,  the 
Community  Reinvestment  Act  (1997)  requires  banks  to  offer  credit  throughout  their  entire 
area of operation and prohibits them from targeting only the rich neighbourhoods. In France, 
the law on exclusion (1998) emphasizes an individual’s right to have a bank account. 
The German Bankers’ Association introduced a voluntary code in 1996 providing for a so-
called  “everyman”  current  banking  account  that  facilitates  basic  banking  transactions.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
South Africa, a low-cost bank account, called Mzansi, was launched for financially excluded 
people in 2004 by the South African Banking Association. In the UK, a Financial Inclusion 
Task Force was constituted by the government in 2005 in order to monitor the development 
of the process. 
Several  African  countries  have  harnessed  the  unique  aspects  of  mobile  banking  to  drive 
financial  inclusion.  A  G-20  (Group  of  Twenty)  Financial  Inclusion  Experts  Group  has  been 
launched. The Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion serve as a guide for policy and 
regulatory approaches with the objectives of fostering safe and sound adoption of innovative, 
adequate, low-cost financial delivery models, helping provide conditions for fair competition 
and a framework of incentives for the various banking, insurance, and non-banking entities 
involved and delivery of the full range of affordable and quality financial services. 
Broader financial inclusion 
India  has,  for  a  long  time,  recognized  the  social  and  economic  imperatives  for  broader 
financial  inclusion  and  has  made  an  enormous  contribution  to  economic  development  by 
finding  innovative  ways  to  empower  the  poor.  Starting  with  the  nationalization  of  banks, 
priority sector lending requirements for banks, lead bank scheme, establishment of regional 
rural banks (RRBs), service area approach, self-help group-bank linkage programme, etc., 
multiple  steps  have  been  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  over  the  years  to 
increase access to the poorer segments of society. 
General Credit Cards (PDF) 
Kisan Credit Cards (PDF) 
Also see 
 
 
It  encouraged  expansion  of  bank  branches,  especially  in  rural  areas,  resulting  in  multifold 
increase in branch network from around 8,000 in 1969 to more than 89,000 today, spread 
across  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  country.  The  accompanying  chart  and  graph  show 
population  group-wise  distribution  of  bank  branches  of  scheduled  commercial  banks, 
including RRBs, over all these years. 
Also see / Branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks (PDF) 
Despite all these efforts, a significant proportion of the households, especially in rural areas, 
still remained outside the coverage of the formal banking system. It is estimated that about 
40% of Indians lack access even to the simplest kind of formal financial services. 
The  major  barriers  to  serve  the  poor,  apart  from  socioeconomic  factors  such  as  lack  of 
regular income, poverty, illiteracy, etc., are the lack of reach, higher cost of transactions and 
time taken in providing those services. Products designed by the banks are not tailored to 
suit the needs of low-income families. The existing business models do not pass the test of 
scalability, convenience, reliability, flexibility and continuity. 
Also see 
 
 
In  India,  the  term  financial  inclusion  first  featured  in  2005,  when  RBI,  in  its  annual  policy 
statement of 2005–06, while recognizing the concerns in regard to the banking practices that 
Villages Covered (PDF) 
Branches Vs Business Correspondents (PDF) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
tend  to  exclude  rather  than  attract  vast  sections  of  the  population,  urged  banks  to  review 
their existing practices to align them with the objective of financial inclusion. 
National commitment 
Moving towards universal financial inclusion has been both a national commitment as well as 
a public policy priority for our country. To achieve the ultimate objective of reaching banking 
services  to  all  the  600,000  villages,  financial  inclusion  has  to  become  a  viable  business 
proposition for the banks. 
For this to happen, the delivery model needs to be devised carefully so as to move from a 
cost-centric model to a revenue-generation model. This will help in providing customers with 
quality  banking  services  at  their  doorstep  and  at  the  same  time  generating  business 
opportunities  for  the  banks.  This  is  sustainable  only  if  delivery  of  banking  services,  at  the 
minimum, includes the following four products: 
 
 
 
 
A savings-cum-overdraft account  
A remittance product for electronic benefits transfer (EBT) and other remittances  
A pure savings product, ideally a recurring deposit scheme 
Entrepreneurial  credit in  the  form  of  a  kisan credit  card  (KCC)  or  a  general  credit 
card (GCC)  
RBI  has  been  undertaking  financial  inclusion  initiatives  in  a  mission  mode  through  a 
combination  of  strategies  ranging  from  provision  of  new  products,  relaxation  of  regulatory 
guidelines  and  other  supportive  measures  to  achieve  sustainable  and  scalable  financial 
inclusion. 
In India, RBI has initiated several measures to achieve greater financial inclusion, such as 
facilitating no-frills accounts and GCCs for small deposits and credit. Some of these steps 
are: 
Opening  of  no-frills  accounts:  Basic  banking  no-frills  accounts  with  nil  or  very  low 
minimum balance as well as charges that make such accounts accessible to vast sections of 
the population. Banks have been advised to provide small overdrafts in such accounts. 
Relaxation  on  know-your-customer  (KYC)  norms:  KYC  requirements  for  opening  bank 
accounts were relaxed for small accounts in August 2005, thereby simplifying procedures by 
stipulating that introduction by an account holder who has been subjected to the full KYC drill 
would suffice for opening such accounts. 
The banks were also permitted to take any evidence as to the identity and address of the 
customer to their satisfaction. It has now been further relaxed to include the letters issued by 
the Unique Identification Authority of India containing details of name, address and Aadhaar 
number. 
Engaging  business  correspondents  (BCs):  In  January  2006,  RBI  permitted  banks  to 
engage  business  facilitators  (BFs)  and  BCs  as  intermediaries  for  providing  financial  and 
banking  services.  The  BC  model  allows  banks  to  provide  doorstep  delivery  of  services, 
especially cash in-cash out transactions, thus addressing the last-mile problem. The list of 
eligible individuals and entities that can be engaged as BCs is being widened from time to 
time. With effect from September 2010, for-profit companies have also been allowed to be 
engaged as BCs. 
Use of technology: Recognizing that technology has the potential to address the issues of 
outreach and credit delivery in rural and remote areas in a viable manner, banks have been 
advised  to  make  effective  use  of  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT),  to 
provide  doorstep  banking  services  through  the  BC  model  where  the  accounts  can  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
operated  by  even  illiterate  customers  by  using  biometrics,  thus  ensuring  the  security  of 
transactions and enhancing confidence in the banking system. 
Adoption  of  EBT:  Banks  have  been  advised  to  implement  EBT  by  leveraging  ICT-based 
banking  through  BCs  to  transfer  social  benefits  electronically  to  the  bank  account  of  the 
beneficiary and deliver government benefits to the doorstep of the beneficiary, thus reducing 
dependence on cash and  lowering transaction costs. 
GCC:  With  a  view  to  helping  the  poor  and  the  disadvantaged  with  access  to  easy  credit, 
banks have been asked to consider introduction of a general purpose credit card facility up to 
25,000 at their rural and semi-urban branches. The objective of the scheme is to provide 
hassle-free  credit  to  banks’  customers  based  on  the  assessment  of  cash  flow  without 
insistence  on  security,  purpose  or  end  use  of  the  credit.  This  is  in  the  nature  of  revolving 
credit entitling the holder to withdraw up to the limit sanctioned. 
Simplified branch authorization: To address the issue of uneven spread of bank branches, 
in  December  2009,  domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks  were  permitted  to  freely  open 
branches  in  tier  III  to  tier  VI  centres  with  a  population  of  less  than  50,000  under  general 
permission, subject to reporting. In the north-eastern states and Sikkim, domestic scheduled 
commercial  banks can now open branches in rural, semi-urban and urban centres without 
the need to take permission from RBI in each case, subject to reporting. 
Opening  of  branches  in  unbanked  rural  centres:  To  further  step  up  the  opening  of 
branches in rural areas so as to improve banking penetration and financial inclusion rapidly, 
the need for the opening of more bricks and mortar branches, besides the use of BCs, was 
felt.  Accordingly,  banks  have  been  mandated  in  the  April  monetary  policy  statement  to 
allocate  at  least  25%  of  the  total  number  of  branches  to  be  opened  during  a  year  to 
unbanked rural centres. 
Road  map  for  providing  banking  services  in  unbanked  villages  with  a  population  of 
more than 2,000: Banks were advised to draw up a road map to provide banking services in 
every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. RBI advised banks 
that such banking services need not necessarily be extended through a bricks and mortar 
branch, but could also be provided through any of the various forms of ICT-based models. 
About 73,000 such unbanked villages were identified and allotted to various banks through 
state-level bankers’ committees. 
Financial  inclusion  plans  of  banks  for  three  years:  RBI  advised  all  public  and  private 
sector  banks  to  submit  a  board-approved,  three-year  financial  inclusion  plan  (FIP)  starting 
April 2010. These plans broadly include self-set targets in respect of rural bricks and mortar 
branches  opened;  BCs  employed;  coverage  of  unbanked  villages  with  a  population  above 
2,000 as also other unbanked villages with population below 2,000 through branches; BCs 
and  other  modes;  no-frills  accounts  opened,  including  through  BC-ICT;  KCCs  and  GCCs 
issued;  and  other  specific  products  designed  by  them  to  cater  to  the  financially  excluded 
segments. 
Banks  were  advised  to  integrate  board-approved  FIPs  with  their  business  plans  and  to 
include  the  criteria  on  financial  inclusion  as  a  parameter  in  the  performance  evaluation  of 
their  staff.  The  progress  by  commercial  banks  (excluding  RRBs)  during  the  year  2010–11 
clearly indicates that banks are on the right path towards deploying BCs, villages covered, 
opening  of  no-frills  accounts,  and  grant  of  credit  through  KCCs  and  GCCs.  The  numbers 
would be much higher if the figures pertaining to RRBs were to be added. 
Long way to go 
As  indicated  above,  while  India  has  made  enormous  strides  towards  greater  financial 
inclusion,  there  is  a  long  way  to  go,  about  500,000  villages  are  yet  to  be  provided  with 
banking  services.  The  financial  inclusion  for  the  underprivileged  will  lead  to  hosts  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
downstream opportunities with an estimated 500,000 jobs for the participants to work as BCs 
at remote villages. 
In a networked India in which banking services are extended to all villages, ultimately, a so-
called model will emerge where customers will have the option to transact with the bank of 
their  choice  in  any  village  by  using  UID  (unique  identity)-enabled  micro-ATMs  (automated 
teller machines), reducing the dependence on cash and lowering transaction costs. The task 
is gigantic, but definitely achievable by following a systematic approach: 
 
Awareness in general, coupled with financial awareness on opening and operating 
accounts, must accompany the financial inclusion initiative. 
Banks should prepare comprehensive plans to cover all villages, through a mix of 
branchless banking and bricks and mortar branch banking. They should speed up 
enrolment  of  customers  and  opening  of  UID-enabled  bank  accounts.  It  envisages 
putting in place a system that enables routing of all social benefits to bank accounts 
electronically  as  also  seamless  cash  transfer  to  the  poor,  as  and  when  the 
government replaces the age-old system of subsidy and public distribution system 
with cash transfers. 
 The success of the BC model is highly dependent on the kind of support provided by base 
branches,  especially  for  cash  management,  documentation  and  redressal  of  customer 
grievances. Hence, it is necessary that a bricks and mortar structure is available to support 
about  8–10  BCs  at  a  reasonable  distance  of  2–3km.  These  branches  can  be  low-cost 
intermediary  simple  structures  comprising  minimum  infrastructure  for  operating  small 
customer transactions and can act as an effective supervisory mechanism for BC operations. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  banks  must  provide  a  minimum  four  products  –  a  no-frills 
 
savings  account  with  an  overdraft  facility,  a  pure  savings  product,  entrepreneurial 
credit and remittance services, and new products tailored to income streams of poor 
borrowers and according to their needs and interests. Banks must be able to offer 
the entire suite of financial products and services to poor clients at attractive pricing. 
Though  the  cost  of  administering  small-ticket  personal  transactions  is  high,  this  can  be 
brought  down  if  banks  effectively  leverage  ICT  solutions.  This  can  be  attained  through 
product  innovation  with  superior  cost  efficiency.  They  must  understand  and  penetrate  the 
rural markets efficiently to cross-sell products and services. Mobile banking has tremendous 
potential and the benefits of m-commerce need to be exploited. 
 
It is important that adequate infrastructure such as digital and physical connectivity, 
uninterrupted  power  supply,  etc.,  is  available.  All  stakeholders  will  have  to  work 
together  through  sound  and  purposeful  collaborations.  Local  and  national-level 
organizations have to ensure that these partnerships look at both commercial and 
social aspects to help achieve scale, sustainability and impact. 
This collaborative model will have to tackle exclusion by stimulating demand for appropriate 
financial  products,  services  and  advice  with  the  appropriate  delivery  mechanism,  and  by 
ensuring that there is a supply of appropriate and affordable services available to those that 
need them. 
 
Mindset, cultural and attitudinal changes at grass roots and cutting-edge technology 
levels  of  branches  of  banks  are  needed  to  impart  organizational  resilience  and 
flexibility.  Banks  should  institute  systems  of  reward  and  recognition  for  personnel 
initiating, ideating, innovating and successfully executing new products and services 
in the rural areas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Conclusion 
Empirical  evidence  shows  that  economic  growth  follows  financial  inclusion.  Boosting 
business  opportunities  will  definitely  increase  the  gross  domestic  product,  which  will  be 
reflected in our national income growth. People will have safe savings along with access to 
allied  products  and  services  such  as  insurance  cover,  entrepreneurial  loans,  payment  and 
settlement facility, etc. 
Our  dream  of  inclusive  growth  will  not  be  complete  until  we  create  millions  of  micro-
entrepreneurs across the country. All budding entrepreneurs have to face these challenges 
and find solutions. People working in the social sector should work for filling up the deficit 
existing in the economic and social arena. 
To sum up, financial inclusion is the road that India needs to travel toward becoming a global 
player. Financial access will attract global market players to our country and that will result in 
increasing employment and business opportunities. Inclusive growth will act as a source of 
empowerment  and  allow  people  to  participate  more  effectively  in  the  economic  and  social 
process. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
