Paul Tucker: A few remarks on current monetary policy in a rebalancing 
economy 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at The Joint 1900/City Club Lunch, London, 22 November 2011. 
 The outlook for economic activity has deteriorated over the past few months. The MPC has 
responded with a further round of quantitative easing to underpin demand, and so reduce the 
chance of inflation undershooting our target in the medium term. 
Monetary credibility: accommodating the price level shocks 
Our ability to provide and sustain that stimulus depends absolutely on the credibility of our 
commitment to the 2% inflation target. If our credibility were to slip and medium-term inflation 
expectations  were  to  rise,  we  would  have  to  run  with  a  tighter  monetary  stance  than 
otherwise  in  order  to  put  the  genie  back  into  the  bottle.  The  Committee’s  most  important 
judgment over the past year or so has, accordingly, been that the elevated rate of inflation, 
now  about  5%,  is  temporary.  We  have  had  conviction  in  that  judgment  because  of  the 
observable upward impulses to the price level from sterling’s depreciation, the VAT increase, 
and the rise in commodity prices. There is occasionally a rather odd debate about whether 
the MPC could have avoided the consequent increase in inflation. Big picture, the answer is 
that we could have done, but we chose not to. We have, in effect, accommodated something 
like half of the cumulative impulse to the price level. We could have chosen instead to offset 
the price level shocks by running a much tighter monetary policy. Had we done so, spending 
in  the  economy,  activity  and  employment  would  all  have  been  squeezed.  Conditions  have 
anyway been difficult for many households due to the squeeze on real incomes, but I think it 
would  have  been  worse  if  we  had  tightened  policy.  Our  ability  to  sustain  exceptional 
monetary stimulus has, I should reiterate, depended on the credibility of our commitment to 
low inflation over the medium term being preserved. I worried that chatter in the markets in 
late 2010/early 2011 marked incipient signs of fragility in that credibility.  
That was one of the reasons why, at the beginning of this year, I had expected to vote for an 
increase in Bank Rate at our February meeting. The weak output data for Q4 2010 published 
shortly before that meeting changed my mind, and the Committee’s course, as they revealed 
that the economy was softer than I had thought.  
Escape velocity 
In the months that followed, I made clear that, with inflation well above our 2% target, I would 
be looking for an opportunity to begin the process of withdrawing the exceptional monetary 
stimulus  once  the  economy  had  achieved  “escape  velocity”.  By  that,  I  meant  that  the 
economy  would  need  to  be  growing,  and  be  set  to  continue  to  grow,  at  a  rate  that  would 
gradually absorb the slack in the economy. “Escape velocity” has not yet been achieved.  
The principal sources of the deterioration lie overseas – from the squeeze on real incomes 
due  to  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  and,  more  recently,  weakening  global  demand  due 
largely to the euro area crisis. Even if, as we all hope, a credible solution to the euro area’s 
problems can be put in place in the coming weeks, the traumas of the past few months will 
take a while to overcome. Confidence has been sucked out of financial markets. Pressured 
European banks are deleveraging by disposing of assets, or letting loans run off, elsewhere 
in  the  world.  Trade  finance  is  again  becoming  impaired.  Capital  raising  by  companies  has 
declined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
And confidence has been drained out of the UK real economy too. Earlier in the year, we 
faced  a  tug  of  war  between  a  resilient  corporate  sector  looking  to  expand  when  demand 
picked up, and a fragile household sector worried about a rising cost of living, jobs and house 
prices,  with  some  households  therefore  saving  more  in  order  to  strengthen  their  balance 
sheets. In recent months, as confidence amongst businesses has flagged, they have been 
tugging on the same end of the rope, with the MPC at the other end, in effect tugging back.  
Part of that easing in monetary conditions has come through lower interest rates. In case that 
sounds odd given that Bank Rate has been at 0.5% for over two years, I should underline 
that, even in normal circumstances, monetary policy works through the expected path of our 
policy rate. The markets now expect us to keep Bank Rate low for longer. Two-year risk free 
money market rates are over 100bp lower than in the late spring. That has helped to offset 
the  rise  in  credit  spreads,  and  so  means  lower  borrowing  costs  in  the  real  world.  I  place 
weight on that, as my MPC colleagues know. Above that, we have decided to add £75bn to 
our  programme  of  Quantitative  Easing  (QE).  The  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  will  slowly 
increase as the agreed QE is executed. That money does not, as is sometimes suggested, 
get  stuck  with  the  banks.  The  whole  point  of  the  Bank’s  operating  framework  for  QE  has 
been to avoid that. All central bank money is ultimately held by banks: that is what a banking 
system is. But by buying bonds from insurance companies, pension funds and others, we put 
the  money  into  their  hands.  It  is  money  that,  by  construction,  provides  a  meagre  return  
– negative in real terms – and so money that they will want to get rid of by purchasing other 
higher-yielding assets. Policy still works through asset prices, increasing wealth and reducing 
the cost of capital relative to where they would be otherwise.  
Rebalancing: impediments 
We  recognise  that  the  stimulus  we  have  provided  risks  slowing  further  progress  with  the 
necessary medium term rebalancing of the economy. Rebalancing will not, in any case, be 
easy. The composition of demand in the UK was imbalanced for so long that the productive 
capacity of economy is unbalanced. Crudely, the balance of aggregate demand needs, over 
the medium term, to shift away from household and public consumption towards net trade 
and investment. Up to a point, some of that has already happened. But domestic monetary 
expansion will work partly through deferring some of the restructuring of household balance 
sheets,  underpinning  consumption.  And,  looking  ahead,  the  greater  question  is  whether 
rebalancing  can  be  sustained  as  and  when  the  economy  returns  to  “full  employment”, 
ie when the economy’s spare capacity is utilised again.  
Rebalancing is already impeded by tight credit conditions. Although our banking sector has 
done  much  to  strengthen  capital  and  liquidity  over  the  past  few  years,  it  would  still  have 
ground  to  cover  in  rebuilding  balance  sheets  even  if  the  external  environment  were  more 
propitious.  With  instability  from  the  euro  area  crisis  threatening  the  UK,  our  banks  cannot 
avoid being exposed to outsized risks. That is reflected in elevated funding costs, which they 
pass on to their customers to a greater or less extent. The gradual improvements in credit 
conditions seen until the summer, and documented in the Bank’s quarterly Credit Conditions 
Survey, have been arrested for now. 
In  my  book,  this  is  not  only  bad  for  the  needed  cyclical  recovery  in  aggregate  demand.  I 
suspect  that  it  will  impede  the  rebalancing  of  the  economy’s  productive  capacity.  Firms 
wishing to enter or expand export markets, or compete against importers, often need credit. 
Finance  is  the  oil  that  lubricates  the  allocation  –  and  so,  in  current  circumstances, 
reallocation – of capital in our economy.  
This is manifestly affecting SMEs. My hunch is that housing market conditions are a factor 
too.  As  long  as  anyone  can  remember,  a  crucial  element  of  SME  finance  has  been  the 
capacity of entrepreneurs to pledge their home at the outset of a loan or, contingently, if and 
when their business hits choppy waters. Uncertainties about the path of house prices do not 
make that a comfortable backdrop for lenders in current conditions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Rebalancing  will  affect  labour  market  conditions  too.  Perhaps  the  greatest  surprise  to  the 
MPC over the past few years has been subdued productivity growth. One could think of this 
as firms maintaining employment at higher levels than would have been predicted given the 
fall in the level of output. Labour hoarding. That squares with business managers explaining 
that they worry about “structural” skill shortages and so are loathe to lose employees who 
they  will  need  when  their  markets  recover.  But  it  does  not  really  square  with  surveys  of 
business conditions reporting that firms say they are carrying relatively little spare capacity. 
We have scratched our heads about this. One possible explanation is that, in an economy 
based heavily on the production of services, firms have been putting their teams to work on 
marketing and sales to drum up business against a backdrop of weak overall demand. Those 
teams may well be working hard. In that case, it may not feel to managers, when filling in 
surveys, as if they have lots of spare capacity, But, as I have described it, those staff would 
be  working  on  inputs  rather  than  outputs  –  making  productivity  across  the  economy  as  a 
whole look weak.  
Nor does labour hoarding square obviously with relatively healthy growth in private sector 
employment over 2010 and the first half of 2011, before the recent slowing. In our internal 
debates,  I  have  posited  that  this  could  be  a  symptom  of  the  economy’s  necessary 
rebalancing. Firms facing expanding markets and demand may be hiring. Whereas, against a 
backdrop  of  a  very  low  policy  rate  and  some  forbearance  by  banks,  individual  firms  in 
contracting  sectors  could  be  holding  out,  either  not  recognising  that  their  market  is 
contracting  or  believing  and  hoping  that  it  will  be  their  competitors  rather  than  themselves 
that end up cutting capacity or closing. It can be argued against that that rising employment, 
and weakness in productivity, is spread fairly evenly across the private sector. But I suspect 
that  we  have  to  dive  down  into  the  data  to  get  a  more  disaggregated  picture  than  we,  as 
macroeconomic  policymakers,  usually  need.  I  am  glad  to  say  that  my  colleagues 
Ben Broadbent  and  Martin  Weale  are  now  working  with  Bank  staff  on  just  that.  While  we 
cannot  yet  tell  whether  a  clear  message  will  emerge,  it  is  the  kind  of  work  that  is  needed 
when the real economy is undergoing a degree of structural change.  
Policy 
The  uneven  and  unavoidably  difficult  path  for  rebalancing  in  the  real  economy  makes  it 
harder  than  usual  to  read  the  signals  of  cyclical  conditions.  But,  by  the  same  token,  our 
monetary accommodation can help to ease the costs to firms and households of adjusting. 
By smoothing the path of aggregate demand, the impact on capital resources and on human 
livelihoods can be limited somewhat. 
In the Committee’s latest forecasts, the central projection is for inflation to be under the 2% 
target in two-to-three year’s time. But it also has inflation rising back towards target through 
that period as monetary stimulus gradually helps the economy to achieve escape velocity, 
reducing  slack  in  firms  and  the  labour  market.  Given  the  ferocity  of  the  shocks  that  have 
already hit the economy, and the pervasive uncertainty that persists about global economic 
and  financial  conditions,  these  are  circumstances  where  taking  longer  than  usual  to 
reachieve the 2% target is warranted. It will help to mitigate the risks of the economy’s supply 
capacity being impaired.  
But that is to look ahead to the most likely path of inflation in a year or two. In the meantime, 
inflation is uncomfortably high, and an absolute precondition for maintaining our support to 
demand  is  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy.  Over  the  next  few  quarters,  the  Committee’s 
most  important  judgment  call  will  be  put  to  the  test.  We  will  all  discover  whether  inflation 
declines rapidly from 5% towards 3% as the effects of the price level shocks wane.  
Finally,  let  me  stress  that  the  gloom  should  not  be  overdone.  The  record  is  that  flexible 
economies with sound macroeconomic regimes recover from almost any crisis. The UK will 
recover. Meanwhile the MPC will continue to underpin demand, consistent with getting back 
to the 2% inflation target and so with sound money.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
