Duvvuri Subbarao: Gross financial flows, global imbalances, and crises 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Twelfth L K Jha Memorial Lecture, Mumbai, 13 December 2011. 
 1. 
Good  evening.  On  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  I  have  great  pleasure  in 
welcoming  Prof.  Maurice  Obstfeld,  who  will  shortly  be  delivering  the  L.K.  Jha  Memorial 
Lecture.  Warm  welcome  also 
in 
acknowledging the presence here of members of the family of late Dr. L.K. Jha – Smt. Dipika 
Maharaj Singh, Smt. Sharika Glover and Master Kiran Glover. Your presence here means a 
lot to us. Thank you very much. Of course, a warm welcome to all our distinguished invitees 
who have made time to be here for this lecture.  
to  Mrs.  Jeniffer  Obstfeld. 
I  also  have  pleasure 
Dr. L.K. Jha 
2.  
Dr.  L.K.  Jha  was  by  far  one  of  India’s  most  distinguished  civil  servants.  With  a 
remarkable career as an economic administrator and several impressive accomplishments to 
his credit, he has been a role model for generations of civil servants. After graduating from 
the Banaras Hindu University, “LK”, as he was popularly known, went on to study at Trinity 
College, Cambridge where he was a student of legendary economists such as A.C. Pigou, 
J.M. Keynes and D.H. Robertson. He joined the Indian Civil Service in 1936. After an early 
career in Bihar, he was seconded to Government of India in 1942 where he served in several 
important positions, and ended up in the pivotal job of Secretary to Prime Minister. 
3.  
Dr. Jha was Governor of the Reserve Bank from July 1967 to May 1970, at a time 
when the economy was going through one of India’s most challenging phases. The country 
was  shaken  by  food  security  concerns,  and initiatives  to  redress  this  resulted in  the  much 
celebrated “Green Revolution”. The Reserve Bank, under Governor Jha, was an influential 
force in shaping these initiatives. The distress suffered by the poor because of the overall 
scarcity situation resulted in poverty reduction becoming the overarching consideration of all 
policy.  The  Reserve  Bank,  under  Dr.  Jha’s  stewardship,  contributed  to  designing  and 
implementing many of these policies. 
4.  
After his tenure in the Reserve Bank, Dr. Jha served as India’s Ambassador to the 
United States and as Governor of Jammu and Kashmir. He was also a member of the widely 
acclaimed Brandt Commission which made a persuasive case for North-South cooperation. 
That  some  of  the  issues  raised  in  the  Brandt  Commission  are  relevant  even  today  is  a 
testimonial to the foresight and wisdom of the Commission’s members such as Dr. Jha. 
5.  
This lecture series in his name honours Dr. Jha’s outstanding service to the nation 
and his leadership of the Reserve Bank during a very critical period. So far, there have been 
11 lectures. The last one was given by Prof. John Taylor in February 2010, two years ago, on 
“Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets”. The lecture by 
Prof. Obstfeld this evening will be the 12th in the series. 
The distinguished speaker – Prof. Maurice Obstfeld 
6. 
It  is  perhaps  presumptuous  to  introduce  Prof.  Maurise  Obstfeld,  who  is  a 
distinguished academic and internationally renowned economist. Regardless, I will indulge in 
the pleasure of doing so because the occasion demands it. 
7. 
Prof. Obstfeld is currently the Class of 1958 Professor of Economics and Director of 
the Center for International and Development Economic Research (CIDER) at the University 
of  California  in  Berkeley.  He  got  his  Doctorate  from  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Technology  (MIT)  in  1979  under  the  supervision  of  the  legendary  Professor  Rudiger 
Dornbusch of the textbook fame. Thereafter, Prof. Obstfeld taught at Columbia, University of 
Pennsylvania and Harvard before moving to UC, Berkeley in 1989. 
8.  
Publishing papers is part of plying the trade of being an academic. A few of them 
also write text books. But far fewer of them write text books that become standard teaching 
material cutting across university and national barriers. Prof. Obstfeld belongs to that select 
category.  Many  among  the  audience  here  must  have  learnt  economics  from  his  seminal 
textbook on International Economics, co-authored with Prof. Paul Krugman. 
9.  
Economists  have  been  categorized  in  several  ways  –  classical  and  neo-classical, 
macro and micro, Keynesian and monetarist, free market and leftist. It is fashionable these 
days  to  categorize  economists  as  salt  water  or  fresh  water  to  classify  their  academic 
persuasion which, curiously, seems to be correlated with whether their university is located 
inland  or  on  the  coast.  Prof.  Obstfeld  has  largely  been  in  coastal  schools,  and  it  will  be 
interesting  to  find  out  if  his  academic  persuasion  fits  in  with  this  salt  water  –  fresh  water 
dichotomy. 
10.  
Prof. Obstfeld’s earliest research was focused on portfolio models of exchange rate 
and  capital  flows,  and  the  effects  of  sterilization  policies,  including  foreign  exchange 
intervention. Later, he turned to models of monetary and real international adjustment based 
on  dynamic  optimization,  an  approach  that  has  since  become  standard  in  international 
economics.  In  the  mid-1980s,  Prof.  Obstfeld  began  to  pursue  the  insight  that  speculative 
attacks on exchange-rate regimes could be self-fulfilling. Subsequent developments, notably 
the Asian crisis of the late 90s, validated this theory. 
11. 
and Crises”, unexceptionably a topic of great relevance in the current context. 
Prof. Obstfeld will be speaking today on “Gross Financial Flows, Global Imbalances 
Global imbalances need to be redressed for the sake of global stability 
12.  
No  crisis  as  complex  as  the  one  we  are  going  through  has  a  simple  or  a  single 
cause. In popular perception, the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008 will 
remain marked as the trigger of the crisis. At one level that may well be true. Indeed, I can 
visualize  future  text  books  in  finance  dividing  the  world  into  “before  Lehman”  and  “after 
Lehman”. But if we probe deeper, we will learn that at the heart of the crisis were two root 
causes – the build up of global imbalances and developments in the financial markets over 
the  last  two  decades.  And  received  wisdom  today  is  that  these  two  root  causes  are 
interconnected, and that financial market developments were in a sense driven by the global 
imbalances. 
13.  
Global  macro  imbalances  got  built  up  because  of  the  large  savings  and  current 
account surpluses in China and much of Asia in the wake of the Asian Crisis in the 1990s. 
These  were  mirrored  by  large  increases  in  leveraged  consumption  and  current  account 
deficits in the US. In short, Asia produced and America consumed. 
And  why  did  these  imbalances  get  built  up?  The  answer  lies  in  globalization  – 
14.  
globalization  of  trade,  of  labour  and  of  finance.  The  world  witnessed  a  phenomenal 
expansion in global trade over the last three decades; global trade as a proportion of global 
GDP increased from 37 per cent in 1980 to 53 per cent in 2008, just before the crisis hit us.1 
Globalization  of  finance  was  even  more  prolific,  especially  over  the  last  decade.  For  the 
world  taken  together,  the  ratio  of  foreign  assets  and  foreign  liabilities  to  GDP  rose  from 
133 per cent in 1994 to over 300 per cent in 2008.2  
                                                 
1  Calculations based on IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, June 2010. 
2  Calculations based on IMF Balance of Payments Year Book, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The impact of globalization of labour was by far more striking. Emerging Asia added 
15.  
nearly three billion to the world’s pool of labour as it integrated with the rest of the world over 
the last two decades thus hugely improving its comparative advantage. Together, the three 
dimensions of globalization – trade, finance and labour – helped emerging Asia multiply by a 
factor  its  exports  to  the  advanced  economies.  The  result  was  large  and  persistent  current 
account surpluses in the Asian economies and corresponding current account deficits in the 
importing  advanced  economies.  These  global  imbalances  combined  with  developments  in 
the financial sector to brew the crisis to its explosive dimensions.  
16. 
So,  where  do  we  go  from  here?  The  G-20  is  now  actively  engaged  in  the 
challenging  task  of  redressing  structural  imbalances  in  the  global  economy.  At  their 
Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009, the G-20 leaders agreed on a “Framework for Strong, 
Sustainable and Balanced Growth” and committed to a “Mutual Assessment Process” (MAP) 
which  is  a  peer  review  of  each  country’s  progress  towards  meeting  the  shared  objectives 
underlying the framework. Recognizing that global imbalances, which had narrowed during 
the crisis, started widening again in the exit phase, the G-20 resolved that promoting external 
sustainability should be the focus of the next stage of the MAP and entrusted this task to a 
Framework Working Group (FWG).  
17. 
India  is  privileged  in  co-chairing,  together  with  Canada,  the  Framework  Working 
Group  for  managing  the  task  of  developing  the  indicative  guidelines  for  assessing  and 
addressing  persistent  global  imbalances.  The  success  of  this  initiative  is  critical  for 
redressing the problem of global imbalances.  
18. 
In moving forward on finding a sustainable solution to global imbalances, we will be 
guided,  individually  at  the  country  level  and  collectively  at the  G-20  level,  by  insights  from 
academic research. It is in this context that work of insightful economists like Prof. Obstfeld 
will be important. Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming Prof. Maurice Obstfeld 
to deliver the 12th L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
