Mark Carney: Global liquidity 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  to  the  Canada-United  Kingdom  Chamber  of  Commerce,  London, 
8 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be in London and an honour to speak in Drapers’ Hall. 
This magnificent building was for centuries where merchants met to trade cloth. During the 
15th  and  16th  centuries,  the  Drapers’  Company  was  one  of  the  most  important  City 
companies. It had extensive powers to regulate the woollen cloth trade in the City of London – 
setting the standard measure by which all cloth was sold and controlling its sale at fairs held 
in the City. Dealers could only sell cloth to a freeman of the Company and, as their portraits 
on  these  walls  attest,  it  was  a  very  profitable  monopoly  for  those  on  the  inside.  It  was, 
however, decidedly less advantageous for those on the outside, and so the stranglehold of 
the Drapers’ Company eventually eroded. 
By the 17th century, the trade began to move out of the City and the companies’ powers of 
regulation declined. Eventually, freed from the restrictions of the guilds, a highly competitive, 
global textiles industry became one of the foundations of the British Empire. While wool had 
been a tidy little earner, textiles helped deliver a century of unprecedented prosperity. 
There is an analogy to London’s position in global finance. The City re-established its pre-
eminence following the deregulation of the closed shop of British finance in the mid-1980s. 
The  subsequent  reduction  of  capital  controls,  first  across  advanced  and  then  emerging 
economies,  spurred  an  explosion  of  cross-border  capital  flows.  In  an  era  when  trade 
expanded sevenfold, capital flows would increase more than thirty times. 
Today, the City is the centre of global finance, and its fortunes are tied to cycles in the global 
economy,  and  more  particularly  to  large,  sometimes  abrupt,  fluctuations  in  cross-border 
financial flows. 
This  is  my  subject  today:  how  global  liquidity  cycles  affect financial stability  and  economic 
growth, and what policy can do about it.1 
Over the past five years, global liquidity has swung wildly from the exuberant surge that fed a 
cavalier “search for yield” during the Great Moderation to the severe retreat that prompted 
the  desperate  “rush  for  shelter”  in  the  aftermath  of  Lehman.  In  response  to  the  massive 
monetary and fiscal policy stimulus unleashed following that debacle, liquidity flooded back, 
boosting asset prices and bolstering growth across the globe. 
Now the cycle is again turning. The ongoing deleveraging of the European banking system is 
reducing global liquidity, with cross-border credit being pulled from many emerging markets 
and some U.S.-dollar asset classes. Market-making activity is becoming thinner, and private 
financing is slowing across the world. 
The  volatility  of  global  liquidity  in  recent  years  underscores  the  value  of  the  structural  and 
cyclical policies that can dampen these cycles and channel the flows to their most productive 
uses. 
                                                 
1  This speech draws heavily on the forthcoming report, “Global Liquidity – Concept, Measurement and Policy 
Implications,” prepared by a group of the Committee on the Global Financial System chaired by Jean-Pierre 
Landau of the Bank of France. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Defining global liquidity 
Global liquidity is an amorphous concept. The Usual Suspect for any event or dynamic too 
complicated to explain, global liquidity is the Keyser Söze of international finance. It has no 
agreed  definition  and,  as  a  consequence,  there  has  been  no  coherent  policy  approach  to 
tame its more violent tendencies. 
At  its  core,  liquidity  represents  the  ease  with  which  financial  institutions,  households  and 
businesses can obtain financing.2  
Global  liquidity  cannot  be  understood  by  simply  summing  domestic  measures  of  financial 
conditions. The international components of liquidity (such as cross-border lending) will affect 
market  and  macroeconomic  outcomes 
recipient  countries,  and  can  have  a 
disproportionately large role in fluctuations in financial stability. 
To capture all the dimensions of global liquidity requires a combination of price and quantity 
measures.  Price  indicators,  such  as  the  general  level  of  interest  rates  or  credit  spreads, 
provide  information  about  the  conditions  under  which  liquidity  is  provided,  while  quantity 
measures,  such  as  credit  aggregates,  show  the  degree  to  which  such  conditions translate 
into the build-up of risks. 
in 
Official liquidity 
Overall levels of global liquidity are the product of the levels of official and private liquidity 
and the complex interactions between the two. 
Official liquidity is funding that is unconditionally available to settle claims through monetary 
authorities. It can only be created by central banks. Core official liquidity is base money, or 
the sum of currency in circulation and funds held by financial institutions at the central bank. 
Official liquidity has traditionally been small relative to economic activity. Before the financial 
crisis, it was about 5 per cent of GDP in the United Kingdom and the United States. In recent 
years, the central banks of the crisis economies have roughly tripled base money to offset 
the retreat in private liquidity. 
In addition to their monopoly on the creation of official liquidity, central banks employ various 
facilities  to  redistribute  liquidity  in  their  domestic  markets.  During  periods  of  stress,  repo 
facilities  take  in  liquidity  from  risk-averse  private  institutions  and  re-offer  it  (against  good 
collateral) to other private institutions. 
It is in this way that the European Central Bank (ECB) has prevented the most severe effects 
of the shortages in funding liquidity plaguing European banks. Partly as a result of the scale 
of  concerns  about  counterparty  risk,  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet  has  risen  from  13  to  about 
20 per cent of GDP since the start of the crisis. Although unprecedented, the combination of 
the ECB’s bold moves and €4 trillion in unencumbered collateral at European banks should 
ensure that there is no European equivalent of Lehman. 
However, measures that avoid disaster are not necessarily sufficient to promote recovery. 
There are also various ways public authorities can provide the private sector with access to 
official  liquidity  in  foreign  currency  –  the  most  traditional  of  which  is  drawing  on  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  More  recently,  central  banks  have  added  bilateral  swap  lines  to  their 
arsenals. In the extreme, these resources could be supplemented by conditional loans from 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
                                                 
2  For present purposes, it is important to distinguish between funding and market liquidity. Market liquidity is the 
ability to trade an asset or financial instrument at short notice with little impact on its price. Funding liquidity 
refers  to  the  ability  to  raise  cash  either  through  the  sale  of  an  asset  or  by  borrowing.  These  concepts  of 
liquidity are closely interlinked. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Private liquidity 
Overall  global  liquidity  conditions  are  the  result  of  complex  interactions  among  several 
factors,  including  macroeconomic  policies  (such  as  the  monetary  policy  stance  and 
exchange  rate  regime),  microprudential  regulations  (such  as  capital  and  liquidity  rules), 
financial market innovation and risk appetite. 
A key determinant is the financial sector’s willingness to provide cross-border financing. This 
can take the form of direct lending, the provision of market liquidity by banks to securities 
markets  through  market  making,  or  funding  liquidity  to  other  financial  institutions  through 
repos. The conditions under which these intermediaries can fund their own balance sheets, 
in turn, depend on the willingness of other private sector participants to provide funding or 
market liquidity. 
These interrelationships and changes in risk appetite mean private liquidity is highly cyclical. 
In  good  times,  when  economic  volatility  is  low,  risk  appetite  and  leverage  increase.  The 
resulting  easing  in  financial  conditions  promotes  a  surge  in  private  liquidity  with  greater 
maturity  and  currency  mismatches  at  financial  institutions,  compressed  risk  premia,  faster 
credit growth in the real economy, and marked run-ups in asset prices. Higher asset prices in 
turn further promote funding liquidity as the cycle progresses. 
These dynamics can be particularly pronounced if expectations develop of prolonged periods 
of unusually low interest rates. Moreover, some of the policy responses intended to mitigate 
the  effects  of  liquidity  shortages  can  themselves  affect  the  patterns  of  capital  flows,  the 
prices of financial assets and, reflexively, the creation of further global liquidity. For example, 
the massive, predictable reserve buildup by Asian central banks has dampened longer-term 
interest rates, promoted carry trades and fed global liquidity creation. Efforts by some to self-
insure have made the system as a whole more vulnerable. 
When  the  cycle  reverses,  deleveraging  amplifies  the  downswing.  During  periods  of 
heightened economic uncertainty – such as we are currently experiencing – sharp declines in 
risk appetite reduce funding liquidity, forcing market participants to sell riskier assets to raise 
liquidity.  Such  fire  sales  can  lead  to  a  generalized  decline  in  asset  prices,  which  further 
raises  investors’  funding  liquidity  risk  through  margin  calls.  In  the  extreme,  widespread 
uncertainty about the viability of banks can lead to a total drying up of private funding, with 
significant adverse effects on the financial system and the broader economy. 
Global  liquidity  is  intensely  procyclical,  with  the  complacency  fostered  by  periods  of 
excessive global liquidity contributing to the buildup of large mismatches across currencies, 
maturities  and  countries.  History  suggests  that  the  greater  the  reliance  on  cross-border 
liquidity, the more extreme these cycles can be, and the larger the disruption when they turn. 
Recent developments in global liquidity 
With increasing financial integration, the impact of global liquidity on domestic financial and 
economic  conditions  is  growing.3  The  recent  Irish  experience  demonstrates  how  it  can 
amplify the cyclical dynamics of domestic credit and asset prices. Direct cross-border flows 
of bank credit to Irish non-financial corporations increased at about a 40 per cent annual rate 
during the three years leading up to the crisis.4 Together with strong lending from domestic 
sources,  these  cross-border  flows  led  to  sharp  increases  in  private  domestic  debt  and 
unsustainable growth in house prices and housing sector activity. 
                                                 
3  Gross cross-border capital inflows rose from less than 5 per cent of global GDP in the mid-1980s to about 
20 per cent before the financial crisis. 
4  By 2008, the sum of direct cross-border lending and cross-border sources of bank funding accounted for more 
than half of total bank credit to non-banks in Ireland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  Irish  experience  was  not  unique.  Globally,  cross-border  bank  credit  (particularly 
interbank  funding)  grew  rapidly  between  2003  and  2007,  reaching  annual  rates  of  20  per 
cent  by  the  eve  of  the  crisis.  This  surge  fed  the  buildup  of  large  currency  mismatches, 
particularly  for  European  banks  in  U.S.  dollars.  After  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  cross-border 
interbank lending fell sharply, reducing funding liquidity, forcing asset fire sales and further 
reducing overall private liquidity. 
Although central banks stepped into the breach with a host of facilities, the damage to both 
confidence and broader funding was severe. Given the scale of the deleveraging process in 
the  real  economy,  the  change  in  central  bank  liquidity  (base  money)  in  the  United  States, 
United Kingdom and euro area has covered only about 70 per cent of the decline in private 
credit from its pre-crisis peak. 
Other cross-border credit cycles illustrate how vulnerabilities can arise in environments like 
the  present.  Recall  that  in  the  late  1990s,  the  Japanese  banking  system,  undercapitalised 
and determined to delever, triggered the reversal of the capital inflows that had helped fuel 
the Asian boom. 
The impact of European deleveraging on global liquidity 
Current difficulties in the European banking sector should be seen in this light. Stresses there 
could  trigger  sharp  swings  in  global  liquidity,  with  consequences  across  financial  systems 
and economies. 
Funding conditions in Europe have tightened markedly in recent months as a result of rising 
concerns over sovereign risk. The 3-month EURIBOR-OIS spread has more than tripled and 
bank access to longer-term unsecured financing has been sporadic at best. The retreat of 
cross-border flows has been the determining factor. For example, U.S. money market funds 
have  sharply  reduced  their  exposures  to  European  banks.  As  a  result,  U.S.-dollar  funding 
pressures have been particularly acute, prompting the ECB to extend its U.S.-dollar liquidity 
facilities. 
The deterioration in funding markets in Europe has had important spillover effects on broader 
European  financial  conditions.  Lending  standards  for  businesses  and  households  have 
tightened  significantly  and,  partially  as  a  consequence,  economic  momentum  has  slowed. 
Indeed, despite the major steps taken in recent weeks by European authorities, the Bank of 
Canada now expects the euro area to experience at least a brief recession as a result. 
The effects are not limited to Europe. Global financial conditions have tightened significantly. 
Market-making  activity  has  decreased,  with  U.S.  primary  dealer  inventories  of  corporate 
bonds down about 40 per cent since April to a level of about one-quarter of their pre-crisis 
peak. More importantly, relative to levels over the previous two years, new issuance volumes 
have fallen by about 80 per cent in the U.S. high-yield market, and roughly 25 per cent in 
investment-grade corporate markets over the past three months. 
As global liquidity recedes, volatility is increasing and activity falling. The effect on the real 
economy will soon be felt. 
Policy implications 
Authorities  are  closely  monitoring  these  developments  and  will  act  if  necessary  to  offset 
them.5  In  the  absence  of  decisive  actions  to  address  the  underlying  sovereign  problems, 
there are several alternatives to mitigate the effects. 
                                                 
5  The  recent  communiqué  of  G-20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  committed  the  G-20  to 
continued efforts to assess developments in global liquidity conditions (15 October 2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The first is to limit the scale of deleveraging itself. The severity of the downturn will depend in 
part on how European  banks delever. The new requirement to raise core Tier 1 capital to 
9 per  cent  by  next  June  can  be  met  through  a  combination  of  retained  earnings,  capital 
increases and asset sales. In the extreme, if only asset sales were used, up to €2.5 trillion of 
disposals would be required in coming months. Based on last year’s earnings and assuming 
no dividends are paid, the lower bound for asset sales would be €1.4 trillion. 
These will likely be concentrated in non-core businesses – notably in emerging markets and 
in U.S. dollars. Perhaps not surprisingly, in recent months, capital flows to emerging markets 
have  slowed  and,  in  some  cases,  reversed.  Anticipation  of  this  trend,  combined  with  a 
generalised decrease in risk appetite, could further feed this dynamic. Now may be a time for 
Asian authorities to draw on official reserves to offset the withdrawal of private liquidity. 
The advantage for European banks of selling U.S.-dollar assets is obvious. Doing so would 
reduce  the  funding  currency  mismatch  that  has  plagued  them  for  the  past  several  years. 
Non-European  creditors  are  seeing  opportunities  in  structured  products,  trade  and  project 
finance,  as  well  as  conventional  corporate  lending  facilities.  This  will  displace  new  credit 
creation in the United States. 
One way European authorities could reduce these spillovers is to require European banks to 
meet  at  least  part  of  their  requirements  by  raising  private  capital,  including  high-trigger 
contingent capital. The latter would limit the dilution of existing shareholders, while providing 
a loss absorbing cushion. The current situation is ideally suited for this instrument since the 
capital is being raised for an extreme tail event (losses on highly rated sovereign debt) – the 
public nature of which would involve no risk of regulatory forbearance. 
The  second  line  of  defence  involves  co-operative  measures  to  provide  foreign  currency 
liquidity.  In  recent  years,  central  banks,  led  by  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve,  have  instituted 
swap lines to redistribute U.S.-dollar official liquidity in order to address currency mismatches 
in the financial sector.6  
In their first round in 2008–09, U.S.-dollar swaps proved very effective in containing currency 
basis  swap  rates  and  OIS  funding  spreads,  before  ultimately  helping  to  end  the  period  of 
liquidity destruction and stabilising global financial markets. 
Since the intensification of the European crisis this past summer, the swap lines have been 
supplemented  by  the  reintroduction  of  unlimited  3-month  U.S.-dollar  liquidity  operations  at 
the ECB, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England and the Swiss National Bank.7  
Given the close relationship between global and domestic liquidity, central banks also stand 
ready to activate domestic facilities, if required.8  
Country-specific  or  regional  liquidity  shocks  may  also  be  addressed  through  IMF  facilities. 
The IMF is already playing an important role in the peripheral country programs, which could 
be expanded through further conventional, conditional lending if the situation required. 
                                                 
6  These facilities have been implemented flexibly with country coverage and the liquidity amounts adjusted on a 
timely basis, depending on the prevailing market conditions. Importantly, they have also been designed to limit 
moral  hazard,  with  access  at  a  penalty  rate  to  ensure  that  market  participants  return  to  private  sources  of 
liquidity as market conditions improve. 
7  These  banks  will  offer  unlimited  U.S.-dollar  liquidity  at  a  fixed  rate  of  OIS  plus  100  basis  points  in  three 
operations,  which  span  year-end.  These  central  banks  were  already  providing  7-day  unlimited  U.S.-dollar 
liquidity and are continuing to do so. 
8  For example, in response to the sharp, synchronous global recession, the Bank of Canada almost doubled our 
balance sheet to provide the Canadian financial sector  with exceptional Canadian-dollar liquidity. We stand 
ready to take similar steps if the international spillovers of the European situation prove severe. At this stage 
the limited direct links between our two financial sectors suggest that this is unlikely unless there is a more 
generalised reduction in risk appetite affecting global markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
However, the IMF can only redistribute liquidity. It cannot lean against the retreat of private 
liquidity by creating official liquidity. 
The final line of defence is to adjust monetary policy if the outlook for economic activity and 
inflation warrant. For those economies at the zero lower bound for their policy interest rate, 
this would likely mean the direct provision of additional official liquidity through quantitative 
easing, as the Bank of Japan and the Bank of England have done in recent weeks. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, recent history has amply demonstrated that global liquidity has an important 
impact on financial stability and economic growth. 
Global  liquidity  has  fluctuated  wildly  over  the  past  five  years,  and  we  are  on  the  cusp  of 
another retrenchment. There are steps that can be taken to mitigate, but not eliminate, the 
negative effects of the current wave. How European banks choose to delever will determine 
which ones authorities around the world need to take. 
Central banks remain best placed to address future surges and shortages in global liquidity. 
Through  regular  private  discussions,  central  banks  understand  each  others’  economic 
outlooks  and  reaction  functions,  thus  providing  the  context  within  which  they  can  set  their 
own  policy.  At  our  most  recent  G-20  meeting,  we  committed  to  redouble  these  efforts, 
beginning with improved monitoring of global liquidity conditions. 
Although central bank measures can help address current volatility, such a situation is hardly 
ideal.  Over  the  medium  term,  the  continuation  of  such  extreme  liquidity  cycles  could 
ultimately threaten open capital markets and a free trading system if not better addressed. 
There is a premium on improved oversight and regulations that reduce the procyclicality of 
global liquidity and make the system more resilient. 
The  G-20’s  financial  reform  agenda,  once  fully  implemented,  will  dampen  global  private 
liquidity  cycles.  Measures  that  increase  the  resilience  of  financial  institutions,  such  as  the 
new Basel III capital and liquidity standards, will reduce the probability and frequency of a 
sudden  liquidity  shock.  Measures  that  reduce  the  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  will 
help stabilise global liquidity flows. Key elements in this regard include countercyclical capital 
buffers, the implementation of more resilient financial market infrastructure, reductions in the 
variability of repo margins, and other macroprudential policies such as loan-to-value ratios in 
property markets. 
Of  course,  the  impact  of  the  financial  reforms  will  be  weakened  to  the  extent  that  new 
regulations divert activity to unregulated parts of the financial system.  Particularly in boom 
periods, non-regulated institutions tend to take on an increasing share of intermediation and 
cross-border  credit  provision.  This  is  why  enhanced  supervision  and  regulation  of  shadow 
banking will be one of the top priorities for the Financial Stability Board in the coming months. 
In this respect, we need to heed one of the lessons of this Hall: it will do no good to tightly 
regulate a market only to see the bulk of activity flee beyond our reach. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
