Ryuzo Miyao: A macroprudential perspective in the conduct of monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the 2011 
Asia Economic Policy Conference, San Francisco, 30 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
First of all, I would like to thank the organizer of this conference for inviting the Bank of Japan 
and allowing me to exchange views among such distinguished panelists and scholars. 
Today  I  would  like  to  highlight  one  of  the  key  issues  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy, namely a macroprudential perspective in monetary policy making. More specifically, I 
will discuss how to take into account the risk of accumulation of financial imbalances in the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  which  could  help  prevent  financial  bubbles  and  subsequent 
crises. I would also like to introduce our experience and summarize what the Bank of Japan 
has done so far in this regard. 
You may find it somewhat premature to talk about how to prevent future crises given that the 
world  is  still  struggling  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  However,  in  order  for 
Asia  to  keep  playing  a  leading  role  in  the  global  economy,  the  issue  must  be  of  great 
importance,  although  I  should  immediately  add  that  we  have  not  observed  excessive 
financial imbalances in the region. Looking back at the period after the Asian crisis, we have 
witnessed a series of incidents that can be deemed crises. It appears that the frequency of 
such incidents is rising and that efforts to deal with one crisis might have provided the seeds 
for  a  subsequent  crisis.  In  the  coming  years,  Asia  will  not  be  allowed  the  luxury  of  simply 
being pleased with the situation. 
The essence of the global financial crisis 
I. 
As background, let me briefly review the essence of the global financial crisis. 
Although a variety of economic and financial factors are involved, the essence of the global 
financial crisis is the formation and bursting of the credit bubble. In forming the bubble, the 
household sector in the United States expanded borrowing and consumption along with the 
boom in housing prices. On the financial front, new types of transactions such as securitized 
products and derivatives prevailed, and leverage also increased significantly. Such excess in 
real  economic  activity,  asset  prices,  and  financial  markets  had  a  shared  influence  among 
each  of  these  components,  and  this  led  to  further  excess  that  spread  beyond  national 
borders,  resulting  in  the  global  credit  bubble.  Balance-sheet  adjustment  has  continued  to 
constrain recovery in many countries, which is typical after the bursting of a large-scale credit 
bubble. 
Unlike the case of the IT bubble in the early 2000s, the global financial crisis has had such a 
prolonged  and  serious  aftereffect  because  financial  imbalances  have  been  accumulated 
widely on a significant scale in the form of the credit bubble. This accumulation of financial 
imbalances took place during a long period of global monetary easing amid the combination 
of high growth and stable inflation – the so-called “Great Moderation”. Such an environment 
led to the prevalence of optimism about the future. There was also growing overconfidence in 
the sophistication of financial technologies. In those circumstances, imbalances accumulated 
in  the  form  of  expanding  credit  and  leverage  as  well  as  the  rise  in  asset  prices  on  a 
worldwide basis. 
At  this  moment,  the  most  pressing  and  immediate  concern  for  the  global  economy  is  the 
sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe.  The  problem  could  be  described  as  a  part  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
prolonged balance-sheet adjustment process after the financial crisis. The introduction of a 
single  currency  may  also  have  contributed  to  accommodative  financial  conditions  and 
macroeconomic  stability  in  the  mid-2000s,  resulting  in  the  lack  of  fiscal  and  financial 
discipline during the period. 
Two views on how to deal with asset price bubbles 
II. 
On the monetary policy front, central bankers and economists have attempted to address the 
issue of what is a desirable response to the accumulation of financial imbalances, especially 
how a central bank should respond to asset price bubbles. 
Discussions  on  this  issue  may  be  categorized  into  two  broad  views.  The  first  view 
emphasizes ex-post measures, arguing that “a central bank should not apply monetary policy 
to asset price fluctuations but should carry out aggressive monetary easing after the bursting 
of  a  bubble”.  The  second  view  stresses  ex-ante  responses,  arguing  that  “considering  the 
magnitude of the adverse impact following the bursting of a bubble, a central bank should 
conduct monetary policy to prevent it”. 
Monetary  policy  responses  to  asset  price  developments  involve  a  variety  of  issues,  and  it 
may not be possible to simply conclude which is right or wrong. Having said that, the global 
financial crisis has shown that, when asset price inflation is associated with a credit bubble, 
the  impact  of  its  bursting  is  significant,  and  ex-post  measures  have  certain  limitations  in 
terms of their effects, no matter how promptly and aggressively they are implemented. As a 
result,  although  there  remains  the  challenge  of  implementation,  as  I  will  describe  shortly, 
there  is  seemingly  a  growing  consensus  that  monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  by 
sufficiently  taking  into  account  asset  price  inflation  associated  with  a  credit  bubble,  and 
including ex-ante responses. 
Importance of a macroprudential perspective 
III. 
In other words, we could say that a macroprudential perspective in the conduct of monetary 
policy  has  become  more  widely  recognized  as  of  essential  importance.  When  one  says 
“macroprudential”, it is usually used in the context of how to ensure financial stability. In a 
macroprudential approach, risks are analyzed and evaluated from the viewpoint of the entire 
financial  system,  and  institutional  designs  and  policy  responses  are  formed  on  these 
assessments. Such a macroprudential approach is also very useful in examining the risk of 
accumulation of financial imbalances when conducting monetary policy. 
In  the  preceding  discussion,  I  mainly  touched  upon  asset  price  bubbles,  which  are  one 
aspect of financial imbalances that could threaten the stability of the entire financial system 
and adversely affect economic activity. Such imbalances can also take the form of excessive 
mismatching in terms of interest rates and foreign exchange rates at financial intermediaries. 
As  we  have  witnessed  in  the  current  crisis,  imbalances  could  also  develop  in  an 
unprecedented manner as a result of new financial techniques and products. Although they 
may  take  different  forms,  one  common  feature  is  that  imbalances  accumulate  through  the 
interconnectedness of financial institutions, financial markets, and other components of the 
financial system, all of which are accompanied by an excessive expansion of credit and/or 
leverage.  This  feature  is  a  key  when  examining  the  risk  of  financial  imbalances  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Challenges involved in implementation 
IV. 
We  now  understand  the  importance  of  examining  the  risk  of  accumulating  financial 
imbalances and evaluating where and how much risks lie in the conduct of monetary policy, 
at least conceptually. For actual implementation, however, difficult challenges remain. One 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
such challenge is how to detect the accumulation of financial imbalances. To this end, efforts 
have been made globally, including by the Bank of Japan, to develop analytical tools. 
Another challenge is how to respond to the accumulation of financial imbalances when they 
are detected successfully. In the first place, monetary policy by itself is not meant to achieve 
financial  system  stability,  and  moreover  it  is  not  possible  to  fully  ensure  financial  system 
stability  through  monetary  policy  alone.  Taking  the  example  of  asset  price  bubbles  again, 
suppose  a  central  bank  tries  to  accomplish  a  soft  landing  of  asset  price  inflation  through 
monetary tightening. Then the more market participants believe that such an attempt will be 
successful, the higher asset prices may increase further. If a central bank conducts monetary 
tightening aggressively enough to prick bubbles, this could end up with overkill and hurt the 
real economy. 
As  such,  in  order  to  restrain  systemic  risks  from  a  macroprudential  perspective,  it  is  not 
appropriate  to  simply  assign  monetary  policy  directly  for  that  purpose.  Greater  importance 
should be placed on macroprudential tools such as a restriction on the loan-to-value (LTV) 
ratio  for  real  estate  loans  and  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  in  the  Basel  III  capital 
adequacy requirements. It is also true that an accumulation of financial imbalances develops 
in  a  prolonged  period  of  accommodative  financial  conditions,  and  therefore  such  a  risk 
should be duly considered in the conduct of monetary policy.  
The case of BOJ 
V. 
Now I would like to explain the experience by the Bank of Japan and summarize efforts we 
have been making so far. 
Because we experienced the formation and bursting of a significant credit and asset price 
bubble in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Bank of Japan placed importance on the risk of 
accumulating  financial  imbalances  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  2006,  when  we 
exited from the quantitative easing policy, the Bank introduced a monetary policy framework 
in  which  economic  and  price  developments  are  assessed  from  two  perspectives.  The  first 
involves  assessing  the  baseline  scenario  for  economic  activity  and  prices,  examining 
whether  the  economy  is  on  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  The  second 
perspective assesses the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy, 
including  risks  that  have  a  longer  time  horizon  than  the  first  perspective.  In  line  with  this 
second perspective, the Bank examines the accumulation of financial imbalances as one of 
the risk factors with a longer-term horizon. 
The  Bank’s  emphasis  on  the  risk  of  financial  imbalances  can  also  be  found  in  the  policy 
commitment made in October last year in the context of the comprehensive monetary easing 
framework. The Bank has made it clear that it will continue the virtually zero interest policy 
until it judges that price stability is in sight on the basis of the “understanding of medium- to 
long-term  price  stability”  –  that  is,  the  level  of  inflation  that  each  Policy  Board  member 
understands as price stability. The current understanding is “a positive range of 2 percent or 
lower, centering around 1 percent”, on the basis of the year-on-year CPI inflation rate. The 
unique  feature  in  the  policy  commitment  last  October  is  that  an  explicit  macroprudential 
condition is attached to the commitment, that is to say, the bank will continue the virtually 
zero interest rate policy “on condition that no problem is identified in examining risk factors, 
including the accumulation of financial imbalances”. 
In practice, however, detecting the accumulation of financial imbalances is not an easy task. 
In  searching  for  early  warning  indicators  for  financial  crises,  vigorous  research  has  been 
done  globally  at  various  institutions  such  as  the  IMF  and  BIS  as  well  as  central  banks, 
including  us.  The  results  of  those  efforts  have  shown  that,  for  the  purpose  of  detecting 
financial  crises,  it  is  useful  to  assess  the  degree  of  financial  excesses  by  monitoring 
indicators  such  as  asset  prices,  credit  aggregate,  total  investment,  and  residential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
investment,  most  typically  their  deviation  from  a  trend.  The  Bank  has  established  a 
framework to regularly check such indicators in the conduct of monetary policy. 
While developing analytical tools devoted to the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank has 
also  been  making  efforts  to  better  analyze  and  assess  risks  across  the  entire  financial 
system.  Specifically,  it  has  produced  diversified  stress  scenarios  as  part  of  macro  stress 
testing and developed the new Financial Macroeconometric Model to analyze the feedback 
process in which stress exerted on economic conditions and asset prices spreads to the real 
economy through the behavioral changes of financial institutions. The Bank has also been 
developing  indicators  useful  in  analyzing  excessive  credit  expansion  and  the  financial 
sector’s risk-taking, as well as in detecting signs of instability in the financial system. These 
new tools and assessments were incorporated in our Financial System Report published in 
October,  which  is  available  at  our  web  site.  The  Bank  also  attempts  to  further  promote 
concerted  efforts  between  these  assessments  of  financial  system  stability  and  monetary 
policy  making.  The  recent  economic  outlook  released  in  October  and  subsequent  policy 
judgments reflect these new developments from macroprudential perspectives. 
Closing remarks 
Let me conclude. I have described the importance of a macroprudential perspective in the 
conduct of monetary policy and the Bank of Japan has been making certain efforts in this 
regard. However, I should admit that these are only partially completed and we should keep 
up our endeavor. In the aftermath of the global crisis, each country has implemented various 
policy reforms based on similar grounds. I would like to finish by expressing my sincere hope 
that a policy framework to prevent future crises will be further established worldwide in the 
coming period, through sharing experiences at various gatherings such as this conference. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
