José  Manuel  González-Páramo:  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  – 
lessons from the crisis and challenges for the coming years 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  SEACEN-CEMLA  Conference,  Kuala  Lumpur,  13  October 
2011. 
I would like to thank Conception Alonso, Alain Durré and Cornelia Holthausen for their inputs to this speech. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  attend  the  SEACEN-CEMLA  Conference,  as  it  offers  me  a  new 
opportunity to describe and explain to my esteemed colleagues from other parts of the world 
the experience of the ECB’s monetary policy over the past four years of crisis. I would also 
like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  discuss  with  you  what  I  consider  to  be  some  of  the  main 
challenges that modern central banking will have to face in the future. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  I  should  say  that  the  implementation  of monetary  policy  was 
relatively  straightforward  during  normal  times.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  Eurosystem 
decided on the level of the key ECB interest rates, following a comprehensive assessment of 
the outlook for price stability and the associated risks, based on its economic and monetary 
analyses. The Executive Board of the ECB then organised the refinancing operations with 
eligible counterparts in order to implement the decision of the Governing Council. And it did 
so  in  a  relatively  “standard”  fashion,  employing  a  relatively  small  set  of  instruments  in  a 
rather predictable way.  
Through its refinancing operations, the ECB aims at supplying the amount of liquidity that is 
necessary  for  a  smoothly  operating  banking  system,  influencing  short-term  money  market 
interest  rates  to  align  them  with  the  policy  stance  signalled  by  the  Governing  Council. 
Through  the  money  market  yield  curve,  the  monetary  policy  stance  is  transmitted  to  the 
pricing  of  financial  instruments,  and  credit  conditions  more  generally.  These  conditions  in 
turn  influence  saving  and  investment  decisions  and  monetary  dynamics  in  the  economy 
which finally also influence price developments in the euro area. 
The  operational  framework  is  the initial link  between  the  key  ECB  policy  rates  and  money 
market  rates.  It  supports  the  fulfilment  of  the  ECB’s  mandate  for  price  stability  by  letting 
monetary  policy  decisions  feed  through  as  quickly  and  precisely  as  possible  to  short-term 
money market rates. 
Let  me  now  explain  in greater  detail  the  many  challenges  that  the  ECB  had  to  face  when 
implementing its monetary policy during the financial crisis.  
The ECB’s monetary policy framework during “normal” and “turbulent” times  
2.  
The assessment of the monetary policy stance is essential in order to be able to make the 
right interest rate decisions at the appropriate time. In the case of the ECB, this assessment 
has  two  elements:  i)  the  formation  of  a  view  on  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook  and,  in 
particular,  the  risks  to  price  stability,  based  on  the  interaction  of  supply  and  demand  in 
various markets (economic analysis); and ii) the identification of the monetary impulses from 
current  and  past  monetary  policy  decisions  taking  into  account  that  these  impulses  are 
always transmitted to the economy with a certain lag (monetary analysis). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Needless  to  say  that  assessing  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  real  time  is  always  a 
challenging exercise. This is even more so in turbulent periods when there is a high degree 
of uncertainty surrounding current and future economic conditions and the functioning of the 
economy,  including  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  itself.  The  assessment  of  the 
appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  must  therefore  be  broad-based  and  forward-looking, 
encompassing  all  the  information  relevant  to  the  formation  of  a  view  on  the  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term, including the potential impact on price developments of risks 
to the growth outlook. 
Monetary  policy  decisions  may  only  affect  the  developments  of  economic  variables  in  the 
intended way if financial markets efficiently transmit the initial monetary impulses along the 
yield  curve.  This  requires  that  money  markets,  as  well  as  broader  financial  markets,  are 
functioning properly. If this condition is not met, it may become necessary for central banks 
to  take  action  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channel  continues  to  work 
effectively, while at the same time continuing to assess the appropriateness of the monetary 
policy stance given changes in the economic environment. If the central bank did not act to 
prevent markets from becoming dysfunctional, its decisions over monetary policy rates would 
remain purely theoretical. Its decisions would have little or no impact on the real economy 
and the impact itself would become increasingly difficult to predict. This is precisely what led 
the ECB to implement various “unconventional measures” during the different stages of the 
financial crisis. I will elaborate more on this, as well as on the new measures that the ECB 
announced on 6 October, in a moment. 
By  construction,  the  monetary  policy  framework  of  the  ECB  (i.e.  the  decision  on  the 
appropriate  level  of  interest  rates  and  the  management  of  inter-bank  liquidity  conditions 
needed to implement this decision) implies a separation between monetary policy decisions, 
on the one hand, and the implementation of the desired monetary policy stance through open 
market operations, on the other. A clear distinction therefore has to be maintained between 
interest rate decisions taken to preserve price stability (i.e. the determination of the monetary 
policy stance) and liquidity decisions taken in the course of implementing this stance.  
This  distinction  is  useful  both  under  normal  market  conditions  and  in  periods  of  financial 
turbulence, albeit for somewhat different reasons. In normal times, this so-called “separation 
principle” allows the central bank to fine-tune operational procedures in order to steer short-
term interest rates very close to the main policy rate, without risking that those adjustments 
are  regarded  by  observers  as  changes  to  the  monetary  policy  stance.  In  exceptional 
circumstances, when severe distortions in financial markets emerge (reflected, for instance, 
in volatile and rising money market spreads), a more non-standard liquidity management by 
the  central  bank  may  be  needed  without  jeopardising  the  central  bank’s  main  monetary 
policy  objective.  Against 
the  so-called  “unconventional  measures” 
implemented  by  the  ECB  during  the  crisis  still  aim  mainly  at  implementing  the  monetary 
policy  stance  by  contributing  to  restoring  the  smooth  distribution  of  liquidity  in  the  money 
market. It is along those lines that the ECB’s actions during the ongoing financial crisis must 
be understood. 
It is the view of the ECB that the role of a central bank under any circumstances, and in crisis 
times in particular, is to inflexibly pursue its main objective, which in the ECB’s case is price-
stability, and to perform as a key anchor of stability. This implies very careful analyses of any 
sudden unexpected shocks before considering a change to its monetary policy stance. In the 
same vein, the ECB also must assess in real time the effectiveness of its actions in order to 
be  able  to  decide  at  the  right  time  whether  or  not  to  phase  out  the  exceptional  measures 
implemented to cope with exceptional events. This is the main reason why the ECB never 
pre-commits  to  any  particular  future  policy  stance  or  measure.  Given  the  high  level  of 
uncertainty that exists in a crisis environment, any pre-commitment would risk persisting with 
a particular policy stance even when this stance is judged to no longer be appropriate by the 
ECB on the basis of its assessment of the most up to date information.  
this  background, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  regards  the  additional  liquidity  providing  operations  introduced  by  the  ECB  during  the 
crisis,  let  me  mention  that  these  non-standard  measures  have  been  enacted  at  positive 
interest rates throughout the financial turmoil, even though the level of policy rates was close 
to a lower bound. In normal times, remunerating reserves allowed banks to have convenient 
buffers  to  face  liquidity  shocks  at  low  costs.  In  crisis  times,  it  proved  to  be  insufficient. 
Nevertheless,  the  link  between  the  policy  rate  and  the  remuneration  rate  on  required 
reserves allowed us to conduct non-standard measures with positive (non zero) policy rates, 
and  hence  without  affecting  the  costs  of  keeping  high  level  of  reserves  at  the  ECB.  In 
addition, the rate that the ECB pays on cash placed overnight on our deposit facility in effect 
sets a floor for short term money market rates. Throughout the crisis, the EONIA, the index 
for euro-area overnight money  market interest rates, always fluctuated at levels above the 
deposit  facility  rate.  Especially  in  periods  with  a  very  high  degree  of  liquidity  provision, 
EONIA  tended  to  be  quite  close  to  the  deposit  facility  rate,  but  the  difference  remained 
always  positive.  Consequently,  it  was  possible  in  the  euro  area  to  conduct  non-standard 
measures  at  low,  but  positive  short-term  interest  rates  consistent  with  a  reasonably 
functioning inter-bank money market.  
Let me now turn to the details of the measures taken by the Eurosystem during the past four 
years of financial market turmoil. 
The ECB’s monetary policy during the financial crisis 
3.  
The implementation of the ECB’s monetary policy during the crisis can be divided into four 
phases in the period between 9 August 2007 and October 2011.1 
The first phase – which we can call the “Market Turmoil” phase – runs from 9 August 2007 – 
the  day  the  French  bank  BNP  Paribas  announced  that  it  suspended  the  redemption  of 
shares in its funds that had invested in sub-prime mortgages – until 15 September 2008 – 
the day Lehman Brothers failed. The main challenges faced by the ECB during this period 
were to calibrate adequately the “right” amount and timing of frontloading of liquidity, to be 
able  to  continue  steering  the  overnight  interest  rate  without  relying  on  “too”  frequent 
interventions. This was done in an environment where the reserve averaging mechanism – 
which under normal market conditions ensures a stable interest rate path – was no longer 
sufficient to stabilize money market conditions. There were various reasons for this, including 
the hoarding of liquidity by banks, heightened aversion by banks to counterparty credit risk 
and increased cross border market segmentation. In addition to these factors, liquidity in the 
inter-bank market was also negatively affected both by the idiosyncratic liquidity uncertainty 
faced  by  individual  banks  and  the  aggregate  liquidity  uncertainty  faced  by  the  banking 
system as a whole. During this phase, the ECB also needed to determine the appropriate 
split  in  the  provision  of  liquidity  between  short-  and  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
subject to market participants’ preferences. 
The second phase – which we can call the “Financial Crisis” phase – covers the last quarter 
of 2008 and the first three quarters of 2009. This period was marked by a sharp contraction 
in world output and trade followed by a sluggish recovery. In fact, in the autumn and winter of 
2008/09, macroeconomic developments tracked very closely those observed at the start of 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  During  this  period  the  Eurosystem  implemented  “non-
standard” monetary policy measures. Against the background of a sharp contraction in World 
output and trade and in reaction to increasingly dysfunctional money and financial markets, 
the ECB took bold steps to support the banking system which is at the core of the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism  in  the  euro  area.  In  terms  of  conventional  monetary  policy 
the ECB cut the minimum bid rate (MBR) in a sequence of steps from 4.25% to a record low 
                                                 
1   See, for example, Cassola, Durré and Holthausen (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of 1%. In terms of non-conventional measures the ECB announced that it would conduct all 
of its refinancing operations at a fixed rate (the MBR rate) with full allotment. At the same 
time  the  ECB  decided  to  narrow  the  interest  rate  corridor  of  its  standing  facilities.  The 
eligibility criteria for collateral was temporarily extended and the credit threshold for eligibility 
was lowered from A- to BBB- for marketable assets (except ABS) and non-marketable assets 
(with  an  additional  haircut).  In  July  2009  the  ECB  also  launched  its  first  Covered  Bond 
Purchase  Programme  (CBPP)  with  the  intention  of  supporting  a  financial  market  segment 
that is particularly important for the longer-term funding of banks and the financing of the real 
economy in the euro area and which had become dysfunctional during the crisis. The ECB 
also  strengthened  its  international  coordination  with  other  central  banks  through  initiatives 
like  re-activating  US  dollar  liquidity  providing  operations.  These  type  of  operations  had 
already  been  implemented  in  December  2007,  following  the  establishment  of  bi-lateral 
currency swap agreements with the Fed, but in 2008 they were offered under the fixed-rate 
full-allotment tender modality and with longer maturities.  
These measures were implemented with a view to re-establishing market functioning so that 
the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  would  continue  to  work.  The  fear  was  that  the 
malfunctioning of financial markets would lead to a deterioration of credit conditions and spill 
over to the real economy. Indeed, as recent ECB research shows, banks with weaker core 
capital positions, and greater dependence on market funding and on non-interest sources of 
income,  restricted  their  loan  supply  more  strongly  than  other  banks  during  the  crisis  (see 
Marquez and Gambacorta, 2011). 
The third phase, which we can call the “Phasing-Out” phase, spanned the period between 
December 2009 to April 2010. During this phase the Eurosystem announced and initiated the 
gradual phasing-out from the “non-standard” policy measures. The ECB began this process 
by  not  renewing  the  one-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  and  other  supplementary 
refinancing operations with maturities of 3- and 6-months, which reduced the liquidity surplus 
in the interbank market as the old operation began to expire. On the collateral side, eligibility 
requirements for ABSs were tightened (in December 2009) and the expiry date for the other 
temporary  collateral  measures,  like  the  enlargement  of  the  list  of collateral  assets  and  the 
reduction of the rating threshold, was initially set for the end of 2010. In addition, the supply 
of USD liquidity providing operations was discontinued and variable rate tender procedures 
were reintroduced for regular 3-month refinancing operations.  
The intensification of the sovereign debt crisis, which had started in late 2009 and peaked for 
the  first  time  in  the  spring  of  2010,  however,  led  to  a  re-assessment  by  the  ECB  of  the 
appropriateness  of  embarking  on  the  phasing-out  process.  This  re-assessment  marks  the 
beginning of what one could call “the fourth phase”, or the “sovereign debt crisis phase”, in 
which  we  are  still  in.  In  early  2010,  the  sovereign  bond  spreads  of  several  euro  area 
countries,  relative  to  German  bonds,  widened  sharply.  Even  though  these  developments 
could  be  interpreted  as  the  result  of  growing  market  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of 
public finances in Greece, clear signs of contagion to other euro area bond markets emerged 
towards  the  spring  of  2010.  This  contagion  affected  Ireland  and  Portugal  and,  eventually, 
also Spain and Italy. Sovereign bond markets in an increasing number of euro area countries 
began to become dysfunctional. This weakened the transmission channel of monetary policy 
decisions to financial markets and broader financing conditions in the economy. In order to 
address this problem, on 10 May 2010, the ECB launched the Securities Market Programme 
(SMP)  under  which  it  conducts  outright  purchases  of  euro  area  debt  securities  in  the 
secondary market. Although the SMP remained inactive for a period of around four months 
between  April  and  August  2011,  following  renewed  tensions  in  euro  area  sovereign  bond 
markets, the ECB announced on 7 August 2011 that it would resume purchases under this 
programme.  This  took  place  after  the  announcement  of  new  fiscal  and  structural  policy 
measures by the Italian and Spanish governments. 
A key distinguishing feature of asset purchases made under the SMP is that their liquidity 
impact  has  been  sterilised  through  the  conduct  of  weekly  liquidity  absorbing  operations. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Overall,  there  has  been  no  net  injection  of  central  bank  liquidity  to  the  market  as  a 
consequence  of  these  operations.  These  measures  and  their  objectives  are  therefore 
fundamentally different from quantitative easing. 
On 6 October the ECB announced a number of important additional non-standard measures. 
First, the Governing Council decided to conduct two new longer-term refinancing operations 
(LTROs),  with  maturities  of  12  and  13  months,  with  the  fixed-rate  full-allotment  tender 
procedures.  The  rate  in  both  operations  will  be  fixed  at  the  average  rate  of  the  main 
refinancing operations over the life of these respective LTROs.  
Second,  main  refinancing  operations  (MROs)  will  continue  to  be  conducted  with  fixed-rate 
full-allotment  tender  procedures  for  as  long  as  necessary,  and  at  least  until  10  July  2012. 
This  procedure  will  also  remain  in  use  for  the  special-term  refinancing  operations  with  a 
maturity  of  one  maintenance  period,  which  will  continue  to  be  conducted  for  as  long  as 
needed,  and  at  least  until  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  2012.  The  fixed  rate  in  these 
special-term refinancing operations will be the same as the MRO rate prevailing at the time.  
The six LTROs with maturities of three-months that will be conducted in the first half of 2012 
will  also  be  conducted  with  fixed-rate  full-allotment  tender  procedures.  The  rates  in  these 
three-month  operations  will  be  fixed  at  the  average  rate  of  the  MROs  over  the  life  of  the 
respective LTRO.  
Third,  a  new  covered  bond  purchase  programme  (CBPP2)  will  be  launched.  Under  the 
CBPP2  the  Eurosystem  will  purchase,  in  both  primary  and  secondary  markets,  covered 
bonds for a total value of EUR 40 billion over a period on one year beginning in November 
2011.  Further  details  on  the  modalities  of  CBPP2  will  be  announced  after  the  Governing 
Council meeting of 3 November 2011. 
4.   Challenges ahead 
After four years of financial market turmoil, market conditions in many countries, including the 
euro  area,  remain  exceptionally  fragile.  In  response,  the  Eurosystem  continues  to  provide 
support to euro area money markets in the ways I have just described. Such support should 
prove beneficial if three principles are followed: it should be timely, targeted and temporary. 
The ECB’s interventions have been timely since the outbreak of the crisis, in the sense that 
on  the  day  in  which  tensions  from  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market  first  spilled  over  to 
euro money markets, the ECB reacted quickly by temporarily offering unlimited amounts of 
liquidity  to  the  banking  sector,  to  avoid  that  liquidity  tensions  would  spill  over  to  other 
segments of the financial markets and to maintain control over short-term unsecured interest 
rates. More recently, the decision to phase out, or to introduce new non-standard measures, 
was  also  taken  in  accordance  with  what  was  judged  to  be  appropriate  under  the  market 
conditions that prevailed at the time.  
The Eurosystem’s response has also been targeted. Our response has, for example, focused 
on  the  banking  sector,  because  this  sector  continues  to  play  a  major  role  in  euro  area 
financial markets, in particular for the transmission of monetary policy.  
Finally,  the  ECB  has  repeatedly  emphasized  the  temporary  nature  of  its  non-conventional 
measures. Indeed, maintaining measures which have outlived their usefulness for too long 
could trigger other types of imbalances which could contribute to a new crisis in the future. 
For example, if support for the banking sector is provided for too long, banks’ incentives to 
resume  market-based  funding  activities  may  suffer  and  markets  may  become  increasingly 
dependent on central bank funding. Incentives for banks to monitor each other may also be 
lost, and this could result in further market inefficiencies. For these reasons, the Eurosystem 
tries to keep its interventions in financial markets at a low level that is still commensurate with 
its main objective. This is the so-called market principle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  Eurosystem  will  eventually  also  have  to  face  the  challenge  of  timing  the  process  of 
phasing out its non-conventional policies appropriately. When the time comes, it is important, 
in  my  view,  that  our  approach  to  monetary  policy  implementation  is  adapted  in  a  gradual 
manner to normalizing market conditions. This will allow the central bank to better fine-tune 
its  exit  steps,  and  to  ensure  that  the  withdrawal  of  its  support  measures  does  not  lead  to 
renewed market tensions.  
Once  market  conditions  have  improved  to  the  point  at  which  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism  can  function  without  additional  central  bank  support,  monetary 
policy  implementation  will  be  able  to  revert  to  a  more  conventional  format.  I  would  like  to 
emphasize,  however,  that  the  decision  to  scale  back  the  non-standard  measures  can  be 
taken separately from any decisions on the level of interest rates that are set by the ECB.  
In a gradual phasing-out, the ordering of different steps will need to be defined carefully, and 
in line with market developments. When the time comes, the Eurosystem will also need to 
define clearly what the appropriate design of the operational framework in a post-crisis world 
should be.  
In  the  years,  before  2007,  the  framework  performed  very  well,  as  it  was  able  to  achieve 
stable short-term money market rates close to the minimum bid rate of our main refinancing 
operations. This was achieved with a relatively rules-based implementation framework that 
did not require frequent ad-hoc interventions by the Eurosystem. 
Would the same framework achieve equally good results in a post-crisis environment? This 
will depend on whether the financial landscape will change in ways that are important for the 
transmission of monetary policy. I would like to mention a few possible developments.  
First,  as  the  annual  ECB  money  market  surveys  show,  wholesale  interbank  unsecured 
lending activity has declined during the financial crisis. It is possible, that unsecured lending 
will continue to account for a low share of overall lending in the interbank market, also in the 
years  to  come.  This  could  affect  monetary  policy  implementation  in  two  ways:  first,  the 
steering  of  short-term  unsecured  rates  constitutes  the  first  step  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism.  This  mechanism  might  be  weakened,  should  unsecured  interest 
rates become less relevant in determining overall access to credit. Second, it could lead to 
more volatility in this market and thus make the steering of interest rates less precise. One 
possible  hypothetical  response  to  such  developments  could  be  that  central  banks  give 
greater prominence to secured and repo market rates. 
As  a  second  possible  development,  market  participants  may  retain  a  higher  level  of  risk 
aversion  than  was  the  case  before  the  crisis.  This  could  lead  to  higher  risk  premia  and 
continued  market  tiering.  Lending  rates  in  the  money  markets  may  also  become  more 
dispersed, depending on the credit quality of the bank that is borrowing. This would render 
the task of the central bank more complex. 
Finally,  the  interaction  between  the  new  Basel  III  liquidity  standards  and  monetary  policy 
operations is likely to be significant and complex. Central banks’ policies can influence the 
ability  of  banks  to  comply  with  the  new  liquidity  risk  regulation,  because  this  regulation  is 
likely to affect banks’ recourse to the central bank’s operational framework. For instance, in 
jurisdictions where the set of assets eligible for central bank operations is broader than the 
one  qualifying  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  liquidity  standards,  one  may  witness  an  increased 
reliance on central bank refinancing using less liquid assets as collateral.  
The  question  of  whether  central  bank  operational  frameworks  should  support,  or  not,  the 
fulfilment  of  banks  regulatory  liquidity  standards  is  certainly  not  straightforward.  The 
interaction  between  liquidity  regulation  and  central  bank  operations  will  certainly  be 
pervasive. Indeed, central banks are by definition the only agents which are not affected by 
liquidity  risk  and  which  generally  continue  to  be  considered  free  from  default-risk  during  a 
financial crisis. For these reasons, and as they fulfil a public mandate, central banks act as 
lenders  of  last  resort  in  financial  crises,  providing  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  in  their 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
jurisdiction.  Liquidity  regulation  is  about  ensuring  that  banks  remain  liquid  also  in  a  stress 
situation to avoid the negative externalities of liquidity hoarding and the fire sale of assets. 
Therefore, the lender of last resort function and liquidity regulations in some way share the 
same goal, although none of them can by themselves be considered sufficient to address the 
issue of financial instability caused by liquidity stress. They will also interact in the sense that 
banks will factor in both liquidity regulations and the last resort function in their optimisation 
behaviour. The two must therefore not be treated in isolation.  
The  possible  impact  of  the  new  liquidity  standards  on  central  bank  operations  and  related 
relevant market segments (including those relevant for the transmission of monetary policy) 
is currently being analysed carefully by the ECB.  
Conclusion 
5.  
To sum up, the financial crisis has brought many challenges for central banks in general, and 
for the ECB in particular. More specifically, the conduct of monetary policy had to take into 
account  an  increasingly  large  number  of  uncertainties  while  liquidity  management  by  the 
central  banks  had  to  adjust  flexibly  to  implement  monetary  policy  decisions  in  an 
environment of distorted money market segments. 
The  flexibility  of  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  has  proved  invaluable  during  the 
crisis,  and it  will  allow  the  Eurosystem  to  adjust,  if  necessary,  to  a  possibly  change  in  the 
financial landscape.  
Of  course,  the  recent  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  some  euro  area  counties  poses  additional 
challenges,  also  for  the  Eurosystem.  In  this  regard,  it  is  essential  that  prudent  fiscal  and 
economic  policies  are employed  in  all  euro  area  countries.  This  will reduce  bank’s  current 
over-reliance on central bank funding and facilitate the ECB’s task of delivering price stability. 
In this context, I would like to emphasize that the central bank must remain vigilant in order to 
ensure  that  its  enhanced  intermediation  role  during  crisis  times  is  not  abused  by  fiscal 
authorities  and  market  participants,  as  it  remains  essential  that  they  strictly  fulfil  their  own 
responsibilities. This approach means that market participants must also adopt a pro-active 
liquidity  management  policy  and  accept  trading  with  each  other  again.  It  also  implies  that 
different public authorities, like regulators and governments, should also take the necessary 
measures  to  stabilise  the  financial  system,  so  that  it  can  play  its  part  in  the  recovery  of 
activity and employment.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Cassola, N., A. Durré and C. Holthausen (2010): “Monetary Policy Operations – Experiences 
during  the  crisis  and  lessons  learnt”,  in  Approaches  to  Monetary  Policy  Revisited  – 
Lessons  from  the  Crisis,  Proceedings  of  the  Sixth  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference,  
18–19 November 2010, p 280–321. 
Eisenschmidt, E. and C. Holthausen (2010): “The minimum liquidity deficit and the maturity 
structure  of  central  banks’  open  market  operations:  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis”, 
European Central Bank Working Paper 1282. 
Gray,  S.  (2011):  “Central  bank  balances  and  reserve  requirements”,  IMF  Working  Paper 
WP/11//36. 
Marqués-Ibáñez D. and L. Gambacorta (2011), “The bank lending channel: lessons from the 
crisis”, Economic Policy 26, 66, 137–182. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
