Andreas Dombret: Back home – making the G20 Summit commitments 
work 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 14th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
1 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  recent  G20  Summit  in  Cannes  was  another  decisive  step  towards  a  more  resilient 
international financial system. The work to develop a new regulatory framework is slowly but 
surely nearing completion. 
Nevertheless,  we  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  to  make  the  commitments  work  back  home. 
Ultimately, it is the globally consistent implementation and transposition of the agreed policy 
measures  into  national  laws  and  regulations  that  will  count.  In  terms  of  effectiveness  and 
consistency of these internationally agreed reforms and standards, it is therefore a great plus 
for the international community that the FSB is strengthening its implementation monitoring. 
I would like to focus on three key areas where consistent implementation is most critical:  
1. 
addressing the risks posed by systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs for 
short),  
strengthening oversight and regulation of the shadow banking system and  
putting  into  effect  the  new  capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  banks,  known  as 
Basel III.  
2. 
3. 
I would now like to briefly discuss these areas in more detail. 
Dealing with SIFIs 
2 
The  past  few  months  have  witnessed  substantial  progress in  tackling  the  SIFI  problem.  In 
Cannes, the G20 endorsed the comprehensive policy framework presented to them by the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  The  requirement  for  SIFIs  to  hold  additional  capital  above 
the Basel III minimum standards – which was specified by the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision  –  lies  at  the  heart  of  this  concept.  To  this  end,  an  initial  set  of  29  global 
systemically  important  banks  has  been  identified.  To  take  account  of  dynamics  within  the 
financial system, the set will be updated annually with respect to its number as well as its 
composition. 
SIFIs  will  have  to  meet  the  additional  loss  absorbency  requirements  with  common  tier  1 
capital, which is a particularly good buffer for covering losses. The specific amount will be 
determined on the basis of each SIFI’s systemic importance, currently ranging from 1.0% to 
2.5% of risk-weighted assets. 
I  very  much  appreciate  the  FSB’s  recommendations,  as  such  capital  add-ons  are  an 
appropriate measure for improving the resilience of SIFIs, forcing their owners to take greater 
responsibility  for  their  actions.  Moreover,  they  put  a  price  tag  on  the  implicit  government 
guarantee  that  SIFIs  enjoy,  thereby  reducing  misguided  incentives  to  take  excessive  risks 
and countering competitive distortions. 
Nevertheless, it was clear from the outset that strengthening SIFIs’ loss absorbing capacity 
would  not  be  enough.  We  should  remember  and  be  very  clear  that  failures  are  part  and 
parcel  of  a  market  economy.  Unfortunately,  the  crisis  has  revealed  a  significant  lack  of 
suitable  instruments  for  effectively  dealing  with  failing  financial  institutions.  These  gaps  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
legal frameworks must be addressed. SIFIs, too, must be able to exit the market in an orderly 
manner that does not expose taxpayers to the risk of loss. 
A  number  of  jurisdictions  have  already  adopted  legislation  to  improve  their  resolution 
regimes.  For  instance,  the  German  Restructuring  Act,  which  came  into  effect  at  the 
beginning  of  this  year,  includes  a  significant  extension  of  supervisory  powers,  allowing 
authorities to restructure and resolve banks. Yet, despite the progress made at national level, 
obstacles  to  the  effective  resolution  of  financial  institutions  remain.  National  resolution 
regimes are clearly stretched to their limits when it comes to globally operating SIFIs. One of 
our main tasks in the coming months will therefore be to ensure mutual compatibility between 
different national resolution regimes. 
In  this  regard,  the  FSB  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions,  which  were  also  endorsed  by  the  G20  in  Cannes,  represent  a  major  leap 
forward.1 The Key Attributes constitute a new international standard and serve as a point of 
reference  for  the  overhaul  of  national  resolution  regimes,  setting  out  elements  needed  for 
enabling the orderly resolution of financial institutions, irrespective of their size or importance. 
The Key Attributes require jurisdictions to have a designated resolution authority in place that 
possesses all necessary powers to intervene in and resolve financial institutions that are no 
longer  viable.  This  includes  specific  legal  powers  as  well  as  the  operational  capacity  to 
implement orderly resolutions. In addition, for internationally active firms, institution-specific 
cross-border cooperation agreements should and will be established. The Key Attributes also 
call  for  the  establishment  of  Recovery  and  Resolution  Plans  (RRPs)  for  global  SIFIs, 
supported  by  resolvability  assessments  to  evaluate  the  feasibility  of  resolution  strategies. 
The objective of these plans is to organise the recovery or resolution ex ante in such a way 
that systemically important units or functions can be maintained without systemic disruptions. 
Following their endorsement by the G20, the Key Attributes now have to be put into effect 
across  jurisdictions.  This  will  require  substantial  efforts  by  both  national  authorities  and 
financial institutions. Legislative changes will be needed in many jurisdictions to ensure that 
national authorities can exert all necessary powers. Recovery and resolution plans must be 
developed  and,  finally,  financial  institutions  may  need  to  change  their  structure  and 
operations to ensure their resolvability. 
Looking ahead, the FSB framework will be extended from global to other SIFIs. In Cannes, 
the G20 called on the FSB to deliver, by April 2012, possible ways to broaden the framework 
to  include  banks  that  are  systemically  important  at  national  rather  than  international  level. 
Furthermore, there are concrete plans to include, in the medium term, other financial market 
players such as insurers, financial market infrastructures and non-bank financial institutions. 
Illuminating the shadow banking system 
3 
The next challenge I would like to address is the need to look beyond the banking system 
and to illuminate what is known as the shadow banking system. We should bear in mind that 
the  shadow  banking  system  is  not  a  new,  autonomous  part  of  the  financial  system.  Most 
entities  and  activities  ascribed  to  it  are  already  subject  to  some  kind  of  monitoring  and 
regulation. 
Yet  the  crisis  has  made  it  painfully  clear  that  the  shadow  banking  system  can  become  a 
source  of  systemic  risks  and  endanger  the  entire  financial  system.  To  reduce  these  risks, 
gaps and loopholes in the existing regulatory framework need to be closed. Undoubtedly, we 
have to act fast, as the stricter rules imposed on banks via Basel III and the rules for SIFIs 
                                                 
1  See  Financial  Stability  Board,  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions, 
October 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
clearly  pose  the  risk  of  activities  being  shifted  to  less  regulated  areas.  We  must  not  allow 
risky behaviour previously taken on by banks to be pushed into the dark. 
Much  work  has  already  been  done  in  this  respect.  In  Cannes,  the  G20  endorsed  a 
comprehensive  set  of  recommendations  put  forward  by  the  FSB.  These  recommendations 
call for both an effective monitoring of the shadow banking system and, where necessary, 
regulatory measures.2 To improve monitoring, the FSB has set out high-level principles for 
the  relevant  authorities  and  a  stylised  monitoring  process.  The  FSB  will  conduct  annual 
monitoring  exercises  to  assess  global  trends  and  risks  in  the  future.  The  results  of  these 
global assessments will be reported to the G20. 
Getting  back  again  to  national  authorities:  their  main  task  is  now  to  implement  the  FSB’s 
recommendations for effective monitoring in a timely and internationally consistent manner. 
In  order  to  gain  a  comprehensive  picture  of  the  shadow  banking  system  and  the  risks  it 
poses,  authorities  must  put  in  place  an  appropriate  system-wide  oversight  framework. 
Ensuring that national authorities have sufficient powers to collect all necessary data at an 
adequate frequency is of utmost importance in this context.  
Yet improving data availability will require substantial efforts. For instance, in order to obtain 
a picture of the shadow banking system’s scale, national authorities must be able to draw on 
high quality, consistent data on financial sectors’ assets and liabilities – this is known as Flow 
of Funds data. Unfortunately, in many countries a number of limitations in the Flow of Funds 
statistics have come to light. Aggregating or comparing these data across jurisdictions has 
proven to be especially difficult. 
Furthermore,  better  monitoring  of  the  shadow  banking  system  will  not  be  enough;  better 
regulation will be needed too. This could be achieved either by regulating banks’ interactions 
with  the  shadow  banking  system  or  by  regulating  activities  and  participants  in  the  shadow 
banking system themselves. 
The FSB has already initiated work to assess the potential case for regulatory actions. It has 
set  out  general  principles  for  designing  and  implementing  regulatory  measures  in  order  to 
strengthen  international  consistency  and  to  reduce  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage. 
Over  the  coming  months,  the  FSB,  together  with  competent  standard  setting  bodies,  will 
issue  a  series  of  studies  and  recommendations  for  regulatory  actions  which  will  deal  with 
identified  gaps  and  with 
in  national  regulatory  approaches.  These 
recommendations  will  then,  once  again,  have  to  be  implemented  at  regional  and  national 
level, calling for further substantial changes in laws and regulations. 
We should keep in mind that, when designing new monitoring and regulatory measures, our 
actions must be forward-looking and we must be mindful of unintended consequences. Given 
the fluid, evolutionary nature of the shadow banking system, we should not focus solely on 
risks which have come to light during the current crisis. We have to be sufficiently flexible to 
capture  future  developments  as  well.  In  this  respect,  exchanging  information  across 
jurisdictions on a regular basis is crucial. 
inconsistencies 
Implementing Basel III 
4 
I would like to finish with a few words about the new capital and liquidity standards for the 
banking sector, commonly known as Basel III. The new rules represent one of the key pillars 
of  financial  sector  reform  as  they  will  significantly  strengthen  banks’  resilience  by  raising 
quality, quantity and international consistency of bank capital and introducing global liquidity 
                                                 
2  See Financial Stability Board, Shadow Banking: Strengthening Oversight and Regulation, Recommendations 
of the Financial Stability Board, October 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
standards.  Last  year,  at  their  Summit  in  Seoul,  the  G20  committed  themselves  to 
implementing the new framework. 
Unfortunately, over the last months, some market participants have raised fears that Basel III 
might  hamper  economic  recovery  or  would  damage  national  interests.  Yet  this  is  not  the 
case.  The  new  rules  are  indispensable  for  improving  banks’  resilience  and  will  generate 
substantial  benefits  by  reducing  the  likelihood  of  financial  crises  as  well  the  output  losses 
associated with such crises in the future. 
I therefore warmly welcome the fact that, in Cannes, the G20 leaders took the opportunity to 
call on jurisdictions to meet their commitments to fully and consistently implement the new 
Basel framework within the agreed timeframe. Individual countries should not seek to gain 
advantages by watering down or reluctantly implementing internationally agreed reforms.  
Conclusion 
5 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
To sum up: 
The  cornerstones  for  making  the  financial  system  more  resilient  are  now  in  place. 
Nevertheless,  much  remains  to  be  done.  We  must  put  our  commitments  into  practice  and 
translate the agreed reforms into national laws and regulations. In particular, we need 
 
to  ensure  that  all  financial  institutions  can  be  resolved  without  destabilising  the 
financial system,  
to  better  illuminate  the  shadow  banking  system  and  put  in  place  regulatory 
measures where necessary and  
to implement the new Basel framework consistently across jurisdictions.  
  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
