K C Chakrabarty: Gearing up for the competitive impulse in the Indian 
banking in its defining decade 
Special address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
BANCON 2011, Chennai, 4 November 2011. 
Assistance provided by Dr Mridul Saggar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged.  
 Introduction 
I:  
Dear  Shri  Narendra,  CMD,  Indian  Overseas  Bank  and  host  of  Bancon  2011,  Shri  M.D. 
Mallya,  Chairman,  Indian  Banks  Association  and  CMD,  Bank  of  Baroda,  Shri  M.V.  Nair, 
CMD,  Union  Bank  of  India,  Shri  S.  Raman,  CMD,  Canara  Bank,  CMDs  and  EDs  of  other 
banks  present  here,  fellow  Bankers  and  all  the  delegates  attending  BANCON  2011, 
representatives of the print and electronic media, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  to  share  my  thoughts  on  the  theme  of  the 
Conference.  I  would  do  this  not  from  the  policy  perspective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  as  a 
regulator of the banks. Having worked on either side of the regulatory fence, I would bring in 
my understanding both as a bank executive and my present experience with the regulatory 
policy to try to chart out some ideas that you may like to ponder upon and debate during the 
Conference. I would be looking at Indian banking dispassionately and giving my frank views 
on how I see the banking industry evolving and what we need to do right to tap opportunities. 
The theme “Competing in the Defining Decade for Indian Banking” is in the form of a mission 
statement. Banks in India need to imbibe it as their mission and develop a clear vision and a 
strategy to achieve this objective. Why is this theme relevant now? Its immediate relevance 
stems from the fact that financial sector reforms lost some of its pace in the face of the global 
financial  crisis  of  2008  and  is  now  starting  to  regain  traction.  So  competition  can  hot  up 
again. 
Large retirements provide defining moment for Indian banks 
I.1 
Why is the next decade likely to be a defining decade? In my view, in the coming years, the 
Indian  banking  can  unshackle  several  constraints  that  it  faces  today  bringing  about  a 
transformation into an era of globally competitive banking. The biggest of the constraint has 
been  the  legacy  of  staffing  that  the  public  sector  banks  face.  Indian  banks  employ  about 
1 million people, three-fourths of which are in public sector banks. It is estimated that about 
55 per cent employees would be retiring in the next decade. This provides a defining moment 
for  these  banks  to  transform  by  hiring  the  right  talent,  right-skilling  its workforce  and  bring 
about  a  cultural  transformation  in  the  functioning  of  the  banks.  There  is  an  opportunity  for 
business process reengineering on the back of manpower transformation. It can bring in a 
change in management as well as work ethos. While it may not be possible to quickly move 
to a fully-flexible wage model, a lot could still be done to link monetary and non-monetary 
incentives to productivity and efficiency. 
As  a  large  cohort  of  retirees  leave,  banks  can  start  removing  other  constraints  in  Indian 
banking.  There  are  several  drivers 
that  would  enhance  competition  and  ensure 
transformation of the Indian banking sector in the coming years. These include drivers which 
are  external  to  the  bank,  regulatory  drivers  and  drivers  which  are  internal  to  the  bank. 
External  drivers 
inclusion,  growing  pool  of  savings,  consolidation, 
globalisation and competition itself. Regulatory drivers include measures such as regulatory 
focus on fair treatment to customers and stringent KYC norms, risk management guidelines 
and reducing entry barriers through new licences to the banks. Internal drivers would be led 
financial 
include 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
by manpower change opportunity that the retirements would bring. Banks would need to gear 
up for winning the “war” for talent in a competitive market place. If they do so, other external 
drivers such as newer technologies and newer operating models can follow, enabling banks 
to improve efficiency. However as banks prepare to meet the challenges and opportunities 
from these new drivers it is important that first and foremost, they place financial inclusion on 
the top of their agenda. 
II:  
External drivers to change the face of banking in India 
Financial inclusion to lead transformation of economy and banking 
II.1  
Financial inclusion would need to be placed at the apex of the banking agenda over the next 
few years, as it is an unfinished agenda of last four decades. It will change the way banking 
for the masses would be done. By doing so banks would be addressing not only the banking 
and several other financial services needs of the low-income population, but they also would 
be  increasing  the  base  for  value-added  banking  services  in  times  to  come.  Partnering  in 
poverty and unemployment reduction and growth acceleration should not only be an altruistic 
objective for the banks, but a self-serving one. It has to be done in a viable and profitable 
manner and appropriate business and delivery models need to be evolved so that affordable 
financial products and services could be provided to the customers. In doing so, they would 
be  paving  the  way  for  increasing  the  size  of  the  banking  market  in  years  to  come.  Once 
banks  make  progress  on  financial  inclusion,  they  can  then  go  on  addressing  other 
constraints. With new human talent, a lot could be achieved in fields like customer service, 
risk  management,  technology  solutions  and  reap  synergies  through  consolidation  or 
restructuring where possible. The important aspect is for bank managements to take up the 
leadership for reorienting the entire organization by adopting an end-to-end approach. Banks 
which lose this opportunity of transformation may be left a generation behind and may face 
survival  issues.  Banks  which  show  proclivity  of  change  can  not  only  seize  expanding 
business opportunities in India but can rub shoulders with the global giants. 
Banks  need  to  quickly  move  towards  universal  financial  inclusion.  This  is  both  a  national 
commitment as well as a public policy priority. In order to achieve the ultimate objective of 
reaching  banking  services  to  all  the  six  lakh  villages,  financial  inclusion  has  to  become  a 
viable  business  proposition  for  the  banks.  There  is  little  alternative  to  providing  a  solution 
through  regulated  mainstream  financial  institutions  and  alternative  banking  structures, 
including the MFIs, can only complement these efforts. We need to find profitable models for 
financial inclusion through mainstream banking involving other layers as may be appropriate 
to provide an added force multiplier.  
For  this  to  happen,  the  delivery  model  needs  to  recast  from  a  cost-centric  to  a  revenue 
generation model. This will help in providing customers with quality banking services at their 
door  step  and  at  the  same  time  generating  business  opportunities  for  the  banks.  This  is 
sustainable only if delivery of banking services, at the minimum, includes the following four 
products:  (i)  a  Savings  cum  Overdraft  Account,  (ii)  a  remittance  product  for  Electronic 
Benefits Transfer (EBT) and other remittances, (iii) a pure savings product, ideally a recurring 
deposit  scheme  and  (iv)  entrepreneurial  credit  in  the  form  of  Kisan  Credit  Card 
(KCC)/General Credit Card (GCC). 
Reserve Bank has been undertaking financial inclusion initiatives in a mission mode through 
a combination of strategies ranging from provision of new products, relaxation of regulatory 
guidelines  and  other  supportive  measures  to  achieve  sustainable and  scalable  financial 
inclusion. In India, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has initiated several measures to achieve 
greater financial inclusion, such as facilitating “no-frills” accounts and “General Credit Cards” 
for small deposits and credit. For paucity of time and my hope that this audience would be 
well acquainted with these steps, I would not detail them here. But let me reiterate that the 
Reserve  Bank  is  very  serious  that  all  public  and  private  sector  banks  implement  a  Board 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
approved  three-year  Financial  Inclusion  Plan  (FIP).  These  plans  and  targets  would  be 
monitored closely. In doing so banks should note that financial inclusion does not only means 
mere opening of banking outlets. It is equally important to provide the financially excluded 
people with products that are relevant. But, more importantly, it is the banks which have to 
serious in delivering affordable products and services in a profitable and viable manner. 
Recently the world population has crossed the seven billion mark and India accounts for 18% 
of this share. With such huge population, we need to place financial inclusion highest on our 
priority list. We cannot become big players in the global banking space if we leave out a large 
segment of our own population out of their reach. We need to be worried about competition 
and  externalities,  but  not  at  the  expense  of  prime  motive  of  providing  our  products  to  all 
those who need it. 
Catalyzing economic growth by unlocking financial savings 
II.2  
Over the last two decades, there has been an increasing recognition that finance is important 
for  growth.  Countries  with  better  functioning  banks  and  financial  markets  grow  faster.  The 
degree to which a country’s financial system is bank-based or market-based does not matter 
much,  but  better-functioning  financial  systems  promote  growth  by  diminishing  external 
financing  constraints  that  a  firm  faces.  Finance  also  matters  for  income  distribution,  and 
poverty alleviation as it reduces information and transactions costs. That finance matters for 
growth should be intuitively obvious as economic growth depends on what one invests and 
so is found to have a long-run relationship with savings. Bilateral causality exists between the 
domestic savings growth and the economic growth. Higher growth raises savings, but higher 
savings also raises growth. 
India  has  been  a  bank  dominated  financial  system,  even  as  financial  markets  have 
developed a great deal since the 1990s. Bank account for about 29% of the total financial 
flows in the economy, but are now faced with increased competition from non-bank financial 
intermediaries whose share increased rapidly to a significant 16% in 2007–08. Even though 
51%  of  the household’s  financial  surplus  gets  intermediated  through  banks,  other financial 
institutions account for a significant 41% share. India’s high savings rate has been a crucial 
driver of its economic boom, providing productive capital and helping to fuel a virtuous cycle 
of higher growth, higher income and higher savings. 
Since the 1990s, the gross domestic savings rate has risen steadily from an average of 23% 
to an estimated high of 36.9% in 2007–08 before it declined and was 33.7% in 2009–10. The 
decline  in  savings  in  India  has  been  due  to  public  sector  saving  less  as  revenue  deficits 
widened, as also private corporate sector saving less as retained earnings could not keep 
the  pace  of  growth  seen  earlier.  Household  saving  rate  has  stagnated  and  larger  public 
spending has not translated into higher savings by private agents. More importantly, financial 
saving of the households has moderated to 9.7% of GDP in 2010–11 from 12.1% of GDP in 
the  preceding  year.  High  inflation,  low  bank  deposit  rates,  volatile  equity  markets  and 
increasing  leverage  by  households  affected  the  rate  of  financial  saving.  With  construction 
activity starting to slow down, the physical savings of the households could also be at risk. 
Falling  savings  is  a  matter  of  concern  if  India  is  to  grow  at  an  envisaged  rate  of  9%  per 
annum during the Twelfth Plan. If ICOR remains unchanged from 4.5 that has been realized 
so  far  in  the  Eleventh  Plan,  it  would  need  an  investment  rate  of  40.5%.  Assuming  current 
account deficit (CAD) averages 2% of GDP in this period, as wider average CAD could risk 
sustainability, then a saving rate of 38.5% becomes necessary. Banks need to play their role 
in unlocking financial saving if we hope to step up the aggregate saving rate by 5 per cent 
from the current level to realize this target. The current economic situation is putting pressure 
on both corporate profitability and the public finances. As savings in these two sectors are 
unlikely to grow as rapidly as in the past, household savings, especially its financial saving 
holds the key to India’s growth story. It is in the hands of the banks to live up to the challenge 
and the opportunity they face from this macro-arithmetic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Banks  have  large  business  opportunities.  Of  the  10.4  trillion  households’  saving  pool  in 
financial 2010–11, nearly 42% was in the form of bank deposits. This pool could grow rapidly 
allowing  banks  significant  expansion  opportunities  in  wholesale  and  retail  banking.  Also, 
much of Indians’ physical savings is still locked up in unproductive physical assets – such as 
houses and gold and banks can help households slowly convert a large part of these into 
financial  assets.  So  while  banks  may  be  focusing  on  corporate  banking  to  boost  its  asset 
side,  it  should  not  miss  the  opportunities  that  the  liabilities  side  of  business  provide  and 
should  aggressively  protect  its  turf  by  gearing  up  for  competition  from  non-bank  financial 
institutions. 
Competition, consolidation and globalisation to re-shape Indian banking 
II.3  
Competition  in  not  a  choice  before  the  Indian  banking.  It  would  come  naturally  aided  by 
regulatory impulses and increased openness of the Indian economy. Not only will there be 
increased number of players but the number and type of products and services will undergo 
a change. With likelihood of an increasing competition over the next decade, there could be a 
process  of  consolidation  among  banks  as  has  been  the  case  elsewhere  in  the  world.  It  is 
expected to be a market-driven process. Cost improvements in output efficiency are likely to 
emerge  from  this  process  as  banks  seek  to  reap  economies  of  scale  and  scope.  Mergers 
could  be  fruitful  for  smaller  banks  so  they  can  increase  their  scale  and  expand  into  new 
product lines. 
The recent financial crisis has reopened debate on the scale and scope economies in the 
context of big banks being too big to fail. For instance, Nobel laureate, John Vickers clearly 
advocated splitting large UK banks to combat the problem of too-big-to-fail. In US too, some 
regulatory features have been added through the Dodd-Frank Act to increase the social utility 
of the largest, most complex financial firms. 
In India, most banks that operate are as yet not of a global size. They are not big enough to 
be competitive. So our problems are different. We need to develop a vision of banking over 
next  decade  that  incorporates  not  only  M&A  but  changes  in  structure  and  in  operational 
framework.  Banks  will  need  to  consider  “end-to-end”  operational  changes  that  places 
customer on the top of the pyramid and then redesign the processes. Our first priority is to 
bring  about  universal  financial  inclusion.  However,  once  financial  inclusion  is  achieved, 
banks can focus on consolidation. 
Competition  and  consolidation,  in  turn,  may  prompt  globalization  of  Indian  banks.  India  is 
viewed  as  one  of  the  biggest  growth  stories  among  emerging  markets.  Trade  in  goods, 
services and finance has exploded. Foreign banks are increasingly seeking to be present in 
India. They could find easier entry through the wholly-owned subsidiary route. Indian banks 
also have aspiration to turn global. Indian businesses are making overseas acquisitions even 
as  large  inward  FDI  is  taking  place.  This  would  impel  banks  to  globalize  to  provide  better 
wholesale and corporate banking services. The focus of competition will, thus, be both on the 
nature of institutions and products and services. The competition will be intense as there will 
be diversity in terms of type of institutions as well as products and services. This will drive the 
costs  of  products  and  services  down,  making  it  affordable  to  the  entire  segment  of  the 
society. 
Regulatory drivers can provide impetus of change 
III:  
Banks  may  need  to  read  the  signal  of  change.  Drivers  of  competition-driven  change  are 
already  emerging  as  a  result  of  impetus  being  provided  by  regulatory  changes.  More 
regulatory drivers could be in offing in coming years. Across the globe, the crisis acted as a 
moderator in the area of financial innovations in the banking and financial services industry 
(BFSI). Regulators’ comfort with such innovation also dimmed. As the crisis unfolded, there 
was a need for some regulatory forbearance. Regulatory reforms were back-peddled. At the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
same time, the resultant economic downturn prompted developed country central banks to 
adopt  ultra  loose  monetary  policies.  Consequently,  a  regime  of  low  interest  rates  helped 
mask  some  of  the  risks  that  existed  in  the  system.  Banks  started  to  shrink  their  balance 
sheets adopting a risk-averse behaviour. All this reduced incentives for banks to innovate or 
rather  “finnovate”, 
innovation  and  compete.  Some  sort  of 
complacency set in. This behaviour was in evidence in India too. 
i.e.  undertake 
financial 
Saving deposit rate deregulation is good for banks and the economy 
III.1  
However,  competitive  spirit  is  getting  rekindled,  at  least  in  India,  where  financial  sector 
reforms are back on the forefront. The Reserve Bank in its October 2011 policy set the tone 
for increased competition by deregulating the saving deposit rate. It has also charted out a 
course  for  entry  of  new  private  sector  banks  and  also  given  a  clear  indication  that  foreign 
banks are encouraged to come by setting up a bank subsidiary. RBI has also given a carte 
blanche to domestic scheduled commercial banks (other than RRBs) to set up new branches 
in Tier 2 centres. While global financial system still faces considerable risk, I think the time 
has come for banks in India to live with those risks by factoring those in and get to the task of 
providing banking services. 
Increased competition is desirable for banks as well as economy. Take the instance of the 
long-awaited reform of deregulating saving bank deposit interest rates. The measure would 
go  a  long  way  in  encouraging  thrift  behaviour  in  the  economy,  helping  it  grow  faster.  It  is 
possible that it may temporarily affect banks’ net interest margins, especially in case of the 
high  CASA  banks.  Yet,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  these  banks  will  not  be  able  to 
make 
reducing 
intermediation costs and providing more value added services to emerge stronger, resilient 
and efficient banks. At the same time, the low CASA banks have an opportunity to grow and 
improve their scale economies turning Indian banking into a more competitive space. 
I have been told by some bankers that the time for deregulation was perhaps not right as the 
NPA  cycle  is  on  the  upswing.  We  all  know  the  truth  that  there  never  will  be  a  completely 
appropriate  time  for  such  reforms.  At  least,  today  we  have  the  comfort  that  banks  have 
substantially  got  rid  of  the  asset-liability  mismatches  that  were  created  earlier  by  credit 
growth outstripping deposit growth. As regulators, our job is to support financial stability and 
the health of the banking system, but not to unduly protect banking business at the cost of 
welfare of those who consume financial services. Intermediation costs in Indian banking have 
stayed high. We need to develop new paradigm for creating a competitive edge in the Indian 
banking that drives down intermediation costs. 
the  necessary  adjustment  by  better  asset-liability  management, 
Reduced barriers to entry to spur competition 
III.2  
Banks  already  operating  in  India  need  to  prepare  themselves  for  competition  from  new 
players as the barriers to entry are reduced. There is a need to extend the geographic reach 
of banking in hitherto under-banked areas and improve access to banking services for those 
who are hitherto excluded or inadequately served. The extant policy has been that industrial 
houses are not permitted to promote new banks. This had good logic in restraining the risks 
of connected lending that had created banking problems in a number of countries. In India, 
individual  companies,  directly  or  indirectly  connected  with  large  industrial  houses  were 
permitted to own only 10 per cent of the equity of a bank, but without any controlling interest. 
However, the Reserve Bank has now guided a more open regime but this regime would need 
to be developed with lots of checks and balances and not sacrificing the essential safeguard 
principles. The Reserve Bank has also guided that it would be open to more foreign banks 
coming  into  India  through  the  wholly  owned  subsidiary  route.  Reduced  entry  barriers  and 
resultant increase in competition could be an important driver for existing banks to change. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Banks need to shift to customer-centric model 
III.3  
In recent period, the Reserve Bank has provided a regulatory impetus to improve customer 
service  in  banks.  This  regulatory  driver  can  change  the  operating  models  of  banking  in 
several  ways.  Bank  need  to  adopt  more  customer-centric  models  of  growth  and  service. 
Technology  is  not  an  end,  but  means  of  business  and  it  must  help  reduce  intermediation 
costs. Bank need to be conscious of the fact that “lender liability” could become a reality and 
banks can be held accountable if their lending practices dent a business. They also need to 
be vigilant about depositor rights. 
At the cost of repetition, let me reiterate the question I am often asked, “Why as a regulator, 
are we concerned about customer care and protection? Why it is not left to the market forces 
and competition to take care of? The answer to this lies in the fact that in any service industry 
where  market  forces  and  competition  play  out  freely,  it  may  well  have  been  the  case,  but 
banking  /  financial  services  industry  is  a  highly  regulated  service  industry  with  stiff  entry 
norms  and  consumer  protection  cannot  entirely  be  left  to  the  market  forces.  Hence,  the 
regulator has a role. Availability of financial services / products, at affordable prices on an 
uninterrupted basis is the purpose and result of financial sector stability. 
Regulatory  focus  on  customer  services  is  ultimately  in  the  interest  of  banks  themselves. 
Banking  after  all  is  about  increasing  business  but  that  in  turn  is  contingent  upon  better 
customer  service.  Responsible  marketing,  responsible  lending,  responsible  grievances 
redress mechanism and responsible consumer protection are not mutually exclusive but are 
inter-dependent. The public deposits and the funds available to the financial services industry 
represent a nation’s wealth. As such the least we can think of is protecting the owners of this 
wealth not merely in terms of deposit insurance but also in terms of day to day transactions 
and  contractual  relationships  a  consumer  has  with  the  banking  and  financial  services 
industry. 
The second thought which I would like all the delegates to ponder on is to assess whether 
we are competitive domestically? The degree of concentration in the banking market is not a 
reliable  proxy  for  the  intensity  of  competition.  The  arrival  of  new  entrants,  technological 
developments,  the  increasing  role  played  by  intermediaries  and  the  varying  corporate 
strategies  pursued  by  the  suppliers  of  financial  services  continuously  changed  the 
competitive  environment  of  financial  markets  especially  in  relation  to  retail  customers.  The 
bottom line of banks should reflect the opinion of the customer about pricing of products and 
services.  Customer  opinion  (measured  as  customer  satisfaction)  and  behaviour  (loyalty) 
should form the dominant element in assessing the behaviour of banks, together with more 
objective  measures  such  as  credit  availability  and  pricing.  It  is  increasingly  becoming  a 
matter of debate between too big to fail versus too small to survive. Competition must create 
a level playing field and the desired objective of consumer protection should be built into any 
competition strategy adopted by the players in the industry. 
A  point  that  cannot  be  missed  is  about  the  changing  face  of  competition  and  the  role  of 
marketing. Banking has been and will always be a “People Business”. Pricing is important 
but  there  may  be  other  valid  reasons  why  people  select  and  stay  with  a  particular  bank. 
Especially in transparent situations with a high level of competitiveness, banks must try to 
distinguish  themselves  by  creating  their  own  niches  or  images.  They  must  articulate  and 
emphasize the core values to attract and retain certain customer segments. Values such as 
“sound”,  “reliable”,  “innovative”,  “international”,  “close”,  “socially  responsible”,  “Indian”  ,  etc 
need to be emphasized through concrete actions on the ground and these words should not 
merely form a part of the ad campaign of banks. 
Let me turn my attention to certain aspects concerning fair treatment of customers. There is 
an  imbalance  of  power  as  regards  information  and  resources  between  consumers  and 
financial service providers. This could lead to market failure. Consumer protection financial 
literacy  promote  efficiency,  transparency  and  deepening  of  retail  financial  markets.  It  also 
protects  the  financial  sector  from  the  risk  of  Government  overreaction.  However,  market 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
forces  and  competition  policy  will  not  fully  address  the  consumer  protection  issues.  It  is  a 
challenge  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  regulation  and  market  competition.  The  fair 
practices code, code of commitment to customers etc. cannot be a substitute for regulation 
but  can  be  useful  in  improving  business  practices  of  banks.  We  need  transparency,  non-
exploitative  pricing,  fair  and  non-coercive  selling  practices,  inexpensive  and  speedy 
grievance redressal and respect for privacy on personal financial information. 
Before I end talking on customer service, I would like to flag three important changes that are 
expected  to  occur  in  the  backdrop  of  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Committee  on 
Customer Service in Banks (Damodaran Committee). The first one pertains to doing away 
with foreclosure charges on home loans that are carrying floating interest rates. The second 
one is concerning zero liability against loss in ATM and on-line transactions. Lastly, banks 
should offer transparent and non-discriminatory pricing to customers. These changes could 
alter the reach of banking and the customer welfare it provides. 
KYC and integration of business in banking 
III.4  
Sound  KYC  policies  are  being  advocated  for  a  long  time  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  These 
policies  protect  the  integrity  of  the  banking  system  by  reducing  the  likelihood  of  banks 
becoming vehicles for money laundering, terrorist financing and other unlawful activities. So 
KYC in a sense has become public good. There are obviously private costs attached to this 
as banks have to spend on ensuring KYC and customers too have to incur costs in time and 
in  meeting  the  requirements.  Yet,  it  is  not  as  if  the  gains  are  all  public  and  costs  are  all 
private so that meeting KYC becomes a tax on banks. There are private benefits to banks 
too. These procedures are in the interest of banks themselves as they contribute to a bank’s 
overall safety and soundness. KYC reduces risks of defaults. It benefits banks as it reduces 
default  costs.  It  benefits  customer  by  reducing  risk  premia  in  loan  pricing.  It  also  benefits 
society by making it a safer place to live and do business. 
Bank need to prepare for a more stringent KYC regulatory regime. At the same time, costs of 
KYC need not increase as better use of technology is possible, especially by integrating KYC 
with UID. With such an integration, KYC can achieve some degree of portability with UID, 
reducing incremental costs to a bank and affording customer to more freely choose between 
banks. Bank in turn would need to do more on KYC. They should consider KYC as done only 
if they know the “business” of their customers; (KYBC) and understand and assess the risks 
associated  with  each  of  their  customers’  businesses  (KYCBR).  These  would  become  an 
integral part of elementary risk management process of the bank in years to come. But this 
change also makes a good business sense. Thus, implementation of KYC in all the above 
three  manifestations  and  making  banking  more  customer  focussed  and  friendly  will  be 
another driver for making the next decade a defining decade. 
Towards global best practices in risk management 
III.5  
The  world  has  started  looking  to  India  as  an  example  for  from  which  they  can  take  some 
positives  while  considering  global  best  practices.  Indian  banks  were  one  of  the  few  which 
emerged comparatively unscathed from the global financial crisis of 2008. Yet, risks in the 
global  financial system  have  increased  once  again.  Though  not  on  the  scale  of  2008  they 
cannot  be  ignored  with  global  economy  expected  to slow down  ahead  and  with euro  area 
sovereign debt and banking problem still unresolved. At the same time with banks in India 
expected  to  reap  greater  scale  and  scope  economies  through  organic  growth  as  well  as 
possible  consolidation,  they  are  likely  to  face  new  challenges  in  risk  management.  These 
would require to be addressed through enterprise risk management. 
Banks already have internal controls and risk management systems in place. The need is for 
better  enterprise-wide  assessment  of  both  quantity  and  quality  of  risks.  The  assessment 
needs to be stress-tested adequately and appropriately. Portfolio aggregation of risk capital 
becomes  necessary  and  the  economic  equity  –  which  is  the  result  of  the  benefits  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
diversification  at  the  group  level  –  needs  to  be  considered  so  that  capital  charge  can  be 
determined.  Only  through  such  an  approach  can  the  banks  in  India  move  to  global  best 
practices in the risk management. A great deal of quantitative work needs to be done for the 
purpose and banks need to attract talent which is skilled in economics, statistics, financial 
econometrics and risk metrics for the purpose. 
The key of the Risk Management is to ensure that banks have adequate capital and have a 
framework for risk based pricing of products and services. While Basel guidelines will bring 
out the challenges of capital planning, banks have to strive hard to meet the challenges of 
capital requirement. More importantly, the challenge for Indian Banks going forward is going 
to be in the area of risk based pricing. Banks have not been able to establish an information-
based  operational  framework  for  pricing  risk.  The  foundation  for  this  has  to  be  laid  and 
strengthened.  There  are  three  elements  of  this  foundation  a)  an  efficient  and  reliable 
Transfer Pricing Mechanism (TPM), b) a cost-benefit framework for each product and service 
which  needs  the  specific  presence  of  a  scientific  costing  and  pricing  mechanism,  and 
c) introduction of the concept of profit accountability by banks over and above the existing 
concept of risk accountability. Banks have to quickly move in this area if they have to meet 
the challenges of capital as well as risk management. 
Banks’ risk management strategies could be build on three pillars. First, a risk-return trade-
off  for  all  its  businesses  need  to  be  assessed  and  careful  choices  need  to  be  made  to 
operate  at  the  optimal  point  on  the  risk-return  transformation  frontier  that  ensures  bank’s 
liquidity  at  almost  all  the  times  except  in  some  tail  risk  or  black  swan  events  and  bank’s 
solvency at all times. Second, a cost-benefit framework for all its products and services is 
needed  in  the  bank.  This  would  help  banks  in  strategic  planning  to  reduce  risks.  Finally, 
banks need to undertake profit accountability at all its functional and area units. Each unit 
must  understand  not  only  cost  of  business  but  also  the  opportunity  cost  of  not  doing 
business. Enhanced focus on risk management is all the more necessary as banks in India 
prepare themselves for the “Basel III” regime. The Reserve Bank is planning to issues draft 
guideline on this by the end of December 2011, so that the Basel III can be phased-in from 
next year. Our assessment is that banks in India are adequately capitalized at system level, 
as also in case of most banks and a smooth transition to Basel III should be possible even 
though banks are entering into a relatively tougher environment of capital raising. 
IV:  
Internal drivers an added force for change in banks 
IV.1  Winning the “war” for talent in a competitive market place 
Manpower  transformation  is  the  biggest  transformative  factor  for  banks  in  India.  The 
contribution  of  human  capital  to  growth  of  economy  or  institution  is  often  underestimated. 
While physical capital attracts a lot of attention, human capital is often taken as given unless 
the  economy  faces  labour  supply  constraints.  This  anomaly  is  getting  corrected  as  with 
increased sophistication in banking, the quality of human capital is getting priced in labour 
market with large differential returns at least in private and foreign banks. The public sector 
banks are constrained on account of rigidities in human resource management. 
In a competitive environment in banking human qualities like leadership and professionalism 
would be the key to winning lenders and borrowers. The client is increasingly differentiating 
customer  service.  He  pays  attention  not  only  to  the  bank  products,  but  also  the  service 
quality offered by the bank. Human capital can affect both the products the banks offer and 
the  service  it  gives.  Even  though  transfer  of  knowledge  on  products  is  easier,  customer 
service critically depends on quality of human capital. The work environment, friendship and 
collaboration between the bank employees reflect positively in the bank-client relationship. 
In  this  backdrop,  the  “war”  for  talent  assumes  importance.  The  challenge  is  to  recruit, 
assimilate, empower, reward and retain the best and the brightest professionals in a High-
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
finance, 
the  understanding  of  economics, 
Performance workplace. It is important to recognize that increased sophistication in financial 
services leaves no alternative to talent-hunt. Take for instance the increasing reliance on risk 
management. It requires study of granular data for a long history that requires statistical as 
well as banking expertise as also software familiarity. Take the case of treasury. No treasury 
can  effectively  operate  without 
financial 
econometrics,  operations  research  and  global  networks.  It  is  just  not  possible  to  develop 
treasury  through  general  recruitment.  We  need  not  only  educated  manpower,  but  a 
manpower  which  is  right-skilled  and  is  ready  to  constantly  update  itself  with  rapidly 
advancing  knowledge  frontiers.  Banks  need  to  turn  themselves  into  knowledge  institutions 
and  employ  knowledge  management  tools  to  deliver  high  quality  services  to  increased 
demand  from  institutionalized  customers.  Globalisation  will  bring  in  new  human  resource 
challenges  and  opportunities.  Companies  will  be  multinational  and  multicultural. 
Management  would  have  to  tackle  not  only  entry  level  employees  but  also  senior  level 
transition.  Employees  must  be  willing  to  relocate  globally.  Banks  have  to  be  prepared  for 
lateral recruitment not only at entry level but all levels. A market related compensation, for 
which  there  will  be  increasing  clamour,  is  not  sustainable  if  unaccompanied  by  market 
related  recruitment  and  promotion.  Even  senior  management  and  executives  could 
potentially  be  hired  from  the  market.  This  will  entail  greater  transparency  in  performance 
appraisal thus necessitating defining of job roles, identifying skill requirement for a job and 
developing the skill or hiring someone with that skill. Sourcing and retaining the employee 
will, thus, be a major challenge and banks would have to create a salubrious environment 
where knowledge employees would prosper.  
Human  resource  management  practices  are  most  effective  when  matched  with  strategic 
goals  of  the  organizations.  In  terms  of  number  of  employees,  retail  banking  offers  a  large 
scope of recruitment. While given the large pool of new management graduates and others 
that  come  to  job  market  each  year,  recruitment  is  not  difficult.  However,  the  challenge 
remains to develop commitment-based practices and maintain employee motivation and their 
competitive impulse. The rate of attrition is rising fast in this area. 
Leveraging on core banking solution to open new vistas 
IV.2 
Second  internal  driver  could  come  from  core  banking  solution  (CBS).  The  move  would 
require an integrated planning across organization. Banks have made a giant leap in recent 
years  by  adopting  Core  Banking  Solution  (CBS).  They  cannot,  however,  rest  with  the 
success of shifting to CBS and need to leverage on the technology. CBS, in fact, would soon 
be a forgotten acronym. They need to scale up their activities. The question to ask is has the 
banking  consumer  in  India  benefitted  from  use  of  technology?  We  are  still  struggling  with 
home-branch, non-home branch boundaries not with a view to own the customer but charge 
him for accessing the bank from anywhere based on the industry’s promise of “anywhere” 
banking. The staff at the bank branches has not got out of the branch mind-set but expect 
only the customer to “understand”. I have always cited the examples of the textile industry, 
publishing  industry  and  mobile  phone  technology  where  the  customer  has  benefitted  by 
extensive  use  of  technology  and  scaling  up  of  operations.  The  banking  industry  was  and 
perhaps is still too obsessed with outsourcing. We need to open our eyes and mind to realize 
that globally banks are now talking of “in-sourcing” and “co-sourcing”. 
Bank can also leverage on CBS by opening new vistas in wholesale banking focussing on 
mid-corporates and SMEs. The expanding Indian economy’s high growth phase has brought 
with it new opportunities for wholesale banking. Revenues from wholesale banking activities 
are  likely  to  more  than  double  in  5–6  years  time.  The  growth  of  mid-corporates  affords  a 
large opportunity for such banking in India. The large infrastructure investments by banking 
industry  are  creating  supplementary  demand 
for  additional  banking  products.  The 
globalization of Indian companies with two-way FDI investments is also adding to demand for 
wholesale banking. The global financial crisis may have temporarily slowed down the rapid 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
growth investment banking but this could reverse soon. M&A activity may pick up with easing 
of entry of new private sector banks. 
Increased openness of the economy means demand for overseas business could expand. 
As  such,  wholesale  banking  would  need  to  gear  up  to  provide  globalized  services.  These 
services  would  need  to  cover  trade  finance  as  well  as  treasury  operations.  The  cash 
management could get more complex. 
Indian  banks  have  hitherto  devoted  disproportionate  attention  to  serving  large  corporate 
clients.  They  need  to  retrain  attention  to  mid-corporates  and  SMEs  by  planning  for  a  new 
level of relationship management, offer more structured credit products and niche investment 
banking  services.  In  this  respect,  public  sector  banks  in  particular,  need  to  enhance  their 
non-fund based banking activities, improve their offshore business capabilities and leverage 
technology to support wholesale banking. 
Governance, MIS and the S-curve in technology in banking 
IV.3 
Over  the  past  two  decades  there  has  been  a  rapid  rate  of  technological  innovation  in  the 
financial sector. This includes greater reliance on the electronic means of payment through 
technology support and better networking. Today’s banking would need to grapple with the 
rapid  advancement  and  high  rate  of  obsolescence  in  technology  that  often  impose  huge 
costs. Yet, banks can ill-afford to ignore scope of application of new banking technology. At 
the same time technology has helped improve MIS in the banks. They need to leverage on 
this. Ultimately the key to success of transforming a bank lies in improving governance. 
Diffusion of new technology typically is observed to follow an S-curve or the sigmoid curve of 
which  a  logistic  curve  is  a  special  case.  This  pattern  is  often  observed  for  sale  of  new 
consumer  products  as  well,  but  is  perhaps  sharper  in  case  of  new  technology.  In  simple 
intuitive terms, the s-curve reflects four phases of in life cycle of a technological innovation – 
emerging, growing, maturing and aging. 
We  need  to  keep  our  vistas  open,  but  not  necessarily  jump  to  adopt  any  new  technology 
without  fully  understanding  it.  The  so-called  Web  3.0  cluster  technologies  extensively 
leverage  social  media  and  facebook  ethos.  However,  collaboration,  sharing,  creativity, 
conversational  marketing,  customer  advocacy,  and  innovation  would  require  appropriate 
security  solutions  first.  Cloud  computing,  the  Internet-based  highly  scalable  computing 
infrastructure  may  also  look  attractive  but  banks  need  to  focus  both  on  computing  as  a 
product and computing as a service. Cloud computing can of course add to capabilities with 
minimal investments in new IT hardware or software. The “Big Data” can also significantly 
scale up banks abilities for data analysis and can go a long way in supporting compliance, 
risk management and other strategic decision functions. It can enable radical customization 
and  support  novel  business  models  that  can  help  banks  face  a  more  competitive 
environment. 
We need to recognize that it is still early days for these data-intensive techniques to form the 
core of the banking. Yet, need for greater granularity and business complexity needs to be 
acknowledged. In due course, these techniques can potentially open up vistas for real time 
targeting of customers’ requirements. At the same time, new S-curves for banking can come 
in  some  other  forms.  For  instance,  as  technology  diffusion  for  RTGS  matures  brining  in 
several  benefits  to  banks  and  customers,  the  RBI  is  planning  to  move  to  introduce  next 
generation RTGS in due course. 
The  focus  of  technology  adoption  should  be  customers  rather  than  vendors  or  employee. 
The key objective is to reduce the costs of banking products and services and make them 
affordable.  Thus,  technology  must  make  the  products  and  services  cheaper,  faster  and 
convenient. Steps like back office centralization, business process re-engineering, etc. would 
significantly reduce the branch workload which would enable the branches to function as sale 
and service points. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
While  keeping  pace  with  changing  technology,  we  need  to  give  some  thought  to  IT 
Governance and Management Information Systems. Concerns on high cost investment in IT 
infrastructure are increasing with speedy technological innovations. There seems to be ever-
increasing dependence on IT for operating and managing day-to-day business activities of 
the  banks.  So  there  is  need  for  IT  Governance  to  focus  on  IT  systems,  IT  security,  their 
performance  audits  and  alignment  of  technology  with  business  opportunities  and  risk 
management.  MIS  would  need  to  re-designed  to  truly  act  as  MIS  and  not  just  as  an 
accounting  information  system.  In  the  entire  IT  efforts,  I  (Information)  has  to  be  given  a 
sharper focus. 
Transformative impulses to bring decisive change in banking in India 
V.  
Finally,  let  me  provide  a  recap  for  you  by  saying  that  whether  we  like  it  or  not,  external, 
regulatory and internal changes are setting in to provide a transformative impulse for banks. 
A total change in banking paradigm is possible with manpower planning opportunities that 
the retirements would provide over next three years. Bank need to gear up for talent hunt, 
both at top management levels and down the stream to the junior most professional. They 
need  to  plan  wholesale  business  changes  from  end-to-end.  Opportunities  would  come 
through more inclusive, more competitive and more globalised banking. Banks which miss 
this opportunity to transform may be left a generation behind. Banks have to transform and I 
am confident that they will. Banks which transform would become globally competitive banks 
and, thus, would be winners and those that do not will lose out. A total change in the face of 
Indian banking is possible with these drivers. A total change is, in fact, writing on the wall. 
Individual  organisms  and  clusters  can  either  adapt  or  face  a  Darwinian  extinction.  I  am 
sanguine  that  today’s  banks  leadership  will  take  their  banks  forward  to  be  a  more  global, 
competitive and customer centric in this decade. I wish all the best in your endeavours. 
With that thought, I thank the organizers of BANCON 2011 and in particular the wonderful 
host Shri Narendra. Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
