Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy – current situation, outlook, and 
challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 28 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be here today to speak and exchange views with business leaders from the 
Chubu  region.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  deep  gratitude  for  your 
cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s Nagoya branch. 
This  region  currently  faces  a  very  severe  economic  situation,  as  the  significant  relative 
importance of the automobile industry to the regional economy has amplified the impact of 
negative events including supply-chain disruptions due to the Great East Japan Earthquake, 
the appreciation of the yen since this summer, and the floods in Thailand since last month. 
While  the  Bank  has  been  fully  aware  of  such  economic  conditions  as  a  result  of  having 
obtained information from various sources including reports from the Nagoya branch, I came 
here today to learn of your concerns directly. Before we exchange views, I will first talk about 
the  outlook  for  and  risks  facing  Japan’s  economy,  followed  by  the  Bank’s  conduct  of 
monetary policy. I will then offer my views on the most pressing issue for Japan’s economy  
– strengthening its medium- to long-term growth potential. 
The outlook for and risks facing Japan’s economy 
I. 
I  will  start  with  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy.  Although  the  economy  has  faced  very 
severe supply constraints since this March, including supply-chain disruptions and electricity 
shortages due to the earthquake and tsunami, economic activity has recovered faster than 
expected  thereafter,  which  reflects  the  remarkable  capability  of  Japanese  firms  and  the 
Japanese people to respond to such adversity. As well as the expected gradual decline in 
the  pace  of  growth  that  generally  follows  this  kind  of  rapid  recovery  phase,  new  concerns 
have surfaced since this summer: I am talking, of course, about the slowdown in overseas 
economies  and  the  rapid  appreciation  of  the  yen  against  the  backdrop  of  the  tensions  in 
Europe.  As  a  result  of  these  factors,  the  tempo  of  Japan’s  economic  recovery  has  been 
moderate. Moreover, given the addition of new ones such as the floods in Thailand, Japan’s 
economy is expected to be impacted by the adverse effects of these negative events for the 
time being. Considering their high growth potential, however, emerging economies will start 
leading  the  global  economy  again,  assuming  that  they  achieve  a  soft  landing  through 
appropriate policy responses, and growth rates of overseas economies are likely to pick up. 
In  Japan,  reconstruction-related  demand  after  the  earthquake  is  expected  to  gradually 
materialize. In the Bank’s current baseline scenario, therefore, Japan’s economy is expected 
to  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path  after  slowing  for  the  time  being.  According  to  the 
Bank’s projections released at the end of last month, the real GDP growth rate will remain 
relatively  low  in  fiscal  2011,  at  0.3  percent,  but  will  continue  to  register  positive  growth  in 
fiscal  2012 and  fiscal  2013  –  of  2.2  percent and  1.5  percent,  respectively.  Meanwhile,  the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  currently  at  around 
0 percent following a gradual narrowing of the negative CPI growth rates since the summer 
of 2009. It is expected to gradually rise to around 0.5 percent as we approach fiscal 2013, 
with the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance (Chart 1). 
As illustrated, in the Bank’s baseline scenario, the slightly more long-term perspective is that 
Japan’s economy will eventually return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. At the 
same time, the Bank fully recognizes that such an outlook is subject to various uncertainties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The most significant risk factor is the sovereign debt problem in Europe, or in the words of 
European authorities in official documents, “the sovereign debt crisis”. How will this problem 
develop in the coming period and how will it affect global financial markets and the global 
economy? In Europe, interest rates on government bonds issued by countries whose fiscal 
situations  have  become  subjects  of  concern  have  been  rising  significantly  and,  more 
recently, rates have started to rise even in Italy, the third-largest economy in the euro area 
(Chart 2). As a result, European financial institutions with large holdings of the government 
bonds in question have faced difficulties raising funds from the market due to rising concerns 
about their creditworthiness, thereby making it inevitable that they restrain lending in order to 
maintain  liquidity.  As  illustrated,  in  Europe,  an  adverse  feedback  loop  is  operating  with 
respect  to  the  fiscal  situation,  the  financial  system,  and  economic  activity,  under  which  a 
decline  in  confidence  in  fiscal  conditions  has  increased  concerns  about  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, which in turn has started to affect economic activity. Such economic and 
financial developments in Europe have been affecting economies in other regions around the 
world. 
The  sovereign  debt  problem  has  also  been  an  underlying  cause  of  the  yen’s  appreciation 
since  this  summer.  Global  investors  have  become  increasingly  risk  averse  amid  growing 
uncertainty  regarding  the  global  economy.  When  a  global  financial  crisis  materializes,  it 
always does so in the form of a currency crisis. In this regard, although Japan faces a wide 
range of challenges in the medium to long term as I will point out later, the yen has been 
considered a relatively safe asset and is therefore an attractive buying option for investors, 
due  in  part  to  Japan’s  current  account  surplus  and  the  resultant  significant  amount  of  net 
external assets. 
II. 
The Bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
The three-pronged approach 
Amid  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  appreciation  of  the  yen,  the  Bank  has 
recently  taken  measures  to  enhance  monetary  easing  twice  –  in  August  and  October  this 
year  –  due  to  heightened  concerns  about  the  likelihood  of  a  future  slowdown  in  Japan’s 
economy  (Chart  3).  As  the  Bank  has  heard  various  opinions  with  regard  to  the  Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy, I would like to give a rather detailed explanation of the policy, 
starting from the current framework. As many of you may be aware, the Bank has taken the 
three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing under the framework of the 
“comprehensive monetary easing” implemented in October 2010, ensuring financial market 
stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. Through 
this approach, the Bank has continued to consistently make contributions as the central bank 
in order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path 
under price stability as soon as possible. 
Regarding  the  first  of  these  three  measures  –  powerful  monetary  easing  under  the 
comprehensive monetary easing framework – the Bank sets the policy rate at around 0 to 
0.1 percent,  which  can  be  deemed  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy,  and  is  publicly 
committed to continuing this policy until it judges that price stability is in sight. Moreover, it 
has established on its balance sheet a program for purchasing financial assets, called the 
Asset  Purchase  Program,  under  which  it  purchases  from  the  markets  not  only  long-  and 
short-term government bonds but also – in a highly extraordinary measure for a central bank 
– risk assets such as CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real 
estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  Through  this  measure,  the  Bank  aims  to  encourage  a 
decline in longer-term interest rates and various risk premiums. The Program has increased 
to  a  total  of  55  trillion  yen  after  being  repeatedly  expanded  in  size,  and  the  Bank  is 
proceeding  with  its  purchases  of  various  financial  assets  amounting  to  approximately 
15 trillion yen in the period until the end of next year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second,  the  Bank  has  been  ensuring  financial  market  stability.  This  becomes  especially 
important at a time like this given the increasing anxiety in global financial markets due to the 
sovereign debt problem in Europe. In this regard, the Bank has continued to provide ample 
yen  funds,  and  has  established  frameworks  for  providing  U.S.  dollar  funds,  in  cooperation 
with central banks in North America and Europe (Chart 4). While maintaining close contact 
with overseas central banks, the Bank will do its utmost to ensure market stability. 
Third,  the  Bank  is  providing  support  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth, 
which is another extraordinary measure for a central bank (Chart 5). Under this framework, 
the  Bank  supports  the  efforts  of  firms  and  financial  institutions  aimed  at  strengthening  the 
growth potential of Japan’s economy by providing financial institutions with long-term funds 
at a low interest rate. 
The accommodative financial environment 
How, then, are effects of such powerful monetary easing transmitted to economic activity? 
Proceeding  with  this  discussion  requires  consideration  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary  policy  in  two  stages  (Chart  6).  The  first  stage  is  the  transmission  of  monetary 
easing effects from the realm of monetary policy to the financial environment; in other words, 
this refers to the extent to which borrowing and availability of funds for firms and households 
become  more  accommodative.  The  second  stage  is  the  transmission  of  effects  from  the 
financial environment to the real economy, or in other words the extent to which firms and 
households make use of the accommodative financial conditions to increase their investment 
and spending. 
Looking at the first stage, financial conditions in Japan have continued to ease steadily amid 
increased  strains  in  global  financial  markets  against  the  backdrop  of  the  sovereign  debt 
problem  in  Europe  (Chart  7).  More  specifically,  market  interest  rates  including  longer-term 
ones  have  been  at  extremely  low  levels,  and  corporate  bond  and  CP  yield  spreads  over 
Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs),  or  credit  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  and  CP,  have 
remained  stable  at  low  levels.  Moreover,  bank  lending  rates  have  declined  moderately. 
Various surveys of firms suggest clear improvement in both the lending stances of financial 
institutions as perceived by firms and in firms’ financial positions. This is in sharp contrast to 
the  situation  in  Europe  and  the  United  States,  where  financial  conditions  have  tightened 
since the summer against the backdrop of market anxiety due to the sovereign debt problem 
in Europe. The Bank assesses that the improvement in Japan’s financial conditions can be 
partly  attributed  to  the  Bank’s  highly  stimulative  monetary  policy,  which  I  touched  upon 
earlier. 
Shifting our focus to the second stage of the transmission of monetary policy, unfortunately 
even an extremely accommodative financial environment has not led to an active increase in 
investment  and  spending  by  private  economic  agents.  This  is  in  fact  a  prime  source  of 
concern for the Bank as well as Japan’s economy. 
As  a  response  to  this  situation,  some  believe  that  economic  activity  would  eventually  be 
stimulated  if  the  Bank  took  further  drastic  measures.  In  reality,  however,  interest  rates  in 
Japan, particularly actual funding rates for private economic agents, have continued to ease 
and are the lowest among advanced economies. As for quantitative indicators, the monetary 
base  –  funds  provided  by  the  central  bank  –  and  money  stock  –  funds  possessed  by 
households and firms – relative to nominal GDP indicate that the amount of fund provision in 
Japan is the largest among advanced economies, far exceeding the amounts in the United 
States  and  the  euro  area  (Chart  8).  While  the  United  States  substantially  increased  its 
amount of fund provision after the Lehman shock, Japan conducted such aggressive fund-
provisioning at an earlier stage given that it experienced a financial crisis at an earlier stage. 
This may explain why the Bank’s active efforts may not be so noticeable. Nonetheless, the 
hard  fact  based  on  data  is  that  Japan’s  monetary  base  relative  to  nominal  GDP  already 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
attained in 2002 the level currently reached by that of the United States, and has been rising 
further over the past several years. 
Although  the  Bank  continues  to  enhance  monetary  easing,  given  the  accommodative 
financial environment surrounding Japan that I have described, it is more important to make 
efforts  to  take  advantage  of  such  conditions  –  namely,  efforts  aimed  at  strengthening  the 
economy’s growth potential. I will discuss this in more detail later, but before that let me turn 
to the effect of and responses to the yen’s appreciation, which is closely connected to this 
issue and is considered a matter of grave concern among people in this region. 
Responses to the Yen’s appreciation 
III. 
Regardless  of  whether  a  currency  is  appreciating  or  depreciating,  the  impact  of  foreign 
exchange  rate  fluctuations  is  highly  significant  for  business,  for  local  economies  where 
businesses cluster, and for the national economy as a whole. Looking back, the yen was on 
a  significant  depreciation  trend  toward  the  middle  of  the  2000s,  which  was  followed  by  a 
period of significant appreciation. The current appreciation of the yen has both advantages 
and disadvantages, and how they each materialize differs depending on the phase and time 
horizon. After considering all these factors, the Bank has concluded that, in the current time 
of high uncertainty regarding the future prospects of overseas economies, due attention is 
necessary to the risk that the yen’s appreciation will dampen future growth through a decline 
in exports and corporate profits as well as a deterioration in business sentiment. This is the 
very  reason  that  the  Bank  has  embarked  on  monetary  easing  measures  twice  since  this 
summer. 
The most debated issue at present with regard to the yen’s appreciation is the possibility that 
Japan’s  firms  will  accelerate  their  shift  to  overseas  production,  which  may  result  in  a 
hollowing-out  of  domestic  industries.  The  trend  of  a  rising  share  of  overseas  production 
among  Japanese  firms  can  be  basically  understood  as  a  part  of  firms’  growth  strategy  to 
place  production  sites  near  markets  that  are  experiencing  rising  demand,  against  the 
backdrop of a global shift of growth centers toward emerging economies. Having said that, 
the timing of this global shift is also affected by foreign exchange rate developments. As you 
may recall, in the phase of significant yen depreciation toward the middle of the 2000s, the 
profitability  of  domestic  production  improved  dramatically  and  firms  started  to  refocus  on 
domestic  production  while  pausing  their  shift  to  overseas  production.  However,  as  the 
aftershocks of the collapse of Lehman Brothers and impact of the sovereign debt problem in 
Europe  have  persisted,  the  yen  has  stayed  at  a  higher  level  than  the  period  before  these 
problems  emerged.  Given  this  development,  firms  are  returning  to  the  strategy  of  shifting 
production  overseas  that  they  had  been  pursuing  in  response  to  the  expansion  of  global 
markets. Therefore, during this period of transition in business strategy, the pace at which 
production is shifted overseas will generally accelerate compared to the past average. During 
this  period,  if  the  pace  of  this  shift  increases  excessively,  it  may  be  difficult  to  create 
replacement job opportunities at home at a similar pace. Moreover, if core companies and 
factories with long-term competitiveness move overseas, they are less likely to return home 
even with a correction in the yen’s appreciation. Therefore, as well as the risks that I have 
pointed  out  so  far,  the  impact  of  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  yen  on  Japan’s  economy 
warrants due attention. 
At the same time, the appreciation of the yen also has advantages, including lower import 
costs  for  energy  and  materials,  which  increases  the  purchasing  power  of  firms  and 
households. After the earthquake, the trade balance turned negative due to the expansion of 
imports of crude oil and LNG against the backdrop of the suspension of operation of nuclear 
power  plants  and  an  associated  increase  in  electricity  generated  from  thermal  power.  The 
yen’s appreciation has also worked to offset the negative impact of such drain of income to 
overseas.  Such  advantages  are  not  uniformly  extended  to  all  firms  and  industries.  With 
regard to the impact on the national economy as a whole, it is also important to consider how 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to make use of such advantages to promote the development of new businesses and reform 
of  the  industrial  structure.  Unfortunately,  however,  we  have  rarely  seen  such  positive 
initiatives so far. 
Necessity to strengthen medium- to long-term growth potential 
IV. 
Let me now move on to the topic of strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy, 
which I briefly touched upon earlier. I believe this is the most fundamental challenge currently 
facing Japan’s economy. 
The growth rate can be broken down into the rate of growth in the number of workers and the 
rate  of  growth  in  GDP  per  worker,  or  productivity.  The  long-term  downtrend  in  Japan’s 
economic growth is determined by two factors: a decrease in the number of workers due to 
the  rapid  aging  of  the  population  and  low  productivity  growth  (Chart  9).  With  this  in  mind, 
what will happen in terms of the future growth rate? Assuming that labor market participation 
by the elderly and female population remains unchanged, based on long-term projections of 
demographic trends, the rate of decline in the number of workers will accelerate further to 
0.6 percent in the 2010s and 1.3 percent in the 2030s (Chart 10). The rate of growth in the 
number  of  workers  and  the  rate  of  growth  in  productivity  together  constitute  the  economic 
growth  rate.  Assuming  that  the  productivity  growth  rate  is  around  the  average  of  the  past 
20 years, that is, around 1 percent, the annual rate of economic growth for the 2010s onward 
will ultimately remain between 0.0 and 0.5 percent on average and enter negative territory in 
the 2030s. 
Given  that  such  a situation  can be  clearly  foreseen,  we must  do  our  utmost  to  improve  it, 
even if only slightly. This means that in order to strengthen the economy’s medium- to long-
term  growth  potential  and  thereby  prevent  it  from  entering  a  period  of  stagnation,  it  is 
necessary  to  both  prepare  a  working  environment  that  encourages  an  increase  in  labor 
market participation by elderly people and women and make efforts to enhance productivity 
growth. Productivity growth is defined as the capacity of individuals to generate added value, 
or in other words, the ability to earn. Aside from being somewhat lucky, the ability to earn 
cannot  be  acquired  without  actual  efforts  to  achieve  it,  and this  applies to  both individuals 
and firms. Active efforts to respond to a changing business environment are thus required. 
Taking the example of firms’ shifting of production overseas, in order to realize an expanded 
equilibrium  of  profits  and  employment,  firms  need  to  rebuild  development  and  production 
systems  at  home,  especially  for  goods  and  services  enabled  by  high  technology  and  with 
high  brand  value,  and  explore  the  domestic  market  with  a  focus  on  capturing  diversifying 
needs while further expanding their overseas operations to carry out production and sales 
activities that can be shifted overseas. More than anything, it will be firms’ efforts and their 
spirit of willingness to take on challenges that will make such developments possible. At the 
same  time,  it  is  equally  important  for  the  government  to  support  firms’  potential  to  make 
progress  through,  for  example,  reform  of  regulations  and  tax  systems.  The  Bank  also 
supports firms in their efforts by providing them with a stable financial environment. As the 
key to growth lies in adapting to changes, it becomes just as important for society as a whole 
to share a sense of values that regard the active metabolism of the economy in a positive 
way. 
Low growth over a protracted period tends to draw attention to aspects of Japan’s economy 
that  are  facing  challenges.  Taking  a  step  back  and  looking  at  the  state  of  the  country 
objectively,  however,  Japan  possesses  countless  qualities  that  reflect  its  uniqueness  and 
strengths,  including  the  following:  its  advantage  in  international  competition  in  terms  of 
geography,  in  that  it  is  located  in  Asia;  its  genbaryoku,  or  “competitiveness  at  worksites”, 
which  was  demonstrated  in  the  way  that  post-earthquake  supply-side  constraints  were 
resolved; its adherence to high-quality manufacturing and courteous service; and its financial 
system stability. I believe that, if firms pursue a dual strategy of expanding business globally 
and  exploring  domestic  demand  while  taking  advantage  of  their  strengths,  it  will  become 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
gradually evident that Japan’s economy as a whole is on course toward effectively capturing 
both  external  and  domestic  demand.  Once  such  a  virtuous  circle  begins  to  be  formed, 
Japan’s growth potential will strengthen. The course future developments will take depends 
on  whether  we  are  capable  of  accurately  identifying  the  true  cause  of  the  severity  of  the 
current situation and engaging in the necessary efforts to address these issues. 
Concluding remarks 
As I have already used up most of my time, I would now like to conclude my remarks. As I 
mentioned at the start, Japan’s economy is likely to continue to face a severe situation for the 
time  being,  especially  with  respect  to  exports.  The  Bank  is  determined  to  support  Japan’s 
economy as it seeks to return to a sustainable growth path, by continuing to pursue powerful 
monetary easing with due recognition of the actual situation. In order for Japan’s economy to 
regain its strength in the medium to long term and thereby overcome its deflationary trend, it 
needs to make efforts to end the decline in its growth potential, the fundamental cause of the 
deflationary trend. The Bank hopes that various endeavors will be made so as to enable the 
economy to take full advantage of the extremely accommodative financial environment. 
In this regard, this region has long been known for its deep-rooted spirit of entrepreneurship. 
In a period of large-scale changes, the first step to opening the door to dramatic growth is to 
accept those changes and view such uncertainties as opportunities to be seized. The Bank 
will continue to support your efforts, so that regional innovation and new business models will 
inspire and motivate not only the region but Japan’s economy as a whole. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 