William C Dudley: Securing the recovery and building for the future 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the United States Military Academy at West Point, West Point, 
New York, 17 November 2011. 
 I am honored to have the opportunity to speak to you today in the hallowed halls of West 
Point.  I  do  not  need  to  tell  anyone  here  of  the  long  and  distinguished  tradition  of  this 
institution and the U.S. Army. I believe that the U.S. military is one of our nation’s greatest 
institutions  and  a  living  demonstration  of  the  best  of  America.  Your  example  of  national 
service inspires us all to live up to our duty to do all we can to advance the national interest.  
I am the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, part of the Federal Reserve 
System that serves as our nation’s central bank. In this capacity I am also vice chairman of 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC),  the  Federal  Reserve  committee  that  sets 
interest rates and makes other decisions about monetary policy. This committee sets policy 
to  advance  the  mandate  given  to  us  by  Congress:  to  promote  maximum  employment  and 
price stability. 
In  the  support  of  these  objectives  I  and  my  colleagues  must  also  guard  as  best  we  can 
against threats to financial stability, because credit is the lifeblood of the economy. Without 
financial stability we cannot achieve good economic outcomes, as the experience of the past 
few years so painfully demonstrates. 
I will talk today about our nation’s economy and the challenges that we face. As you know, 
the state of our economy is important not just for the well-being of our people, but also for the 
national  security  of  our  country.  We  need  a  strong  economy  so  that  we  have  the  fiscal 
capacity and technological, industrial and educational dynamism to sustain a military capable 
of defending America’s global interests. 
Today I will focus on why it has proven so difficult to generate a strong economic recovery. I 
will then lay out some prescriptions as to what we can do to put growth on a firmer footing. 
This is not just about what the Federal Reserve can do on the monetary policy front, but also 
about what other steps can be taken elsewhere – in areas such as financial stability, housing 
policy,  fiscal  policy,  and  structural  adjustment  to  facilitate  domestic  and  global  economic 
rebalancing. Before I continue, let me remind you that the views I offer today are my own and 
do not necessarily represent those of my colleagues on the FOMC or the Federal Reserve 
System. 
Recent developments and the outlook for the U.S. economy 
We  stand  here  today  several  years  after  the  onset  of  the  worst  financial  crisis  in  modern 
times.  The  origins  of  the  crisis  are  complex,  but  it  had  its  roots  in  the  bursting  of  a  credit 
bubble that had grown to great size during the middle part of the last decade. 
Prior to the onset of the crisis, a combination of rapid financial innovation and unbalanced 
global economic integration resulted in a mispricing of risk worldwide. This was particularly 
extreme in certain markets such as U.S. housing and housing finance. 
This mispricing of risk led to a misallocation of resources and an excessive build-up of debt 
in many parts of the global economy. Many – though not all – U.S. households responded to 
the  easy  availability  of  credit  and  rising  home  prices  by  taking  on  more  debt.  When  the 
housing boom lost steam and began to burst, expectations about housing prices and wealth 
were disappointed. The bursting of the credit bubble also created instability within the global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial system, and this in turn resulted in a sharp constraint in the availability of credit for 
households and businesses. 
The  result  was  what  is  now  called  the  “Great  Recession.”  Over  the  period  from  late  2007 
through mid-2009, real gross domestic product (GDP) declined more than 5 percent, making 
this recession the longest and deepest recession of the postwar period. 
The recession manifested itself in many ways, but one of the most painful was the severe 
impact  it  had  on  the  labor  market.  Employment  dropped  sharply  during  the  recession, 
contributing to a sharp rise in the unemployment rate from around 4.5 percent in the middle 
of 2007 to over 10 percent in October 2009. 
Extraordinary  actions  by  authorities  around  the  world,  including  the  Federal  Reserve, 
prevented  full-scale  financial  and  economic  collapse,  and  the  global  economy  stabilized 
around  mid-2009.  But  since  then,  the  recovery  has  been  bifurcated.  While  emerging 
economies  have  rebounded  rapidly,  the  developed  world  has  grown  only  slowly.  This  has 
hastened a historic shift in the balance of economic power that was already underway before 
the crisis. 
In  the  United  States,  the  recovery  has  proven  to  be  persistently  weaker  than  expected. 
Growth has been insufficient to either bring down unemployment significantly or to achieve a 
self-reinforcing cycle of strengthening confidence, demand, income and employment. 
Although the latest news on the U.S. economy is somewhat more encouraging than that from 
earlier in the year, we should not take much solace from that. After a very weak first half, 
when growth was less than one percent, economic activity has strengthened somewhat and 
inflation  pressures  are  starting  to  ease.  Growth  in  the  third  quarter  is  currently  estimated 
2.5 percent, and recent indicators suggest growth in the fourth quarter could be somewhat 
higher.  However  as  we  look  toward  2012  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  face  several 
obstacles to a robust economy. Accordingly, I expect growth of about 2.75 percent for 2012, 
not much higher. We also continue to face significant downside risks, mostly related to the 
stress in the eurozone. 
We cannot be satisfied with the current state of the economy or the outlook for the next few 
years.  The  economy  is  operating  far  below  its  productive  potential  –  leaving  the  levels  of 
output,  income  and  employment  much  lower  than  they  would  be  if  the  economy’s  unused 
resources were put back to work. One summary statistic says it all – the unemployment rate 
is unacceptably high at 9 percent. 
Imbalances and deleveraging 
So why has the U.S. recovery been so underwhelming? I think the answer lies in the nature 
of  the  boom  in  credit  and  housing,  and  the  collateral  damage  that  the  bust  caused  to 
household  balance  sheets  and  to  the  financial  system.  Recoveries  that  take  place  in  the 
aftermath of severe financial shocks and big declines in asset prices that were mainly funded 
by debt require highly indebted borrowers to deleverage, or in other words, pay down their 
debts. 
These shocks and asset price declines, in turn, generate large losses for the financial sector 
that tightens credit availability and further restricts demand. With weak demand comes weak 
income growth. Meanwhile, financial and economic volatility and the uncertainty this creates 
about prospects for future incomes causes those who retain access to credit to hold back. 
What we have learned, I think, is that the power of these economic forces is even stronger 
than  we  had  previously  understood.  And,  in  such  circumstances,  although  a  stimulative 
monetary policy is essential for recovery, it may not be sufficient. 
To illustrate the problem, let’s begin by examining net debt flows in the private nonfinancial 
and government sectors over the last 10 years. As can be seen in Chart 1, borrowing by the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
private nonfinancial sector rose rapidly from 2003 to 2006 and remained high until the crisis 
hit. Then borrowing turned negative as new loans were more than offset by repayments and 
write-offs. Only recently has borrowing turned weakly positive. 
Chart  2  illustrates  how  the  stock  of  net  debt  in  different  sectors  of  the  economy  evolved 
throughout  this  period.  It  shows  that  much  of  the  credit  boom  was  concentrated  in  the 
household sector. The business sector only experienced a surge from 2006 onward. 
During the boom, leverage also increased in the financial sector. As the boom proceeded, 
credit losses were low and earnings strong. But once the bust began, this dynamic reversed. 
Credit losses at financial institutions surged and the sector was forced to deleverage rapidly 
and raise new capital. This resulted in a significant contraction in the availability of credit and 
was a major direct shock to the global economy. Crucially, this tightening of credit standards 
exacerbated  how  much  many  households  and  firms  had  to  deleverage.  It  also  crimped 
demand,  inhibiting  economic,  employment  and  income  growth,  which  in  turn  made  the 
deleveraging process more challenging. 
The nature of this process can be usefully illustrated with a simple, but important accounting 
identity  based  on  the  difference  between  current  income  and  expenditure  in  each  of  the 
nonfinancial sectors of the economy. For each sector, this difference we call the balance. If 
the economy were isolated from the rest of the world, then government-sector balance and 
private-sector balance would add up to zero. 
In real life, of course, we have a foreign sector, too. If the United States in total spends more 
than it earns, that must be offset by foreigners spending less than they earn and vice versa. 
When domestic expenditures exceed income, this produces a deficit in the current account 
balance. Putting these pieces together we have: 
government-sector balance + private-sector balance = current account balance. 
As can be seen in Chart 3, when the crisis hit, the private-sector balance moved quickly into 
positive territory as households in general tried to save more, and this was accommodated 
by  a  record  government  deficit  and  a  smaller  current  account  deficit.  More  recently,  the 
private-sector  surplus  has  declined  and  the  government  deficit  has  decreased,  with  little 
change in the external balance. 
This  distribution  of  surplus  and  deficit  across  the  economy’s  different  sectors  illustrates  a 
substantial  challenge  for  U.S.  economy.  In  the  early  stages  of  adjustment,  it  was  quite 
appropriate  for  the  government  to  offset  part  of  the  sharp  increase  in  private-sector  net 
saving  with  increased  borrowing.  If  this  had  not  occurred,  the  recession  would  have  been 
even deeper. But at 10 percent of GDP, the government-sector deficit must be reduced over 
time to avoid creating an unsustainably large government debt burden. This decrease in the 
fiscal  deficit  has  to  be  offset  by  some  combination  of  a  smaller  current-account  deficit  or 
reduced private-sector surplus. 
Over time, the U.S. economy needs to increase net exports. However, a rapid turnaround will 
be hard to accomplish in a world in which most other nations are also looking to increase net 
exports to support retrenchment at home. 
So  it  appears  likely  that  even  as  we  try  to  lay  the  foundation  for  a  more  export-oriented 
economy, securing the recovery will require help from the domestic private sector – a smaller 
private-sector surplus. But if highly indebted households continue to deleverage, while those 
households  and  businesses  with  low  debt  remain  very  cautious  about  spending  and 
investment, there will be little impetus in this direction. In that case, the U.S. economy will 
have trouble building forward momentum. 
The financial sector also plays an important role in this process. If credit availability remains 
tight, then households and businesses may not be able to increase their borrowing even if 
they want to. While major financial institutions in the United States have strengthened their 
capital  positions  significantly  since  the  peak  of  the  crisis  in  2008,  and  deleveraging  has 
abated, the financial system as a whole is still undergoing a process of repair. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
To understand our prospects a bit better, we need to look at the likely behaviors of business 
and household sectors separately. 
Circumstances for the business sector are mixed with larger corporations generally in much 
better shape than smaller businesses. Many large corporations entered the recession with 
healthy  balance  sheets.  While  leverage1  did  increase  sharply  in  the  recession,  it  has 
subsequently  come  back  down  to  levels  similar  to  the  1990s.  Record  profit  margins  have 
enabled large corporations to build substantial buffers of highly liquid assets. 
Large businesses are cautious because of concerns about the sustainability of growth and 
demand, political dysfunction, the health of the financial system and their ability to retain their 
access to credit throughout the business cycle. 
For smaller firms, the situation is generally more difficult. Because this sector has a higher 
exposure to real estate, falling real estate values pushed up leverage for this group and it 
remains  well  above  previous  historical  highs.  Although  small  businesses  identify  weak 
demand as their major problem, the availability of credit is also an issue. An improvement in 
their ability to obtain credit would seem to require some stabilization of real estate prices and 
a substantial increase in demand for their products and services. 
Turning now to the household sector, Chart 4 shows that a combination of the fall in interest 
rates, paying down of debt and debt write-offs has substantially lowered the share of income 
required for households to service their debt. However, as shown in Chart 5, the average 
homeowner  still  is  substantially  more  leveraged  than  before  the  crisis  and  has  lower  net 
worth. 
One significant problem is the trajectory of home prices. Homeowners have lost more than 
$6,000  billion  in  home  equity  since  the  housing  market  turned.  For  homeowners  with 
mortgage debt, about one-quarter of these homeowners have mortgage debt that exceeds 
the value of their homes. The loss of home equity is a serious problem in itself of course, but 
it  has  been  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  many  households  have  found  it  very  difficult  to 
refinance to take advantage of lower mortgage rates. 
Without  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  ability  to  refinance,  the  outlook  for  real  estate 
prices, and in income prospects, it seems likely that many of the households that ended up 
with too much debt after house prices fell 30 percent from their peak may need to deleverage 
further. 
This implies that for the household balance to fall and provide an impetus to growth, those 
households  with  low  debts  will  have  to  spend  more  of  their  income.  In  many  ways  these 
households  are  in  a  similar  situation  to  large  corporations:  their  balance  sheets  contain 
substantial liquid assets. They are undertaking precautionary saving as a response to greater 
uncertainty about the economic outlook and their long-term prospects. 
In  more  normal  times,  lowering  short-term  interest  rates  would  induce  households  and 
businesses to spend more or invest more in less liquid long-term assets as the real return on 
their liquid short-term assets fell. The increase in expenditures produced by this change then 
would  lead  to  increased  employment  and  income  growth,  higher  assets  values  and  a 
virtuous, reinforcing circle. However, with short-term interest rates close to zero already and 
problems in the housing market, this standard rebalancing channel is not working as well as 
we would like. 
This discussion, I hope, has underscored two important truths. First, while deleveraging had 
to take place following the excesses of the boom period, both the extent of deleveraging on 
the part of those with high debts, and the degree of precautionary savings by those with low 
                                                 
1   Defined here as credit market debt to net worth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
debts, depend on many factors, some of which can be influenced by the policy choices we 
make. 
Second, the amount of deleveraging and precautionary savings depends on the availability of 
credit  and  the  health  of  the  financial  system  and  upon  the  degree  to  which  income  is 
sustained during this deleveraging process. Note that if income growth is sufficiently weak, 
households may struggle to achieve desired increases in savings and reductions in leverage, 
which appears to have been the situation of late. 
Policy responses in this environment 
So  what  should  be  done?  What  should  economic  policy  do  to  secure  the  recovery  and 
provide  a  sustainable  environment  for  long-term  growth?  Clearly,  monetary  policy  will 
continue to have an important role. But other, complementary, policy initiatives will also be 
important. 
Monetary policy is important as a means of sustaining aggregate demand at a time that the 
deleveraging  process  is  not  yet  fully  complete  and  credit  availability  remains  impaired. 
Sustained  low  interest  rates  help  support  financial  asset  and  house  prices,  induce 
households and firms that do not have high debt to save less and spend more, and enable 
households that do have high levels of debt to refinance them at lower rates. This reduces 
the amount of deleveraging that has to take place. 
However,  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  provide  additional  support  is  somewhat 
constrained by the zero bound – the fact that we cannot lower short-term interest rates below 
zero, and have to rely on other, less efficient means, to put further downward pressure on 
longer  term  borrowing  costs.  As  a result,  it  becomes  progressively  more  difficult to  induce 
households  with  low-debt  to  bring  forward  consumption  by  buying  motor  vehicles  or  other 
consumer durables, and to provide further support for asset prices and household net worth. 
Finally, problems in housing mean that this sector is relatively unresponsive to the low level 
of interest rates. 
Despite  this,  we  are  not  out  of  ammunition.  Although  short-term  interest  rates  have  been 
effectively at zero since December 2008, the Federal Reserve has used other tools – such 
as  balance  sheet  expansion  and  communication  policies  to  lower  longer  term  rates  and 
make financial conditions more supportive of growth. 
We  could  do  more  in  both  directions.  For  instance,  we  could  elaborate  on  our  forward 
commitment  to  keep  short-term  rates  low.  Indeed,  I  believe  it  would  be  desirable  if  the 
committee were able to provide additional guidance as to the economic conditions that the 
committee would expect to see before raising interest rates. 
And we could purchase more longer term financial assets. If additional asset purchases were 
deemed  appropriate,  it  might  make  sense  to  do  much  of  this  in  the  mortgage-backed 
securities market. This would have a greater direct impact on the housing market and would 
be less likely to disrupt market functioning compared with further purchases in the Treasury 
market. 
At the same time, we do have to recognize the costs as well as the benefits of further action. 
Forward commitment entails some risks to our credibility since it is difficult to capture all the 
considerations that go into policy judgments in simple and concise language. And balance 
sheet expansion has potential costs, as well. 
These potential costs stem not only because some may view balance sheet expansion as 
sowing  the  seeds  of  future  inflation  –  an  incorrect  view  in  my  opinion  –  but  also  because 
balance sheet expansion increases the amount of interest rate risk in the Federal Reserve’s 
portfolio of assets and could, if carried to an extreme, harm private market functioning. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Because  reasonable  people  can  differ  over  the  costs  and  benefits  of  further  action,  you 
should  not  be  surprised  that  there  is  vigorous  debate  among  FOMC  participants  about 
whether  more  monetary  policy  stimulus  should  be  applied.  Don’t  take  this  debate  for 
disagreement about the broader goal: I am convinced that all FOMC members are committed 
to taking whatever steps they deem would help advance the dual mandate of price stability 
and full employment. 
For  my  own  part,  I  am  deeply  unhappy  with  the  current  forecast  of  prolonged  high 
unemployment, and will continue to review whether there is more that we could do that would 
bring more benefit than cost. 
Monetary policy must do its part. But there is a strong case for complementary policy actions 
because  such  actions  can  help  secure  better  outcomes  than  can  be  achieved  through 
monetary  policy  alone.  If  we  are  to  achieve  the  best  possible  recovery  and  build  for  the 
future, we will also need ongoing efforts across four broad fronts: financial stability, housing 
policy, fiscal policy and structural adjustment to foster more sustainable U.S. growth and a 
more balanced global economy. 
Ongoing  attention  to  financial  stability  and  the  reform  and  repair  of  the  financial  system  is 
essential to support recovery. We need to make sure this proceeds in a manner that is not 
pro-cyclical,  and  for  this  reason  we  are,  for  instance,  phasing  in  new  capital  and  liquidity 
standards, and monitoring how institutions adjust to the new requirements. Nonetheless, the 
financial  system  must  be  healthy  to  support  sustained  access  to  credit.  If  we  want  those 
households and businesses with low levels of debt to reduce precautionary saving, we need 
to restore their confidence in the financial system. 
This means providing credible assurance that the financial sector is in solid shape today and 
that the restructured financial system will be able to reliably supply credit across the business 
cycle  –  ensuring  there  is  no  2008-style  sudden  sharp  constriction  in  credit  availability.  For 
this reason, policies that increase financial stability, both ex ante by eliminating incentives for 
excessive risk-taking and making the system more robust to failure, and ex post, by ensuring 
the capacity to respond to a major shock, will help support growth today. 
The process of financial repair also matters greatly in terms of high debt households, since 
underwriting standards help define how much deleveraging must occur to regain access to 
credit. While we do not want a return to the easy credit standards of the bubble period, we 
also don’t what to overshoot in the opposite direction. 
Housing is another area where policy can support the recovery by helping to stabilize house 
prices and housing activity. Housing is the most important tangible asset for most American 
households,  and  housing  debt  the  biggest  liability.  Obstacles  to  mortgage  refinancing 
undermine the impact of monetary policy. Moreover, declines in house prices and the risk of 
future  declines  directly  affect  the  degree  of  deleveraging  that  needs  to  take  place  among 
homeowners with high levels of debt, and the extent of precautionary saving by homeowners 
with low levels of debt. 
While  home  prices  had  to  correct  following  the  bubble,  they  no  longer  appear  overvalued 
relative to historic multiples of cash flow, income and rents. But it would be unwise to simply 
assume the market will bottom out at these levels for three reasons. First, expectations of 
house price declines can easily be self-fulfilling. The feared loss in value can overwhelm the 
benefit of low mortgage rates, leading would-be buyers to sit out the market. 
Second,  with  home  construction  at  minimal  levels,  housing  supply  cannot  decline  in 
response  to  weak  demand.  Home  prices  thus  are  very  sensitive  to  shifts  in  demand  and 
credit  supply.  If  access  to  mortgage  credit  for  home  purchases  is  unduly  restricted,  the 
market-clearing price for housing will be lower than it would be if access to mortgage credit 
was less constrained. 
Third, in contrast to the efficient mechanisms in place in the commercial property market to 
work-out  troubled  debt,  the  infrastructure  of  the  residential  mortgage  market  is  wholly 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inadequate  to  deal  with  a  systemic  shock  to  the  housing  market.  Left  alone,  this  flawed 
structure will destroy much more value in housing than is necessary. 
In  a  recent  speech  I  called  for  a  comprehensive  approach  to  housing  policy.  This  might 
include actions to 
1) 
prudently  expand  access  to  mortgage  credit  for  homebuyers,  including  by  limiting 
putback  risks  that  discourage  loan  origination  and  addressing  problems  with 
appraisals; 
eliminate  frictions  and  lower  costs  to  refinancing  for  all  borrowers  with  prime 
conforming loans; 
enable  borrowers  who  are  “underwater”  on  their  loans  but  continue  to  make  their 
monthly payments to earn accelerated principal reduction over time; 
provide bridge financing for borrowers with proven ability to service their debts who 
lose their jobs and may take longer than normal to find new jobs in today’s weak 
labor market; and 
manage the disposition of homes repossessed by creditors in a manner supportive 
of large-scale conversion into rental units. 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
I am encouraged by the recent decision by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) to 
make  it  easier  for  certain  borrowers  with  high  loan-to-value  ratios  to  refinance.  I  hope  this 
initial step will be followed by others that collectively move in the direction of stabilizing house 
prices. I believe this would not just be good economic policy, but it would also be extremely 
beneficial  for  taxpayers,  who  now  effectively  own  the  credit  risk  of  those  home  loans 
guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 
On the fiscal policy front, ongoing support for demand from the public sector at a time when 
many  households  are  deleveraging  sustains  jobs  and  incomes.  But  this  can  be  partly  or 
wholly offset if households and businesses lack confidence in the long-term fiscal outlook for 
our nation. 
It would be greatly beneficial if the Administration and Congress could more effectively work 
together  to  craft  a  coherent  fiscal  policy.  As  I  see  it,  this  would  consist  of  two  
elements – continued near-term fiscal support to underpin economic activity and long-term 
fiscal consolidation to ensure debt sustainability. Without action in Washington, fiscal policy 
will turn sharply restrictive in 2012 – exerting a direct drag on real GDP growth of more than 
one  percentage  point.  At  the  same  time,  the  long-term  path  under  current  policy  is 
unsustainable. 
It  should  be  possible,  even  in  a  time  of  sharp  ideological  differences,  to  agree  on  some 
common  pro-growth  principles:  support  for  demand  today  made  possible  by  credible  long-
term fiscal consolidation, and a mix of fiscal adjustments that are supportive of future growth. 
This  would  involve  making  an  appropriate  distinction  between  outlays  that  support  current 
consumption versus outlays that lift the economy’s long-run potential such as investment in 
infrastructure, research and human  capital – similarly, between taxes that inhibit work and 
investment versus those that are more neutral in their impact. Broadening the tax base and 
making tax system simpler might also be helpful. Progress on the fiscal front would have an 
important  ancillary  benefit  –  a  demonstration  that  Washington  can  put  aside  partisan 
interests and step up to the challenges our nation faces would boost household and business 
confidence. 
Finally,  we  need  structural  adjustment  policies  to  facilitate  the  reorientation  of  the  U.S. 
economy away from the growth path of the previous business cycle – away from a reliance 
on  asset  price  gains  and  easy  credit  to  support  consumption  to  a  more  durable  long-term 
growth path with greater reliance on business investment and exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
As I discussed in a previous speech, we can learn from the example of emerging nations that 
took the tough decisions necessary to emerge from past crises stronger, more competitive, 
and  better  positioned  to  take  advantage  of  their  comparative  advantages  in  a  fast-
transforming  world  economy.  This  means  not  just  plugging  gaps  of  deficient  demand,  but 
also solving structural problems. 
Done right, such structural reforms would provide the foundations for long-term growth. But 
this would also support the recovery today. By boosting household and business confidence 
about  the  future  and  about  their future  income prospects,  this  would  reduce  the  need  and 
desire to further deleverage and increase precautionary savings. 
A  structural  adjustment  program  for  the  U.S.  would  include  a  number  of  elements  beyond 
those already mentioned. These include labor market policies to retrain workers, investment 
in  education  and  infrastructure,  more  efficient  regulation,  more  efficient  provision  of 
healthcare services, and pro-growth trade and immigration reform. 
Steps that raise the productivity of U.S. workers lead to rising living standards. Also, they can 
help put the economy on a more sustainable fiscal path. Higher productivity leads to a bigger 
economy that can more easily support the ever increasing number of retired workers. 
As  we  take  such  steps  to  put  our  own  house  in  order,  we  could  reasonably  look  to  other 
nations to take complementary steps to promote global economic rebalancing. By spurring 
domestic  demand  growth,  emerging  market  economies  could  support  global  activity  while 
enabling their own citizens to reap the full benefits of the remarkable increases in productivity 
and output they have achieved in recent years. 
If we were to take all the steps outlined above, then I think we will have a pretty good 2012, 
with  even  better  prospects  after  that.  If  instead,  it  is  all  left  to  monetary  policy,  then  the 
outlook  will  be  much  less  satisfactory.  My  baseline  forecast  –  absent  the  full  suite  of 
complementary policies to support growth – is that 2012 will not differ much from the second 
half  of  2011:  moderate  growth,  slightly  stronger  employment  and  some  moderation  of 
inflation.  But  I  worry  about  the  downside  risks  to  this  forecast  especially  if  the  stresses  in 
Europe continue to escalate, or if little progress is made on housing, fiscal policy and global 
rebalancing.  In  particular,  accommodative  monetary  policy  becomes  much  less  effective  if 
the housing market remains in the doldrums. 
Conclusion 
I know that I have laid out here today a daunting set of policy objectives in an environment 
that is quite challenging. But before being discouraged by that, let’s reflect for a moment on 
what we already have achieved to date and some of the reasons why success is fully within 
our  grasp.  U.S.  households  have  already  undertaken  considerable  deleveraging.  The  U.S. 
financial system has made material progress toward better health. House prices are back at 
levels consistent with long-term affordability ratios. Banks have much more capital than they 
had on the eve of the financial crisis, the quality of that capital is much better and liquidity 
buffers are now much deeper. Credit availability is slowly improving. Though our challenges 
are large, we have come a good way already. 
And the policy challenges we face are not insurmountable. Even the long-term fiscal issues 
are  not  as  intractable  as  some  maintain;  Social  Security  can  be  put  on  a  sustainable 
trajectory  with  relatively  moderate  changes,  and  while  Medicare  and  Medicaid  are  more 
complex,  successful  reform  must  be  possible  given  that  other  industrialized  economies 
spend a lot less on healthcare, often with better results across the population. 
Even  with  determined  effort  the  road  ahead  will  not  be  easy,  and  it  will  be  several  years 
before our economy once again operates at something close to its true potential and all who 
seek work have a good chance of finding employment. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However, provided we secure the recovery, there is every reason to expect our nation will 
return in time to prosperity and solid growth. The United States has an extraordinarily flexible 
economy  with  a  strong  entrepreneurial  bias  that  generates  new  opportunities,  jobs  and 
income. Our higher education system is second to none and the country remains a magnet 
for talented people around the world. The United States has better demographics than most 
developed countries and some very impressive institutions – such as the U.S. Army – that 
provide a pathway upward for all based on merit regardless of background. 
America’s place in a fast-adapting world economy and the prosperity and economic strength 
of our nation will depend upon the choices we make. In this fundamental sense our economic 
destiny is in our own hands. Let’s get at it. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
I would be happy to take a few questions. 
 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 