Andreas Dombret: What does good macroprudential regulation look like? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the ICFR (International Centre for Financial Regulation) Annual International 
Regulatory Summit, Berlin, 19 October 2011. 
 Introduction 
1 
Good regulation has a great number of facets. I am impressed by how many of these the 
organisers  successfully  included  in  their  conference  programme,  and  I  wish  to  thank  the 
ICFR for inviting me to offer my views on good macroprudential regulation.  
The  theme  of  this  session  is  very  topical:  it  does  have  long-term  as  well  as  short-term 
aspects. Most of my speech will focus on the importance of good macroprudential policies for 
achieving and securing the long-term stability of the financial system. But I will, later on, also 
comment on current developments and the need for a macroprudential design in the present 
crisis management. 
Macroprudential policy is much talked about, but it may not always be clear what the term 
exactly  stands  for.  I  doubt  its  definition  has  already  been  set  for  good  and  for  all.  Having 
been  in  investment  banking  before  joining  the  Bundesbank,  I  actually  hardly  ever  used  to 
think about macroprudential policy measures – something that has quite changed since then. 
To  explain  it  in  a  few  words:  macroprudential  oversight  is  supposed  to  complement 
microprudential  regulation  and  supervision  –  macroprudential  policies  increasing  prudence 
with  respect  to  the  financial  system,  microprudential  policies  with  respect  to  single 
institutions.  
To explain it at more length: The main objective of good macroprudential policy is to enhance 
financial stability by applying supervisory and regulatory tools. We want the financial system 
allocating  financial  resources  and  risks  efficiently  at  all  times,  ie  also  in  times  of  stress. 
However,  in  the  event  of  a  malfunctioning  of  the  system,  the  economic  and  social  costs 
should  be  as  low  as  possible.  Mitigating  systemic  risk  is  crucial  for  maintaining  financial 
stability  and  for  minimising  the  costs  of  stress.  Addressing  systemic  risk,  macroprudential 
policy  rests  on  three  pillars:  first,  the  strengthening  of  risk  absorbency  for  systemic  risk; 
second, necessary changes to the regulatory framework; and third, a forward-looking design 
of crisis management. These three pillars appear powerful and effective. However, in order 
for macroprudential policy to run smoothly, an adequate macroprudential mandate has to be 
defined. 
Macroprudential instruments to mitigate systemic risk 
2 
The first pillar of macroprudential policies is a simple one: more buffers, and with that I mean 
more risk absorbency. Less simple is the discussion about what kind of buffers should be set 
and which policymaker should be implementing them.  
When  considering  systemic  risk,  a  distinction  between  a  cyclical  dimension  and  a  cross-
sectional  dimension 
those  risk 
characteristics.  The  cyclical  dimension  is  related  to  possible  excessive  risk  taking  or  risk 
aversion  over  the  financial  cycle.  In  contrast,  the  cross-sectional  dimension  relates  to  the 
interdependence  structure  of  the  financial  system:  the  interconnectedness  of  institutions, 
parallel behaviour and/or common exposures that lead to the rapid spreading of risks. 
In the near future, operational macroprudential instruments to counter systemic risk have to 
be developed. To reduce the cyclical component of systemic risk, time-varying capital and 
liquidity  requirements  are  at  the  forefront.  Further  instruments  are  under  consideration.  To 
the  selection  of 
instruments 
to  counter 
facilitates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
toolkit,  we  can  report 
to  our  macroprudential 
address the cross-sectional dimension of systemic risk, stricter capital surcharges as well as 
liquidity ratios for systemically important financial institutions are under discussion in order to 
increase their resilience and to stabilise their funding.  
With  respect 
first  successes.  The 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  about  to  be  implemented  as  the  first  truly  macroprudential 
instrument.  It  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities  in  order  to  dampen 
excessive credit growth in their jurisdiction. A credit boom is often closely connected to the 
build-up of system-wide risks. Little attention has so far been paid to a novelty feature of the 
buffer, which can be considered as one of the major improvements of Basel III: reciprocity. 
This  means,  for  instance,  if  Germany  were  to  set  a  buffer  of  1%  on  exposures  against 
domestic borrowers, other jurisdictions would have to impose the same buffer on their banks 
for  cross-border  claims  against  German  borrowers.  The  countercyclical  buffer  is  therefore 
related  to  the  origin  of  the  exposures  instead  of  the  origin  of  the  bank.  This  principle  is 
essential in order to avoid regulatory arbitrage and to counter effectively the build-up of risks 
in a specific region or sector.  
3 
Strengthening the regulatory framework by ensuring market functioning and 
market discipline 
Let me now turn to the second pillar. Strengthening the regulatory framework – this is more a 
question of ensuring market functioning and less of increasing state intervention. In principle, 
the regulatory framework must make sure that risk is borne by those  who receive the risk 
premia.  Therefore,  we  need,  first,  to  credibly  remove  implicit  government  guarantees  and, 
second, to enhance transparency. These are two major steps forward on the way to more 
market  discipline  and  to  better  market  functioning.  Against  the  backdrop  of  the  present 
challenges, this may look somewhat out of place but I am convinced this needs to be at the 
forefront of policymakers’ considerations. 
A failure of a systemically important bank is likely to cause significant disruption to the wider 
financial  system  and  to economic  activity.  This is  why,  up until  now,  these  institutions  can 
well count on a public bail-out. The adverse effects of this implicit state guarantee have been 
widely discussed. A first major step towards the resolvability of banks has been made here in 
Germany,  where  the  so-called  “Restrukturierungsgesetz”,  the  restructuring  law,  came  into 
force at the beginning of this year. This law strengthens the powers of banking supervision 
authorities  and  contains  comprehensive  regulations  that  facilitate  the  restructuring  and 
resolution of financial institutions. While these reforms have made progress on the national 
level, the challenge now lies in the promotion of international consistency of these regimes. 
Therefore, the Financial Stability Board has developed an international framework for cross-
border  resolution  which  will  be  discussed  at  the  upcoming  summit  in  Cannes.  On  the 
European  level,  the  Commission  is  leading  the  work  for  a  European  framework  for  the 
management of failing financial institutions.  
Transparency  is  another  –  or  maybe  even  the  other  –  major  issue  which  has  to  be 
strengthened  in  the  regulatory  framework.  Establishing  and  maintaining  transparency  is  a 
permanent topic in the regulatory debate and a necessary condition for market discipline. It 
goes without saying that market participants need transparency in order to identify and value 
risk appropriately. – Let me in this context point to the lack of transparency in the shadow 
banking system, which played a crucial role in the recent financial crisis and which will also 
see an action plan which is to be discussed at the summit in early November. 
Macroprudential design of crisis management 
4 
The  third  pillar  of  macroprudential  policy  refers  to  the  forward-looking  design  of  crisis 
management.  Crisis  management  is  the  policy  field  which  seems  to  receive  most  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
attention at the moment. Let me start with some conceptual remarks before I share my views 
on some topics of current interest. 
In times of crisis there is the threat that the short-term benefits of rescue operations are given 
priority  over  the  long-term  benefits  of  incentive-compatible  financial  markets.  Therefore, 
maintaining a long-run perspective in crisis management is of the utmost importance for the 
policymakers involved. The very existence of suitable – ie, in the long-run, stability enhancing – 
crisis  resolution  mechanisms  increases  the  credibility  of  macroprudential  policies.  It  has  a 
positive impact on market discipline and so contributes to a more stable financial system.  
Financial  crisis  management  is  more  effective  when  it  can  take  advantage  of  the  market 
forces instead of combating or suspending them. That is an important guideline for today’s 
challenge.  Undoubtedly,  the  vigour  and  the  systemic  nature  of  the  current  crisis  call  for 
immediate and determined action. The efficiency of the measures hinges on the mobilisation 
of  private  investment.  Public  funds  cannot,  and  should  not,  resolve  this  crisis  alone. 
Transparency is key for encouraging private capital and for restoring market discipline. In the 
current context, for example, it is vital to remove uncertainty on how politics envisage dealing 
with Greek debt going forward.  
The systemic nature of the crisis entails severe contagion triggering a loss of confidence in 
European banks. To raise the banks’ resilience, a temporary additional capital buffer is under 
discussion.  There  cannot  be  any  doubt  that  credibility  is  crucial  for  restoring  confidence. 
Gaining credibility calls for a realistic valuation of all relevant exposures and for setting an 
ambitious benchmark for minimum capital buffers.  
While  it  goes  without  saying  that  it  was  not  the  banks  that  are  responsible  for  the  current 
sovereign  debt  crisis,  I  can  understand  the  debate  which  is  ongoing  about  the  possible 
recapitalisation  of  European  banks.  Admittedly,  earmarking  the  temporary  core  tier  1 
benchmark  appears,  to  some  extent,  arbitrary.  However,  a  prudent  approach  tends  to 
emphasise the downside risk. Therefore, it is in my opinion much better to err on the high 
side  so  that  the  worst  case  does  not  materialise.  For  example,  a  core  tier  1  ratio  for 
systemically  relevant  banks  in  Europe  of  9  %  after  realistic  mark  to  market  of  risks, 
introduced with the right sense of proportion, could be feasible and could provide reasonable 
comfort. 
Following the principle of prioritising market solutions, there is a clear order. As a principle, 
the  banks  should  address  the  capital  markets  first.  Only  private  banks  which  fail  to  raise 
private capital would receive a public capital injection. As a provider of last resort, the EFSF 
can make resources available to the countries. Admittedly, such a solution takes some time. 
However, the crucial point is that the announcement of the measures establishes clarity and, 
in doing so, sets the stage for restoring market confidence. 
The macroprudential mandate in the context of the present challenges 
5 
It  goes  without  saying  that  a  fundamental  cure  of  the  problem  certainly  requires  extensive 
consolidation as well as reform measures in the countries concerned. And to prevent such a 
build-up  of  imbalances  in  the  future,  macroprudential  analysis  has  to  monitor  and  to  warn 
when risks emerge. However, such warnings have to be translated into policies and actions. 
To facilitate the transition from analysis to remedial action, good macroprudential regulation 
needs an unambiguous mandate which has to be assigned to an authority. And to make it 
quite clear: the mandate for macroprudential surveillance encompasses not only the banking 
system.  It  is  clear  that,  over  time,  we  also  have  to  consider  extending  macroprudential 
policies  to  insurance  companies,  to  securities  and  derivatives  markets  as  well  as  to  the 
infrastructure of the financial system.  
A  crucial  point  with  respect  to  macroprudential  policy  is  the  bias  towards  inaction:  nobody 
wants  to  take  away  the  punch  bowl  in  the  middle  of  a  party.  To  act  nonetheless,  at  least 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
operational independence of the macroprudential authority from political and banking sector’s 
influence must be ensured. This independence must, however, be combined with appropriate 
accountability mechanisms.  
Some countries have already adopted national mandates. For example, the UK concentrates 
micro-  and  macroprudential  policy  at  the  Bank  of  England.  France,  in  contrast,  has 
established  a  coordinating  body  for  the  central  bank  and  the  supervisory  agencies,  which 
have  been  partly  reformed  but  remain  independent  from  each  other.  It  is  essential  that 
national structures need to mirror broadly the European setup to ensure consistency. This 
entails  the  necessity  for  coordination  between  involved  bodies  or  within  the  designated 
authority.  Furthermore,  a  national  mandate  has  to  provide  for  the  possibility  of  issuing 
warnings and recommendations, both confidential and public. 
In  general,  central  banks  have  extensive  knowledge  of  financial  markets  and  the  macro 
economy  and  should  therefore  play  a  prominent  role  in  macroprudential  policy.  More 
specifically, in Germany, the Bundesbank is well suited to conduct independent, well-founded 
original research and analyses in order to identify a possible build-up of systemic risk at an 
early stage as part of an ongoing macroprudential surveillance. For the operational task of 
applying  instruments,  the  German  supervisor  BaFin  is  the  appropriate  body.  Tight 
coordination  between  macro-  and  microprudential  policies  as  well  as  between  the 
participating  institutions  needs  to  be  ensured.  This  should  also  extend  to  the  Ministry  of 
Finance as it has the ultimate responsibility for financial policy and is the representative of 
the taxpayer. 
Macroprudential  authorities  need  to  ensure  transparency  and  clear  communication  of 
decisions  and  decision-making  processes.  Transparency  and  communication  in  terms  of 
policy  strategy,  risk  assessment  and  the  use  of  instruments  are  indispensable  in  order  to 
make  macroprudential  policies  comprehensible  to  financial  market  participants  and  the 
general public.  
Systemic  risk  does  not  respect  national  borders.  Therefore,  it  is  in  our  best  interests  to 
coordinate our actions in order to mitigate systemic risk internationally. The establishment of 
the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  –  ESRB  in  short  –  is  the  European  answer  to  this 
international  challenge.  The  task  of  the  ESRB  is  to  assess  systemic  risk,  to  issue 
recommendations  –  and,  should  the  situation  worsen  –  to  issue  warnings  across  Europe. 
Recently, the scope of the ESRB has even broadened: it will assume a coordinating role for 
macroprudential policies and guard against protectionism in the regulatory framework. In its 
work,  the  ESRB  should  draw  on  the  substantial  expertise  and  analytical  capabilities  of  its 
members  to  fulfill  its  mandate.  It  is  my  strong  belief  that  national  authorities  possess  the 
greatest  expertise  in  the  analysis  of  macroprudential  risks.  According  to  the  principle  of 
subsidiarity,  and  because  the  costs  of  a  crisis  are  borne  on  a  national  level,  EU  member 
states need the appropriate authority for macroprudential interventions and the calibration of 
instruments.  
Now,  the  EU  member  states  must  get  their  macroprudential  policies  to  work.  Today’s 
challenges call for a macroprudential policy which is alert and capable. 
Conclusion 
6 
Let me conclude with a very brief outlook. 
At the current stage, good macroprudential regulation is more about basics such as defining 
properly the objective, compiling the efficient toolkit and setting up the competent institutions.  
One day, this part of the job will be done. Then, we will enter a new stage in which good 
macroprudential  policy  is  more  related  to  conduct  and  to  daily  routine.  From  then  on,  the 
foreseeable challenges will more or less correspond to the five famous principles of better 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regulation,  that  is:  being  proportionate,  accountable,  consistent,  transparent  and 
targeted.  
I  am  confident  that,  in  the  near  future,  determined  macroprudential  policy  will  be 
implemented  in  Germany  and  that  the  Bundesbank  will  be  given  a  significant  role  fulfilling 
this  mandate.  The  five  principles  of  better  regulation  will  be  important  guidelines  in  this 
regard.  Today,  by  attending  this  ICFR  conference,  I  hope  I  can  at  least  comply  with  the 
principle of being transparent. The exchange of views between regulators and markets has 
to be continued. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
